[Cites
26
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Commissioner Of Service Tax Delhi vs Quick Heal Technologies Limited on 5 August, 2022
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5167 OF 2022
                                         (DIARY NO. 24399 OF 2020)


                         COMMISSIONER OF SERVICE TAX DELHI             …APPELLANT(S)
                                                    VERSUS

                         QUICK HEAL TECHNOLOGIES LIMITED              …RESPONDENT(S)
                                                      WITH
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 5168­5169 OF 2022
                          (ARISING OUT OF S.L.P. (CIVIL) NOS. 6715­6716 OF 2022)


                                                JUDGMENT
J.B. PARDIWALA, J. :
1.   Since the issues raised in both the captioned cases are the

                         same, those were taken up for hearing analogously and are

                         being disposed of by this common judgment.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2022.08.05
15:23:05 IST
Civil Appeal (Diary No. 24399 of 2020)
Reason:
2.   Delay condoned.
1
3.   This appeal under
Section 35L(b)
of the Central Excise Act,

1944 (for short, ‘the Act 1944’), as made applicable to the

service tax by Section 83 of Chapter V of the Finance Act, 1994

(for short, ‘the Act 1994’), is at the instance of the revenue and

is directed against the order No. 50022/2020 dated 09.01.2020

passed by the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate

Tribunal, New Delhi (for short, ‘the Tribunal’) in the Service Tax

Appeal No. 51175 of 2016 by which the Tribunal allowed the

appeal filed by the respondent herein (assessee) thereby set

aside the Order in Original dated 28.01.2016 passed by the

Additional Director General (Adjudication) DGCEI, Delhi.
FACTUAL MATRIX
4.   For the sake of convenience, the appellant herein shall be

referred to as the “revenue” and the respondent herein shall be

referred to as the “assessee”.
5.   The      assessee    is    registered   with   the   Service   Tax

Commissioner, Pune­III for providing taxable services, inter alia,

under   the    category    of    “Information   Technology    Software
2
Service”. The assessee is engaged in the development of Quick

Heal brand Antivirus Software which is supplied along with the

license code/product code either online or on the replicated

CDs/DVDs to the end­customers in India.
6.   It appears from the materials on record that it came to the

notice of the Directorate General of Central Excise Intelligence

(Headquarters) that the assessee engaged in the development of

Quick Heal brand Antivirus Software had not been paying

service tax prior to 01.07.2012 on the services covered under

the category of “Information Technology Software Service”

falling under Item No. (vi) of clause (zzzze) of sub­section (105)

of
Section 65
of the Act 1994 w.e.f 01.07.2012 on the services

covered under the category of “Information Technology Software

Service” under
Section 66E(d)
of the Act 1994 for providing

Quick Heal brand Antivirus Software license key/code supplied

along with the CD/DVD replicated with the Quick Heal brand

Antivirus Software through the dealers/distributors to the end­

customers in India.
3
7.   In the aforesaid context, an inquiry was initiated against

the assessee and at the end of the same, the revenue reached to

the conclusion that the assessee is liable to pay service tax on

the transactions with the end­customers to supply the license

codes/keys of Quick Heal brand Antivirus Software in the retail

packs. The revenue reached to the conclusion that the assessee

had failed to pay the service tax on the consideration received

for the supply of the license codes/keys of Antivirus Software to

the end­customers in retail packs during the period between

01.03.2011 and 31.03.2014.
8.   In such circumstances referred to above, a show cause

notice dated 02.02.2015 came to be issued to the assessee by

the Additional Director General, DGCEI (Hqrs.), New Delhi

proposing a demand/recovery of service tax amounting to Rs.
62,73,05,953.36p. (Rupees Sixty Two Crore Seventy Three Lakh

Five Thousand Nine Hundred Three and paise Thirty Six Only)

on the taxable value of Rs. 5,30,94,66,783/­ (Rupees Five Arab

Thirty Crore Ninety Four Lakh Sixty Six Thousand Seven

Hundred Eighty Three Only) for supplying Quick Heal Antivirus
4
Software   replicated   CDs/DVDs     in    the   retail    packs    (i.e.

Information    Technology    Software      Service)       through    its

dealers/distributors to the end­customers in India for the

period between 01.03.2011 and 31.03.2014 under the proviso

to
Section 73(1)
of the Act 1994 by invoking the extended period

of limitation with interest and penalty.
9.    The show cause notice referred to above was adjudicated

by the Additional Director General (Adjudication), DGCEI, Delhi,

who, in turn, confirmed the demand of service tax amount to

Rs. 56,07,05,595/­ (Rupees Fifty Six Crore Seven Lakh Five

Thousand Five Hundred Ninety Five Only) alleged to have been

not paid by the assessee on the service of Information

Technology Software Service vide its Order in Original dated

28.01.2016.
10.   The assessee, being aggrieved with the order passed by the

Additional Director General (Adjudication), DGCEI, preferred

the Service Tax Appeal No. 51175 of 2016 before the Tribunal.
11.   The Tribunal allowed the appeal filed by the assessee

herein essentially on the following three grounds:­
5
i.        The antivirus software did not have an element

          of interactivity.
ii.       As per the decision of the Supreme Court in the

           case of
Tata Consultancy Services v. State of

           Andhra Pradesh
, (2005) 1 SCC 308, (“TCS”), the pre­

           packaged/canned software would be treated as goods.
Once the software is put on a medium like a CD and

           then sold, such software would be treated as goods.
iii.          The Central Board of Excise & Customs (CBEC)

           issued guidelines when the negative regime was

           issued on 1.7.2012. The guidelines clarified that the

           pre­packaged/canned software would not be goods

           even if there was a licence.
12.    The revenue, being dissatisfied with the order passed by

the Tribunal, has come up before this Court with the present

appeal under
Section 35L(b)
of the Act 1944.
13.    The revenue has in its memorandum of appeal formulated

the following questions of law for consideration of this Court:­
6
“(i) Whether the Tribunal is right in holding that the
      transaction in the present case results in the right to
      use the software and would amount deemed sale?
(ii) Whether the Antivirus Software license key/code
      supplied by the respondent along with CD/DVD
      replicated with Quick Heal Brand Antivirus Software
      through dealers/distributors to the End­Customers is
      liable to Service Tax?
(iii) Whether the service provided by the respondent is
      classifiable under Information Technology Service
      liable to service tax under
Section 65(105)(zzzze)
of the
      Finance Act, 1994 prior to 01.07.2012 and under
Section 66E(f)
of the Finance Act, 1994 w.e.f.
      01.07.2012?
(iv) Whether the transfer of goods by way of hiring,
      leasing, licensing or any such manner without transfer
      of right of use such goods, is a declared service under
      clause (1) of
Section 66E
of the Finance Act, 1994?”

SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE REVENUE :
14.   The learned counsel appearing for the revenue vehemently

submitted that the Tribunal committed a serious error in

passing the impugned order by relying upon the decision of this

Court in
TATA Consultancy Services
(supra).
He would

submit that the question before this Court in the case of the
TATA Consultancy Services
(supra) was whether the canned

software sold by the appellants therein could be termed to be
7
“goods” under the
Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957
and hence, assessable to the sales tax?
He submitted that the

principal contention of the appellants before this Court in the

case of the
TATA Consultancy Services
(supra) was that the

canned software was “intangible property” and hence would not

come within the definition of the “goods”. He would submit that

the issue was clearly not whether the canned software was

“goods” or “service”. He laid much stress on the fact that no

argument was canvassed on the canned software being a

service. Since the question did not pertain to the canned

software being a “service”, this Court did not make any

comment on whether the canned software could be a “service”.
He would submit that in such circumstances, the Tribunal

committed an error in relying on the ratio of the decision of this

Court in the case of
TATA Consultancy Services
(supra).
15.   The learned counsel would further submit that the entire

transaction of selling or trading of the software can be divided

into two stages:­
8
(a)      Up to the replication of the Master CD by the

      replicators under the terms of agreement. This is

      covered by this Court’s judgment in the case of
TATA

      Consultancy Services
(supra). There rises no dispute

      of paying duty at this stage, since, the recording of the

      software on their CDs and making them marketable

      makes it ‘Goods’ which is chargeable to the Central

     Excise Duty;
(b)     The supply to the end­users under a separate

      End User Licensing Agreement, consists of 2 parts:
(i) Supply of Antivirus software in the CD.
(ii) Providing electronic updates to the software

             originally provided.
16.   He would submit that the present dispute is one

relating to part (b) as above of the transaction.
17.   Referring to the decision of this Court in the case of
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. v. Union of India
, (2006) 3 SCC

1, (for short, ‘BSNL’), he would submit that the same deals with
9
the “composite transaction” of giving telephone connection that

involves service and sale. It was held therein by the majority

that it is possible for the State to tax the sale element provided

there is a discernible sale and the “dominant intention” test is

satisfied. To put it in other words, the learned counsel would

submit that the test for a composite contract other than those

mentioned in the
Article 366(29A)
of the Constitution continues

to be “did the parties have in mind or intend separate rights

arising out of the sale of goods?”. If there was no such

intention, there is no sale even if the contract could be

disintegrated. According to the learned counsel, the test for

deciding whether a contract falls into one category or the other

is as to what is 'the substance of the contract’.
He pointed out

that in the case of BSNL (supra) it was held that what amounts

to being “goods” in the sale transaction remains primarily a

matter of contract and intentions.
18.   He placed strong reliance on the decision of the Madras

High Court in the case of M/s
Infotech Software Dealers

Association v. Union of India
, 2010 (20) S.T.R. 289 (Mad.),
10
wherein the High Court took the view that the supply of

packaged antivirus software to the end user by charging license

fee as per the end user license agreement amounts service and

not sale. The Madras High Court held that for the purpose of

imposition of tax, the nature of transaction should be looked

into.
19.
In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned

counsel appearing for the revenue, prays that there being merit

in his appeal, the same may be allowed by answering the

proposed questions of law in favour of the revenue and against

the assessee.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE ASSESSEE :
20.     On the other hand, Mr. Arvind P. Datar, the learned senior

counsel appearing for the assessee, vehemently opposed this

appeal by submitting that no error, not to speak of any error of

law, could be said to have been committed by the Tribunal in

passing the impugned order. He would submit that in para 29

of the impugned order the Tribunal rightly rejected the

contention of the revenue that the antivirus software was
11
interactive. Mr. Datar would submit that the Tribunal rightly

held that a programme could be said to be interactive only

when it involves the user to have exchange of information or

when there is action and communication between the user and

the software. The learned senior counsel gave an example by

pointing that the MS Word, Excel, etc. are interactive softwares

which can be run only after the receipt of the instructions from

the user.   On the other hand, there is no interactivity in an

antivirus software as there is no requirement of giving any

command for detecting and removing the virus. In other words,

no manual input is required to operate an antivirus software as

it acts automatically upon detecting any virus. He would submit

that the antivirus software which is installed in a computer

system cannot be treated as an interactive software.
21.   The learned senior counsel thereafter took this Court

through the decision rendered by this Court in the case of
TATA Consultancy Services
(supra).
The learned senior

counsel offered the following comments on the impact of the

decision in the case of
TATA Consultancy Services
(supra) :­
12
“4.1 The question as to whether software can be
treated as goods was referred to a bench of five judges
in the aforesaid TCS case.
4.2 The State of Andhra Pradesh had levied
VAT/sales tax on software CDs, which were packed
and sold to customers. This Hon’ble Court, after
extensive consideration of India and U.S. decisions,
held that even though the copyright in a software
program may remain with the originator of the
program, the moment the software is loaded onto a CD
and copies are made and marketed, they become
goods, “which are susceptible to sales tax”.
4.3 There is no difference between sale of a software
program on a CD/floppy disc or the sale of music or
film CD. It categorically held that the software and the
medium cannot be split up in a sale of a computer
software, which is a sale of goods. Apart from the
judgment of Justice Variava, Justice S.B. Sinha gave a
concurring opinion giving additional reasons as to why
software, which is put on a medium and sold, is in the
nature of a commodity and has to be treated as goods.
The learned judge also held that the definition of
canned software would be exigible to sales tax.
4.4 In the present case, the impugned CESTAT order
has reproduced several paragraphs from the TCS
ruling and concluded in paragraph 35/Page 54, Vol. I
that once software is put in a media and marketed, it
would become goods.
4.5 The negative regime of service tax came into force
on July 1, 2012. Barring specific exemptions, almost all
contracts were to be treated as services when they
were supplied for consideration. Service tax was
13
sought to be levied on Information and Technology
      Service, under
section 65(53a)
which reads as follows:
(53a)   “information technology software” means
       any representation of instructions, data, sound or
       image, including source code and object code,
       recorded in a machine readable form, and capable of
       being manipulated or providing interactivity to a user,
       by means of a computer or an automatic data
       processing machine or any other device or equipment;
4.6 Similarly, the definition of taxable services is
      contained in
section 65(105) (zzzze)
which are also
      reproduced earlier.
4.7 While the above definitions were prevailing prior
      to 01.07.2012, section 66E(d) – provided for declared
      service under the new negative regime and read as
      follows:
“development, design, programming, customization,
        adaptation,       upgradation,        enhancement,
        implementation of information technology software”
      4.8 Further, section 65B (28) defined “information
      technology software” which was almost identical to the
      earlier definition under
section 65 (63a)
.”
22.   The   learned   senior   counsel    thereafter   made      his

submissions on the CBEC Circular/Education Guide. Following

comments have been offered as regards the said Circular in the

written note furnished to this Court:­
14
“5.1 After the negative regime came into force on
       1.7.2012, reproduced above, the CBEC Education Guide
       issued the following guidelines:
(i)Pre­packaged or canned software would not be covered
      by the entry relating to information technology
      software. This is because such software as “goods” as
      held by the Supreme Court in the TCS case. The
      guidelines specifically reproduced the text of the
      Supreme Court ruling.
(ii)It then concluded that if pre­packaged or canned
      software, were sold, then the transaction would be in
      the nature of a sale of goods and no service tax would
      be levied.”
23.    The learned senior counsel thereafter submitted as regards

the excise duty/tariff   entry and     exemption notifications as

under :­

      “6.1 It is pertinent to note that S. No. 84A of the third
      schedule to the
Central Excise Act, 1944
, deals with
      entry 8523 80 20 corresponding to “Packaged software
      or canned software”. The Explanation provided
      thereunder defined “packaged software or canned
      software” as a software which is intended for sale or
      capable of being sold off­the­shelf.
6.2 Moreover, Notification No:14/2011 CE dated 01­
      03­2011 adopted this definition and exempted excise
      duty on such “packaged software or canned
      software”.”
15
24.   He vehemently submitted that the transaction cannot be

bifurcated into two components as suggested by the revenue i.e.
(i) sale of CD, and (ii) supply of updates. In this regard, he

submitted as under :­


      “7.1 During the arguments, the Department submitted
      that apart from the sale of CD, the updates which were
      to be provided under the contract would amount to
      service. It is submitted that this is incorrect because the
      pre­packaged antivirus software which is sold in the
      box has a condition of sale that updates for the period
      of license would be also provided to the person who
      has purchased the goods without any further
      consideration. These updates are part and parcel of the
      sale of software itself and cannot be divorced from the
      transaction and treated separately as a service.
      7.2 Indeed, every pre­packaged software that was
      sold in a box, where there it is Tally or Word or Excel,
      would also include supply of updates for the period of
      licence.
7.3 Further, section 65B (44) defined service to mean
      any activity carried out by a person for a consideration
      and includes a declared service. In the present case, no
      separate consideration is charged for the updates
      which are part and parcel of the sale of goods itself.
      Consequently, even if the updates are treated as
      declared    services    under    section    66E(d),   no
      consideration is charged for such service separately.
      7.4 In
BSNL v. Union of India
it was categorically held
      that the contract cannot be vivisected or split out. Once
16
a lumpsum has been charged for the sale of CD and
      sales tax has been paid thereon, the Department
      cannot levy service tax on the entire sale consideration
      once again on the ground that updates are being
      provided.”
25.   In the last, the learned senior counsel submitted that the

payment of VAT and service tax are mutually exclusive. He

would submit that :­

      “8.1 It is well settled that sales tax and VAT is covered
      by Entry 54 of List­II in the VII Schedule of the
      Constitution. Only State Legislatures can levy VAT on
      the sale of goods. On the other hand, service tax is
      leviable under the
Finance Act, 1994
(as amended) on
      the provision of service and such levy is permissible
      under Entry 97 of List­I.
      8.2 It is also well settled that there could be no
      overlapping of taxes as the taxing powers have been
      carefully split between Union and the State.
      Accordingly, the taxation of goods has been allotted to
      the State Legislatures while taxing of service is
      retained by the Centre.
8.3 In Imagic Creative Pvt. Ltd. v. CCT, (2008) 9 STR
      337 (SC) : (2008) 2 SCC 614, this Court held that
      payment of VAT and service tax are mutually exclusive.
      After the TCS judgment, the controversy was put to rest
      in intellectual property where software or music or film
      which has been put on a medium such as a CD will be
      treated as goods and consequently can subject only to
      sales tax/VAT.”
17
26.    In such circumstances referred to above, the learned

senior counsel appearing on behalf of the assessee, prays that

there being no merit in the present appeal, the same may be

dismissed. ANALYSIS :
27.    Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties

and having gone through the materials on record, the only

question that falls for our consideration is, whether the

Tribunal committed any error in passing the impugned order?
28.    Before we advert to the rival submissions canvassed on

either side, we must look into some of the reasons assigned by

the Tribunal while allowing the appeal preferred by the assessee

against the order of the adjudicating authority. We quote:­

      “25. The contention of the Appellant is that the software
      developed by it can neither be manipulated nor does it
      provide any interactivity to a user and, therefore, does
      not satisfy the requirement of “information technology
      software”. According to the Appellant, once the computer
      system is booted, the Antivirus Software begins its
      activity of detecting the virus and continues to do so till
      the time the computer system remains booted. Thus,
      there is no interactivity or requirement of giving any
      commands to the software to perform the function of
      detecting and removing virus from the computer system.
18
The Appellant further contends that the software
developed by it is quite distinct from software like ERP,
EXCEL, MS Word, where there is a constant to and from
interaction between the user and the computer system
containing the said software. These softwares perform
their function only after receipt of input from the user,
which is not the case in the Antivirus Software
developed by the Appellant.
x          x          x
28. The Adjudicating Authority, however, has not
accepted the contention of the Appellant and has
observed that the software can issue commands to scan
drives, both internal and external and that it has an
interface with the user to tune­up the personal computer
and that it has also a parallel control feature. These
features, according to the Adjudicating Authority, need a
command by the user to the software and, therefore, it is
interactive.
29. It is not possible to accept this finding. The Antivirus
Software developed by the Appellant is complete in itself
to prevent virus in the computer system. Once the
computer system is booted, the Antivirus Software
begins the function of detecting the virus, which
continues till the time the computer system remains
booted. The computer system only displays a message
that viruses existed and that they have been detected
and removed. No interactivity takes place nor there is
any requirement of giving any command to the software
to perform its function of detecting and removing virus
from the computer system. It is also seen from the
meaning assigned to “interactive” that a program should
involve the user in the exchange of information. There
has to be action and communication between the two. A
19
user should communicate with the computer facility and
      receive rapid responses, which can be used to prepare
      the next inputs. In contract, in other softwares like ERP,
      EXCEL, MS Word, there is continues interaction between
      the user and the computer system and these softwares
      perform only after receipt of input from the user.
30. Such being the position, no service tax was leviable
      under
section 65(105)(zzzze)
of the Act prior to 1 July,
      2012. Even after 1 July, 2012 the definition of
      “information technology software” under section 65B(28)
      remained the same and so also service tax was not
      leviable.
31. The matter can be examined from another angle.
      Section 65B (51) defines a “taxable service” to mean any
      service on which service tax is leviable under section
      66B. Section 66B provides that there shall be levied
      service tax on the value of all services, other than those
      services specified in the negative list, provided or agreed
      to be provided in the taxable territory by one person to
      another and collected in such manner as may be
      prescribed. Section 65B (44) define “service” to mean
      any activity carried out by a person for consideration,
      and includes a declared service, but shall not include,
      amongst others, an activity which constitutes merely
      such transfer, delivery or supply of any goods which is
      “deemed to be a sale” within the meaning of clause
      (29A) of
article 366
of the Constitution.”
29.    The Tribunal thereafter proceeded to consider the decision

of this Court rendered in the case of
TATA Consultancy
20
Services
(supra). Upon analysis of the ratio of
the said decision
,

the Tribunal recorded the following findings :­

      “35. It is clear from the aforesaid decision of the
      Supreme Court in Tata Consultancy Services that
      intellectual property, once it is put on the media and
      marketed could become “goods” and that a software
      may be intellectual property and such intellectual
      property contained in a medium is purchased and sold
      in various forms including CDs.
36.
Section 65B (44)
of the Act also excludes from the
      definition of “service” any activity which constitutes
      merely such transfer, delivery or supply of any goods
      which is deemed to be a sale within the meaning of
      clause (29A) of
article 366
of the Constitution. As noticed
      above, the Supreme Court in Tata Consultancy Services
      held that Canned Software supplied in CDs would be
      “goods” chargeable to sales tax/VAT and no service tax
      can be levied.”
30.    The Tribunal thereafter, in para 37 of its order, considered

the CBEC Education Guide for service tax containing the official

guidelines for new system of levy of service tax. After due

consideration of the same, it recorded the following findings in

para 38:­

      “38. A perusal of the aforesaid guidelines would
      indicate that after making a reference to the judgment of
      Supreme Court in Tata Consultancy Services, it
      mentions that a transaction would be in the nature of
      sale of goods when a pre­packaged or Canned Software
21
is sold, and no service tax would be leviable. However, a
      license to use the software which does not involve the
      transfer of “right to use” would neither be a transfer of
      title in goods nor a deemed sale of goods. Such an
      activity would fall in the ambit of definition of “service”.
      Thus, if a pre­packaged or Canned Software is not sold
      but is transferred under a license to use such software,
      the terms and conditions of the license to use such
      software would have to be seen to arrive at a conclusion
      whether the license to use the packaged software
      involves a transfer of “right to use” such software in the
      sense the phrase has been used in sub­clause (d) of
article 366(29A)
of the Constitution. The guidelines also
      provide that in case a license to use pre­packaged
      software imposes restrictions on the usage of such
      licenses, which restriction interfere with the free
      enjoyment of the software, then such a license would
      not result in transfer of “right to use” the software within
      the meaning of Clause 29(A) of
article 366
of the
      Constitution. However, every condition imposed would
      not make it leviable to service tax. The condition should
      be such so as to restrain the right to free enjoyment on
      the same lines as a person who has otherwise
      purchased goods is able to have.”
31.    The Tribunal thereafter proceeded to consider the terms of

the agreement to ascertain whether there was transfer of the

“right to use goods”.      The Tribunal in para 44 of its order

recorded the following relevant provisions of the Quick Heal

Internet Security End­User License Agreement:­

      “16. BY USING THIS SOFTWARE OR BY ACCEPTING
      OUR SOFTWARE USAGE AGREEMENT POLICY OR
22
ATTEMPTING TO LOAD THE SOFTWARE IN ANY WAY,
(SUCH ACTION WILL CONSTITUTE A SYMBOL OF
YOUR     CONSENT    AND   SIGNATURE),     YOU
ACKNOWLEDGE AND ADMIT THAT YOU HAVE READ,
UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED TO ALL THE TERMS AND
CONDITIONS    OF   THIS   AGREEMENT,     THIS
AGREEMENT ONCE ACCEPTED BY "YOU"[ AS AN
INDIVIDUAL (ASSUMING YOU ARE ABOVE 18 YEARS
AND/OR HAVING LEGAL CAPACITY TO ENTER INTO
AN AGREEMENT), OR THE COMPANY OR ANY LEGAL
ENTITY THAT WILL BE USING THE SOFTWARE
(HEREINAFTER REFERRED TO AS YOU' OR YOUR' FOR
THE SAKE OF BREVITY] SHALL BE A LEGALLY
ENFORCEABLE AGREEMENT BETWEEN YOU AND
QUICK HEAL TECHNOLOGIES PRIVATE LIMITED,
PUNE, INDIA (HEREINAFTER REFERRED TO AS
"QUICK HEAL") AND YOU SHALL HAVE THE RIGHTS
TO USE THE SOFTWARE SUBJECT TO THE TERMS
AND CONDITIONS MENTIONED IN THIS AGREEMENT
OR AS AMENDED BY QUICK HEAL FROM TIME TO
TIME. IF YOU DO NOT AGREE TO ALL THE TERMS
AND CONDITIONS BELOW, DO NOT USE THIS
SOFTWARE IN ANY WAY AND PROMPTLY RETURN IT
OR DELETE ALL THE COPIES OF THIS SOFTWARE IN
YOUR POSSESSION.
In consideration of payment of the License Fee, which
is a part of the price, evidenced by the Receipt. Quick
Heal grants the Licensee, a non­exclusive and non­
transferable right. Quick Heal reserves all rights not
expressly granted, and retains the title and ownership
of the software, including all subsequent copies in any
media. This software and the accompanying written
materials are the property of Quick Heal and are
copyrighted. Copying of the software or the written
material is expressly forbidden. In addition to this
security software, Quick Heal offers you Quick Heal
23
Remote Device Management Services to manage your
device(s).
Quick Heal reserves all rights not expressly granted,
and retains the title and ownership of the software,
including all subsequent copies in any media, This
software and the accompanying written materials are
the property of Quick Heal and are copyrighted.
1. DEFINITIONS
   ­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
B. "License period" means the period as more
particularly described in this Agreement.
   ­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
G. “Updates” means collections of any or all among
virus definition files including detections and solutions
for new viruses along with the corrections,
improvements or modifications to the software.
2. DO's & DON'TS

You can:
A. make copy of the software for backup purpose or for
the purpose of sharing through various means (and such
backup copy must be destroyed when you lose the right
to use the Software or is terminated for any other reason
according to the legislation in force in the country of your
principal residence or in the country where You are
using the software) and replace lost, destroyed, or
becomes unusable.
B. use one copy of the software on a single computer. In
case of multiuser pack, use of the software only on the
said number of systems as mentioned on the packaging.
C. install the software on a network, provided you have
a licensed copy of the software for each computer that
can access the software over that network.
24
D. avail Quick Heal RDM service to manage your device
(a maximum of 10 devices in one account.)

You cannot:
A. emulate, or adapt any portion of the software.
B. sublicense, rent or lease any portion of the software.
C. try making an attempt to reveal/discover the source
code of the software.
D. debug, decompile, disassemble, modify, translate,
reverse engineer the software.
E. create derivative works based on the software or any
portion thereof with sole exception of a non­waivable
right granted to You by any applicable legislation. F.
remove or alter any copyright notices or other
proprietary notices on any copies of the software.
G. reduce any part of the software to human readable
form. H. use the software in the creation of data or
software used for detection, blocking or treating threats
described in the user manual.
I. use for unlicensed and illegal purpose.
J. remove your user account from Quick Heal RDM
service once registered
K. retrieve deleted location entries and back up data
from the user account on the Quick Heal RDM service.
L. attempt to gain unauthorized access to Quick Heal
RDM networks.
5. LICENSE PERIOD
A. You are entitled to use this software/ RDM Services
from the date of license activation until the expiry date
of the license.
B. You understand, agree and accept that you are
entitled for the updates and technical support via the
Internet and telephone. Any use of this software/RDM
Services for any other purposes is strictly forbidden and
prohibited and Quick Heal reserves to take any action
against such unauthorized usage.
25
C. License for use of Quick Heal RDM service to manage
devices shell be valid till your device security software
license is valid.
D. You agree, understand that any unauthorized usage
of the software/ RDM services or breach of any/all
terms and conditions stated herein the Agreement shall
result in automatic and immediate termination of this
Agreement and the License granted hereunder and
which may result in criminal and/ Or civil action by
Quick Heal and/ Or its agents against you including but
not limited to right to block the key file/ License key/
product key and without any refund to You and without
any prior intimation/ notice to you in this regard.
E. If you have acquired the specific language localization
of the software/ RDM service, you will not be able to
activate the software by applying the activation code of
other language localization.
F. Quick Heal does not guarantee the protection from the
threats more particularly described in the user manual
after the License to use the software/RDM service is
terminated for any reason.
6. FEATURES OF SOFTWARE
A. During the license period of the software/RDM
services, You have the right to use features of
software/RDM service.
B. During the license Period of the Software/RDM, You
have the right to receive free updates of the software
and Quick Heal RDM service via Internet as and when
Quick Heal publishes the updated virus­ database and
free version upgrade as and when Quick Heal releases
new version upgrade. You agree, understand and accept
that You will be required to regularly download the
updates published by Quick Heal. Any and all updates/
upgrades you receive from Quick Heal shall be governed
by this Agreement, or as amended from time to time by
Quick Heal.
26
C. You agree, accept and acknowledge:
I. that You are solely responsible for the configuration of
the software/ RDM services settings and the result,
actions, inactions initiated due to the same and Quick
Heal assumes no liability/ responsibility in any case
and the Clause of Indemnification shall be applicable.
II. that Quick Heal assumes no liability/responsibility
for any date deletion, including but not limited to any
deletion/ loss of personal, and/or confidential date;
and/or uninstallation of third­party apps; and/or
change in settings; specifically authorized by You or
occurs due to the actions, inactions (whether intentional
or not) by You or any third party whom You have
authorized to use, handle you Device due to features or
software/RDM services.
III. that to avail/use certain features of the
software/RDM services, you may be required to incur
some cost and that Quick Heal does not warrant that
the usage of certain features of the software/RDM
services are free of cost and that Quick Heal shall not
entertain and expressly disclaims, any claim for
reimbursement of any expenses including but not limited
to any direct or incidental expenses arising out of Your
usage of such features of the software/RDM services.
IV. that you be solely responsible and shall comply all
applicable laws, regulations of India and any foreign
laws including without limitation, privacy, obscenity,
confidentiality, copyright laws for using any report,
date, information derived as a result of using the
software and Quick Heal RDM services.
V. that while using the software, Quick Heal suggests
some actions to be initiated by You in your sole benefit,
for example ‖Quick Heal software may suggest You to
uninstall infected applications‖, however such actions
are     suggestive     and    Quick    Heal    takes    no
responsibility/liability if you perform such suggestive
actions or not and Quick Heal assumes no
27
responsibility/ liability for any liability arising out of
such actions/inactions.
9. QUICK HEAL STATUS UPDATE
Upon every update of licensed copy, Quick Heal Update
module will send current product status information to
Quick Heal Internet Centre. The information that will be
sent to the Internet Centre includes the Quick Heal
protection health status like, which monitoring service is
in what state in the system. The information collected
does not contain any files or personal date. The
information will be used to provide quick and better
technical support for legitimate customers. All the
registered user/subscribers will get the updates free of
cost from the date of license activation until the expiry
date of the license.
13. Intellectual Property
The software, source code, activation code, license keys,
documentation, systems, ideas, information, content,
design, and other matters related to the software, Quick
Heal RDM services, trademarks are the sole proprietary
and intellectual property rights of Quick Heal protected
under the Intellectual Property Laws and belongs to
Quick Heal. Nothing contained in this Agreement grant
You any rights, title, interest to intellectual property,
including without limitation any error corrections,
enhancements, updates, or modifications to the software
and Quick Heal RDM service whether made by Quick
Heal or any third party. You understand and
acknowledge that you are provided with a license to use
this software and Quick Heal RDM services subject to
the terms and conditions of this Agreement.”
28
32.    After due consideration of the terms of agreement, the

Tribunal proceeded to observe the following in para 45 of the

impugned order :­

      “45. The agreement provides that the licensee shall have
      right to use software subject to terms and the conditions
      mentioned in the agreement. The licensee is entitled to
      use the software/RDM services from the date of license
      activation until the expiry date of the license. The
      licensee is also entitled for the updates and technical
      support. The conditions set out in the agreement do not
      interfere with the free enjoyment of the software by the
      licensee. Merely because ―Quick Heal‖ retains title and
      ownership of the software does not mean that it
      interferes with the right of the licensee to use the
      software.”
33.    The Tribunal ultimately concluded as under while allowing

the appeal filed by the assessee herein :­

      “51. Thus, viewed from any angle, the transaction in the
      present Appeal results in the right to use the software
      and would amount to “deemed sale”. It is, therefore, not
      possible to accept the contention of the learned
      Authorized Representative of the Department that the
      transaction would not be covered under sub­clause (d) of
article 366(29A)
of the Constitution.”
34.    Thus, from the aforesaid, it is evident that the Tribunal

laid much emphasis on the fact that in accordance with the

agreement the licensee has the right to use the software subject
29
to the terms and the conditions laid therein. The Tribunal took

notice of the fact that in accordance with the agreement the

licensee is entitled to use the software/RDM service from the

date of the activation of the license till the date of its expiry. The

Tribunal also took into consideration the fact that the licensee

is also entitled for the updates and the technical support. In

view of the Tribunal, the right to use the software would

amount to the “deemed sale”. The Tribunal rejected the

contention of the revenue that the transaction would not be

covered under sub­clause (d) of the
Article 366(29A)
of the

Constitution.
RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF LAW
35.    The New definition of the term “service” has been given

under the clause 44 of
Section 65B
of the Act 1994 which reads

as follows :­


      “(44) “service” means any activity carried out by a
      person for another for consideration, and includes a
      declared service, but shall not include­
(a) an activity which constitutes merely,–
30
(i) a transfer of title in goods or immovable property, by
way of sale, gift or in any other manner; or
(ii) such transfer, delivery or supply of any goods which
is deemed to be a sale within the meaning of clause
(29A) of Article 366 of the Constitution; or
(iii) a transaction in money or actionable claim;
(b) a provision of service by an employee to the employer
in the course of or in relation to his employment;
(c) fees taken in any Court or tribunal established under
any law for the time being in force.
Explanation 1.­ For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
declared that nothing contained in this clause shall
apply to,–
(A) the functions performed by the Members of
Parliament, Members of State Legislative, Members of
Panchayats, Members of Municipalities and Members of
other local authorities who receive any consideration in
performing the functions of that office as such member;
or

(B) the duties performed by any person who holds any
post in pursuance of the provisions of the Constitution in
that capacity; or

(C) the duties performed by any person as a
Chairperson or a Member or a Director in a body
established by the Central Government or State
Governments or local authority and who is not deemed
as an employee before the commencement of this
section.
Explanation 2.­For the purposes of this clause,
transaction in money shall not include any activity
relating to use of money or its conversion by cash or by
31
any other mode, from one form, currency or
      denomination,   to  another  form,  currency    or
      denomination for which a separate consideration is
      charged;
Explanation 3.– For the purposes of this Chapter,­
(a) an unincorporated association or a body of persons,
      as the case may be, and a member thereof shall be
      treated as distinct persons;
(b) an establishment of a person in the taxable territory
      and any of his other establishment in a non­taxable
      territory shall be treated as establishments of distinct
      persons.
Explanation 4.­ A person carrying on a business through
      a branch or agency or representational office in any
      territory shall be treated as having an establishment in
      that territory;”
36.    The analysis of the definition of “service” as above makes it

clear that the service will not include those activities which

includes transfer, delivery or supply of any goods which is

deemed to be sale within the meaning of Clause (29A) of
Article

366
of the Constitution.
37.    Clause (29A) of
Article 366
of the Constitution of India

defines the deemed sale. This clause reads as follows:­


      “(29A) tax on the sale or purchase of goods
      includes—
32
(a) a tax on the transfer, otherwise than in pursuance of
      a contact, of property in any goods for cash, deferred
      payment or other valuable consideration;
(b) a tax on the transfer of property in goods (whether as
      goods or in some other form) invoked in the execution of
      a works contract;
(c) a tax on the delivery of goods on hire purchase or any
      system of payment by instalments;
(d) a tax on the transfer of the right to use any goods for
      any purpose (whether or not for a specified period) for
      cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration;
(e) a tax on the supply of goods by any unincorporated
      association or body of persons to a member thereof for
      cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration;
(f) a tax on the supply, by way of or as part of any
      service or in any other manner whatsoever, of goods,
      being food or any other article for human consumption or
      any drink (whether or not intoxicating), where such
      supply or service, is for cash, deferred payment or other
      valuable consideration,

      and such transfer, delivery or supply of any goods shall
      be deemed to be a sale of those goods by the person
      making the transfer, delivery or supply and a purchase
      of those goods by the person to whom such transfer,
      delivery or supply is made;”
38.    Thus, the above clause specifies the cases which the tax in

relation to sale and purchase of goods will include and also

outlines its applicability even in the case of deemed sale.
39.    Section 66E deals with the concept of declared services.
This Section reads as follows:­
33
“66E. The following shall constitute declared services,
namely:––
(a) renting of immovable property;
(b) construction of a complex, building, civil structure or
a part thereof, including a complex or building intended
for sale to a buyer, wholly or partly, except where the
entire consideration is received after issuance of
completion­certificate by the competent authority.
Explanation.­ For the purposes of this clause,­
(I) the expression “competent authority” means the
Government or any authority authorized to issue
completion certificate under any law for the time being
in force and in case of nonrequirement of such
certificate from such authority, from any of the
following, namely:–

(A) architect registered with the Council of Architecture
constituted under the
Architects Act, 1972
; (20 of
1972.) or
(B) chartered engineer registered with the Institution of
Engineers (India); or
(C) licensed surveyor of the respective local body of the
city or town or village or development or planning
authority;
(II) the expression “construction” includes additions,
alterations, replacements or remodeling of any existing
civil structure;
(c) temporary transfer or permitting the use or
enjoyment of any intellectual property right;
(d) development, design, programming, customisation,
adaptation, upgradation, enhancement, implementation
of information technology software;
(e) agreeing to the obligation to refrain from an act, or to
tolerate an act or a situation, or to do an act;
34
(f) transfer of goods by way of hiring, leasing, licensing
      or in any such manner without transfer of right to use
      such goods;
(g) activities in relation to delivery of goods on hire
      purchase or any system of payment by instalments;
(h) service portion in the execution of a works contract;
(i) service portion in an activity wherein goods, being
      food or any other article of human consumption or any
      drink (whether or not intoxicating) is supplied in any
      manner as a part of the activity.”
40.   Thus, the declared services include the services of renting

of     immovable        property,     works       contract,        hire

purchase/instalment payment system, supply of food/drink,

etc. In other words, under the Constitution what is related to

deemed sale is also covered under the deemed service as per the

above Section.
41.   The Transfer of Right to use goods for case, deferred

payment or value consideration is considered as deemed sale

under sub­clause (d) of
Article 366(29A)
of the Constitution of

India. Right to use of tangible goods service has also been

brought under the service tax net by the Finance Act, 2008,

with effect from 16.05.2008 vide notification No. 18/2008­ST,
35
dated 10.05.2008 whereby taxable service has been defined

under Section 65(105)(zzzzj) of the Act 1994 to mean as:­

      “Any services provided or to be provided, to any person,
      by any other person in relation to supply of tangible
      goods including machinery, equipment and appliances
      for use, without transferring right of possession and
      effective control of such machinery, equipment and
      appliances.”


POSITION OF LAW
42.
TATA Consultancy Services
(supra) was a case in which

the    specific    issue    of   computer        software   packages      was

considered as is the concern in the present case also. There

was, however, a distinction drawn insofar as the 'uncanned

software'    and     'canned     software'       alternatively   termed    as

'unbranded' and 'branded' is concerned. The distinction is in

that a 'canned software' contains programmes which can be

used as such by any person purchasing it, while an 'uncanned

software'    is    one     prepared   for    a     particular    purchaser's

requirements by tweaking the original software to adapt to the

specific requirements of a particular entity. While a 'canned

software' could be sold over the shelf, an 'uncanned software' is
36
programmed to specific and particular needs and requirements.
This Court held that in India the test to determine whether a

property is “goods”, for the purpose of sales tax, is not confined

to whether the goods are tangible or intangible or incorporeal.
The correct test would be to determine whether an item is

capable of abstraction, consumption and use and whether it

can be transmitted, transferred, delivered, stored, possessed,

etc. It was held that both in the case of 'canned' and 'uncanned'

software all these are possible (sic para 16).
Associated

Cement Companies Ltd. v. Commissioner of Customs
, (2001)

4 SCC 593, was heavily relied on by this Court. It was held:­


      "27. In our view, the term "goods" as used in
Article
      366(12)
of the Constitution and as defined under the
      said Act is very wide and includes all types of
      movable properties, whether those properties be
      tangible or intangible. We are in complete agreement
      with the observations made by this Court in
      Associated Cement Companies Ltd. A software
      program may consist of various commands which
      enable the computer to perform a designated task.
      The copyright in that program may remain with the
      originator of the program. But the moment copies are
      made and marketed, it becomes goods, which are
      susceptible to sales tax. Even intellectual property,
      once it is put on to a media, whether it be in the form
37
of books or canvas (in case of painting) or computer
discs or cassettes, and marketed would become
"goods". We see no difference between a sale of a
software program on a CD/floppy disc from a sale of
music on a cassette/CD or a sale of a film on a video
cassette/CD. In all such cases, the intellectual
property has been incorporated on a media for
purposes of transfer. Sale is not just of the media
which by itself has very little value. The software
and the media cannot be split up. What the buyer
purchases and pays for is not the disc or the CD. As
in the case of paintings or books or music or films the
buyer is purchasing the intellectual property and not
the media i.e. the paper or cassette or disc or CD.
Thus a transaction/sale of computer software is
clearly a sale of "goods" within the meaning of the
term as defined in the said Act. The term "all
materials, articles and commodities" includes both
tangible and intangible/incorporeal property which is
capable of abstraction, consumption and use and
which can be transmitted, transferred, delivered,
stored, possessed, etc. The software programs have
all these attributes".
28. At this stage it must be mentioned that Mr
Sorabjee had pointed out that the High Court has, in
the impugned judgment, held as follows:
"... In our view a correct statement would be that
   all intellectual properties may not be 'goods' and
   therefore branded software with which we are
   concerned here cannot be said to fall outside the
   purview of 'goods' merely because it is intellectual
   property; so far as 'unbranded software' is
   concerned, it is undoubtedly intellectual property
   but may perhaps be outside the ambit of 'goods'."
(emphasis supplied)
38
29. Mr Sorabjee submitted that the High Court
      correctly held that unbranded software was
      "undoubtedly intellectual property". Mr Sorabjee
      submitted that the High Court fell in error in making
      a distinction between branded and unbranded
      software and erred in holding that branded software
      was "goods". We are in agreement with Mr Sorabjee
      when he contends that there is no distinction
      between branded and unbranded software.
      However, we find no error in the High Court holding
      that branded software is goods. In both cases, the
      software is capable of being abstracted, consumed
      and use. In both cases the software can be
      transmitted,     transferred,   delivered,     stored,
      possessed, etc. Thus even unbranded software,
      when it is marketed/sold, may be goods. We,
      however, are not dealing with this aspect and
      express no opinion thereon because in case of
      unbranded software other questions like situs of
      contract of sale and/or whether the contract is a
      service contract may arise".
43.
Associated Cement Companies Ltd.
(supra) considered

the question whether the drawings, designs, etc. relating to

machinery or industrial technology were goods, leviable to duty

of customs on their transaction value at the time of import. It

was argued that the transfer of technology or know­how though

valuable was intangible. The technology when transmitted to

India on some media does not get converted from an intangible

thing to tangible thing or chattel and that in a contract by
39
supply of services there is no sale of goods, was the argument.
Reading
Section 2(22)
of the Customs Act, 1962 which defines

the word "goods", including clause (c) "baggage" and clause (e)

"any other kind of moveable property", it was held that any

moveable article brought into India by a passenger as part of

his baggage can make him liable to pay customs duty as per

the
Customs Tariff Act, 1975
. Any media whether in the form of

books or computer disks or cassettes which contain information

technology or ideas would necessarily be regarded as “goods”

under the aforesaid provisions of the
Customs Act
, these items

being   moveable   goods,   covered   by
Section   2(22)(e)
of   the

Customs Act. What was transferred was technical advice on

information technology. But the moment the information or

advice is put on a media, whether paper or diskettes or any

other thing, the supply is of a chattel. It is in respect of the

drawings, designs, etc. which are received that payment is

made to the foreign collaborators. The question whether the

papers or diskettes etc. containing advice and/or information

are goods for the purpose of the
Customs Act
was answered in
40
the affirmative. This Court clearly held that "the intellectual

property when put on a media would be regarded as an article

on the total value of which customs duty is payable". "When

technical material is supplied whether in the form of drawings or

manuals the same are goods liable to customs duty on the

transaction value in respect thereof".    It was concluded so in

paragraph 46:
"46. The concept that it is only chattel sold as chattel,
      which can be regarded as goods, has no role to play
      in the present statutory scheme as we have already
      observed that the word "goods" as defined under
      the
Customs Act
has an inclusive definition taking
      within its ambit any moveable property. The list of
      goods as prescribed by the law are different items
      mentioned in various chapters under the
Customs
      Tariff Act, 1997
or 1999. Some of these items are
      clearly items containing intellectual property like
      designs, plans, etc".
(underlining by us for emphasis)
44.   We may also refer to and rely upon a decision of this Court

in the case of 20th
Century Finance Corpn. Ltd. v. State of

Maharashtra
, reported in (2000) 6 SCC 12. In this decision,

this Court considered the incorporation of clause (d) of Clause
41
(29A) of
Article 366
of the Constitution
referred to above
. It is

apt to quote the following relevant portion from the judgment :­


       “26… The      various sub­clauses of clause (29A)
       of
Article 366
permit the imposition of tax thus: sub­
       clause (a) on transfer of property in goods; sub­
       clause (b) on transfer of property in goods; sub­
       clause (c) on delivery of goods; sub­clause (d) on
       transfer of the right to use goods; sub­clause (e) on
       supply of goods; and sub­clause (f) on supply of
       services. The words and such transfer, delivery or
       supply. In the latter portion of clause (29A),
       therefore, refer to the words transfer, delivery and
       supply, as applicable, used in the various sub­
       clauses. Thus, the transfer of goods will be a
       deemed sale in the cases of sub­clauses (a) and (b),
       the delivery of goods will be a deemed sale in case
       of sub­clause (c), the supply of goods and services
       respectively will be deemed sales in the cases of
       sub­ clauses (e) and (f) and the transfer of the right
       to use any goods will be a deemed sale in the case
       of sub­clause (d). Clause (29A) cannot, in our view,
       be read as implying that the tax under sub­clause
(d) is to be imposed not on the transfer of the right to
       use goods but on the delivery of the goods for use.
       Nor, in our view, can a transfer of the right to use
       goods in sub­clause (d) of clause (29A) be equated
       with the third sort of bailment referred to in
       Bailment by Palmer, 1979 edition, page 88. The
       third sort referred to there is when goods are left
       with the bailee to be used by him for hire, which
       implies the transfer of the goods to the bailee. In the
       case of sub­clause (d), the goods are not required to
       be left with the transferee. All that is required is that
       there is a transfer of the right to use the goods. In
42
our view, therefore, on a plain construction of sub­
         clause (d) of Clause (29A), the taxable event is the
         transfer of the right to use the goods regardless of
         when or whether the goods are delivered for use.
         What is required is that the goods should be in
         existence so that they may be used. And further
         contract in respect thereof is also required to be
         executed. Given that, the locus of the deemed sale is
         the place where the right to use the goods is
         transferred. Where the goods are when the right to
         use them is transferred is of no relevance to the
         locus of the deemed sale. Also of no relevance to the
         deemed sale is where the goods are delivered for
         use pursuant to the transfer of the right to use them,
         though it may be that in the case of an oral or
         implied transfer of the right to use goods, it is
         effected by the delivery of the goods.”
45.    While holding that in a contract for the transfer of the

right to use goods, the taxable event would be the execution of

the contract for delivery of the goods, it was observed :­


      “27.
Article 366(29A)(d)
further shows that levy of tax
      is not on use of goods but on the transfer of the right to
      use goods. The right to use goods accrues only on
      account of the transfer of right. In other words, right to
      use arises only on the transfer of such a right and
      unless there is transfer of right, the right to use does
      not arise. Therefore, it is the transfer which is sine qua
      non for the right to use any goods. If the goods are
      available, the transfer of the right to use takes place
      when the contract in respect thereof is executed. As
43
soon as the contract is executed, the right is vested in
      the lessee. Thus, the situs of taxable event of such a
      tax would be the transfer which legally transfers the
      right to use goods. In other words, if the goods are
      available irrespective of the fact where the goods are
      located and a written contract is entered into between
      the parties, the taxable event on such a deemed sale
      would be the execution of the contract for the transfer
      of right to use goods. But in case of an oral or implied
      transfer of the right to use goods it may be effected by
      the delivery of the goods.”
                                        (Emphasis Supplied)
46.
In
BSNL
(supra) this Court took the view that a

telephone service is nothing but a “service”. However, the

nature of the transaction involved in providing the telephone

connection may be a composite contract of “service” and “sale”.
There may be a transfer of right to use the “goods” as defined in

the providing of access or telephone connection by the

telephone service provider to a subscriber. Justice Ruma Pal,

speaking for the Bench in her separate judgment, took the view

that a subscriber to a telephone service could not reasonably be

taken to have intended to purchase or obtain any right to use

electromagnetic waves or radio frequencies when a telephone
44
connection is given. Nor does the subscriber intend to use any

portion of the wiring, the cable, the satellite, the telephone

exchange, etc. At the most, the concept of the sale in a

subscriber's mind would be limited to the handset that might

have been purchased for the purposes of getting a telephone

connection. As far as the subscriber is concerned, no right to

the use of any other goods, incorporeal or corporeal, is given to

him with the telephone connection. In such circumstances, it

was held that the electromagnetic waves or radio frequencies

are not “goods” within the meaning of the word “either in
Article

366(12)
or for the purpose of
Article 366(29A)(b)
”. Emphasis

was laid on the fact, whether there are any deliverable goods or

not. If there are no deliverable goods in existence, like the one

in
BSNL
(supra), there is no transfer of user under
Article

366(29A)(b)
at all.
47.    Justice Dr. AR. Lakshmanan, in his separate but

concurring judgment, highlighted the following attributes in

para 97 of the judgment to constitute a transaction for the

transfer of right to use the goods:­
45
“97. …

      a. There must be goods available for delivery;
b. There must be a consensus ad idem as to the
      identity of the goods;
c. The transferee should have a legal right to use the
      goods ­ consequently all legal consequences of such
      use including any permissions or licenses required
      therefor should be available to the transferee;
d. For the period during which the transferee has such
      legal right, it has to be the exclusion to the transferor ­
      this is the necessary concomitant of the plain
      language of the statute viz. a "transfer of the right to
      use" and not merely a licence to use the goods;
e. Having transferred the right to use the goods during
      the period for which it is to be transferred, the owner
      cannot again transfer the same rights to others.”
48.
In the case of
BSNL
(supra), His Lordship noticed that

none of the aforesaid attributes were present in the relationship

between the telecom service provider and a consumer of such

services.
49.    His Lordship thereafter in para 117 of the judgment

referred to the
Sale of Goods Act, 1930
. We quote para 117 as

under:­
46
“117.
Sale of Goods Act
, comprehends two elements,
      one is a sale and the other is delivery of goods.
      20th
Century Finance Corporation Limited vs. State of
      Maharashtra
, 2000 (6) SCC 12 at p. 44, para 35 ruled
      that

           "35. (c) where the goods are available for the
           transfer of right to use the taxable event on the
           transfer of right to use any goods is on the
           transfer which results in right to use and the situs
           of sale would be the place where the contract is
           executed and not where the goods are located for
           use.
(d) In cases where goods are not in existence or
           where there is an oral or implied transfer of the
           right to use goods, such transactions may be
           effected by the delivery of the goods. In such
           cases the taxable event would be on the delivery
           of goods."
50.    Ultimately, His Lordship took the view that as no goods’

elements were involved, the transaction was purely one of

service as there was no transfer of right to use the goods at all.
51.   The following principles to the extent relevant may be

summed up:­
(a) The Constitution (Forty­sixth) Amendment Act intends to

      rope in various economic activities by enlarging the scope

      of “tax on sale or purchase of goods” so that it may include
47
within its scope, the transfer, delivery or supply of goods

  that may take place under any of the transactions referred

  to in sub­clauses (a) to (f) of Clause (29A) of
Article 366.
The works contracts, hire purchase contracts, supply of

  food    for   human   consumption,    supply   of   goods   by

  association and clubs, contract for transfer of the right to

  use any goods are some such economic activities.
(b) The transfer of the right to use goods, as distinct from the

  transfer of goods, is yet another economic activity intended

  to be exigible to State tax.
(c) There are clear distinguishing features between ordinary

  sales and deemed sales.
(d)
Article 366(29A)(d)
of the Constitution implies tax not on

  the delivery of the goods for use, but implies tax on the

  transfer of the right to use goods. The transfer of the right

  to use the goods contemplated in sub­clause (d) of clause

  (29A) cannot be equated with that category of bailment

  where goods are left with the bailee to be used by him for

  hire.
48
(e) In the case of
Article 366(29A)(d)
the goods are not

  required to be left with the transferee. All that is required

  is that there is a transfer of the right to use goods. In such

  a case taxable event occurs regardless of when or whether

  the goods are delivered for use. What is required is that

  the goods should be in existence so that they may be used.
(f) The levy of tax under
Article 366(29A)(d)
is not on the use

  of goods. It is on the transfer of the right to use goods

  which accrues only on account of the transfer of the right.
In other words, the right to use goods arises only on the

  transfer of such right to use goods.
(g) The transfer of right is the sine qua non for the right to

  use any goods, and such transfer takes place when the

  contract is executed under which the right is vested in the

  lessee.
(h) The agreement or the contract between the parties would

  determine the nature of the contract. Such agreement has

  to be read as a whole to determine the nature of the
49
transaction. If the consensus ad idem as to the identity of

      the good is shown the transaction is exigible to tax.
(i) The locus of the deemed sale, by transfer of the right to

      use goods, is the place where the relevant right to use the

      goods is transferred. The place where the goods are

      situated or where the goods are delivered or used is not

      relevant.
52.   From    the   judicial   decisions,   the   settled   essential

requirement of a transaction for the transfer of the right to use

the goods are :
(i) it is not the transfer of the property in goods, but it is the

right to use the property in goods;
(ii)
Article 366(29A)(d)
read with the latter part of the clause

(29A) which uses the words, “and such transfer, delivery or

supply”… would indicate that the tax is not on the delivery of

the goods used, but on the transfer of the right to use goods

regardless of when or whether the goods are delivered for use
50
subject to the condition that the goods should be in existence

for use;
(iii) in the transaction for the transfer of the right to use goods,

delivery of the goods is not a condition precedent, but the

delivery of goods may be one of the elements of the transaction;
(iv) the effective or general control does not mean always

physical control and, even if the manner, method, modalities

and the time of the use of goods is decided by the lessee or the

customer, it would be under the effective or general control over

the goods;
(v) the approvals, concessions, licences and permits in relation

to goods would also be available to the user of goods, even if

such licences or permits are in the name of owner (transferor) of

the goods, and
(vi) during the period of contract exclusive right to use goods

along with permits, licenses, etc., vests in the lessee.
51
CONSTRUCTION OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES:­
53.   The salient features of the Quick Heal Internet Security

End­User License Agreement are as follows:­
1. Grant of License, not ownership
     In consideration of payment of the License Fee, which is a
     part of the price, Quick Heal (developer) grants the
     purchaser (end­user) a license which is non­exclusive and
     non­transferable. The developer reserves all rights not
     expressly granted and retains the title and ownership of
     the software, including all subsequent copies in any
     media.
2. Termination
     The End­user is entitled to use the software till the date on
     which the license expires. Any unauthorised usage of the
     software would result in automatic and immediate
     termination of the agreement and the license granted.
3. Breach of Contract
     The developer reserves to take any action against
     unauthorised usage. This may be criminal/civil action by
     the developer, including the right to block the key
     file/License key/product key with neither issuance of any
     notice nor refund to the end­user.
4. Right to Updates
     During the license period of the software, the end­users
     are entitled to receive free software updates via Internet.
     The End­users will be required to regularly download these
     updates, which shall be governed by the agreement or as
     amended by the developer.
52
5. Limiting Liability
   The End­users are solely responsible for configuring the
   software settings and the results, actions, inactions
   initiated due to the same. The developer assumes no
   liability for any deletion or modification authorised by the
   user in any case, and the indemnification clause would
   become applicable.
6. Disclaiming Warranties
   Certain features of the software may require additional
   payment. The developer disclaims any claim for
   reimbursement of expenses arising out of end­users’ usage
   of such features.
7. Governing Law
   The End­users are obliged to comply with all laws,
   regulations of India and any foreign law, including privacy,
   obscenity, confidentiality, copyright laws, while using the
   software.
8. Data Collection
   On updating every licensed copy, the developer would
   collect “the current product status information”, which
   include the state of monitoring service in the system. This
   information is used for improving the developer’s technical
   support towards its customers. No files or personal data is
   collected.
9. Intellectual Property Rights of the Developer
   The End­users do not have any right, title, or interest to
   the intellectual property, including any error corrections,
   enhancements, updates, or modifications to the software,
53
whether made by the developer or third party.
54.
In
Delta     International       Ltd. v. Shyam       Sundar

Ganeriwalla
, (1999)        4     SCC      545 :
AIR     1999       SC

2607 and Ramdev        Food    Products    (P)   Ltd. v. Arvindbhai

Rambhai Patel
, (2006) 8 SCC 726, this Court quoted with

approval the following principles of construction of contracts

from the ‘Interpretation of Contracts’ by Kim Lewison, Q.C.

as follows.
“1.03 For the purpose of the construction of contracts,
      the intention of the parties is the meaning of the words
      they have used. There is no intention independent of
      that meaning.
6.09 Where the words of a contract are capable of two
      meanings, one of which is lawful and the other
      unlawful, the former construction should be preferred.
Sir Edward Coke [Co. Litt. 42a] expressed the
      proposition thus:
‘It is a general rule, that whensoever the words of
      a deed, or of one of the parties without deed, may have
      a double intendment and the one standeth with law and
      right, and the other is wrongful and against law, the
      intendment that standeth with law shall be taken.’
            In more modern times that statement was
      approved by the Privy Council in Rodger v. Comptoir
54
D'Escomple de Paris, (1869) LR 2 PC 393 : 16 ER 618, in
      which Sir Joseph Napier, delivering the advice of the
      Board said:
‘The rule that words shall be construed most
         strongly against him who uses them gives place to a
         higher rule; higher because it has a moral element,
         that the construction shall not be such as to work a
         wrong.’
            Similarly, in Fausset v. Carpenter, (1831) 2 Dow
      & Cl 232 : 6 ER 715, the House of Lords accepted the
      submission of counsel that the court:
‘… in judging of the design and object of a deed,
      will not presume that a party executing the deed meant
      to do and did what he was wrong in doing, when a
      construction may be put on the instrument perfectly
      consistent with his doing only what he had a right to do.
However, the question of construction should not
      be approached with a leaning in one direction or
      another. Thus although the law frowns upon covenants
      in restraint of trade, nevertheless such a covenant
      should not be approached on the basis that it is prima
      facie illegal. ‘You are to construe the contract, and then
      see whether it is legal.’”
55.     The sum and substance of the ratio of the case of
BSNL
(supra) as discernible is that the contract cannot be vivisected

or split into two. Once a lumpsum has been charged for the

sale of CD (as in the case on hand) and sale tax has been paid

thereon, the revenue thereafter cannot levy service tax on the
55
entire sale consideration once again on the ground that the

updates are being provided. We are of the view that the artificial

segregation of the transaction, as in the case on hand, into two

parts is not tenable in law. It is, in substance, one transaction

of sale of software and once it is accepted that the software put

in the CD is “goods”, then there cannot be any separate service

element in the transaction. We are saying so because even

otherwise the user is put in possession and full control of the

software. It amounts to “deemed sale” which would not attract

service tax.
56.    In view of the aforesaid, we have reached to the

conclusion that the impugned order of the Tribunal suffers from

no jurisdictional or any other legal infirmity warranting any

interference at our end in the present appeal.
57.    In the result, the appeal fails and it is hereby dismissed.
58.    There shall be no order as to costs.
59.    Pending application(s), if any, also stands disposed of.
56
CIVIL APPEALS ARISING OUT OF S.L.P. (CIVIL) NOS. 6715­
6716 OF 2022
60.   Leave granted.
61.   These appeals, by special leave, are at the instance of the

assessee and is directed against the order passed by the High

Court of Judicature at Madras in Writ Appeal No. 1881 of 2021

and CMP No. 11998 of 2021 decided on 05.08.2021 by which

the High Court dismissed the writ appeal thereby affirming the

Order in Original dated 26.04.2018 passed by the respondent

herein.
FACTUAL MATRIX
62.   The appellant herein obtained the antivirus software

replicated from the units in Himachal Pradesh duly assessed to

Nil Central Excise duty under the Notification No. 50/2003 CE

dated 10.06.2003, and sold antivirus software in the CD form

i.e., as a “packaged software or canned software” both

indigenously by remitting appropriate VAT or exported the

same. Disputes were raised by the tax authorities claiming that

the activities of the appellant herein came within the ambit of

the Information Technology Software Service as defined under
57
Section 65(105)(zzzze)
of the Act 1994. The initial notices issued

ended in the confirmation of demand on the ground that since

the appellant was providing the key and allowing updates

online, it amounted to digital delivery and therefore it would fall

under the above taxable entry.
63.   The appellant preferred statutory appeals against these

orders passed by the Tribunal, Chennai Branch.
64.   The Tribunal was pleased to grant interim stay as the

appellant had paid VAT on the sale of the software. While the

appeals were pending before the Tribunal, Chennai Branch, the

Department continued to issue further show cause notices from

time to time along with the issued statement of demand for

these periods. The appellant filed a detailed reply dated

17.04.2018 contending that no service tax was payable as the

liability towards the VAT had already been discharged and the

software being goods could not be made exigible to service tax.
Despite the clear pronouncement by this Court, an Order­in­

Original dated 26.04.2018 was passed confirming tax on the

regime value charged by the appellant for the sale of the
58
software on which the VAT was paid including the value of the

software exported, leading to the excessive demand not

authorized under law. Further, the authority observed in para

6.6 of his order that in terms of the judgment of this Hon’ble

Court in TCS, the character of the software as goods cannot be

taken away and that it fell within the ambit of “deemed sales”.
The said authority further imposed penalty and levied interest

as well.
65.   The appellant filed Writ Petition No. 25923 of 2018 before

the Madras High Court and a learned single Judge admitted the

writ petition and also granted interim stay noting that the VAT

had already been paid on the goods.
66.   While the writ petition was pending, the Tribunal, Chennai

Branch followed the decision of the Tribunal, Delhi Bench in the

case of
Quick Heal Technologies Ltd.
(supra) and allowed the

appeals filed by the appellant in their earlier cases. It is

significant to note that against this order of the Tribunal,

Chennai Bench no further appeal has been filed by the
59
Department and thus, the view taken by the Tribunal became

final in so far as the appellant is concerned.
67.   When the above­mentioned Writ Petition No. 25923 of

2018 came up for final disposal, the learned single Judge vide

order dated 29.10.2020 dismissed the Writ Petition, inter alia,

on the ground that the High Court was not bound by the

decision of the Tribunal, Delhi Bench in the case of Quick Heal

Technologies Ltd. and the appellant’s own order passed by the

Tribunal, Chennai Bench.
68.   Aggrieved by the order of the learned single Judge, the

appellant preferred the Writ Appeal No. 1881 of 2021 against

the order dated 29.10.2020 passed by the learned single Judge

in Writ Petition No. 25923 of 2018. The Division Bench vide

order dated 05.08.2021 declined to interfere with the order of

the learned single Judge on the ground that an earlier Division

Bench decision of the Madras High Court in the case of M/s
Infotech Software Dealers Association v. Union of India
(supra) covered the issue. It also held that the anti­virus
60
software which is installed in the hardware would interact

whenever the user of the computer engages the system.
69.
In such circumstances
referred to above
, the appellant

herein has come up before this Court by filing the present

appeals.
70.   These appeals should succeed in the light of the reasoning

assigned by us while dismissing the Civil Appeal (Diary No.

24399 of 2020), as above.
71.   However, while allowing these appeals, we may only

observe that in the case of M/s
Infotech Software Dealers

Association v. Union of India
(supra) the challenge was to the

validity of
Section 65(105)(zzzze)
levying service tax on the

information technology software service. The High Court held

that the question whether the software is “goods” or not would

depend on the facts and circumstances of individual case.
It is

evident on plain reading of the judgment rendered by the

Madras High Court in the case of M/s
Infotech Software

Dealers Association
(supra) that it has not referred to the
61
decision of this Court in the case of
TATA Consultancy

Services
(supra).
72.   We take notice of the fact that the appellant herein had

also filed a Review Petition No. 205 of 2021 against the order

dated 05.08.2021 in the Writ Appeal No. 1881 of 2021, which

came to be rejected vide order dated 20.12.2021.
73.   In view of the judgment rendered above in Civil Appeal

(Diary No. 24399 of 2020), these appeals should succeed and

deserve to be allowed.
74.   In the result, the appeals are allowed.      The impugned

order passed by the High Court dated 05.08.2021 in the Writ

Appeal No. 1881 of 2021 as also the order dated 20.12.2021

passed in the Review Petition No. 205 of 2021 in Writ Appeal

No. 1881 of 2021 are hereby set aside.
75.    There shall be no order as to costs.
62
76.   Pending application(s), if any, also stands disposed of.
……………………………………..J.
                               (ABHAY S. OKA)




                               …………………………………….J.
                               (J.B. PARDIWALA)

NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 05, 2022
63