[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Gitabai Maruti Raut (Dead) Thr. Lr. Sh. ... vs Pandurang Maruti Raut (D) Thr. Lrs on 11 August, 2022
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
Hemant Gupta
REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7702 OF 2013



          GITABAI MARUTI RAUT (DEAD) THROUGH LR.
          & ORS.                                                            .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                        VERSUS

          PANDURANG    MARUTI                  RAUT     (DEAD)
          THROUGH LRS. & ORS.                                             .....RESPONDENT(S)




                                              JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.             The plaintiff filed the present appeal against the judgment dated

                         01.10.2008 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay

                         dismissing the second appeal filed by her. However, the plaintiff died

                         on 18.12.2014 during the pendency of the appeal. Now, the legal

                         representatives of the deceased are prosecuting the present appeal.
2.             The question for consideration herein is whether the properties at

                         villages Pirangut and Nande are joint family ancestral properties in the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2022.08.11
hands of Maruti, the deceased son of Balaji, predecessor of the parties
16:53:14 IST
Reason:
in appeal. The admitted family tree shows that Balaji was the common
1
ancestor. He left behind his four sons, Narayan, Raghunath, Maruti and

     Sopan. Maruti died on 13.7.1966. He married twice, both his wives had

     a similar name, Geetabai. The first wife, Geetabai, died in the year

     1948 leaving behind the defendant Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4, namely,

     Pandurang, Krishnakant, Ramchandra and Muktabai. Geetabai, his

     second wife and the original plaintiff, filed a suit for partition. She died

     during the pendency of the proceedings leaving behind two sons and

     three daughters, namely, Chandrakant, Ramesh, Uma, Shailaja and

     Sumitra.
3.   There is no dispute in respect of the property situated at Lavale, which

     has been held to be a joint family property wherein a finding has been

     returned that the plaintiff would have a share in the estate.
4.   In respect of a property at Nande, the High Court affirmed the finding

     that Pandurang/defendant No. 1, purchased the property at village

     Nande vide sale deed dated 25.2.1969 after the death of Maruti. It was

     also held that the appellant neither pleaded nor proved that there is

     sufficient nucleus of the income from the joint family from which the

     property at village Nande could be purchased. In the absence of any

     proof, the claim of appellant for such property situated at Village

     Nande was negated. Our attention was drawn to the plaint filed by the

     deceased Geetabai but we do not find any pleadings regarding the

     property at Nande as purchased from the income of the joint family

     property. All three Courts have concurrently held that the property at
2
Nande is not a joint ancestral property. We find no reason to interfere

     with the findings relating to the property situate in Village Nande.
5.   Hence, the only question which survives for consideration is whether

     the property situated at village Pirangut is an ancestral property, in

     which the appellants had share.
6.   The plaintiff has pleaded that land at Pirangut was purchased by Hindu

     Undivided Family (HUF). The plaintiff and deceased Maruti looked after

     and brought up defendant Nos. 1 to 4. The plaintiff along with all

     defendants were living jointly and after the death of Maruti, the joint

     family continued even thereafter, as the Defendant No. 1 assumed the

     position of Karta of Maruti’s family. It is pleaded that there was a

     partition of the properties during Maruti’s life time. The memo was

     reduced in writing and signed by all the four sons of Balaji in the year

     1961, but the mutation on the basis of family settlement was sought in

     the year 1970, only after the death of Maruti.
7.   In respect of the property at Pirangut, the High Court returned the

     following findings:
“9. This takes me to consider the claim of the Appellant in the
           property at Pirangut. The property at Pirangut was admittedly
           purchased by Raghunath, uncle of Defendant no. 1 from one
           Kanhu Dhondu Kudale on 19 th August 1947. According to the
           appellant by Mutation entry 1274 this property was partitioned,
           and the land at Pirangut was given to Defendant no. 1. If that be
           so the Appellant obviously has share in it. Per contra it is the
           case of the defendant no. 1 that this property was purchased by
           Raghunath in 1947, which was latter on gifted in favour of
           Defendant no. 1. In order to claim share in the property at
           Pirangut it was for the appellant/plaintiff to plead and prove that
           property at Pirangut was ancestral property. Then and then only
3
appellant/Plaintiff would have share in it. In the absence of any
               evidence that the property in the hand of Raghunath was
               ancestral property, in my considered view, the appellant/plaintiff
               could not have relied upon the Mutation entry no. 1274 to claim
               share in the suit property.”
8.      Mr. Sudhanshu S. Choudhari, learned counsel for the appellants

        referred to judgments reported as Mallappa Girimallappa Betgeri &

        Ors. v. R. Yellappagouda Patil & Ors.1,
Surendra Kumar v.

        Phoolchand (D
) through LRs.
&
Anr. 2 and Appasaheb Peerappa

        Chamdgade v. Devendra Peerappa Chamdgade & Ors.3
to

        contend that the property purchased by Raghunath was the property

        from the income of the ancestral property and, therefore, in the said

        property, the appellants cannot be deprived of their share.                 The

        appellants also referred to the statement of Sopan, brother of

        Raghunath, who had appeared as PW-2. Sopan had deposed that the

        ancestral property is situated at Lavale and Pirangut and that the

        property at Pirangut was entered in the name of the elder brother

        Raghunath. The partition took place between the brothers and a

        memorandum (Ex 111) was prepared to this effect.
9.      The memorandum dated 23.12.1961- Ex-111 has been produced by

        the appellants before this Court. The said memorandum shows

        different parts of the land situated in village Pirangut falling to the

        share of Narayan, Raghunath, Maruti and Sopan. Apart from the share

1    AIR 1959 SC 906
2    (1996) 2 SCC 491
3    (2007) 1 SCC 521
4
in the land, even the other activities were arranged for and

      memorandum was prepared. In the cross-examination, Sopan admitted

      that there was no joint family at Nande but the partition had taken

      place between the brothers of the property situated at Lavale and

      Pirangut. He stated that the property situated at Pirangut was standing

      in the name of his brother Raghunath.
10.   The plaintiff Geetabai appeared as PW-1. She deposed that landed

      property at Pirangut was inherited by them from her father-in-law,

      Balaji.     She has also referred to the memorandum of settlement

      recorded on 23.12.1961 and that it bears the signature of Raghunath

      and Sopan (PW-2) and thumb impression of Narayan. In the cross-

      examination, she stated that the land in the name of her father-in-law

      was situated at Village Lavale and Pirangut. She further deposed that

      landed property situated at Pirangut as well as the property at Nande

      were purchased by her husband. She denied that the property situated

      at Pirangut was purchased by Raghunath. She also denied the

      suggestion that property at Village Lavale alone was joint family

      property.
11.   The memorandum of partition was entered on 23.12.1961 when Maruti

      was alive, but the same was sought to be given effect in the revenue

      record vide Ex.104, Mutation No. 1274 on 28.6.1970. Such revenue

      record is in respect of land situated at village Pirangut, wherein,

      namely, Narayan, Raghunath and Sopan, sons of Balaji and Pandurang
5
Maruti son of fourth brother Maruti, have been allotted separate share

      of land in the land situated at Village Pirangut. Pandurang had been

      given share as by that time Maruti had died. Therefore, Pandurang got

      the property by partition amongst four brothers alone.
12.   The High Court has misread the most important evidence led by the

      appellants i.e., one of the brothers, Sopan (PW-2), who had deposed

      that the land at village Pirangut was ancestral land. The Mutation No.

      1274 itself shows that the land was partitioned amongst the brothers.

      It was not a gift by Raghunath in favor of Pandurang/defendant no.1, as

      found by the High Court. The name of Pandurang in respect of share of

      Maruti came after the death of Maruti in the year 1966 being the eldest

      male member as Karta of the joint family of Maruti. Pandurang held the

      property as Karta of the joint family property fallen to the share of

      Maruti in terms of the settlement arrived on 23.12.1961. The

      settlement (Ex.111) is with Maruti and not Pandurang as he was alive

      on that day.   Since, when the revenue entry was being recorded in

      1970, after Maruti had died, Pandurang represented the estate of

      Maruti as Karta. In view of the said fact, the findings recorded by the

      High Court in para 9 are not tenable.
13.   In fact, neither Geetabai (PW-1) nor Sopan (PW-2) had been suggested

      that the property was gifted by Raghunath to Pandurang. Pandurang

      has not said a word about the partition entered by four brothers on

      23.12.1961. In the cross-examination, he admitted that there was a
6
partition between his father and uncle before 1960 but he could not

      tell the exact year. He could not identify the signatures of his uncle on

      Ex.111, though he identified the signatures of Sopan (PW-2). He also

      admitted that he has not raised any objection regarding mutation entry

      no. 1274.    He denied that his father had purchased any land at

      Pirangut. Though Pandurang has stated that Raghunath has gifted the

      property to him but no gift deed has been produced on record nor the

      immovable property could be gifted orally. Therefore, the stand of the

      Pandurang that the land was gifted to him is untenable. Therefore, the

      findings recorded by the High Court is without any evidence.
14.   The principles of law enunciated in the above judgments are not in

      dispute. Since the evidence on record including written memorandum

      of settlement dated 23.12.1961 (Ex.111) and the mutation (Ex.104)

      show that Pirangut was a joint family property, therefore, the

      expression ‘partition’ has been used.    There is no evidence that the

      property at Village Pirangut was gifted to Pandurang by Raghunath, the

      eldest son of Balaji. There is no evidence that Raghunath was the sole

      owner or that he acquired the property from his income. The

      categorical statement of Geetabai, the plaintiff is that her father-in-law

      was the owner of the property at Pirangut. Even Sopan has also

      deposed to the same effect. He was examined as the surviving son of

      Balaji. In the absence of any evidence that Raghunath had the capacity

      to purchase the property as the documentary evidence in respect of
7
partition of the property situated at Village Pirangut, the findings

         recorded by the High Court cannot be sustained.
15.      The plaintiff and defendants including daughters of Maruti have equal

         share in the Pirangut and Lavale property in view of the judgment of

         this Court reported as
Vineeta Sharma v. Rakesh Sharma & Ors.4
.

         Thus, Geetabai, the plaintiff, Pandurang, Krishnakant, Ramchandra,

         Muktabai, defendant Nos. 1 to 4, and Chandrakant, Ramesh, Uma,

         Shailaja and Sumitra, defendant Nos. 5 to 9 would have 1/10 th share

         each. The share of Geetabai would devolve according to law of

         succession applicable. The purchaser shall be entitled to such interest

         in the property as its vendor had in terms of the above decree.
16.      The preliminary decree is ordered to be granted in the said terms. The

         parties are directed to seek final decree from the competent Court in

         accordance with law.
17.      The appeal thus stands allowed in the above terms.
.............................................J.
                                                                  (HEMANT GUPTA)




                                             .............................................J.
                                                                     (VIKRAM NATH)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 11, 2022.
4     (2020) 9 SCC 1
8