[Cites
6
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Arun Bhatiya vs Hdfc Bank on 8 August, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
A S Bopanna
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Reportable
                                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                               Civil Appeal Nos 5204-5205 of 2022
                                          (Arising out of SLP(C) Nos 29765-29766 of 2019)




     Arun Bhatiya                                                               .... Appellant(s)


                                                              Versus


     HDFC Bank & Ors                                                            ....Respondent(s)




                                                         JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J



     1                   Leave granted.
2                   The appeals arise from two orders of the National Consumer Disputes Redressal

                         Commission 1, namely, (i) an order dated 7 May 2019 by which the NCDRC dismissed

                         the appeal as withdrawn with liberty to approach the appropriate forum on the

                         request of the counsel for the appellant; and (ii) an order dated 25 July 2019 of the
Signature Not Verified
NCDRC dismissing the application for review.
Digitally signed by
3                   The appellant instituted a consumer complaint before the State Consumer Disputes
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2022.08.16
10:59:29 IST
Reason:
1   “NCDRC”
2
Redressal Commission 2 at Lucknow. The case of the appellant was that he and his

       father, the fourth respondent, opened a joint Fixed Deposit3 account on 7 January

       2016, at the Agra Branch of the first respondent 4. The FD was in the amount of INR

       75 lakhs for a period of 145 days, interest being payable at the rate of 7.5% per

       annum. The amount of the FD on maturity was INR 77 lakhs. According to the

       appellant, on 31 May 2016, the appellant and his father jointly gave written

       instructions to the respondent bank to renew the joint FD for ten days, while

       retaining the joint mode of operation.
4      On 1 June 2016, appellant’s father travelled to Surat to stay with his other son, the

       appellant’s elder brother. The appellant alleges that on 2 June 2016, his father

       submitted a letter to the Manager of the respondent bank at its Adajan Branch,

       Surat requesting encashment of the entire FD amount of INR 77 lakhs to his (the

       father’s) individual savings account at Agra. On 3 June 2016, the appellant wrote to

       the respondent bank with instructions to not transfer the FD amount to any individual

       bank account. However, contrary to the instructions, the proceeds of the FD were

       credited to the account of the appellant’s father. On 4 June 2016, the appellant

       received an email from the respondent bank stating that they had credited INR 77

       lakhs to the appellant’s account. However, the appellant alleges that no such

       amount was credited to his account.
5      The appellant moved a consumer complaint on the allegation that there was a

       deficiency of service by the respondent bank. The SCDRC, by its judgment dated

       24 October 2018, declined to entertain the complaint on the ground that the

       dispute essentially was between the appellant and his father and did not fulfill the


2 “SCDRC”
3 “FD”
4 “Respondent bank”
3
description of a consumer dispute. During the course of its judgment, the SCDRC

          held that from the statement made by both the parties, it was evident that the

          amount had been deposited jointly in the name of the appellant and his father for

          a period of 145 days, the maturity date being 31 May 2016. While the case of the

          appellant was that upon the maturity of the FD, both the appellant and his father

          had jointly issued a direction to the bank for renewing it for a period of ten days, the

          bank claimed that the FD amount was credited to the account of appellant’s

          father on the request made by the appellant’s father on 31 May 2016. The SCDRC

          noted the submission of the appellant that since the FD amount was deposited in

          the joint name of the appellant and his father, it could not be credited solely into

          the account of the father. The SCDRC was of the view that the dispute was primarily

          between the appellant and his father on the issue of the FD amount deposited, and

          therefore only a civil court was competent to deal with such a dispute. Having

          recorded the rival submissions, the SCDRC relegated the appellant to the remedy of

          a civil suit before the competent forum.
6         The appellant instituted an     appeal against the decision of the SCDRC under
section 19
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 5 (as it was then in operation). The

          appeal which was filed before the NCDRC was disposed of on 7 May 2019, in terms

          of the following order:
“After some arguments, counsel for the appellant, upon
                       instructions, seeks to withdraw the present appeal, with
                       liberty to approach the appropriate Forum.
Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed as withdrawn with
                       liberty to the appellant to approach the appropriate
                       Forum.”
7         The appellant then filed a review application along with an affidavit stating that he

5   “1986 Act”
4
was present before the NCDRC and had not furnished any instructions to the

    counsel to withdraw the appeal. The appellant also alleged that the previous

    counsel had only provided a truncated copy of the FD document without the

    reverse, which contained the terms and conditions of the FD. The application for

    review has been rejected on 25 July 2019. The observations of the NCDRC are

    extracted below:
“It is not at all the case that the impugned order under review
                 had been passed because the FD produced was in a
                 truncated form or any such fact. The order under review is
                 crystal clear in that it had only allowed the counsel for the
                 appellant to withdraw the present appeal with liberty to
                 approach the appropriate forum. It is also clear from the order
                 that this was done after some arguments in respect of the
                 appeal had been heard.
It is as well to mention that earlier, it had been noted in the
                 Commission’s order dated 8.1.2019 that there was an issue of
                 maintainability of this complaint, as it appeared to be father-
                 son dispute and was therefore not in the nature of consumer
                 complaint for the Consumer Fora.
In view of the above, I see no reason to review the order
                  dated 7.5.2019. This review Application No. 221 of 2019
                  alongwith I.A. No. 11513 of 2019 are accordingly dismissed.”

8   We have heard Mr Kushagra Pandey, counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant

    and Mr Arvind Nayar, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents nos. 1

    to 3.
9   Having set out the rival cases in the manner in which the consumer complaint was

    considered by the SCDRC, it becomes apparent that the appellant’s complaint is

    that there is a deficiency of service on the part of the respondent bank. Essentially,

    the case of the appellant is that:
(i) The FD was in the joint names of the appellant and his father;
5
(ii) Upon the FD maturing for payment, a request was jointly made at the Agra

           Branch of the respondent bank for renewing it for ten days; and
(iii) The Bank was not justified in law in entertaining the unilateral request of his

           father for crediting the proceeds to his account.
On this basis, it has been submitted that there is a clear deficiency of service on the

     part of the respondent bank.
10   Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has adverted to a communication

     which was addressed by the appellant to the respondent bank, which was

     received by the bank at 9.35 am on 3 June 2016. By his communication, the

     appellant stated that since the FD representing the amount of INR 77 lakhs was to

     be renewed in terms of the request which was submitted on 31 May 2016, the

     respondent bank ought not to act on          contrary instructions since the amount

     belonged jointly to the appellant and his father. Through the said communication,

     the appellant also instructed the bank to not transfer the FD amount to any single-

     person account. However, it has been submitted that, on 4 June 2016, the bank

     addressed an email to the appellant, in response to the communication dated 3

     June 2016 of the appellant, stating that the amount of INR 77 lakhs had been

     credited on 4 June 2016 to the account of the appellant. The appellant submits

     that the statement that the amount was credited to his account was palpably

     incorrect since the money was credited in the account of his father contrary to the

     instructions which were jointly issued on 31 May 2016.

11   In a counter filed on behalf of respondents 1 to 3, it was averred that the joint FD in

     the name of the appellant and his father of INR 75 lakhs was redeemed on 31 May
6
2016 and an amount of INR 77 lakhs was credited on 31 May 2016 in the account of

     appellant’s father. It was averred that thereafter the appellant approached the

     respondent bank with a request signed by his father for creating another FD of INR

     77 lakhs. Further, the appellant allegedly informed the respondent bank that his

     father could not have visited the bank personally due to old age and ill-health.

     Based on the representation made by appellant, the respondent bank put the FD

     request in process and debited INR 77 lakhs from the account of appellant’s father.

     Upon becoming aware of this, appellant’s father approached respondent bank

     with instructions to not book the FD request and credit the said amount in his

     account for his personal use. Respondent 1 to 3 allege that the appellant

     misrepresented the age and health of his father to booked the second FD.

     Therefore, the respondent bank credited back INR 77 lakhs in the account of

     appellant’s father.
12   Respondents 1 to 3 seek to controvert the correctness of the claim of the appellant.
However, at this stage, the narrow issue before the Court is as to whether the

     consumer complaint was correctly disposed of by the SCDRC without going into the

     merits of the claim of a deficiency of service on the ground that the appropriate

     remedy of the appellant would lie before the civil court.

13   The main contention of the appellant is that the premature encashment of the FD

     by respondent bank is in contravention of the terms and conditions of the joint FD

     and would amount to a deficiency of service under
Section 2(1)(g)
of the 1986 Act.

     At this point, it is pertinent to enumerate the relevant terms and conditions relating

     to the joint FD:
“In the case of premature encashment, all signatories to the
                   deposit must sign the encashment instruction.”
7
14        The present case arises under the 1986 Act, which was enacted to protect the

          welfare and interest of consumers. It will be helpful to look at the specific provisions

          of law relied upon by the appellant. The relevant provision, namely,
section

          2(1)(d)(ii)
of the 1986, reads as under:
“(d) “consumer” means any person who, -
(ii) hires or avails of any services for a consideration which has
                         been paid or promised or partly paid and partly promised, or
                         under any system of deferred payment and includes any
                         beneficiary of such services other than the person who hires or
                         avails of the services for consideration paid or promised, or
                         partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of
                         deferred payment, when such services are availed of with the
                         approval of the first mentioned person but does not include a
                         person who avails of such services for any commercial
                         purposes.
Explanation – For the purposes of this clause, “commercial
                        purpose” does not include use by a person of goods bought
                        and used by him and services availed by him exclusively for
                        the purposes of earning his livelihood by means of self-
                        employment”

15        Section 2(1)(g) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 defines ‘deficiency’ as:
“(g) “deficiency” means any fault, imperfection, shortcoming,
                         or inadequacy in the quality, nature and manner of
                         performance which is required to be maintained by or under
                         any law for the time being in force or has been undertaken to
                         be performed by a person in pursuance of a contract or
                         otherwise in relation to any service;”
16        A two-judge bench of this Court consisting of Justice D K Jain and Justice H L Dattu

          (as the Chief Justice was then) in
Maharashtra State Financial Corporation v. Sanjay

          Shankarsa Mamarde
6 observed that the scope of ‘deficiency’ as defined under

          clause 2(1)(g) of the 1986 Act is wide and is to be determined on the basis of the

          facts and circumstances of a particular case. The court observed:
“20. It is manifest from the language employed in the clause


6   (2010) 7 SCC 489
8
that its scope is also very wide but no single test as decisive in
                        the determination of the extent of fault, imperfection, nature
                        and manner of performance, etc. required to be maintained
                        can be laid down. It must depend on the facts of the
                        particular case, having regard to the nature of the “service”
                        to be provided.“
17         The expression ‘service’ has been defined in
Section 2(1)(o)
of the 1986 Act as

           follows:
(o) “service” means service of any description which is made
                         available to potential users and includes, but not limited to,
                         the provision of facilities in connection with banking, financing,
                         insurance, transport, processing, supply of electrical or other
                         energy, board or lodging or both, housing construction,
                         entertainment, amusement or the purveying of news or other
                         information, but does not include the rendering of any service
                         free of charge or under a contract of personal service;
18        A bench of this Court in
Vodafone Idea Cellular Limited v. Ajay Kumar Agarwal
7 (of

          which one of us, Dr Justice DY Chandrachud, was part) explained that service of

          every description will fall within the ambit of the definition of ‘services’ under
section

          2(1)(o)
of the 1986 Act. The relevant extract reads as follows:
“12. The definition of the expression “service” is couched in
                        wide terms. The width of statutory language emerges from the
                        manner in which the definition is cast. Parliament has used the
                        expression “service of any description which is made available
                        to potential users”. The definition employs the “means and
                        includes formula”. The means part of the definition
                        incorporates service of “any” description. The inclusive part
                        incorporates services by way of illustration, such as facilities in
                        connection with banking, finance, insurance, transport,
                        processing, supply of electrical and other energy, board or
                        lodging and housing construction. The inclusive part is
                        prefaced by the clarification that the services which are
                        specified are not exhaustive. This is apparent from the
                        expression “but not limited to”. The last part of the definition
                        excludes (i) the rendering of any service free of charge; and
(ii) services under a contract of personal service. Parliament
                        has confined the exclusion only to two specified categories.
The initial part of the definition however makes it abundantly
                        clear that the expression “service” is defined to mean service

7   (2022) 6 SCC 496.
9
of any description. In other words, a service of every
                  description would fall within the ambit of the statutory
                  provision.”

19   The respondent bank does not dispute that the appellant, along with his father,

     opened a joint FD with the bank. A person who avails of any service from a bank

     will fall under the purview of the definition of a ‘consumer’ under the 1986 Act. As a

     consequence, it would be open to such a consumer to seek recourse to the

     remedies provided under the 1986 Act.
20   There was a manifest error on the part of the SCDRC in declining to entertain the

     consumer complaint on merits. Whether the appellant is able to establish his case is

     a matter which has to be decided within the parameters of law as it emerges from

     the provisions of the 1986 Act. The essence of the complaint of the appellant is that

     there was a deficiency on the part of the respondent bank in proceeding to credit

     the proceeds of a joint FD exclusively to the account of his father. The SCDRC ought

     to have determined whether the complaint related to deficiency of service as

     defined under the 1986 Act. The SCDRC had no justification to relegate the

     appellant to pursue his claim before a civil court. The appellant did not, in the

     proceedings before the SCDRC, raise any claim against his father. Therefore, the

     SCDRC was wrong deducing that there was dispute between appellant and his

     father. Assuming that there was a dispute between the appellant and his father,

     that was not the subject matter of the consumer complaint. The complaint that

     there was a deficiency of service was against the bank.

21   The appellant instituted an application for review before the NCDRC categorically

     stating on affidavit that he had not furnished instructions to his counsel to apply for

     withdrawal of the appeal. In this view of the matter, the NCDRC ought to have

     entertained the review and should have set down the appeal for hearing. The
10
NCDRC having failed to do so, we pass the following order:
(i)      The orders of the NCDRC dated 7 May 2019 and 25 July 2019 are set aside.
First Appeal No 2262 of 2018 is restored to the file of the NCDRC; and
(ii)     Since the consumer complaint was instituted before the SCDRC in 2016, the

         entirety of the dispute shall be resolved on merits by the NCDRC.
(iii)    All the rights and contentions of the parties, including the defence of the

         appellant on merits, are kept open;
(iv)    The appellant would be at liberty to file an additional affidavit setting out any

         further defence it has, within a period of four weeks;
(v)     The NCDRC shall dispose of the appeal within a period of four months of the

         date on which a certified copy is placed on the record.
(vi)    Save and except for holding that the consumer complaint is maintainable, no

         observation has been made by this Court on the merits of the rival

         contentions.
11
22    The appeals are allowed in the above terms.
23    Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
………....…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                 [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                  ………..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                  [A S Bopanna]
New Delhi;
August 08, 2022
-S-