[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Samaj Parivartana Samudaya vs State Of Karnataka . on 26 August, 2022
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
Hima Kohli
,
N.V. Ramana
REPORTABLE


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                         IA No. 10973/2018, 83141/2017, 72931/2017 and 218/2014
                                                     IN
                                  WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 562 OF 2009


          SAMAJ PARIVARTANA SAMUDAYA
          AND ORS.                                                       .....PETITIONERS


                                                  VERSUS



          STATE OF KARNATAKA AND ORS.                                    ..... RESPONDENTS



                                                   ORDER
1. The present hearing is in continuation of our earlier hearing and

          order dated 20.05.2022, whereby this Court had considered and

          granted certain reliefs relating to the sale and export of iron ore

          in the Districts of Bellary, Tumkur and Chitradurga in the State

          of Karnataka. In the said order, we had specifically left open the

          question           of    the   lifting/relaxation   of   the   ceiling   limit   for

          production of iron ore in the abovementioned Districts and had

          sought an opinion from the Oversight Authority appointed by this
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
Date: 2022.08.26
15:11:30 IST
Court vide order dated 21.04.2022. The observations made by
Reason:
1
this Court were as follows:
“22….For the present, we propose to confine the
         scope of this order to examining the twin prayers
         made by learned counsel for the applicants namely,
         permission to sell the unsold stock of iron ore already
         excavated without resorting to the process of eauction
         conducted through the Monitoring Committee and for
         lifting the ban on export of iron ore/pellets from the
         districts of Bellary, Chitradurga and Tumkur situated
         in the State of Karnataka. Although certain
         submissions were made by the parties regarding
         lifting of the ceiling limit for total production of iron
         ore, at this juncture we are not inclined to decide the
         said issue.
32. With respect to the submissions of the parties in
            relation to the lifting of the ceiling limit for production
            of iron ore for mining leases in the Districts of
            Bellary, Chitradurga and Tumkur, we are of the
            considered opinion that it would be expedient to
            obtain an opinion from the Oversight Authority
            appointed by this Court vide order dated 21st April,
            2022 about the same before deciding the said issue.
We request the Oversight Authority to take inputs
            from the stakeholders, including the CEC and the
            Monitoring Committee, and to send his opinion to
            this Court preferably within a period of 4 weeks.”
2. On the last date of hearing, this Court took on record the Report

   filed by the learned Oversight Authority and had directed that

   copies of the same be made available to the parties whereafter,

   the matter was posted for considering the issue of lifting of ceiling

   limit.
3. Heard Mr. Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel appearing on
2
behalf of the original petitioner and Mr. Dushyant Dave, learned

   senior counsel appearing on behalf of Federation of Indian

   Mineral Industries, South.
4. Mr. Prashant Bhushan submitted that the ceiling limits were

   imposed in view of the earlier CEC recommendation and the

   report of the learned Lokayukta, which suggested that the rate of

   mining of iron ore in the State of Karnataka was unsustainable

   and would result in exhaustion of the iron ore deposits in the

   State of Karnataka within 30 years. This as per the learned

   counsel would seriously impact the goal of inter­generational

   equity. Lastly, he submitted that as the learned Oversight

   Authority has sought additional information regarding the

   infrastructural capacity before giving an opinion as to the

   viability of lifting of the ceiling limit, this Court should presently

   refrain from passing any orders at this juncture.
5. On the other hand, Mr. Dushyant Dave, Senior Advocate

   submitted that the present regime relating to iron ore mining in

   the State of Karnataka, with Court imposed ceiling limits, has

   been in existence for over a decade. When the ceiling limit was

   first imposed, the Court was confronted with a vastly different
3
situation, where there was rampant illegal mining activity taking

   place in the State of Karnataka. The said situation has now been

   remedied through series of orders passed by this Court. As a

   result, all illegal mining in the area has been halted and several

   ameliorative measures have been taken for the improvement of

   the   environment    and    ecology   of   the   region.   In   such

   circumstances, the learned Senior Advocate submitted that the

   present mining lease holders, who are complying with all the

   laws, are being unfairly penalized for the illegalities that were

   committed a decade ago. Such ceiling limits has resulted in a

   discriminatory situation where mining lease holders in the State

   of Karnataka are governed by one legal regime, while those in

   other States of the country are governed by a completely different

   regime.
6. At this juncture, it might be relevant, to highlight the history of

   the ceiling limits on production of iron ore through various Court

   orders. On 29.07.2011 and 26.08.2011, this Court had imposed

   a ban on mining in the districts of Bellary, and Chitradurga and

   Tumkur, respectively based on the report of the Centrally

   Empowered Committee (‘CEC’).
4
7. On   13.04.2012,    this   Court       had   accepted   some   of   the

   recommendations contained in the Report dated 13.03.2012 of

   the CEC, including the following recommendation:
“B) a ceiling of 25 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) for
        total production of iron ore from all the mining
        leases in District Bellary may be prescribed. A
        ceiling of 5 MMT for production of iron ore from
        all the mining leases in Districts Chitradurga and
        Tumkur together may be prescribed”
                                          (emphasis supplied)
8. The above position was reiterated by this Court vide judgment

   dated 18.04.2013, wherein the underlying set of petitions were

   disposed.
9. Vide judgment dated 14.12.2017, while dealing with certain

   applications seeking enhancement/lifting of ceiling cap. This

   court had permitted to increase the same from 25 MMT to 28

   MMT with respect to Bellary District, and from 5 MMT to 7 MMT

   for Chitradurga and Tumkur Districts collectively, based on a

   fresh report of the CEC dated 14.07.2017. Certain observations

   made by this Court for granting the relaxation merit reiteration:
“16. The cap fixed by this Court by Orders dated
       5.08.2011 and 1.09.2014 was in a situation where
       there was virtually no control or effective
       regulatory measures as to the maximum output
       that could be generated by a particular mine.
There was no scientific study of the iron ore
       reserves allocated to a particular mine in the
5
lease granted. As a result, it was virtually a free
for all exercise designed to achieve the maximum
profit within the shortest possible time frame.
There was rampant and illegal mining with
encroachments into forest land, particularly for
use as overburdened dumps resulting from
excessive mining. This had led to environmental
and ecological depredation to an extent that
necessitated judicial intervention to resolve a
situation which is the normal course may have fallen
within the executive domain. It is on the basis of the
intervention by the Court that R&R Plans have been
prepared for each mine by an expert body, ICFRE,
based on a scientific study of various parameters
including mining reserves. R&R Plans have been
drawn up specifying a particular/permissible limit for
each mine on the basis of limitations of reserves,
dumping     areas,    available  infrastructure    etc.
Accordingly, recommendations have been made for
increase of MPAP for 13 different category ‘A’ mines
and also for increase of MPAP in respect of 2 leases
held by the public sector lessee, i.e., NMDC.
Similarly, 10 mines are anticipated to undertake
operations within a short time….The solution offered
by the Court has to be realistic. Therefore, it is the
various features of the current scenario on the
ground as highlighted in the report of the CEC that
would deserve a close look/consideration. In this
regard, we may also take note of the fact that the
assessment of reserves has also changed over the
years and today the iron­ore reserves across the
State of Karnataka, comprising of haematite and
magnetite reserves, is to the tune of 10.071 BMT
(Billion Metric Tonnes). All these reasons impel us
to accept the recommendations of the CEC for
enhancement of the cap for category A and B Mines
in the 3 district of Bellary, Tumkur and Chitradurga
as well as the recommendations with regard to MPAP
of NMDC and MML, as mentioned in paragraph 12
6
hereinabove, with the further direction that all
         pending proposals for enhancement of MPAP shall be
         decided without delay, naturally, subject to the cap
         as above.”
                                          (emphasis supplied)
10. It is in light of the above set of facts that the submissions made

   by learned counsel ought to be considered. In 2017, this court

   was of the view that the situation had vastly changed in the State

   of Karnataka and had therefore allowed an increase in the ceiling

   limit. We are now in the year 2022. It can be no one’s case that

   the situation subsisting in the State of Karnataka currently, is

   the same as had existed when the underlying petition was first

   taken up, or when the Court had passed the order in 2017,

   relaxing the ceiling limit to some extent.
11. This is also clear from the changed stance of the State of

   Karnataka and the CEC before this Court. In 2017, the CEC had

   recommended a cumulative increase in the ceiling limit up to 5

   MMT, whereas now, the CEC supports the view that the ceiling

   limit need not to continue. The State of Karnataka, in 2017, had

   submitted before this Court that the ceiling limit may be raised to

   40 MMT, and gradually increased later to 50 MMT. However, the

   State of Karnataka is now in favor of a complete removal of the
7
ceiling limit.
12. In fact, it appears that the CEC, the State of Karnataka, the

   Ministry of Steel, Union of India, Karnataka Iron and Steel

   Manufacturers Association (‘KISMA’) and the mining lease

   holders are all ad idem that the changed situation on ground

   warrants a complete removal of the ceiling limits that were

   imposed by this Court to ensure protection of the environment

   and keeping in mind the principles governing intergenerational

   equity. The response dated 10.04.2022 of the CEC (viz. CEC

   Report No. 3 of 2022) on the issue of lifting of ceiling limits merits

   reproduction and is extracted herein below:
“17. This Hon’ble Court by orders dated
               05.08.2011 and 01.09.2014 had fixed a
               production cap of 25 MMT in respect of
               District Bellary and 5 MMT in respect of
               Districts Chitradurga and Tumkur. This
               Hon’ble     Court     by   Judgement     dated
               14.12.2017 enhanced the production cap to
               28 MMT in respect of District Bellary and 7
               MMT for Districts Chitradurga and Tumkur.
The availability of iron ore as approved in the
               R&R plans currently exceeds the limit of 35
               MMT per annum fixed by this Hon’ble Court. As
               per the latest data furnished by the Monitoring
               Committee, currently 34 category ‘A’ and ‘B’
               mining leases are in operation with an
               approved MPAP of 36.31 MMT. An Additional 9
               Category “C” mining leases and 4 Category “A”
8
and “B” expired leases, which were e­auctioned,
are operational with MPAP of 5.54 MMT and
2.41 MMT respectively. Another 4 mining leases
located in Districts Bagalkote and Davanagere
have production capacity of 6.29 lakh MT per
annum and 60000 MT per annum respectively.
The production of iron ore in these two Districts
is not affected by the orders of this Hon’ble
Court. The sum of approved annual production
capacity of iron ore in Karnataka as on 31 .
03.2022 adds upto 44.949 MMT. In addition,
there are 5 Category “C” and 2 expired Category
“A” & “B” mines which have been e­auctioned
by the state but the execution of lease
agreements are pending in respect of these 7
mines as on 31.3.2022.
…
…
23. Keeping in view the facts highlighted in the
preceding paragraphs, it is for consideration of
this Hon’ble Court whether the restrictions on
production and sale of the iron ore in the three
Districts Bellary, Chitradurga and Tumkur
imposed following the total ban on mining are
required to be reviewed and if agreed upon by
this Hon’ble Court the following may please be
considered
(i) Vacation of the orders of this Hon’ble
     Court directing sale of iron ore through e­
     auction conducted by the Monitoring
     Committee, and which ore has been
     produced by the lessees after resumption
     of mining operation. However, the sale of
     balance old stock of iron ore, including
     sub­grade iron ore available on the date of
     imposition of ban on mining be continued
     through     e­auction.    The    Monitoring
     Committee be directed to dispose all the
9
balance old stock through e­auction before
                   31st July 2022. If any stock over which the
                   lessee has the ownership right is left
                   unsold the lessee may be allowed to
                   dispose of it.
(ii) The collection of 10 per cent of the sale
                   value from all the lessee except NMDC and
                   20% of sale value from NMDC towards
                   their contribution to the SPV may be
                   discontinued.
(iii) Vacation of the orders on total ban on
                   export of iron ore and pellets from the
                   districts of Bellary, Chitradurga and
                   Tumkur.
(iv) Vacation of the orders on fixing
                   district level caps on production of iron
                   ore in respect of Category ‘A’ and
                   Category ‘B’ mines from the financial
                   year 2022­2023.
24. However the system of determination of the
              Maximum Permissible Annual Production
              (MPAP) being fixed through the R&R Plans and
              Supplementary Environment Plans, after
              ensuring the scientific and sustainable mining
              and after taking into account the mining
              reserves available within the lease area and
              after following the standards stipulated under
              various environmental and mining statutes, as
              approved in order dated 13.4.2012 and
              judgement dated 18.4.2013 of this Hon’ble
              Court, may continue. All mining leases to
              operate strictly adhering to such MPAP, as may
              be fixed /refixed.”
13. The Monitoring Committee, without directly alluding to the issues
10
raised by the others with respect to why the ceiling limit should

   be maintained or lifted, has highlighted a separate concern, viz.,

   the infrastructural incapacity to transport the iron ore excavated

   if the ceiling limits were to be raised. It is in this context that the

   learned Oversight Authority appointed by this Court expressed

   his inability to conclude on the said issue. The learned Oversight

   Authority, in his report dated 29.07.2022, observed as follows:
The Oversight Authority as at present in unable
              to express its firm opinion in the matter in view
              of the conflicting reports submitted by Central
              Empowered Committee and the Monitoring
              Committee. It is not for the Oversight Authority
              to express any opinion as to whether the
              Monitoring Committee has exceeded its brief in
              joining an issue with Central Empowered
              Committee by pleading for continuation of the
              ceiling limit. Be it as it may, it is just and
              necessary to gather some further evidence in
              the    matter     of   ‘current  available   road
              infrastructure’,     ‘existing   as    well    as
              improvements made to transport infrastructure’.
              There is no evidence as such made available for
              the perusal of the Oversight Authority as to
              what are the developments that have taken
              place between today and 20.05.2022 i.e. when
              the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India passed the
              Orders referred to hereinabove.
14. Mr. Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

   the original petitioner, is therefore the sole objector to the request
11
of lifting of the ceiling limit, on principles. The motivating concern

   behind the objection appears to be the anxiety that lifting of the

   ceiling limit may spiral into the same situation that had resulted

   in this Court’s judicial intervention in the first place. Learned

   counsel submitted that such an order of lifting the ceiling limit

   might lead to unmitigated mining activity in the State of

   Karnataka, setting the clock back entirely and resulting in

   regression of the entire state of affairs.
15. The concerns of the original petitioner and the Monitoring

   Committee merit due consideration of this Court. Much good

   work has been done in the State of Karnataka, because of the

   action initiated by the original petitioner and the subsequent

   judicial interventions by this Court. In fact, it is this progress

   made steadily over the past decade that weighed with this Court

   to even consider the relief regarding raising of the ceiling limit

   sought by the present applicants. The concerns raised by the

   original petitioner, of possible over excavation and its adverse

   impact on intergenerational equity, must be balanced against the

   concerns of the other parties, as the principles of sustainable

   development also comes into play.
12
16. This Court has generally accepted the recommendations of the

   CEC when it comes to the ceiling limit. In the present case, the

   CEC has recommended a complete relaxation of the ceiling limit.

   But we are not inclined to allow the same in toto. Rather, the

   situation merits a cautious approach, keeping in view the

   concerns raised and to ensure that any changes in the situation

   with respect to the mining activity in the State of Karnataka is

   brought about gradually, we are of the opinion that the ceiling

   limit of iron ore mining may be raised from 28 MMT to 35 MMT

   for District Bellary, and from 7 MMT to 15 MMT for Chitradurga

   and Tumkur Districts collectively.
17. Conservation of the ecology and the environment must go hand

   in hand with the spirit of economic development and the fine

   balance between the two goals is what is sought to be achieved

   even now.
18. IA Nos. 83141/2017, 72931/2017 and 218/2014 are disposed of

   on the above terms. As far as IA No. 10973/2018 is concerned,
13
the same relates to directions to the CEC and Monitoring

Committee regarding deciding applications for enhancement of

MPAP in terms of the earlier orders of this Court. The same may

be considered by the Court on the next date of hearing.
...........................CJI.
(N.V. RAMANA)



                                          …...........................J.
                                                   (HIMA KOHLI)



                                          …...........................J.
                                            (C.T. RAVIKUMAR)
     NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 26, 2022.
14