[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sakharam Since Deceased Through L.Rs vs Kishanrao on 3 August, 2022
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Indira Banerjee
2022 INSC 1312
                                                                   REPORTABLE


                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 5067-5068 OF 2022
                    (Arising out of SLP(C)Nos.13573-74 of 2022
                                           (D.No.15379 of 2021)


         SAKHARAM SINCE DECEASED
         THROUGH L.RS & ANR.                             ... APPELLANT(S)


                                           VERSUS


         KISHANRAO                                       ... RESPONDENT(S)

                                          O R D E R
Leave granted.
2.      These appeals arise out of the judgment and decree of

         the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Aurangabad Bench,

         dismissing a Second Appeal as having abated due to the

         death     of   one    of   the    respondents   and   dismissing    an

         application to set aside abatement.
3.      Heard learned counsel for both sides.
2
4.   Sans unnecessary details, the facts leading to the

aforesaid appeals can be summarized as follows:-
(i)     Two sons of one Tukaram Rodge filed a civil suit
     for declaration and possession against the two sons
     of one Gangaram Rodge impleading the mother of the
     plaintiffs as a proforma Defendant No.3.
(ii)         The suit was dismissed by a judgment and
     decree dated 30.06.1982.
(iii)        The unsuccessful plaintiffs filed a Regular
     First    Appeal       in    C.A.No.134         of   1982.       The    First
     Appellate Court decreed the suit as prayed for, by a
     judgment and decree dated 30.12.1992.
(iv)          The Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 namely sons of
     Gangaram filed a Second Appeal in S.A. No. 67 of
     1993, on the file of the High Court.
(v)          The original plaintiffs, namely, the two sons
     of    Tukaram,    were      Respondent         Nos.   1   and   2     in   the
     Second Appeal and the 3rd Defendant, who was only a
     proforma defendant, was Respondent No.3 in the Second
     Appeal.
(vi)         During the pendency of the second appeal, the
     proforma      Defendant      No.3,       who    was   Respondent       No.3,
     died on 30.03.1994.             Since, her sons were already
     parties as Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in the Second
     Appeal, the appeal did not abate on account


     of     the    death    of     the       proforma      Respondent       No.3.
However, one of the two successful plaintiffs, who
3
was the second Respondent in the Second Appeal, died
     on 02.02.1996.
(vii)        In view of the above, the High Court thought
     the appeal had abated on account of the failure of
     the        appellant   to     bring       on   record         the   legal
     representatives of the deceased second Plaintiff who
     was Respondent No.2 in the Second Appeal.
(viii)       The   application         filed   for      setting     aside
     abatement was also dismissed by the High Court.                     This
     is why, the Defendant Nos. 1 and 2, who were the
     appellants in the second Appeal, have come up with
     the above Civil Appeals.
5.   Fundamentally, the High Court fell into an error in

thinking that the Second Appeal abated upon the death of

Respondent No.2 (second Plaintiff).
6.   When two plaintiffs joined together and secured a

decree     of    declaration     and       possession   of    an    immovable

property, the death of one of the decree holders will not

make the second appeal abate.                 As against the surviving

successful        plaintiff,     the   cause of action



survived.        Abatement occurs only when the cause of action

does not survive upon or against the surviving party.
7.   Order XXII Rule 2 of the Civil Procedure Code reads

as follows:-
4
2.   Procedure  where  one   of  several
          plaintiffs or defendants dies and right
          to sue survives.- Where there are more
          plaintiffs or defendants than one, and
          any of them dies, and where the right to
          sue survives to the surviving plaintiff
          or plaintiffs alone, or against the
          surviving defendant or defendants alone,
          the Court shall cause an entry to that
          effect to be made on the record, and the
          suit shall proceed at the instance of
          the surviving plaintiff or plaintiffs,
          or against the surviving defendant or
          defendants.”
8.    The above Rule makes it clear that where there are

more defendants than one and any of them dies and where

the    right   to      sue   survives    against      the      surviving

defendant, the suit shall proceed against the surviving

defendant.     Order    XXII    Rule    11   states     that    in   the

application     of      Order   XXII    to   appeals,    the     word



“plaintiff” shall be held to include an appellant, the

word “defendant” a respondent, and the word “suit” an

appeal.
9.    Therefore, if the word “defendant” appearing in Order

XXII Rule 2 is replaced by the word “respondent”, it will

be clear that the second appeal did not abate and the

right to sue survives against the surviving respondent.
5
10. In view of the above, the dismissal of the Second

Appeal by the High Court on the ground that the appeal

stood abated, without going into the merits of the case

is not in accordance with law. Consequently the dismissal

of the application was also contrary to law.
11. Therefore, the appeals are allowed.             The judgment and

decree of the High Court dismissing the Second Appeal as

well as the order dismissing the application to set aside

abatement are set aside and the Second Appeal is remanded

back   to   the    High   Court   for   a   fresh   consideration   on

merits.
12. We request the High Court to hear and decide the

appeals     as    early   as   possible,    preferably   within     six

months from the date of communication of this order.
………………………………………...J.
                                                  (Indira Banerjee)



                                               ………………………………….....J.
                                               (V. Ramasubramanian)

New Delhi;
August 03, 2022
6
ITEM NO.11                    COURT NO.6                SECTION IX

                S U P R E M E C O U R T O F        I N D I A
                        RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) Diary No(s). 15379/2021

(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 08-04-2019
in SA No. 67/1993 08-06-2021 in CA No. 6740/2019 passed by the High
Court Of Judicature At Bombay At Aurangabad)

SAKHARAM SINCE DECEASED THROUGH L.RS. & ANR.             Petitioner(s)

                                     VERSUS

KISHANRAO                                                Respondent(s)


(IA No. 84320/2021 - CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING IA
No.84318/2021 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT)

Date : 03-08-2022 These matters were called on for hearing today.

CORAM :   HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE INDIRA BANERJEE
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN


For Petitioner(s)      Mr. Shashibhushan P. Adgaonkar, AOR
                       Mr. Omkar J. Deshpande, Adv.
For Respondent(s)      Ms. Rohini Wagh, Adv.
Mr. Ilin Saraswat, adv.
Mr. Aalekh Wagh, Adv.
Mr. Devendra Kumar Shukla, AOR


            UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R

    Leave granted.
The      appeals    are    allowed     in   terms   of   the     signed

reportable order.         The judgment and decree of the High

Court dismissing the Second Appeal as well as the order

dismissing the application to set aside abatement are set
7
aside and the Second Appeal is remanded back to the High

Court for a fresh consideration on merits.
12. We request the High Court to hear and decide the

appeals   as   early    as   possible,   preferably   within   six

months from the date of communication of this order.
(GULSHAN KUMAR ARORA)                          (MATHEW ABRAHAM)
     AR-CUM-PS                                 COURT MASTER (NSH)
(Signed reportable order is placed on the file)