[Cites
27
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Board Of Control For Cricket In India vs Regional Director on 18 August, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
P.S. Narasimha
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS. 13554-13555 OF 2022


         Board of Control for Cricket in India                     …Appellant(s)


                                                 Versus


         Regional Director Employees’ State
         Insurance Corporation and Anr.                            …Respondent(s)



                                                ORDER
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

         and order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay dated

         24.06.2022 passed in First Appeal ST No. 25980 of 2021 preferred by

         the appellant – the Board of Control for Cricket in India (hereinafter

         referred to as “BCCI”) by which the High Court has dismissed the said

         first appeal, which was filed against the judgment and order passed by
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
the Employees’ Insurance Court at Bombay dated 09.09.2021, declaring
Natarajan
Date: 2022.08.30
15:09:42 IST
Reason:
that the BCCI is covered within the meaning of “shop” as per notification
1
dated 18.09.1978 issued by the Government of Maharashtra under the

provisions of
Section 1(5)
of the Employees State Insurance Act, 1948

(hereinafter referred to as the “
ESI Act
”) and remitted the matter for

determining the contribution from BCCI, BCCI has preferred the present

special leave petitions.
2.    By communication dated 22.06.2011, issued by the Regional

Director of Employees’ State Insurance Corporation, Mumbai, it was

communicated that the BCCI is covered under the provisions of
ESI Act
w.e.f. 01.01.2007 and it was allotted a Code number, indicating

applicability of the provisions of the
ESI Act
to the BCCI. The BCCI was

communicated a notice in Proforma C-18 dated 01.07.2014, claiming

contribution amount to the tune of Rs. 5,04,075/- as Employees’ State

Insurance Contribution for the period commencing from May, 2007 to

March, 2014, being subjected to the provisions of the
ESI Act
. The BCCI

resisted the same on the grounds inter alia that the coverage of the

BCCI under the provisions of
ESI Act
is in violation of
Section 2A
of the

ESI Act read with Regulation 10B of the Employees’ State Insurance

(General) Regulations 1950, since the primary object of the BCCI is to

administer, promote and control the game of cricket throughout the

country, and therefore, it is not covered or registered as “shop” under the

provisions of Mumbai Shop and Establishment Act. It was also the case

on behalf of the BCCI that it is not primarily engaged or involved in any
2
trading or commercial activities and therefore, BCCI is not covered within

the meaning of
Section 1(5)
of the ESI Act.
2.1   An appeal was preferred before the Employees’ State Insurance

Court, Bombay (hereinafter referred to as “ESI Court”) against the order

passed under
Section 45A
of the ESI Act, which determined the amount

of contribution to the tune of Rs. 4,93,350/- for the period from June,

2010 to March, 2014.      By a detailed judgment and order and on

considering the various documents produced before it, including BCCI’s

Memorandum of Association, Rules and Regulations; its Annual Reports,

the ESI Court concluded that the activities of the BCCI can be said to be

purely commercial activities and therefore, the provisions of the
ESI Act
shall be applicable to BCCI. The judgment and order passed by the ESI

Court was the subject matter of first appeal before the High Court.


2.2   On appreciation of entire evidence on record, the activities carried

out by the BCCI and the relevant clauses of the Memorandum of

Association and after following the decision of this Court in the case of
Bangalore Turf Club Limited Vs. Regional Director, Employees’

State Insurance Corporation
. 2014 (9) SCC 657, the High Court has

concurred with the findings recorded by the ESI Court that the BCCI can

be said to be a “shop” as per the notification dated 18.09.1978 and

therefore, subjected to the provisions of the
ESI Act
and specifically
3
observed and held that the activities of the BCCI can be said to be

commercial activities for the purpose of definition of “shop” and for

applicability of the provisions of the
ESI Act
.      Consequently, by the

impugned judgment and order, the High Court has dismissed the first

appeal, which is the subject matter of present special leave petitions.
3.    Shri Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned Senior Advocate has appeared

on behalf of the petitioner – BCCI and Shri Manish Kumar Saran,

learned counsel has appeared on behalf of the respondent – ESI

Corporation.
4.    Shri Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

behalf of the petitioner – BCCI has reiterated what was submitted before

the High Court and the ESI Court. It is vehemently submitted that the

activities of the BCCI cannot be said to be commercial activities to bring

it within the definition of “shop” as per the notification dated 18.09.1978.

It is submitted that the revenue earned by the BCCI is ultimately used for

promoting the activities of sports – cricket. It is submitted that therefore,

the BCCI cannot be said to be a “shop” and, therefore, the provisions of
ESI Act
shall not be applicable. Heavy reliance is placed on Clauses 2

and 3 of the Memorandum of Association of BCCI.
4
4.1   It is further submitted by Shri Kaul, learned Senior Advocate

appearing on behalf of the petitioner – BCCI that to bring a particular

entity within the definition of “shop” and while considering whether the

activities of such entity can be said to be commercial activities, the pre-

dominant activity of such entity is to be considered. It is submitted that

so far as the BCCI is concerned, the primary and dominant object is to

promote the cricket. It is submitted that therefore if the pre-dominant

activity of the BCCI is considered
,
in that case
, BCCI shall not fall within

the definition of “shop” and therefore the provisions of the
ESI Act
shall

not be applicable.
Shri Kaul, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

behalf of the BCCI has heavily relied upon the decisions of this Court in

the case of
Secretary, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, Govt.

of India and Ors. Vs. Cricket Association of Bengal and Ors.
, (1995)

2 SCC 161 as well as the subsequent decision in the case of
Commissioner of Sales Tax Vs. Sai Publication Fund
, (2002) 4 SCC

57 (paras 10, 11, 13 and 17) in support of this submission that the BCCI

cannot be said to be a “shop” as per notification dated 18.09.1978 and

that the provisions of the
ESI Act
shall not be applicable.
5.    While opposing the present special leave petitions, Shri Manish

Kumar Saran, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents –

ESI Corporation has taken us to the specific findings recorded by the

ESI Court as well as the High Court holding that the activities of the
5
BCCI can be said to be commercial activities to bring the BCCI within the

definition of “shop” It is submitted that the findings recorded by the ESI

Court and the High Court are on appreciation of evidence/material on

record and considering the relevant clauses namely Clauses (e), (f), (k),
(m), (n), (o), (p), (r), (s) of the Memorandum of Association.        It is

submitted that on considering the material on record and even

considering the statement of the Chief Executive Officer of the BCCI, the

ESI Court has specifically observed and held that the BCCI is the body

involved in entertaining and/or the body carrying out systematic

commercial activities and is engaged in providing public services to

public at large by organizing events, promoting cricket as source of

entertainment and thereby collecting funds.
5.1   It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf

of the ESI Corporation that the
ESI Act
being a beneficial legislation and

therefore, as held by this Court in the case of
Bangalore Turf Club

Limited
(supra), a liberal meaning should be given to the word “shop”.

It is submitted that as held by this Court
in
the above case
that since the
ESI Act
is passed for conferring certain benefits to employees in case of

sickness, maternity in case of female employees and employment injury,

the
ESI Act
should receive a liberal and beneficial construction so as to

achieve legislative purpose.
6
5.2   Now, so far as reliance placed upon the decision of this Court in

the case of
Sai Publication Fund
(supra) relied upon by the learned

counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner – BCCI is concerned, it is

vehemently submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

ESI Corporation that
the said decision
shall not be applicable while

considering the provisions of
ESI Act
as the decision in the said case is

relating to
Income Tax Act
.
It is submitted that as observed and held by

this Court in the case of
Bangalore Turf Club Limited
(supra), the

words used in a particular statute cannot be used to interpret the same

word in a different statute especially in light of the fact that the two

statutes are not pari materia with each other and have a wholly different

scheme from one another.
It is submitted on the contrary that the

decision of this Court in the case of
Bangalore Turf Club Limited
(supra), which is dealing with the very provisions under the
ESI Act
shall

be applicable with full force.
5.3   Making above submissions and heavily relying upon the decision

of this Court in the case of
Bangalore Turf Club Limited
(supra), it is

prayed to dismiss the present special leave petitions.
6.    Heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective

parties at length.
7
7.     The short question which is posed for consideration of this Court

is:-
“Whether the BCCI can be said to be “shop” as per the
       notification dated 18.09.1978 and thereby the provisions
       of
ESI Act
shall be applicable to the BCCI or not?”
8.     While   considering   the   aforesaid   issue/question   posed    for

consideration, a direct decision of this Court in the case of
Bangalore

Turf Club Limited
(supra), which is dealing with the very issue and the

applicability of the
ESI Act
is required to be referred to and considered.
8.1    In the case of
Bangalore Turf Club Limited
(supra), this Court

observed and held that the
ESI Act
is a welfare legislation enacted by

the Central Government as a consequence of the urgent need for a

scheme of health insurance for workers and, therefore, liberal rule of

interpretation should be adopted to ensure that the benefits extend to

those workers, who need to be covered based on the intention of the

legislature.
In paragraph 17, this Court considered the object and

purpose of the enactment of the
ESI Act
and in paragraphs 18 to 20

considered the earlier decisions of this Court in the case of
Regional

Director, E.S.I. Corporation Vs. Francis De Costa
, 1993 Supp (4)

SCC 100;
Transport Corporation of India Vs. Employees’ State

Insurance Corpn. and Anr.
, (2000) 1 SCC 332;
Buckingham and
8
Carnatic Co. Ltd. v. Venkatiah
[AIR 1964 SC 1272] and Bombay

Anand Bhavan Restaurant Vs. Deputy Director, Employees’ State

Insurance Corporation, (2009) 9 SCC 61, the relevant observations

made in the aforesaid decisions are as under:-
“18. In ESI Corpn. v. Francis De Costa [1993 Supp (4)
     SCC 100], this Court held that : (SCC pp. 105-06, paras
     5-6)

           “5.
The Act
seeks to cover sickness, maternity,
           employment injury, occupational disease, etc.
The Act
is a social security legislation. It is
           settled law that to prevent injustice or to
           promote justice and to effectuate the object
           and purpose of the welfare legislation, broad
           interpretation should be given, even if it
           requires a departure from literal construction.
           The court must seek light from loadstar
Articles 38
and
39
and the economic and
           social justice envisaged in the Preamble of the
           Constitution which would enliven meaningful
           right to life of the worker under
Article 21.
The
           State is enjoined under
Article 39(e)
to protect
           the health of the workers, under
Article 41
to
           secure sickness and disablement benefits and
Article 43
accords decent standard of life.
           Right to medical and disability benefits are
           fundamental human rights under
Article 25(2)
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
           and
Article 7(b)
of the International
           Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural
           Rights. Right to health, a fundamental human
           right stands enshrined in socio-economic
           justice of our Constitution and the Universal
           Declaration of Human Rights. Concomitantly
           right to medical benefit to a workman is
           his/her fundamental right.
The Act
seeks to
9
succour the maintenance of health of an
insured   workman.        The   interpretative
endeavour should be to effectuate the above.
Right to medical benefit is, thus, a
fundamental right to the workman.
6. Moreover, even in the realm of
interpretation of statutes, rule of law is a
dynamic concept of expansion and fulfilment
for which the interpretation would be so given
as to subserve the social and economic
justice envisioned in the Constitution.
Legislation is a conscious attempt, as a social
direction, in the process of change. The fusion
between the law and social change would be
effected only when law is introspected in the
context of ordinary social life. Life of the law
has not been logic but has been experience. It
is a means to serve social purpose and felt
necessities of the people. In times of stress,
disability, injury, etc. the workman needs
statutory protection and assistance.
The Act
fastens in an insured employment, statutory
obligation on the employer and the employee
to contribute in the prescribed proportion and
manner towards the welfare fund constituted
under the Act (
Sections 38
to
51
of the Act) to
provide sustenance to the workmen in their
hours of need, particularly when they become
economically inactive because of a cause
attributable to their employment or disability or
death occurred while in employment. The fact
that the employee contributed to the fund out
of his/her hard-earned wages cannot but have
a vital bearing in adjudicating whether the
injury       or       occupational       disease
suffered/contracted by an employee is an
employment injury. The liability is based
neither on any contract nor upon any act or
10
omission by the employer but upon the
     existence of the relationship which employer
     bears to the employment during the course of
     which the employee had been injured.
The Act
supplants the action at law, based not upon
     the fault but as an aspect of social welfare, to
     rehabilitate a physically and economically
     handicapped workman who is adversely
     affected by sickness, injury or livelihood of
     dependents by death of a workman.”
                              (emphasis supplied)
19. A three-Judge Bench of this Court, in reference to the
ESI Act
, in
Transport Corpn. of India v. ESI Corpn.
[(2000)
1 SCC 332], held that : (SCC pp. 357-58, paras 27-28)

     “27. Before parting with the discussion on this
     point, it is necessary to keep in view the
     salient fact that the Act is a beneficial piece of
     legislation intended to provide benefits to
     employees in case of sickness, maternity,
     employment injury and for certain other
     matters in relation thereto. It is enacted with a
     view to ensuring social welfare and for
     providing safe insurance cover to employees
     who were likely to suffer from various physical
     illnesses during the course of their
     employment. Such a beneficial piece of
     legislation has to be construed in its correct
     perspective so as to fructify the legislative
     intention underlying its enactment. When two
     views are possible on its applicability to a
     given set of employees, that view which
     furthers the legislative intention should be
     preferred to the one which would frustrate it.…
28. Dealing with this very Act, a three-Judge
     Bench of this Court in
Buckingham and
     Carnatic Co. Ltd. v. Venkatiah
[AIR 1964 SC
11
1272]        speaking through Gajendragadkar,
     J., (as he      then was) held, accepting the
     contention of the learned counsel, Mr Dolia
     that : (AIR p. 1277, para 10)

         ‘10. … It is a piece of social legislation
         intended to confer specified benefits on
         workmen to whom it applies, and so, it
         would be inappropriate to attempt to
         construe the relevant provisions in a
         technical or a narrow sense. This
         position cannot be disputed. But in
         dealing with the plea raised by Mr Dolia
         that the section should be liberally
         construed, we cannot overlook the fact
         that the liberal construction must
         ultimately flow from the words used in
         the section. If the words used in the
         section     are     capable      of   two
         constructions one of which is shown
         patently to assist the achievement of
         the object of the Act, courts would be
         justified in preferring that construction
         to the other which may not be able to
         further the object of the Act.’”
                               (emphasis supplied)
20.
In
Bombay     Anand      Bhavan    Restaurant v. ESI
Corpn.
[(2009) 9 SCC 61], it was observed that : (SCC p.
66, para 20)

     “20.
The Employees' State Insurance Act
is a
     beneficial legislation. The main purpose of the
     enactment as the Preamble suggests, is to
     provide for certain benefits to employees of a
     factory in case of sickness, maternity and
     employment injury and to make provision for
     certain other matters in relation thereto.
The
     Employees' State Insurance Act
is a social
12
security legislation and the canons of
           interpreting a social legislation are different
           from the canons of interpretation of taxation
           law. The courts must not countenance any
           subterfuge which would defeat the provisions
           of social legislation and the courts must even,
           if necessary, strain the language of the Act in
           order to achieve the purpose which the
           legislature had in placing this legislation on
           the statute book.
The Act
, therefore, must
           receive a liberal construction so as to promote
           its objects.”
                                        (emphasis supplied)


8.1.1 That thereafter in paragraph 21, it is observed and held as under:-
“21. The legislature enacted the
ESI Act
to provide certain
     benefits to employees in case of sickness, maternity in
     case of female employees, employment injury and to
     make provision in certain other matters in relation thereto.
     The provisions of the
ESI Act
apply to all the factories
     other than seasonal factories. The State Government with
     the approval of the Central Government is authorised to
     make the provisions of the
ESI Act
applicable to any other
     establishment or establishments. The provisions of the
ESI Act
provide that all employees in factories or
     establishments to which the
ESI Act
applies shall be
     insured in the manner provided under the
ESI Act
. Since
     the ESI Act is passed for conferring certain benefits to
     employees in case of sickness, maternity and
     employment injury, it is necessary that the
ESI Act
should
     receive a liberal and beneficial construction so as to
     achieve legislative purpose without doing violence to the
     language of the enactment.”


8.1.2 Thereafter while interpreting the terms “establishment” and “shop”,

it is observed in paragraphs 37, 38.6 and 39 to 42 as under:-
13
“37. The term “establishment” would mean the place for
transacting any business, trade or profession or work
connected with or incidental or ancillary thereto. It is true
that the definition in dictionaries is the conventional
definition attributed to trade or commerce, but it cannot be
wholly valid for the purpose of constructing social welfare
legislation in a modern welfare State. The test of finding
out whether professional activity falls within the meaning
of the expression “establishment” is whether the activity is
systematically and habitually undertaken for production or
distribution of the goods or services to the community with
the help of employees in the manner of a trade or
business in such an undertaking. If a systematic
economic or commercial activity is carried on in the
premises, it would follow that the establishment at which
such an activity is carried on is a “shop”. This Court,
in
Hyderabad Race Club
case [
ESI Corpn. v. Hyderabad
Race Club
, (2004) 6 SCC 191] , keeping in view the
systematic commercial activity carried on by the club has
held that the race club is an establishment within the
meaning of the said expression as used in the notification
issued under
Section 1(5)
of the ESI Act. Therefore, in our
considered view, the view expressed by this Court is in
consonance with the provisions of the
ESI Act
and also
settled legal principles. Therefore
,
the said decision
does
not require reconsideration.
XXXXXXXXXXX

38.6. From the above, it can be said that a “shop” is a
place of business or an establishment where goods are
sold for retail. However, it may be noted that the
definitions as given in the dictionaries are very old and
may not reflect, with complete accuracy, what a “shop”
may be referred to as in the present day. Therefore, it
may be pertinent to consider the manner in which this
Court has dealt with the word “shop” in its judicial
decisions.
39. The term “shop”, in regard to the
ESI Act
, has been
discussed in earlier cases by this Court.
In
Hindu Jea
Band [Hindu Jea Band v. ESI Corpn.
, (1987) 2 SCC 101 :
AIR 1987 SC 1166] it is observed that a “shop” would be
a place where services are sold on a retail basis.
14
In International Ore and Fertilizers (India) (P) Ltd. v. ESI
Corpn. [(1987) 4 SCC 203] this Court stated that a “shop”
would be a place where the activities connected with
buying and selling of goods are carried on. In
Cochin
Shipping Co. [Cochin Shipping Co. v. ESI Corpn.
, (1992)
4 SCC 245] the Court observed that a “shop” must be
held to be a place where commercial activity of buying
and selling of merchandise takes place.
In R.K. Swamy
case [ESI Corpn. v. R.K. Swamy, (1994) 1 SCC 445] the
Court extended the meaning of a “shop” to include even
sale of services.
40. Therefore, certain basic features of a “shop” may be
culled out from the above. It can be said that a “shop” is a
business establishment where a systematic or organised
commercial activity takes place with regard to the sale or
purchase of goods or services, and includes an
establishment that facilitates the above transaction as
well.
41. The word “shop” is not defined either in the
ESI Act
or
in the notification.
The ESI Act
being a social welfare
legislation intended to benefit as far as possible workers
belonging to all categories, one has to be liberal in
interpreting the words in such a welfare legislation. The
definition of a shop which meant a house or building
where goods are sold or purchased has now undergone a
great change. The word “shop” occurring in the
notification is used in the larger sense than its ordinary
meaning. What is now required is a systematic economic
or commercial activity and that is sufficient to bring that
place within the sphere of a “shop”.
42. In view of the fact that an “establishment” has been
found to be a place of business and further that a “shop”
is a business establishment, it can be said that a “shop” is
indeed covered under, and may be called a subset of, the
term “establishment”.”
15
8.1.3 That thereafter and after observing so, this Court considered

whether the Turf Clubs fall under the definition of the term “shop” for the

purposes of
ESI Act
and it is observed in paragraph 47 as under:-
“47. It is not the case of the appellants that the club does
     not provide services. It may be gainsaid that the said
     services, apart from providing the viewers with a form of
     entertainment, is available to all members of the public at
     a mere payment of an admission or entrance fee. The
     only question, therefore, would be whether such services
     may be construed to be along the same lines as those
     provided for by a shop. If the answer is in the affirmative,
     then such race clubs would surely fall within the definition
     of the term “shop”, and thereby under the
ESI Act
as
     well.”


8.1.4 In the aforesaid decision, it is specifically observed and held that

the scheme and context of the
ESI Act
must be given due consideration.
A narrow meaning should not be attached to the words used in the
ESI

Act
as the
ESI Act
seeks to insure the employees of covered

establishments against various risks to their life, health and well-being

and places the said charge upon the employer. It is further observed

that the term “shop” should not be understood and interpreted in its

traditional sense as the same would not serve the purpose of the
ESI

Act
. It is further observed that an expansive meaning may be assigned

to the word “shop” for the purposes of the
ESI Act
. It is further observed

that the activities of the Turf Clubs are in the nature of organised and

systematic transactions, and that the Turf Clubs provide services to

members as well as to the public in lieu of consideration, therefore, the
16
Turf Clubs are a “shop” for the purpose of extending the benefits under

the
ESI Act
.
9.    Applying the law laid down by this Court in the case of
Bangalore

Turf Club Limited
(supra) to the facts of the case on hand and

considering the systematic activities being carried out by the BCCI

namely, selling of tickets of cricket matches; providing entertainment;

rendering the services for a price; receiving the income from

international tours and the income from the Indian Premier League, the

ESI Court as well as the High Court have rightly concluded that the BCCI

is carrying out systematic economic commercial activities and, therefore,

the BCCI can be said to be “shop” for the purposes of attracting the

provisions of
ESI Act
. After analysing the relevant evidences/material on

record, the ESI Court and the High Court had recorded the findings that

the BCCI is engaged in systematic commercial activities and is a profit

earning institution and is engaged in entertainment industry as it

provides entertainment to the customers at a price, i.e., by selling tickets

and therefore, it must pass on benefits to its employees by extending the

coverage of ESI contribution on the wages payable to the coverable

employees. The findings recorded by the ESI Court and the High Court

are on appreciation of evidence/material on record, which as such are

not required to be interfered by this Court in exercise of the powers

under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India.
17
10.   The submission on behalf of the BCCI that what is required to be

considered is the predominant activities and the predominant activity of

BCCI is to encourage the cricket/sports and, therefore, the same shall

not be brought within the definition of “shop” for the purposes of applying

the
ESI Act
, the aforesaid has no substance. What is required to be

considered is the overall activities. If the test as observed by this Court

in the case of
Bangalore Turf Club Limited
(supra) is adopted, the

activities carried out by the BCCI can be said to be commercial activities,

providing entertainment by selling the tickets.        Therefore, for the

purposes of
ESI Act
, the BCCI can be said to be a “shop”.
As observed

and held by this Court in the case of
Bangalore Turf Club Limited
(supra) the
ESI Act
being a beneficial legislation, the broadest meaning

should be given so as to achieve the object and purpose of enactment of
ESI Act
namely to provide certain benefits to employees in case of

sickness, maternity in case of female employees, employment injury etc.
11.   Now, so far as the reliance placed upon the decisions of this Court

in the case of
Secretary, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting,

Govt. of India and Ors. Vs. Cricket Association of Bengal and Ors.
,

(
1995) 2 SCC 161 and Commissioner of Sales Tax Vs. Sai

Publication Fund
, (2002) 4 SCC 57 relied upon by the learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the BCCI is concerned, while considering the
18
provisions of the
ESI Act
and/or for the purposes of applicability of the
ESI Act
, which is a social beneficial legislation, the aforesaid decisions

shall not be applicable and/or of any assistance to the BCCI.
In the case

of
Sai Publication Fund
(supra), this Court was considering the

provisions of
Income Tax Act
.
As observed and held by this Court in the

case of
Bangalore Turf Club Limited
(supra), the two statutes are said

to be pari materia with each other when they deal with the same subject

matter. It is further observed that the words used in a particular statute

cannot be used to interpret the same word in a different statute

especially in light of the fact that the two statues are not pari materia with

each other and have a wholly different scheme from one another.
12.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, no error

has been committed by the ESI Court and/or the High Court in treating

and considering the BCCI as a “shop” for the purposes of applicability of

the
ESI Act
, which as observed hereinabove, is a social and beneficial

legislation. It is also required to be noted that while holding so, the High

Court has also taken into consideration the relevant clauses of the

Memorandum of Association of the BCCI to come to the conclusion that

the activities of the BCCI can be said to be systematic commercial

activities   providing   entertainment    by   selling   tickets   etc.   The

Memorandum of Association as a whole is required to be considered.
19
13.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, we see no

reason to interfere with the impugned judgment and order passed by the

High Court as well as the ESI Court. As such, we are in complete

agreement with the view taken by the High Court. The special leave

petitions stand dismissed accordingly.
Pending application(s), if any, also stands disposed of.
………………………………….J.
                                            [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                               ………………………………….J.
AUGUST 18, 2022.                            [P.S. NARASIMHA]
20