[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ashwini Kumar Upadhyay vs Union Of India on 26 August, 2022
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
Hima Kohli
,
N.V. Ramana
REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 43    OF   2022

     ASHWINI KUMAR UPADHYAY                                            …PETITIONER

                                                 VERSUS

     UNION OF INDIA AND ANR.                                     …RESPONDENTS
                                                  WITH

                                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 87    OF   2022

                                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 474   OF   2022

                                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 496   OF   2022

                                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 383   OF   2022

                                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 121   OF   2022


                                                ORDER
1.               The questions raised in the present set of petitions relates to

                      promises made by political parties for the distribution of free

                      goods (‘freebies’) as a part of their election manifesto or during

                      election speeches. The main contention of the petitioners is that

                      such pre­election promises, which have a largescale impact on the

                      economy of the State, cannot be permitted. The petitioners submit
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
Date: 2022.08.26
19:31:25 IST
that such pre­election promises are being made by political
Reason:
parties without any assessment of the financial implications on
1
the State is nothing but an attempt to attract the vote bank. This

     goes against the spirit of responsible electioneering and is

     adversely affecting free and fair elections. This severely affects the

     level playing field between the different political parties. The

     money that is being paid by the taxpayers is ultimately being

     misused for political parties/candidates to gain or retain power.
2.   In this batch of petitions there are two sets of writ petitions. The

     first batch relates to pre­elections freebies which may influence

     voters at the time of elections. The second set of petitions

     challenge the grant of benefits by Governments which do not

     relate to any welfare measure or developmental activity but rather

     are a ploy to capture vote banks.
3.   The learned Solicitor General of India has responded to the above

     submissions by stating that the Union has a very limited role

     when it comes to this issue and suggested that this Court may

     constitute a Commission to consider the same.
4.   The Election Commission of India has consistently taken the

     stand before this Court that it has limited scope to interfere in

     such    promises       which    are        being     made         by   political

     parties/candidates.
5.   Additionally,   some    political       parties    have   filed    intervention

     applications in this batch of petitions and have challenged the
2
very maintainability of these petitions. The main thrust of their

     submissions is that the issues raised in these petitions relate to

     policy or fiscal decisions of the State, which decisions are clearly

     outside the scope of the Court’s jurisdiction. They submitted that

     it is unimaginable that any Government or Court can prescribe or

     curtail the rights of political parties to make such promises or

     announcement of schemes as is sought for in the present case.

     The political parties which are responsible for running of the

     Governments are conscious and aware of the problems of the

     people. It was, therefore, contended by the interveners to leave the

     issue open to the political parties.
6.   When these matters were taken up on 03.08.2022, we had also

     sought the opinion of learned Senior counsel Mr. Kapil Sibal

     regarding the issues being raised. He was initially of the opinion

     that this is a serious issue which needs to be tackled in some

     manner. However, subsequently, he has expressed his doubts

     about the appropriateness of judicial intervention on this issue.
7.   Freebies may create a situation wherein the State Government

     cannot provide basic amenities due to lack of funds and the State

     is pushed towards imminent bankruptcy. In the same breath, we

     should remember that such freebies are extended utilizing tax

     payers money only for increasing the popularity of the party and
3
electoral prospects.
8.    We have considered the issues raised in these batch of petitions

      from various angles, as well as the stands taken by the Union of

      India, the Election Commission of India and some political parties

      who have filed intervention applications before us.
9.    There can be no denying the fact that in an electoral democracy

      such as ours, the true power ultimately lies with the electorate. It

      is the electorate that decides which party or candidate comes to

      power, and also judges the performance of the said party or

      candidate at the end of the legislative term, during the next round

      of the elections. It is also necessary to highlight herein the point

      raised by some of the intervenors, that all promises cannot be

      equated with freebies as they relate to welfare schemes or

      measures for the public good. Not only are these a part of the

      Directive Principles of State Policy, but are also a responsibility of

      the welfare state. At the same time, the worry raised by the

      petitioners herein, that under the guise of electoral promises,

      fiscal responsibility is being dispensed with, must also be

      considered.
10.   This Court has generally stayed its hand when confronted with

      issues relating to policy or fiscal matters concerning the State, as

      the same falls outside the ambit of the Court’s jurisdiction.
4
Initially, with the objective of initiating a discussion about the

      issues highlighted, we were of the opinion that it might be

      appropriate to constitute an expert body to prepare a report or

      white paper which could suggest a way forward. To this end, vide

      order dated 03.08.2022 we sought for suggestions from the

      parties before us regarding the possible composition of such a

      body. Additionally, during the course of the last hearing, we had

      suggested to the Union of India that an All Party Meeting be called

      to consider this issue.
11.   Ultimately, it appears to us that the issues raised by the parties

      require an extensive hearing before any concrete orders can be

      passed. Certain preliminary        issues that may    need to    be

      deliberated upon and decided in the present set of petitions are as

      follows:
a.   What is the scope of judicial intervention with respect to the

           reliefs sought in the present batch of petitions?
      b.   Whether any enforceable order can be passed by this Court

           in these petitions?
c.   Whether the appointment of a Commission/Expert Body by

           the   Court   would   serve any   purpose   in   this   matter?

           Additionally, what should be the scope, composition, and

           powers of the said Commission/Expert Body?
5
12.   Apart from the above preliminary questions, many of the parties

      before us have also submitted that the judgment of this Court in
S. Subramaniam Balaji v. State of Tamil Nadu
, (2013) 9 SCC

      659 requires reconsideration.
In
S. Subramaniam Balaji
(supra), this Court was called upon to determine whether pre­

      election promises amounted to corrupt practices under
Section

      123
of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. The Court
in

      that case
held that such promises do not fall within the ambit of

      corrupt      practices   as   specified   under
Section   123
of   the

      Representation of the People Act, 1951, and issued directions to

      the Election Commission of India regarding framing of certain

      guidelines, in the absence of any legislative enactment covering

      the field.
13.   It is submitted by some of the parties herein that the reasoning in

      the above judgment is flawed as it has not considered various

      provisions of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951
. It was

      also submitted that the judgment incorrectly implies that the

      Directive Principles of State Policy can override the fundamental

      rights under Part III of the Constitution, which is against the law

      settled by a Constitution Bench of this Court in
Minerva Mills

      Ltd. v. Union of India
, (1980) 3 SCC 625.
6
14.   Looking at the complexity of the issues involved, and the prayer to

      overrule a judgment rendered by a two­Judge Bench of this Court

      in
S. Subramaniam Balaji
(supra), we direct listing of these set

      of petitions before a three­Judge Bench, after obtaining the orders

      of the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India.
15.   List the matter after 4 weeks.
...........................CJI.
(N.V. RAMANA)



                                                   …...........................J.
                                                            (HIMA KOHLI)



                                                   …...........................J.
                                                     (C.T. RAVIKUMAR)
      NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 26, 2022.
7