[Cites
29
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Reliance Industries Limited vs Securities And Exchange Board Of India on 5 August, 2022
Author:
N.V. Ramana
Bench:
Hima Kohli
,
J.K. Maheshwari
,
N.V. Ramana
REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 1167 of 2022
                          [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL) NO. 3417/2022]



            RELIANCE INDUSTRIES LIMITED                             … APPELLANT

                                                 VERSUS

          SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
          BOARD OF INDIA & ORS.                                   … RESPONDENTS



                                             JUDGMENT
N.V. RAMANA, CJI
1. Leave granted.
2. This appeal is filed against the impugned order dated

                         28.03.2022, passed by the High Court of Judicature at

                         Bombay in Criminal Interim Application No. 1945 of 2021 in
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2022.08.05
Criminal Revision Application No. 209 of 2020.
17:54:46 IST
Reason:
1
3. Brief facts necessary for disposal of this appeal are that a

  complaint    was   filed   on       21.01.2002   by   one   Shri   S.

  Gurumurthy, with the Securities and Exchange Board of India

  [for short ‘the SEBI’] against Reliance Industries Ltd. [for short

  ‘RIL’], its associate companies and its directors, alleging that

  they fraudulently allotted 12 crore equity shares of RIL to

  entities purportedly connected with the promoters of RIL,

  which were funded by RIL and other group companies in

  1994. It was alleged that the company and its directors were

  in violation of
Section 77
of the Companies Act, 1956. Based

  on   the    aforesaid    complaint,     the   SEBI    appointed    an

  investigating officer to inquire into the aforesaid complaint.

  Accordingly, a report was submitted by the said investigating

  officer on 04.02.2005.
4. It may be necessary to note that SEBI chose not to take any

  action with respect to the aforesaid letter.          The appellant

  alleged that a note was prepared by the Legal Affairs

  Department of the SEBI on 17.05.2006, wherein it was noted

  that the report had not brought out any specific violation of
2
any legal provision by RIL. However, the note was said to have

  observed that there was requirement of an opinion by an

  external expert inter alia on the possibility of initiating

  appropriate criminal proceedings against RIL. In this context,

  a retired Judge of this Court, Justice (Retd.) B.N. Srikrishna

  was approached by SEBI for the same.         The learned retired

  Judge is stated to have given his first opinion to SEBI, which

  was divulged by SEBI in parts, to the appellant herein.
5. On 16.04.2010, SEBI sent a letter to RIL alleging that RIL had

  funded purchase of its own shares by 38 related entities and

  thereby violated
Section 77 (2)
of the Companies Act, 1956 and

  consequently, violated Regulations 3, 5 and 6 of the Securities

  and Exchange Board of India (Prohibition of Fraudulent and

  Unfair   Trade   Practices   relating   to   Securities   Market)

  Regulations, 1995. RIL, in reply, addressed numerous letters

  to SEBI requesting for copies of the documents and submitting

  inter alia that the issue concerning violation of
Section 77
of

  the Companies Act, 1956 was examined by the Ministry of
3
Corporate Affairs which had concluded that the transaction

  was compliant with the applicable law.
6. In any case, the Adjudicating Officer of SEBI issued a show

  cause notice to the promoters of RIL under Rule 4 of the

  Securities and Exchange Board of India (Procedure for Holding

  Inquiry and Imposing Penalties by Adjudicating Officer) Rules,

  1995 alleging violation of
Regulation 11(1)
of the SEBI

  Takeover Regulations (as it then stood).
7. It is borne out from the records that an Office Memorandum

  dated 18.7.2011 was issued by the Ministry of Corporate

  Affairs wherein it was noted that provisions under
Section 77
of the Companies Act, 1956 was not attracted.
8. When the matter stood thus, on 29.09.2011, RIL filed a

  settlement application before SEBI, without prejudice to its

  rights, in order to put a quietus to the aforesaid issue which

  had taken place many years ago.
9. In any case, SEBI issued a letter dated 23.04.2014, answering

  the request of documents sought by the appellant herein in

  the following manner:
4
“With regard to the documents/information
          sought in paragraphs 5(a) to (d) of the said letter,
          SEBI’s response is as under:
1. Request 5(a): The copy of the opinion received by
           SEBI on June 11, 2009 from a retired judge of the
           Hon’ble Supreme Court of India cannot be
           provided since it is privileged and confidential in
           nature.
2. Request 5(b): a copy of the case for opinion
           provided by SEBI to the Hon’ble retired judge for
           seeking the opinion is enclosed.
3. Request 5(c): A copy of the communication from
           Ministry of Corporate Affairs dated February 7,
           2012 and dated September 1, 2011 forwarding
           letter dated July 18, 2011 is enclosed.
4. Request 5(d): A copy of the relevant opinion /
           views dated April 6, 2006, June 11, 2009 and
           August 25, 2010 of the legal department of SEBI
           are enclosed.”
10. It is a matter of record that in the year 2017­18, the SEBI

    decided to re­examine the issue and accordingly sought advice

    of Justice (Retd.) B.N. Srikrishna for the second time. Justice

    (Retd.) B.N. Srikrishna addressed a letter dated 26.07.2017 to

    the SEBI in the following manner:
“Considering the importance of the matter I am of
         the view that some very senior person should be
         consulted in this matter.
5
I would suggest SEBI to approach Mr. Y.H.
          Malegam, Chartered Accountant, who may be
          consulted in this matter. He is a person of high
          standing and great repute. In my opinion, he
          would be the most appropriate person to advise us
          as to whether the monies transferred to RUPL and
          RPTL were towards project advances and other
          charges or were merely round tripping.
You may depute one senior person to meet him and
          discuss with him the facts. It would enable him to
          take a view in the matter and make a report to you.
          After the report of Mr. Malegam is received, you
          may further discuss the matter with me.”
11. It is stated by the appellant that Mr. Y.H. Malegam, Chartered

     Accountant examined the records of RIL and various other

     companies and submitted his report to SEBI.
12. Based on the report of Mr. Y.H. Malegam, an opinion was

     sought from the learned retired Judge for the second time.
13. On 21.01.2019,       the appellant addressed a letter to SEBI

     seeking further material in connection with the pending

     settlement application in the following manner:
“Accordingly, we request SEBI to provide us
          inspection and copies of the following in connection
          with the subject settlement:
(a)   All further material collected by SEBI;
(b)   Further internal reports and noting;
6
(c)   Reports from external experts, including
               report from Shri Y.H. Malegam, which was
               confirmed by the Committee as having been
               received;
(d)   Any further case for opinion and opinion
               obtained by SEBI.”
14. In reply, SEBI rejected the request for disclosure of the

    documents in the following manner:
“With regard to your request for the said report, it
         may be noted that no such report or other material
         as asked is asked (sic) is made part of the pending
         settlement proceedings. Further, your attention is
         drawn to
Regulation 13(2)(a)
of the SEBI
         (Settlement Proceedings) Regulations, 2018, which
         reads as under:
“(a) Call for relevant information, documents etc.,
         pertaining to the alleged default(s) in possession of
         the applicant or obtainable by the applicant;
         Explanation – Nothing in these regulations shall
         confer a right upon the applicant to seek
         information from the Board or require the Board to
         seek information from any other person for the
         purpose of relying upon it in the settlement
         proceedings or request the Board to permit it to
         present information not already disposed in the
         applicant, [Illegible] the applicant our (sic) aware of
         at the time of making the application or which
         information upon diligent enquiry being made
         could bare became known to the applicant.”
         In view of the same, I am directed to inform you
         that the request for the said report and other
         material has not been acceded to.”
7
15. Aggrieved by the aforesaid communication of the SEBI, the

    appellant challenged the same before the High Court of

    Bombay in Writ Petition (Lodg.) No. 300 of 2019.   The High

    Court, vide order dated 04.02.2019, dismissed the aforesaid

    petition. It may not be out of context to note that SEBI also

    rejected the supplementary application filed by the appellant

    herein.
16. On 16.07.2020, SEBI filed a complaint in the Court of SEBI

    Special Judge, Mumbai praying therein as under:
“(a) That this Hon’ble Court may be pleased to
         issue the process against the accused for the
         continuing offences punishable under
Section 24(1)
r/w
Section 27
of the SEBI Act, 1992 as amended
         in 2002, for having violated Regulations 3,5 and 6
         of the SEBI (PFUTP) Regulations 1995,
Regulation
         11
of the SEBI (SAST) Regulations, 1997 and be
         further pleased to deal with the accused in
         accordance with the law.
(b) That this Hon’ble Court may be pleased to
         issue the process against the accused for offences
         punishable under
Sections 77(2)
and
77A
r/w
Section 55A
of the Companies Act, 1956.”
8
17. On 30.09.2020, the SEBI Special Court dismissed the

     complaint filed by SEBI as being barred by limitation.
18. The aforesaid order has been challenged by SEBI in Criminal

     Revision Application No. 209 of 2020 before the High Court of

     Bombay. In the aforesaid proceedings, the appellant filed an

     application being IA No. 1945 of 2021, seeking the following

     documents:
(i)     Report of Sh. Y.H. Malegam, Chartered
                  Accountant.
(ii)    Brief for opinion / Case for opinion prepared
                  by SEBI for obtaining further written opinion
                  of Hon’ble Mr. Justice (Retd.) B.N. Srikrishna.
(iii)   Revised written opinion issued by Hon’ble Mr.
                  Justice (Retd.) B.N. Srikrishna.
19. The High Court after extensively hearing the arguments on the

     aforesaid     application   passed   the   impugned    order   on

     28.03.2022 in the following manner:
“5.    At this stage, the prayer sought for in the
        Interim Application cannot be considered without
        hearing the main Revision Application. It is pertinent
        to note that the respondent No.1 – SEBI i.e. original
        applicant in the Revision Application has filed the
        aforesaid Revision Application seeking quashing and
        setting aside of the impugned order dated 30th
        September, 2020, passed by the learned SEBI Special
        Judge, City Civil and Sessions Court, Greater
        Bombay, in SEBI Misc. Application No. 686 of 2020,
9
by which the learned Judge dismissed the
        Miscellaneous Application No. 686 of 2020
        (complaint) only on the ground, that it was barred by
        limitation. Therefore, the question that arises in the
        Revision Application is whether the complaint filed by
        SEBI was barred by limitation or not.
6.     In view of what is stated hereinabove, the
        Interim Application will have to be heard alongwith
        the main Revision Application, on the next date. It is
        made clear that all contentions of the parties in the
        aforesaid Interim Application are kept open,
        including the question of maintainability.”
20. Aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the appellant­RIL has filed

     the present appeal.
21. Mr. Harish Salve, learned Senior counsel appearing on behalf

     of the appellant contends:
i.    That the challenge to the maintainability of the
                 present appeal is misconceived. He stated that the
                 interim application filed for seeking documents was
                 argued at length before the High Court, which was
                 ultimately not considered.
ii.   That the SEBI, being a regulator, has a duty to
                 disclose documents pursuant to
Article 21.
This
                 constitutional mandate has been accepted by this
                 Court and has been applied to SEBI in
T. Takano
                 v. Securities and Exchange Board of India
,
                 2022 SCC Online SC 210

          iii.   SEBI cannot claim litigation privilege       as   the
                 proceedings are not adversarial in nature.
10
iv.   That the selective disclosure of excerpts of the
                opinion by Justice (Retd.) B.N. Srikrishna,
                amounted to cherry picking by SEBI which cannot
                be allowed. The accused is entitled to the complete
                document to ensure a fair trial.
v.    That the action of SEBI of disclosing excerpts of the
                report clearly amounts to waiver of litigation
                privilege claimed by SEBI.
22. Mr. Arvind Datar, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf

    of the respondents contends:
i.   That the present appeal is not maintainable as there
                is no criminal complaint pending as on this date.
                The appellant cannot seek documents in a criminal
                revision against dismissal of the complaint on the
                ground of limitation.
ii.   The issue before the High Court was limited to the
                issue of limitation and the attempt of the accused to
                expand the proceedings to seek documents cannot
                be entertained.
iii.   That the impugned order was a mere adjournment
                order which has not affected any rights of the
                accused. Therefore, the appeal is not maintainable
                against such an adjournment order.
iv.   The law
laid down in
T. Takano v. Securities and
                Exchange Board of India
, 2022 SCC Online SC
                210, is not applicable to the present case as it was
                rendered in the context of investigation under
                different Regulations.
v.    The documents are being sought at a pre­mature
                stage. If cognizance is taken by the trial Court, the
11
accused would be entitled for the documents in
                 terms of
Section 207
of CrPC. Any attempt to seek
                 documents beyond the scope of
Section 207
CrPC
                 cannot be accepted.
vi.    The opinion of the Retd. Judge and the report of the
                 Chartered Accountant are clearly covered as part of
                 litigation privilege in terms of the
Indian Evidence
                 Act
. Such opinions cannot be a matter of production
                 by a party.
23. Having heard the parties at length and perusing the records,

     the following questions arise for consideration:
i.   Whether this appeal is maintainable?
           ii.   Whether SEBI is required to disclose documents in
                 the present set of proceedings?
ISSUE I
24. At the outset, Mr. Datar, learned Senior Counsel appearing on

     behalf of the respondents has challenged the maintainability

     of the present appeal on two grounds namely: (1) that the

     impugned order is a mere adjournment order against which

     this Court should not exercise its discretionary jurisdiction; (2)

     that no criminal complaint exists, to seek document disclosure

     as the trial Court had already dismissed SEBI’s complaint on

     the ground of delay. On the contrary, Mr. Harish Salve,
12
learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant

     has portrayed that the High Court was not justified in

     adjourning a case after hearing the parties on more than two

     occasions on the application.
25. The present dispute pertains to certain facts which took place

     in 1992­1994, when the initial complaint was instituted before

     SEBI in the year 2002, which is alleged to be closed by the

     note    of   the   Legal   Affairs   Department   of   SEBI   dated

     17.05.2006. Further, the letter of the Ministry of Corporate

     Affairs dated 07.02.2012 also clarifies inter­alia, that no

     violation of
Section 77
of the Companies Act, 1956 was made

     out, in the following manner:
4. It has further been reported by the ROC that
            there was no violation of
Section 81(1A)
of the
            Companies Act, 1956 in respect of preferential
            allotment of shares. Also, there was no specific
            guidelines for valuation or determination of
            premium in respect of issue of convertible
            debentures     at   the   relevant   time.  The
            determination of premium was within the
            authority of the company subject to compliance
            with
Section 81(1A)
which appears to have been
            done.
5.MCA had conducted inspection of books of
            accounts of M/s. Reliance Industries Ltd. in
13
2002 and for the various violations reported in
         the inspection report, necessary penal action was
         initiated as stated in para 2 and 3 above.
6. The inspection report of 2002 also revealed as
         follows:­
         i.) Provision of
Section 77
of the Act were not
         attracted in respect of funds invested by the
         company in Somnath Syndicate, a partnership
         firm in which company is a partner;
ii.) No funds was given by RIL to 34 entities to
         which NCDs were allotted;
iii.) Ambanis were neither directors nor
         shareholders of the entities to whom shares were
         allotted;
iv.) Ambanis were not allotted any shares
         pursuant to PPD­IV issue.
7. In view of above, no action is required to be
         taken on the part of Ministry of Corporate
         Affairs.
(Emphasis supplied)

     In this context, the re­examination of the complaint by SEBI

    ought to happen only after providing adequate opportunity to

    the accused to fully defend his case.
26. There is no doubt that the Special Court of SEBI in M.A. No.

    686 of 2020 has dismissed the complaint of SEBI on the

    ground of limitation. Against such an order, SEBI has filed a

    Criminal Revision being Criminal Revision Application No. 209

    of 2020 before the High Court which is pending. On perusal of
14
this Criminal Revision Petition it is clear that SEBI has made

the following prayer:
(a) This Hon’ble Court be pleased to quash and set­
         aside the impugned order dated 30th September,
         2020 and direct the Ld. Special Court Judge
         to issue process against the Accused.
(emphasis supplied)

Interestingly, SEBI has not restricted the revision petition to

the grounds of condonation of delay or inapplicability of

limitation as the offences alleged, are continuing in nature;

rather SEBI has pleaded the case on merits. This is apparent

from the following grounds advanced by SEBI on merits:
F.    The Ld. Judge erred to appreciate that the
     allotment including the allotment of bonus shares,
     was fraudulent since it was issued without any
     authority, and in violation of securities laws,
     including the
Companies Act
. When the actual
     issue and allotment of NCDs with detachable
     warrants and subsequent conversion of warrants
     into equity shares itself was undertaken without
     any authority of the AGM, and the earmarking of
     ‘bonus’ issue of shares for the benefit of a
     debenture­holder i.e. a non­share­holder was done
     and the total private placement of 12 crore shares
     was carried out without any authority either of the
     shares holders or in law resulting in cementing of
     ‘control’ and exercise thereof there was a clear
     breach of the fiduciary duty of the accused
     directors of the issuer company.
15
G. The Ld. Judge erred in failing to appreciate that
the fraud was consummate and involved a complex
subterfuge, spread over a long period of time. The
accused Directors sat in sub­committees that
negotiated and earmarked without any share
holder authority, the NCDs with warrants
convertible of shares with a sizeable free allotment
of bonus shares to allottees of the NCDs which
were essentially paper companies and related
companies of the accused and later on joined them
as person acting in concert (PACs) when the
warrants attached to the NCDs were converted into
shares in 2000. When the directors negotiated the
placement of NCDs with warrants with the Unit
Trust of India (UTI) whose allotment is made as per
Resolution 13 as disclosed on the stock exchange,
no such ‘free’ bonus was given to UTI. However, all
this was not considered by the Ld. Judge who
erred in failing to appreciate that the directors also
granted a conversion price to the accused allottees
which was much less than the conversion price
given to UTI.
…
…

P.    The Ld. Judge erred in failing to appreciate
the ratio
laid down by
the Hon’ble Supreme Court
in the matter of Fiona Shrikhande Versus State of
Maharashtra and another, (2013) 14 Supreme
Court Cases 44 wherein, the Hon’ble Supreme
Court has held that at the complaint stage, the
Magistrate is merely concerned with the allegations
made out in the complaint and has only to prima
facie satisfy whether there are sufficient grounds to
proceed against the accused. In the facts of the
present case there were more than sufficient
grounds for the Ld. Judge to prima­facie be
16
satisfied of the offence and issue process in the
          matter.
…
          …


          W. The Ld. Judge failed to note that it was vitally
          necessary to take cognizance of the offences in the
          interest of justice under
Section 473
, keeping in
          mind the devious method of involving 38
          companies and routing of funds in a preplanned
          and preordained sequence of transactions. If no
          cognizance is taken of such egregious offences, it
          would seriously harm the interest of the investors
          in the securities market. It is in the interests of
          justice that large conglomerates having lakhs of
          shareholders are not permitted to flagrantly violate
          the law and seek to escape prosecution.
27. Coming to the point of delay, inter alia the contention of SEBI

     is that the Court should have considered
Section 473
of CrPC

     to   condone    delay   having    considered    the   facts   and

     circumstances in proper perspective. At this juncture, it is

     relevant to quote
Section 473
of CrPC which reads as under:
“473. Extension of period of limitation in
           certain cases. ­ Notwithstanding anything
           contained in the foregoing provisions of this
           Chapter, any Court may take cognizance of an
           offence after the expiry of the period of limitation,
           if it is satisfied on the facts and in the
17
circumstances of the case that the delay has been
              properly explained or that it is necessary so to do
              in the interests of justice.”

     The aforesaid provision is categorical in stating that any

     limitation prescribed under
Section 468
of CrPC can be

     overlooked if sufficient cause is made out in the facts and

     circumstances of the individual case in the interest of justice.
The said provision, while trying to balance public interest in

     initiating    criminal   prosecutions,   has    been   restricted    to

     peculiarities of individual case while clothing the Court with

     discretionary power. Such a discretion vested in the Court

     ought to be a principled exercise, wherein the facts and

     circumstances      portrayed   justify   such   an     exercise.    The

     intention of the aforesaid provision is to make the inquiry a

     question of fact and not of untrammelled discretion as to

     whether in a particular case, the Court should condone the

     delay.
28. It is in this context that the High Court is bound to consider

     the facts of the present case concerning the modus of

     initiation of the case and other factors, before considering the
18
aspect of condonation of delay in terms of
Section 473
of

    CrPC. The approach of the High Court of adjourning

    adjudication of the interim application seeking disclosure of

    documents cannot be appreciated. Ideally, the High Court

    ought to have considered the interim application before

    dealing with the limitation aspect.
29. Initiation of criminal action in commercial transactions,

    should take place with a lot of circumspection and the Courts

    ought to act as gate keepers for the same. Initiating frivolous

    criminal actions against large corporations, would give rise to

    adverse economic consequences for the country in the long

    run. Therefore, the Regulator must be cautious in initiating

    such an action and carefully weigh each factor.
30. In ordinary course, this Court would have remanded the

    matter for adjudication by the High Court on the interim

    application moved by the appellant seeking such disclosure.
However,   arguments have been extensively advanced before

    this Court touching upon important aspects of criminal
19
jurisprudence which require consideration. Moreover, the facts

    stated above, clearly indicate that the acts which are sought to

    be prosecuted go back to the year 1992­1994, and over three

    decades have passed without there being any end to the

    litigation. In this regard, the Court intends to examine this

    important issue and pass appropriate orders to ensure that

    the adjudication is not delayed unnecessarily, ad infinitum.


    ISSUE II
31. This brings us to the issue as to whether the interim

    application seeking documents, filed by the appellant herein

    deserves to be allowed in the instant case. The respondents

    have raised objections for such disclosure on two counts:
i.    That such a request was already rejected by the High

          Court in an earlier writ petition filed by the appellant

          herein, when the settlement proceedings were on going;
ii.   That the respondents claim legal privilege, as against

          both the opinions of Justice (Retd.) B. N. Srikrishna and
20
the Report of the Chartered Accountant, viz. Sh. Y.H.

             Malegam.
32. Coming to the first objection, there is no gainsaying the fact

     that the respondent (regulator) had issued a letter dated

     16.04.2010, conveying the findings of the investigation. In

     furtherance thereto, the appellant had sought to settle the

     issue considering the fact that substantial time had already

     elapsed.
33. During the settlement proceedings, SEBI had appointed Sh. Y.

     H. Malegam, Chartered Accountant on the advice of Justice

     (Retd.)        B.   N.     Srikrishna.      Accordingly,    the    Chartered

     Accountant is supposed to have submitted a Report to SEBI.

     During the settlement proceedings, the appellant submitted an

     application dated 21.01.2019, wherein it sought the aforesaid

     documents. In response SEBI, vide letter dated 28.01.2019,

     rejected the request by relying on the provisions of
Section

     13(2)
of    the      Securities   and    Exchange      Board   of   India
21
(Settlement   Proceedings)    Regulations,   2018   [hereinafter

    ‘Settlement Regulations’].
34. The aforesaid letter dated 28.01.2019, was impugned by the

    appellant before the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in

    W.P. (Lodg.) No. 300 of 2019. The High Court, by final Order

    dated 04.02.2019, while dismissing the aforesaid writ petition

    held as under:
“10. The internal Committee of the SEBI is seized
         of the matter. During the proceedings, an
         application came to be filed by the petitioner
         seeking copies of certain documents including
         copy of the report submitted by Mr. Malegam.
         The provisions of
Regulation 13(2)(a)
are clear.
         These regulations do not confer any right on
         the Petitioner to ask for a copy of the said
         report. In that view of the matter, the issue of
         principles of fairness does not arise at this
         stage, considering the purpose of the
         proceedings before the internal Committee
         and powers of the High Power Committee and
         the Regulations framed in this regard. There is
         no right conferred under the Regulations on the
         Petitioner to ask for such a copy. In the facts, we
         are not convinced to exercise our writ
         jurisdiction.
As and when the adjudicatory proceedings
         takes place, the Petitioner may ask for copies
         of such documents in accordance with the
22
procedure   established           to      conduct        the
          proceedings.”
                                                        (emphasis supplied)

    We may only note that the High Court was dealing with

    specific requests that were made during the Settlement

    proceedings   under
Regulation           13(2)
of   the    Settlement

    Regulations. From a reading of the Explanation appended to
Regulation 13(2)(a)
of the Settlement Regulations, it is clear

    that the intention of Settlement proceedings is to facilitate the

    Regulator to consider the feasibility of settlement in certain

    cases, without allowing a roving and fishing expedition.
However, the findings of the High Court in the aforesaid case

    are of no avail to the SEBI, as we are at a stage when SEBI

    has invoked the provisions under the criminal law to

    prosecute the appellant herein.
35. At this juncture, SEBI relies on
Regulation 29
of Securities

    and   Exchange    Board   of        India    (Settlement       Proceedings)

    Regulations 2018, which notes as under :
CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION.
29. (1)   All   information   submitted                  and
          discussions   held   in   pursuance   of                  the
23
settlement proceedings under these regulations
     shall be deemed to have been received or
     made in a fiduciary capacity and the same may
     not be released to the public, if the same
     prejudices the Board and/or the applicant.
2) Where an application is rejected or withdrawn,
     the applicant and the Board shall not rely upon
     or introduce as evidence before any court or
     Tribunal, any proposals made or information
     submitted or representation made by the
     applicant under these regulations:
Provided that this sub­regulation shall not
     apply where the settlement order is revoked
     or withdrawn under these regulations.
     Explanation. – When any fact is discovered in
     consequence of information received from a
     person in pursuance of an application, so much
     of such information, whether it amounts to an
     admission or not, as relates distinctly to the fact
     thereby discovered, may be proved.
Reliance on the above provision is misconceived, as both the

clauses must be interpreted to deter usage of the applicant’s

proposals/representations    and   allied   information    before

Courts/Tribunals, in the event the settlement fails. It does not

deal with the disclosure obligations cast on SEBI. In any case,

the purpose of settlement is to ensure that parties come to an

understanding having assessed their relative merits. It is

expected that parties in such proceedings are transparent,
24
more so for Regulators like SEBI, who are expected to share all

    the documents, which are necessary for understanding the

    issue.
36. It is a matter of record that subsequently, the settlement

    proceedings were terminated by SEBI and thereafter SEBI has

    decided to initiate a criminal complaint against the appellant

    herein.
37. In this context, the objection of SEBI that the issue of

    disclosure of documents is res judicata as the same was

    disallowed by the High Court in the earlier round of litigation,

    cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
38. This brings us to the right of the accused­appellant to seek

    document disclosure in the present case. In this case, the

    appellant has been pursuing SEBI for these documents as

    they believe that an attempt is being made by SEBI to

    suppress the Opinions and Reports as they are adverse to the

    cause of SEBI.
25
39. A cursory glance at the background of the matter would reveal

     that initially, a complaint was submitted to SEBI on

     21.01.2002, wherein the appellant and its directors were

     purportedly involved in irregularities in allotment of Non­

     Convertible Debentures in the year 1994. Accordingly, an

     Investigation Report was submitted by the Investigating

     Authority on 04.02.2005. SEBI in its counter­affidavit has

     admitted that the aforesaid Report was inconclusive and

     recommended further enquiry in this regard.
40. In pursuance thereof, SEBI approached Justice (Retd.) B. N.

     Srikrishna in the year 2009. He is supposed to have given his

     first Opinion, which formed the basis of initiating action

     against the appellant herein. It is SEBI’s case that during the

     Settlement proceedings, the appellant had disclosed numerous

     documents, which mandated SEBI to re­examine its stand.

     Accordingly, the matter was referred to Justice (Retd.) B. N.

     Srikrishna for a second time.
26
41. Thereafter, Justice (Retd.) B. N. Srikrishna wrote back to SEBI

     asking them to consult Sh. Y. H. Malegam, a renowned

     Chartered Accountant to determine the culpability of the

     appellant and various directors. It is reported that this

     exercise had culminated in the Second opinion of Justice

     (Retd.) B. N. Srikrishna.
42. SEBI is a regulator and has a duty to act fairly, while

     conducting proceedings or initiating any action against the

     parties.   Being   a   quasi­judicial   body,   the   constitutional

     mandate of SEBI is to act fairly, in accordance with the rules

     prescribed by law. The role of a Regulator is to deal with

     complaints and parties in a fair manner, and not to

     circumvent the rule of law for getting successful convictions.

     There is a substantive duty on the Regulators to show

     fairness, in the form of public co­operation and deference.
43. The duty to act fairly by SEBI, is inextricably tied with the

     principles of natural justice, wherein a party cannot be

     condemned     without       having   been   given     an   adequate
27
opportunity to defend itself.
In
State Bank of Patiala v. SK

    Sharma
, (1996) 3 SCC 364, this Court while dealing with

    document disclosure and natural justice held as under:
“28. The decisions cited above make one thing
           clear, viz., principles of natural justice cannot be
           reduced to any hard and fast formulae. As said
           in Russell v. Duke of Norfolk [(1949) 1 All ER
           109 : 65 TLR 225] way back in 1949, these
           principles cannot be put in a strait­jacket. Their
           applicability depends upon the context and the
           facts and circumstances of each case.
(See
Mohinder       Singh    Gill v. Chief   Election
           Commr.
[(1978) 1 SCC 405 : (1978) 2 SCR 272] )
           The objective is to ensure a fair hearing, a fair
           deal, to the person whose rights are going to be
           affected.
(See
A.K. Roy v. Union of India
[(1982) 1
           SCC 271 : 1982 SCC (Cri) 152] and Swadeshi
           Cotton Mills v. Union of India[(1981) 1 SCC 664] .)
As pointed out by this Court in
A.K.
           Kraipak v. Union of India
[(1969) 2 SCC 262] , the
           dividing line between quasi­judicial function and
           administrative function (affecting the rights of a
           party) has become quite thin and almost
           indistinguishable — a fact also emphasised by
           House of Lords in Council of Civil Service
           Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service [(1984) 3
           All ER 935 : (1984) 3 WLR 1174 : 1985 AC 374,
           HL] where the principles of natural justice and a
           fair hearing were treated as synonymous. …”
44. At this juncture, the appellant has pressed into service the

    ratio laid down by this Court in
Takano
case (supra), to seek
28
document disclosure. On the other hand, the respondents

have tried to distinguish the present case by stating that the

present case is not one of disclosure which is being sought

during investigation by SEBI under the Securities and

Exchange Board of India (Prohibition of Fraudulent and Unfair

Trade Practices Relating to Securities Market) Regulations,

2003.
Although we agree with the respondents that the
Takano
Case (supra) was rendered under the aforesaid

Regulations, however, we are of the opinion that the reasoning

of this Court alludes to a general obligation of disclosure on

the part of SEBI.
This Court has held in the
Takano
Case

(supra) that three fundamental purposes of disclosure of

information are (i) reliability, i.e., the Court will be able to

perform its function accurately only if both parties have access

to information and possess opportunity to address arguments

and counter arguments; (ii) fair trial, i.e., this will enable the

parties to effectively participate in the proceedings; and (iii)

transparency    and   accountability,   i.e.,   the   investigative

agencies are held accountable through transparency and not
29
opaqueness. Keeping a party abreast of the information that

influenced the decision promotes transparency of the judicial

process which was discussed in the aforesaid case in the

following manner:
“24. While the respondents have submitted that
    only materials that have been relied on by the
    Board need to be disclosed, the appellant has
    contended that all relevant materials need to be
    disclosed. While trying to answer this issue, we
    are faced with a multitude of other equally
    important issues. These issues, all paramount in
    shaping the jurisprudence surrounding the
    principles of access to justice and transparency,
    range from identifying the purpose and extent of
    disclosure required, to balancing the conflicting
    claims of access to justice and grounds of public
    interest such as privacy, confidentiality and
    market      interest.   An     identification   of
    the purpose of disclosure would lead us closer to
    identifying the extent of required disclosure.
    There are three key purposes that disclosure of
    information serves:
(i) Reliability: The possession of information by
    both the parties can aid the courts in
    determining the truth of the contentions. The
    role of the court is not restricted to interpreting
    the provisions of law but also determining the
    veracity and truth of the allegations made before
    it. The court would be able to perform this
    function accurately only if both parties have
    access to information and possess the
    opportunity to address arguments and counter­
    arguments related to the information;
30
(ii) Fair Trial: Since a verdict of the Court has far
reaching repercussions on the life and liberty of
an individual, it is only fair that there is a
legitimate expectation that the parties are
provided all the aid in order for them to
effectively participate in the proceedings;
(iii) Transparency     and      accountability: The
investigative agencies and the judicial institution
are held accountable through transparency and
not opaqueness of proceedings. Opaqueness
furthers a culture of prejudice, bias, and
impunity ­ principles that are antithetical to
transparency. It is of utmost importance that in a
country grounded in the Rule of Law, the
institutions adopt those procedures that further
the democratic principles of transparency and
accountability. The principles of fairness and
transparency of adjudicatory proceedings are the
cornerstones of the principle of open justice. This
is the reason why an adjudicatory authority is
required to record its reasons for every
judgement or order it passes. However, the duty
to be transparent in the adjudicatory process
does not begin and end at providing a reasoned
order. Keeping a party bereft of the information
that influenced the decision of an authority
undertaking an adjudicatory function also
undermines the transparency of the judicial
process. It denies the concerned party and the
public at large the ability to effectively scrutinise
the decisions of the authority since it creates an
information asymmetry.
25. The purpose of disclosure of information is
not merely individualistic, that is to prevent
errors in the verdict but is also towards fulfilling
the larger institutional purpose of fair trial and
transparency. Since the purpose of disclosure of
31
information targets both the outcome (reliability)
         and the process (fair trial and transparency), it
         would be insufficient if only the material relied
         on is disclosed. Such a rule of disclosure only
         holds nexus to the outcome and not the process.
         Therefore, as a default rule, all relevant material
         must be disclosed.”
45. There is no doubt that the set of facts portrayed herein are

    unique. The impugned action of the appellant hails back to the

    year 1994, and almost three decades have gone by without

    there being any light at the end of the tunnel. The

    investigation report by SEBI in 2005 was inconclusive about

    the alleged offence. There is even a communique by the

    Minister of Corporate Affairs, Union of India recommending

    closure of the case as they found nothing to further the

    prosecution under
Section 77
of the Companies Act, 1956. In

    this light, SEBI’s action to initiate a criminal complaint

    without providing the appellant an adequate opportunity to

    defend itself by releasing necessary Reports and other

    documents, cannot be appreciated by this Court as it is in

    gross violation of the appellant’s right to natural justice.

    Recently, in
S. P. Velumani v. Arappor Iyakkam
, 2022 SCC
32
Online SC 663, while dealing with the necessity of document

    disclosure in cases where prosecuting authorities blow hot

    and cold, this Court has held as under:
“22…The principles of natural justice demanded
           that the appellant be afforded an opportunity to
           defend his case based on the material that had
           exonerated him initially, which was originally
           accepted by the State.”
46. The approach of SEBI, in failing to disclose the documents

    also    raises   concerns   of    transparency    and   fair   trial.

    Opaqueness       only   propagates    prejudice   and    partiality.

    Opaqueness is antithetical to transparency. It is of utmost

    importance that in a country grounded in the Rule of Law,

    institutions ought to adopt procedures that further the

    democratic principles of transparency and accountability.

    Principles of fairness and transparency           of adjudicatory

    proceedings are the cornerstone of the principles of open

    justice.
47. Even for adjudication of condonation of delay under
Section

    473
, CrPC, the modus of initiation of criminal complaint and
33
the conclusions reached therein are relevant in the facts and

    circumstance of the case.
48. Viewed   from   a   different        angle,   the   respondents   have

    vehemently relied on litigation privilege under
Section 129
of

    the Evidence Act, 1872 to claim exemption from document

    disclosure.
Section 129
of the Evidence Act reads as under:
129. Confidential communications with
             legal advisers.—No one shall be compelled
             to disclose to the Court any confidential
             communication which has taken place
             between him and his legal professional
             adviser, unless he offers himself as a
             witness, in which case he may be compelled
             to disclose any such communications as may
             appear to the Court necessary to be known
             in order to explain any evidence which he
             has given, but no others.
49. The rationale of such a provision has been well known to

    common law since ages. Sir George Mackenzie's Observations

    upon the 18th Act of the 23rd Parliament of King James the

    Sixth against Dispositions made in Defraud of Creditors
34
etc (1675), in Sir George Mackenzie's Works Vol 2 (1755), p1

are significant. He said this, at p 44:
"An Advocate is by the Nature of his
       employment tied to the same Faithfulness that
       any Depositor is: For his Client has depositate
       in his Breast his greatest Secrets; and it is the
       Interest of the Common­wealth, to have that
       Freedom allowed and secured without which
       Men cannot manage their Affairs and private
       Business: And who would use that Freedom if
       they might be ensnared by it? This were to
       beget a Diffidence betwixt such who should, of
       all others, have the greatest mutual Confidence
       with one another; and this will make Men so
       jealous of their Advocates that they will lose
       their private Business, or succumb in their
       just Defence, rather than Hazard the opening
       of their Secrets to those who can give them no
       Advice when the case is Half concealed, or may
       be forced to discover them when revealed."
In England, the Legal professional privilege is often classified

under two sub­headings: legal advice privilege and litigation

privilege. Legal advice privilege comprises of communications

between a client and his legal adviser, and is available when

proceedings are in existence or contemplated. Litigation

privilege on the other       hand, covers a wider      class of
35
communications, such as those between the legal adviser and

     potential witnesses.
50. Coming to legal advice privilege in England, the House of

     Lords through Justice Carswell in Three Rivers District

     Council     and   others   (Respondents)    v.   Governor   and

     Company of the Bank of England (Appellants), [2004]

     UKHL 48, has summarized the law as under:
“The conclusion to be drawn from the trilogy
               of 19th century cases to which I have referred
               and the qualifications expressed in the
               modern case­law is that communications
               between parties or their solicitors and third
               parties for the purpose of obtaining
               information or advice in connection with
               existing or contemplated litigation are
               privileged, but only when the following
               conditions are satisfied:
(a) litigation must be in progress or in
               contemplation;
(b) the communications must have been made
               for the sole or dominant purpose of
               conducting that litigation;
(c) the litigation must be adversarial, not
               investigative or inquisitorial.”
51. The distinction in application of this privilege qua adversarial

     and investigative litigation/inquisitorial litigation is reasoned
36
by English Courts in In Re K (Infants), [1965] AC 201 as

    under:
“Where the judge is not sitting purely, or even
             primarily, as an arbiter but is charged with
             the paramount duty of protecting the interests
             of one outside the conflict, a rule that is
             designed for just arbitrament cannot in all
             circumstances prevail.”
52. Further, In Re E (S.A.) (a Minor) (Wardship: Court’s Duty),

    [1984] 1 WLR 156, while pointing out that a court in wardship

    proceedings was not exercising an adversarial jurisdiction and

    that:
“Its duty is not limited to the dispute between
             the parties: on the contrary, its duty is to act
             in the way best suited in its judgment to serve
             the true interest and welfare of the ward. In
             exercising wardship jurisdiction, the Court is
             a true family court. Its paramount concern is
             the welfare of the ward. It will, therefore,
             sometimes be the duty of the court to look
             beyond the submissions of the parties in the
             endeavor to do what it judges to be necessary”
53. Indian position seems to be different from England.
Section

    126
to
129
of the Evidence Act do not draw any distinction

    between adversarial and investigative litigation as such, and

    privilege is applicable all through. This aspect is crucial, as it
37
touches on the foundations of the legal profession at large in

     India. This Court does not want to express any opinion in this

     regard as the case at hand is different and such an issue does

     not arise, for the following reasons:
i.     The investigation report was inconclusive, as admitted by

            SEBI itself.
ii.    Instead of SEBI referring the issue to an expert, it could

            have undertaken the exercise of further investigation by

            itself, which was not done.
iii.   SEBI ultimately took further steps, only because of the

            first opinion of Justice (retd.) B. N. Srikrishna.
iv.    The first opinion of Justice (retd.) B. N. Srikrishna is a

            part and parcel of the investigation and documents

            connected therewith.
v.     Moreover, certain documents have already been disclosed

            to the appellant herein.
54. The simple test in this case is whether SEBI has launched the

     prosecution on the basis of the investigation report alone. The

     answer seems to be ‘No’ by SEBI’s own admission in its reply
38
where it states that the investigation report was inconclusive

     and hence further scrutiny of the transactions by experts was

     called for. That being the case, further Reports and opinions

     obtained, from whomsoever it may be, are only an extension of

     the investigation to help SEBI as a Regulator to ascertain the

     facts and reach conclusions for prosecution or otherwise.
55. For the above reasons, we do not agree with the contention of

     the learned Senior Counsel for SEBI that the first opinion of

     Justice (Retd.) B. N. Srikrishna is covered by ‘legal privilege’

     under
Section 129
of the Evidence Act. Same is the case with

     the second opinion of Justice (Retd.) B. N. Srikrishna and the

     Report of Sh. Y. H. Malegam, which are nothing but a

     continuation of the fact­finding exercise undertaken by SEBI

     to determine culpability.
56. Moreover, learned Senior counsel, Mr. Arvind Datar, appearing

     for SEBI has pointed out that the present set of proceedings

     have emanated before Criminal Court, wherein the procedures

     must be strictly in accordance with the provisions of
CrPC
. He

     states that the stage of document production under the
CrPC
39
is provided under
Section 207
and
208
, which takes place

after cognizance is taken by the Magistrate. This Court, in
S.

P. Velumani
(supra), while rejecting a similar contention, held

as under:
“26. We may note that the contention of the
     State may be appropriate under normal
     circumstances wherein the accused is entitled to
     all the documents relied upon by the prosecution
     after the Magistrate takes cognizance in terms of
Section 207
of CrPC. However, this case is easily
     distinguishable on its facts. Initiation of the FIR
     in the present case stems from the writ
     proceedings before the High Court, wherein the
     State has opted to re­examine the issue in
     contradiction of their own affidavit and the
     preliminary report submitted earlier before the
     High Court stating that commission of cognizable
     offence had not been made out. It is in this
     background we hold that the mandate of
Section
     207
of CrPC cannot be read as a provision etched
     in stone to cause serious violation of the rights of
     the appellantaccused as well as to the principles
     of natural justice.”

Observing the facts and circumstances of this case, which

have been adumbrated above, we are of the firm opinion that

the defence taken by SEBI that they need not disclose any

documents at this stage as such a request is pre­mature in

terms of the
CrPC
, cannot be sustained.
40
57. Before we part with the present appeal, another disconcerting

     aspect of this case that comes to the fore is SEBI’s attempt to

     cherry­pick the documents it proposes to disclose. There is a

     dispute about the fact that certain excerpts of the opinion of

     Justice (Retd.) B. N. Srikrishna, were disclosed to the

     appellant herein. It is the allegation of the appellant that while

     the parts which were disclosed, vaguely point to the culpability

     of the appellant, SEBI is refusing to divulge the information

     which exonerate it. Such cherry­picking by SEBI only

     derogates the commitment to a fair trial. In Nea Karteria

     Maritime Co Ltd v. Atlantic and Great Lakes Steamship

     Corporation, [1981] Com LR 138 at 139, Mustill J. held as

     under:
‘I believe that the principle underlying the rule of
          practice exemplified in Burnell v British Transport
          Commission [1956] 1 QB 187 is that where a
          party is deploying in court material which would
          otherwise be privileged, the opposite party and
          the court must have an opportunity of satisfying
          themselves that what the party has chosen to
          release from privilege represents the whole of the
          material relevant to the issue in question. To
          allow an individual item to be plucked out of
          context would be to risk injustice through its real
          weight or meaning being misunderstood.’
41
The aforesaid principle is often referred to as the ‘Cherry­

    picking’ principle.
58. In the case at hand, SEBI could not have claimed privilege

    over certain parts of the documents and at the same time,

    agreeing to disclose some part. Such selective disclosure

    cannot be countenanced in law as it clearly amounts to

    cherry­picking.
59. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we allow the present

    appeal and direct the respondents to furnish a copy of the

    following documents to the appellant forthwith:­
(i)     First opinion of Justice (Retired) B.N. Srikrishna
(ii)    Report of Y.H. Malegam
(iii)   Second opinion of Justice (Retired) B.N. Srikrishna


                                               ...........................CJI.
(N.V. RAMANA)


                                               …...........................J.
                                                (J.K. MAHESHWARI)

                                               …...........................J.
                                                        (HIMA KOHLI)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 05, 2022.
42
43