[Cites
59
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Total Environment Building ... vs The Deputy Commissioner Of Commercial ... on 2 August, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
B.V. Nagarathna
REPORTABLE


                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                          CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 8673-8684 OF 2013


         M/s. Total Environment
         Building Systems Pvt. Ltd.                      …Appellant(s)

                                        Versus

         The Deputy Commissioner of
         Commercial Taxes & Ors.                         …Respondent(s)


                                         WITH


                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6525 OF 2014


         YFC Projects Pvt. Ltd.                          …Appellant(s)

                                        Versus

         Union of India                                  …Respondent(s)

                                         WITH


                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6523 OF 2014


         M/s. G.D. Builders                              …Appellant(s)

Signature Not Verified                  Versus
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.08.02

         Union of India & Anr.                           …Respondent(s)
15:45:57 IST
Reason:




                                         WITH
                                           1
                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6526 OF 2014


M/s. National Building
Construction Corporation Ltd. (NBCC)             …Appellant(s)

                               Versus

Union of India & Anr.                            …Respondent(s)


                                WITH


                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2666 OF 2022
             (arising out of SLP (C) No. 36206 of 2014)

M/s. Unitech Ltd.                                …Appellant(s)

                               Versus

Union of India & Ors.                            …Respondent(s)


                                WITH


              CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4547-4548 OF 2014


M/s. National Building
Construction Corporation Ltd. (NBCC)             …Appellant(s)

                               Versus

Union of India & Ors.                            …Respondent(s)



                                WITH

                                  2
                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2667 OF 2022
             (arising out of SLP (C) No. 21828 of 2015)

M/s. Larsen and Toubro Ltd.                      …Appellant(s)

                              Versus

Commissioner of Service Tax, Delhi               …Respondent(s)


                               WITH


                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6792 OF 2010

Commissioner of Service Tax Mumbai - II          …Appellant(s)

                              Versus

M/s. IOT Infrastructure &
Energy Services Limited                          …Respondent(s)

                               WITH


                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2668 OF 2022
             (arising out of SLP (C) No. 32501 of 2015)

M/s. L&T Hydrocarbon Engineering Limited      …Appellant(s)
(previously known as Larsen & Toubro Limited)

                              Versus

Commissioner of Service Tax, Mumbai              …Respondent(s)


                            JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
3
1.    As common question of law and facts arise in this group of

appeals, they are being decided and disposed of by this common

judgment and order.
2.    The issue involved in the present group of appeals is, “whether,

service tax could be levied on Composite Works Contracts prior to the

introduction of the
Finance Act, 2007
, by which the
Finance Act, 1994
came to be amended to introduce
Section 65(105)(zzzza)
pertaining to

Works Contracts?”
3.    Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

and order dated 07.10.2009 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at

Bengaluru in Writ Appeal Nos. 3481-3492 of 2009 by which the Division

Bench of the High Court has dismissed the said writ appeals and has

confirmed the judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge

dismissing the writ petitions in which the appellant challenged the

assessment orders levying service tax, on the ground of alternative

remedy available by way of statutory appeal, assessee - M/s. Total

Environment Building Systems Pvt. Ltd. has preferred the present

appeals – Civil Appeal Nos. 8673-8684 of 2013.
3.1   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

and order passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Writ Petition
4
No. 1342 of 2008 by which, relying upon the decision of the Delhi High

Court in the case of
G.D. Builders Vs. Union of India
, (2013) 32 STR

673 (Delhi), which is the subject matter before this Court by way of Civil

Appeal No. 6523 of 2014, the Division Bench has dismissed the said writ

petition and has held that it is only the service element, which is to be

taxed, the original writ petitioner – assessee – YFC Projects Pvt. Ltd.

has preferred the present Civil Appeal No. 6525 of 2014.


3.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

and order passed by the Division Bench of the High Court dated

13.11.2013 in Writ Petition (C) No. 4107 of 2008 by which the Division

Bench of the High Court has dismissed the said writ petition, the

assessee – G.D. Builders has preferred the present Civil Appeal No.

6523 of 2014.
At this stage, it is required to be noted that in the case of
Commissioner, Central Excise and Customs, Kerala Vs. Larsen and

Toubro Limited
, (2016) 1 SCC 170, this Court has specifically overruled

the judgment of the Delhi High Court in the case of
G.D. Builders
(supra) and has observed and held that the observations made by the

Delhi High Court in paragraph 31 is wholly inaccurate in its conclusion

that the
Finance Act, 1994
contains both the charge and machinery for

levy and assessment of service tax on indivisible works contracts.
5
At this stage, it is reported that as such Civil Appeal No. 6523 of

2014, now under consideration was also heard alongwith the group of

appeals while deciding the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra)

and even the papers of Civil Appeal No. 6523 of 2014 were called for by

the Bench concerned. However, it appears that by oversight and/or by

inadvertence Civil Appeal No. 6523 of 2014 has not been decided and

disposed of and therefore kept pending, which is now notified before this

Court alongwith the other appeals.
3.3   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

and order passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi dated

09.01.2014 in Writ Petition (C) No. 6803 of 2013 by which the Division

Bench of the High Court relying upon its earlier decision in the case of
G.D. Builders
(supra) has dismissed the said writ petition, the assessee

– original writ petitioner – M/s. National Building Construction

Corporation Ltd. (NBCC) has preferred the present Civil appeal No. 6526

of 2014.
3.4   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

and order passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi dated

13.11.2013 in Writ Petition No. 5046 of 2008 by which the Division

Bench of the High Court has dismissed the said writ petition alongwith

another writ petition in the case of
G.D. Builders
(supra), the assessee
6
– M/s. Unitech Ltd. has preferred the present Civil Appeal No. 2666 of

2022 arising out of SLP (C) No. 36206 of 2014.
3.5   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common

judgment and order passed by the Guwahati High Court dated

04.06.2012 passed in Writ Petition Nos. 5676 and 5678 of 2012, the

original writ petitioner – assessee – NBCC has preferred the present

Civil Appeal Nos. 4547-4548 of 2014.
3.6   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

and order dated 19.03.2015 passed by the Customs, Excise and Service

Tax Appellate Tribunal (CESTAT) in Service Tax Stay No. 59278 of 2013

in S.T. Appeal No. 58658 of 2013, the assessee – M/s. Larsen and

Toubro Limited has preferred the present Civil Appeal No. 2667 of 2022

arising out of SLP (C) No. 21828 of 2015.
3.7   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

and order dated 10.03.2010 passed by the CESTAT, West Zonal Bench

in Appeal No. ST/275 of 2006, the Revenue has preferred the present

Civil Appeal No. 6792 of 2010.
3.8   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

and   order   dated   12.06.2015   passed   by   CESTAT,   Mumbai   in

ST/Stay/3022/12-Mum in S.T. Appeal No. 873 of 2012, the assessee –
7
M/s. L&T, Hydrocarbon Engineering Ltd. (previously known as Larsen &

Toubro Ltd.) has preferred the present Civil Appeal No. 2668 of 2022

arising out of SLP (C) No. 32501 of 2015.
4.    As observed hereinabove, the issue involved in the present

appeals is, “whether service tax could be levied on Composite Works

Contracts prior to the introduction of the
Finance Act, 2007
, by which the
Finance Act, 1994
came to be amended to introduce
Section 65(105)

(zzzza)
pertaining to Works Contracts?”
5.    At the outset, it is required to be noted that the very issue had

been considered by this Court in the case of
Commissioner, Central

Excise and Customs, Kerala Vs. Larsen and Toubro Limited
, (2016)

1 SCC 170.       In the aforesaid decision, after considering the entire

scheme of levy of service tax pre-2007 and post-2007, this Court has

specifically observed and held that on indivisible works contracts, for the

period prior to introduction of
Finance Act, 2007
, service tax was not

leviable under
Finance Act, 1994
. It is specifically observed and held

that works contracts on which the service tax was levied under the
Finance Act, 1994
is distinct from contracts of service.
6.    Ms.   Madhavi    Divan,   learned     Additional   Solicitor   General,

appearing on behalf of the Revenue, has not disputed that the issue
8
involved in the present appeals is as such squarely covered by the

decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra). However, according to Ms. Madhavi Divan, the decision of this

Court
in
the above case
, holding that there was no service tax leviable

on works contracts prior to the amendment by the
Finance Act, 2007
needs to be re-considered.
6.1   In support to her prayer to re-consider the decision of this Court in

the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra), Ms. Madhavi Divan,

learned Additional Solicitor General has made a number of submissions

and has taken us to the legislative history pertaining to the service tax.

She has also taken us to the definition of the Works Contract and what

can be said to be Works Contracts.
She has also taken us through a

number of other decisions of this Court including the decisions in the

case of
State of Madras Vs. Gannon Dunkerley & Co., (Madras) Ltd.
,

(1959) SCR 379;
Larsen and Toubro Limited and Anr. Vs. State of

Karnataka and Anr.
, (2014) 1 SCC 708;
Nagarjuna Construction

Company Limited Vs. Union of India and Anr.
, (2013) 1 SCC 721;
Imagic Creative (P) Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes

and Ors.
, (2008) 2 SCC 614; and
T.N. Kalyana Mandapam Assn. Vs.

Union of India and Ors.
, (2004) 5 SCC 632.
9
6.2   It is vehemently submitted by Ms. Madhavi Divan, learned

Additional Solicitor General that, even prior to
Finance Act, 2007
, there

was an elaborate mechanism for segregating the value of the goods

component and the service component in a Works Contract. Therefore,

it is the case on behalf of the Revenue that it cannot be said that there

was no machinery provision to charge as such the service component in

a Composite Works Contracts in order to make it excisable service tax.

Therefore, it is the case on behalf of the Revenue that the observations

and the findings recorded by this Court in the case of
Larsen and

Toubro Limited
(supra) that there was no service tax leviable on Works

Contracts prior to the amendment by the
Finance Act, 2007
is

fundamentally erroneous and contrary to, and in the teeth of the well

settled principles
laid down by
previous judgments, including the

judgments passed by Larger Benches of this Court referred to

hereinabove.
However, for the reasons stated hereinbelow, we do not

propose to elaborately consider the submissions made by Ms. Madhavi

Divan, learned Additional Solicitor General on merits and made in

support of her request to re-consider the decision of this Court in the

case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra).
7.    On the other hand, Shri Arvind P. Datar, learned Senior Advocate,

appearing on behalf of some of the assessees and other learned senior
10
counsel appearing on behalf of the respective assessees have

vehemently submitted that as such, the issue involved in the present

appeals is squarely covered by the decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra).
It is submitted that in most of the

appeals, which are arising out of the judgments and orders passed by

the High Court of Delhi, the High court has followed its decision in the

case of
G.D. Builders
(supra).
That
the said decision
of the Delhi High

Court in the case of
G.D. Builders
(supra) has been held to be wholly

incorrect by this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra).
He has taken us to the relevant observations made by this

Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra) in paragraphs

28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 38 and 39.
7.1   It is vehemently submitted by Shri Datar, learned Senior Advocate

appearing on behalf of some of the assesses that in the case of
Larsen

and Toubro Limited
(supra), it is specifically observed that a taxable

service under the
Finance Act, 1994
covers service contracts simpliciter

and not the Composite Works Contracts (reliance is placed upon the

observations made in paragraphs 23 and 29 of
the said decision
). It is

contended that while referring to exemption notifications in paragraph

42, it has been specifically observed and held that since the levy of

service tax has been found to be non-existent, no question of any
11
exemption would arise.
It is further urged by Shri Datar, learned Senior

Advocate appearing on behalf of some of the assesses that the decision

of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra) has

been subsequently followed by this Court in the case of
Commissioner

of Service Tax and Ors. Vs. Bhayana Builders Private Limited and

Ors.
, (2018) 3 SCC 782.
That after following and considering the

decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra), this Court dismissed the appeals preferred by the Revenue.
7.2   It is further submitted by Shri Datar, learned Senior Advocate

appearing on behalf of some of the assesses that after 2015, the

decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra) has been consistently followed by all the High Courts in the

country and the various Tribunals.
It is submitted that therefore, if after a

period of six to seven years, the decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra) is to be re-considered at the

instance of the Revenue, it may upset the decisions already taken by the

Tribunals and the various High Courts.
It is submitted that therefore on

the principle of stare decisis, this Court may not take a contrary view

than the view taken by this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro

Limited
(supra) and/or may not re-consider the same now at this length

of time at the instance of the Revenue, more particularly, when the
12
Revenue did not file any review application earlier to review the decision

given by this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra).

7.3     It is further submitted by Shri Datar, learned Senior Advocate

appearing on behalf of some of the assesses that some of the appeals in

the present case arise out of the interim orders passed by the Tribunals.
That thereafter, final orders have been passed by the Tribunals by

relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro

Limited
(supra) and the Revenue has not challenged the final decision.

Therefore, as such, the Revenue has accepted the decisions in almost

all cases, which have already attained the finality.


7.4     Shri Datar, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of some

of the assesses has also made elaborate submissions on non-levy of

service tax on the Composite Works Contracts prior to the
Finance Act,

2007
.    He has also taken us through the speech made by the then

Hon’ble Finance Minister while moving the amendment in the Parliament

while introducing the
Finance Act, 2007
. It is submitted that for the first

time, the service tax is levied on the Composite Works Contracts

pursuant to the
Finance Act
amendment made vide
Finance Act, 2007
.
However, for the reasons to be recorded hereinbelow, we do not propose

to elaborately deal with and/or consider the elaborate submissions made

on behalf of the respective parties on whether the service tax was
13
leviable on Composite Works Contracts prior to
Finance Act, 2007
or not

and on whether the decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and

Toubro Limited
(supra) is required to be re-considered, as now

submitted and/or prayed on behalf of the Revenue.
8.    Heard, Ms. Madhavi Divan, learned ASG appearing on behalf of

the Revenue and Shri Arvind Datar, learned Senior Advocate and other

learned senior and other counsel appearing on behalf of the respective

assessees.
9.    The short question which is posed for consideration of this Court

is, “whether for the period prior to introduction of the
Finance Act, 2007
,

the service tax would be leviable on the Composite Works Contracts?”
10.   At the outset, it is required to be noted that whether post-2007, the

service tax was leviable on Composite Works Contracts is now no longer

res integra in view of the direct decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
, (supra).
10.1 Ms. Divan, learned ASG is not disputing that in the case of
Larsen

and Toubro Limited
(supra), this Court has specifically observed and

held that the service tax was not leviable on the indivisible/Composite

Works Contracts, post
Finance Act, 2007
. However, according to the
14
learned ASG
,
the said decision
requires re-consideration and therefore,

the prayer is made to refer the matter to the Larger Bench.
10.2    While appreciating the prayer/submission made on behalf of the

Revenue to re-consider the binding decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra) and to refer the matter to the

Larger Bench, few facts are required to be taken into consideration,

which are as under:-
(i)     The decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro

               Limited
(supra) has been delivered/passed in the year

               2015, in which, it is specifically observed and held that on

               indivisible works contracts for the period pre-
Finance Act,

               2007
, the service tax was not leviable;
(ii)    After considering the entire scheme and the levy of service

               tax pre-
Finance Act, 2007
and after giving cogent reasons, a

               conscious decision has been taken by this Court holding that

               the service tax was not leviable pre-
Finance Act, 2007
on

               indivisible/Composite Works Contracts;
(iii)   While holding that for the period pre-
Finance Act, 2007
, on

               indivisible/Composite Works Contracts, the service tax is not

               leviable, number of decisions have been dealt with and

               considered by this Court in the aforesaid decision;
15
(iv)   That subsequently, the decision of this court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra) has been followed and

       considered by this Court in the case of
Bhayana Builders

       Private Limited and Ors.
, (supra);
(v)    That after the decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen

       and Toubro Limited
(supra) rendered in the year 2015
,
the

       said decision
has been consistently followed by various High

       Courts and the Tribunals;
(vi)   The decisions of the various High Courts and the Tribunals,

       which were passed after following the decision of this Court

       in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra) have

       attained finality and in many cases, the Revenue has not

       challenged the said decisions;
(vii) No efforts were made by the Revenue to file any review

       application to review and/or recall the judgment and order

       passed by this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro

       Limited
(supra).
If the Revenue was so serious in their view

       that decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro

       Limited
(supra) requires re-consideration, Revenue ought to

       have filed the review application at that stage and/or even

       thereafter. No such review application has been filed even

       as on today.
16
(viii) Merely because in the subsequent cases, the amount of tax

            involved may be higher, cannot be a ground to pray for re-
consideration of the earlier binding decision, which has been

            consistently followed by various High Courts and the

            Tribunals in the entire country.
10.3 Keeping in mind the aforesaid factual aspects, the prayer made on

behalf of Revenue to re-consider the decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra) and to refer the matter to the

Larger Bench is required to be considered.
10.4 While considering the prayer made on behalf of the Revenue to

review and/or revisit the earlier decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra), few decisions on the principle of

stare decisis are required to be referred to and considered.
10.5 In the case of
Dr. Jaishri Laxmanrao Patil Vs. Chief Minister

and Ors.
, (2021) 8 SCC 1, after considering the earlier decision of the

Seven Judge Constitution Bench in the case of
Keshav Mills Co. Ltd.

Vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay North, Ahmedabad
, AIR

1965 SC 1636, it is observed and held that before reviewing and revising

its earlier decision the Court must satisfy itself whether it is necessary to

do so in the interest of public good or for any other compelling reason

and the Court must endeavour to maintain certainty and continuity in the

interpretation of the law in the country.
17
10.5.1     After discussing the law on the principle of stare decisis, it is

observed and held that the relevance and significance of the principle

of stare decisis have to be kept in mind and that in law, certainty,

consistency and continuity are highly desirable features. While holding

so, in paragraphs 453 to 456, it is observed and held as under:-
“453. The seven-Judge Constitution Bench judgment
     in
Keshav Mills [Keshav Mills Co. Ltd. v. CIT
, AIR 1965 SC
     1636 : (1965) 2 SCR 908] has unanimously held that before
     reviewing and revising its earlier decision the Court must
     itself satisfy whether it is necessary to do so in the interest of
     public good or for any other compelling reason and the Court
     must endeavour to maintain a certainty and continuity in the
     interpretation of the law in the country.
454.
In
Jarnail Singh v. Lachhmi Narain Gupta
[(2018) 10
     SCC 396], the prayer to refer the Constitution Bench
     judgment in
M. Nagaraj [M. Nagaraj v. Union of India
, (2006)
     8 SCC 212] was rejected by the Constitution Bench relying
     on the law as
laid down in
Keshav Mills
case [
Keshav Mills
     Co. Ltd. v. CIT
, AIR 1965 SC 1636 : (1965) 2 SCR 908].
In
     para 9 the following has been laid down : (
Jarnail Singh
case [
Jarnail Singh v. Lachhmi Narain Gupta
, (2018) 10 SCC
     396], SCC pp. 410-11)

         “9.
Since we are asked to revisit a unanimous
         Constitution Bench judgment, it is important to bear in
         mind the admonition of the Constitution Bench
         judgment in
Keshav Mills [Keshav Mills Co. Ltd. v. CIT
,
         AIR 1965 SC 1636 : (1965) 2 SCR 908]. This Court
         said : (SCR pp. 921-22 : AIR p. 1644, para 23)

           ‘23. … in reviewing and revising its earlier
           decision, this Court should ask itself whether in
18
the interests of the public good or for any other
valid and compulsive reasons, it is necessary
that the earlier decision should be revised. When
this Court decides questions of law, its decisions
are, under
Article 141
, binding on all courts within
the territory of India, and so, it must be the
constant endeavour and concern of this Court to
introduce and maintain an element of certainty
and continuity in the interpretation of law in the
country. Frequent exercise by this Court of its
power to review its earlier decisions on the
ground that the view pressed before it later
appears to the Court to be more reasonable, may
incidentally tend to make law uncertain and
introduce confusion which must be consistently
avoided. That is not to say that if on a
subsequent occasion, the Court is satisfied that
its earlier decision was clearly erroneous, it
should hesitate to correct the error; but before a
previous decision is pronounced to be plainly
erroneous, the Court must be satisfied with a fair
amount of unanimity amongst its members that a
revision of the said view is fully justified. It is not
possible or desirable, and in any case it would be
inexpedient to lay down any principles which
should govern the approach of the Court in
dealing with the question of reviewing and
revising its earlier decisions. It would always
depend upon several relevant considerations —
What is the nature of the infirmity or error on
which a plea for a review and revision of the
earlier view is based? On the earlier occasion,
did some patent aspects of the question remain
unnoticed, or was the attention of the Court not
drawn to any relevant and material statutory
provision, or was any previous decision of this
Court bearing on the point not noticed? Is the
Court hearing such plea fairly unanimous that
19
there is such an error in the earlier view? What
      would be the impact of the error on the general
      administration of law or on public good? Has the
      earlier decision been followed on subsequent
      occasions either by this Court or by the High
      Courts? And, would the reversal of the earlier
      decision lead to public inconvenience, hardship
      or mischief? These and other relevant
      considerations must be carefully borne in mind
      whenever this Court is called upon to exercise its
      jurisdiction to review and revise its earlier
      decisions. These considerations become still
      more significant when the earlier decision
      happens to be a unanimous decision of a Bench
      of five learned Judges of this Court.’ ”
455. The principle of stare decisis also commends us not to
accept the submissions of Shri Rohatgi. the Constitution
Bench of this Court in
State of Gujarat v. Mirzapur Moti
Kureshi Kassab Jamat
[(2005) 8 SCC 534], explaining the
principle of stare decisis laid down the following in paras 111
and 118 : (SCC pp. 589 & 591)

   “111. Stare decisis is a Latin phrase which means ‘to
   stand by decided cases; to uphold precedents; to
   maintain former adjudication’. This principle is
   expressed in the maxim “stare decisis et non quieta
   movere” which means to stand by decisions and not to
   disturb what is settled. This was aptly put by Lord Coke
   in his classic English version as ‘Those things which
   have been so often adjudged ought to rest in peace’.
However, according to Frankfurter, J., the doctrine
   of stare decisis is not “an imprisonment of reason”
   (Advanced Law Lexicon, P. Ramanatha Aiyer, 3rd Edn.
   2005, Vol. 4, P. 4456). The underlying logic of the
   doctrine is to maintain consistency and avoid
   uncertainty. The guiding philosophy is that a view
20
which has held the field for a long time should not be
        disturbed only because another view is possible.
***
118. The doctrine of stare decisis is generally to be
        adhered to, because well-settled principles of law
        founded on a series of authoritative pronouncements
        ought to be followed. Yet, the demands of the changed
        facts and circumstances, dictated by forceful factors
        supported by logic, amply justify the need for a fresh
        look.”
456. the Constitution Bench in
Indra Sawhney [Indra
     Sawhney v. Union of India
, 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217]
     speaking through B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J. has held that the
     relevance and significance of the principle of stare
     decisis have to be kept in mind. It was reiterated that in law
     certainty, consistency and continuity are highly desirable
     features. Following are the exact words in para 683 : (SCC
     p. 657)

        “683. … Though, we are sitting in a larger Bench, we
        have kept in mind the relevance and significance of the
        principle of stare decisis. We are conscious of the fact
        that in law certainty, consistency and continuity are
        highly desirable features.
Where a decision has stood
        the test of time and has never been doubted, we have
        respected it … unless, of course, there are compelling
        and strong reasons to depart from it. Where, however,
        such uniformity is not found, we have tried to answer
        the question on principle keeping in mind the scheme
        and goal of our Constitution and the material placed
        before us.”


10.6 In the case of
Dr. Shah Faesal and Ors. Vs. Union of India and

Anr.
, (2020) 4 SCC 1, the Constitution Bench of this Court had occasion

to consider the principle of stare decisis and the law of precedents/re-
21
consideration/review of earlier decision.
After considering the decision of

this Court in the case of
Chandra Prakash and Ors. Vs. State of U.P.

and Anr.
, (2002) 4 SCC 234 (paragraph 22), it is observed and held by

this Court that doctrines of precedents and stare decisis are the core

values of our legal system. They form the tools which further the goal of

certainty, stability and continuity in our legal system. When a decision is

rendered by this Court, it acquires a reliance interest and the society

organises itself based on the present legal order. By observing and

holding so, it is observed in paragraphs 17 to 19 as under:-
“17. This Court's jurisprudence has shown that usually the
     courts do not overrule the established precedents unless
     there is a social, constitutional or economic change
     mandating such a development. The numbers themselves
     speak of restraint and the value this Court attaches to the
     doctrine of precedent. This Court regards the use of
     precedent as indispensable bedrock upon which this Court
     renders justice. The use of such precedents, to some extent,
     creates certainty upon which individuals can rely and
     conduct their affairs. It also creates a basis for the
     development of the rule of law. As the Chief Justice of the
     Supreme Court of the United States, John Roberts observed
     during his Senate confirmation hearing, “It is a jolt to the
     legal system when you overrule a precedent. Precedent
     plays an important role in promoting stability and even-
     handedness”. [Congressional Record—Senate, Vol. 156, Pt.
     7, 10018 (7-6-2010).]
18. Doctrines of precedents and stare decisis are the core
     values of our legal system. They form the tools which further
     the goal of certainty, stability and continuity in our legal
     system. Arguably, Judges owe a duty to the concept of
22
certainty of law, therefore they often justify their holdings by
      relying upon the established tenets of law.
19. When a decision is rendered by this Court, it acquires a
      reliance interest and the society organises itself based on
      the present legal order. When substantial judicial time and
      resources are spent on references, the same should not be
      made in a casual or cavalier manner. It is only when a
      proposition is contradicted by a subsequent judgment of the
      same Bench, or it is shown that the proposition laid down
      has become unworkable or contrary to a well-established
      principle, that a reference will be made to a larger Bench. In
      this context, a five-Judge Bench of this Court in Chandra
      Prakash v. State of U.P. [(2002) 4 SCC 234], after
      considering series of earlier rulings reiterated that : (SCC p.
245, para 22)

         “22. … The doctrine of binding precedent is of utmost
         importance in the administration of our judicial
         system. It promotes certainty and consistency in
         judicial decisions. Judicial consistency promotes
         confidence in the system, therefore, there is this need
         for consistency in the enunciation of legal principles in
         the decisions of this Court.”
                                           (emphasis supplied)”


10.7 It is observed and held in the aforesaid decision that even the rule

of overruling the judgments should be applied with great caution, and

only when the previous decision is manifestly wrong, as, for instance, if it

proceeded upon a mistaken assumption of the continuance of a

repealed or expired Statute, or is contrary to a decision of another court

which the court is bound to follow; not, upon a mere suggestion, that

some or all of the members of the court might later arrive at a different
23
conclusion if the matter was res integra.     It is further observed that

otherwise there would be great danger of want of continuity in the

interpretation of law. It is further observed and held that the decisions

rendered by a coordinate Bench is binding on the subsequent Benches

of equal or lesser strength and a coordinate Bench of the same strength

cannot take a contrary view than what has been held by another

coordinate Bench unless it is shown to be per incuriam.
11.   At this stage, a few decisions of this Court on consistency,

certainty and uniformity also deserve consideration, which are as under:-
11.1 This Court in
Government of Andhra Pradesh Vs. A.P. Jaswal
,

(2001) 1 SCC 748 has observed as under:-
“Consistency is the cornerstone of the administration of
     justice. It is consistency which creates confidence in the
     system and this consistency can never be achieved without
     respect to the rule of finality. It is with a view to achieve
     consistency in judicial pronouncements, the courts have
     evolved the rule of precedents, principle of stare decisis etc.
     These rules and principles are based on public policy………”


      The aforesaid observations are equally, if not more meaningful and

relevant to tax matters.
11.2 This Court, in the Constitution Bench judgment in
Union of India

Vs. Raghubir Singh (Dead) by LRs
. etc., (1989) 2 SCC 754, on the

question of the merit of promoting certainty and consistency in judicial

decisions, had observed that this enables an organic development of
24
law, besides assuring the individuals as to the consequences of

transactions forming part of his daily affairs, and, therefore, there is a

need for clear and consistent enunciation of legal principles in the

decision of a court.
11.3 In
K. Ajit Babu and Ors. Vs. Union of India and Ors.
, (1997) 6

SCC 473, this Court again emphasized on the aspect of consistency,

certainty and uniformity in the field of judicial decisions as it sets a

pattern upon which future conduct may be based. One of the basic

principles of the administration of justice is that identical/similar cases

should be decided alike. This is the foundation of the doctrine of

precedent, which has considerable benefits and advantages.
Emphasis

on the law of precedent, which promotes certainty and consistency, was

also noticed in
Sundarjas Kanyalal Bhatija and Ors. Vs. Collector

Thane, Maharashtra and Ors.
, (1989) 3 SCC 396, by emphasizing that

it is the duty of the courts to make the law more predictable. Law must

be made more effective as a guide to behaviour, otherwise, the lawyers

or, for that matter, laymen would be in a predicament and would not

know how to advise or conduct themselves. The general public should

not be in a dilemma to obey or not to obey such law.
11.4 In
Medley Pharmaceuticals Limited v. Commissioner of

Central Excise and Customs, Daman
, (2011) 2 SCC 6014, the

question before this Court was whether, "physicians' samples" are
25
excisable goods considering that they are prohibited from being sold

under the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940
. Observing that since this

Court has consistently held that the medical supplies supplied to the

doctors are liable to excise duty, the issue involved in this case was no

longer res integra.
Relying on the Constitutional Bench decision in
Waman Rao v. Union of India
, (1981) 2 SCC 362, it was held:
43. It is settled law that this Court should follow an earlier
     decision that has withstood the changes in time, irrespective
     of the rationale of the view taken. It was held by a
     Constitution Bench in
Waman Rao v. Union of India
[(1981) 2
     SCC 362]: (SCC p. 393, para 40)
40. It is also true to say that for the application of
           the rule of stare decisis, it is not necessary that
           the earlier decision or decisions of longstanding
           should have considered and either accepted or
           rejected the particular argument which is
           advanced in the case on hand. Were it so, the
           previous decisions could more easily be treated
           as binding by applying the law of precedent and
           it will be unnecessary to take resort to the
           principle of stare decisis. It is, therefore, sufficient
           for invoking the rule of stare decisis that a certain
           decision was arrived at on a question which
           arose or was argued, no matter on what reason
           the decision rests or what is the basis of the
           decision. In other words, for the purpose of
           applying the rule of stare decisis, it is
           unnecessary to enquire or determine as to what
           was the rationale of the earlier decision which is
           said to operate as stare decisis."
11.5 In
Saurashtra Cement & Chemical Industries Ltd. and another

Vs. Union of India and others
, (2001) 1 SCC 91 this Court refused to
26
indulge on the question of delegated legislation in taxing statute since

the authority of the legislature in introducing the statute in question, i.e.,
Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957
could not

be doubted and in any event, was a settled proposition of law for more

than a decade.
Applying the doctrine of stare decisis, the Court rejected

the plea to reconsider the decision in State of Madhya Pradesh v.
Mahalaxmi Fabric Mills Ltd., 1995 Supp (1) SCC 642 in the following

words:-
“35. In the wake of the aforesaid, we do feel it expedient to
     record that taking recourse to the doctrine as above would
     be an imperative necessity, so as to avoid uncertainty and
     confusion, since the basic feature of law is its certainty and
     in the event of any departure therefrom the society would be
     in utter confusion and the resultant effect of which would be
     legal anarchy and judicial indiscipline-a situation which
     always ought to be avoided. The Central Legislature
     introduced the legislation
(MMRD Act
) in the year 1957 and
     several hundreds and thousands of cases have already
     been dealt with on the basis thereof and the effect of a
     declaration of a contra law would be totally disastrous
     affecting the very basics of the revenue jurisprudence. It is
     true that the doctrine has no statutory sanction but it is a rule
     of convenience, expediency, prudence and above all the
     public policy. It is to be observed in its observance rather
     than in its breach to serve the people and subserve the ends
     of justice.”
12.   What    was     said   by    the    Constitution   Bench     in
Indra

Sawhney Vs. Union of India
, 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217 and Keshav

Mills Co. Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay North,

Ahmedabad, AIR 1965 SC 1636, on the principle of stare decisis clearly
27
bind us. The judgment of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro

Limited
(supra) has stood the test of time and has never been doubted

earlier. As observed hereinabove
,
the said decision
has been followed

consistently by this Court as well as by various High Courts and the

Tribunals.
Therefore, if the prayer made on behalf of the Revenue to re-

consider and/or review the judgment of this Court in the case of
Larsen

and Toubro Limited
(supra) is accepted
,
in that case
, it will affect so

many other assesses in whose favour the decisions have already been

taken relying upon and/or following the decision of this Court in the case

of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra) and It may unsettle the law,

which has been consistently followed since 2015 onwards. There are all

possibilities of contradictory orders.
Therefore, on the principle of stare

decisis, we are of the firm view that the judgment of this Court in the

case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra), neither needs to be

revisited, nor referred to a Larger Bench of this Court as prayed, i.e.,

after a period of almost seven years and as observed hereinabove when

no efforts were made to file any review application requesting to review

the judgment on the grounds, which are now canvassed before this

Court.
13.   At this stage, it is required to be noted that one of the appeals

being Civil Appeal No. 6523 of 2014 filed by M/s. G.D. Builders is against
28
the decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of
G.D. Builders Vs.

Union of India
reported in (2013) 32 STR 673 (Delhi).
It is to be noted

that
the said decision
of the Delhi High Court in the case of
G.D.

Builders
(supra) has been specifically overruled by this court in the

case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra).
The decision of the Delhi

High Court in the case of
G.D. Builders
(supra) has been considered by

this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra) in

paragraphs 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 38 and 39 and ultimately, this Court

opined that the decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of
G.D.

Builders
(supra) is in fact contrary to a long line of decisions.
It is

further specifically observed and held that the decision of the Delhi High

Court in the case of
G.D. Builders
(supra) is wholly incorrect in its

conclusion that the
Finance Act, 1994
contains both the charge and

machinery for levy and assessment of service tax on indivisible works

contracts.
It is reported that while deciding the group of matters in the

case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra), the papers of the appeal

filed by M/s. G.D. Builders being Civil Appeal No. 6523 of 2014 were

also called and the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the G.D.

Builders was also heard.
It appears that, however, the Civil Appeal No.

6523 of 2014 filed by M/s. G.D. Builders against the decision of the Delhi

High Court has not been specifically disposed of. Therefore, once the

decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of
G.D. Builders
(supra),
29
which is the subject matter of Civil Appeal No. 6523 of 2014 has been

held to be wholly incorrect, Civil Appeal No. 6523 of 2014 filed by M/s.

G.D. Builders has to be allowed and the judgment and order passed by

the Delhi High Court has to be quashed and set aside.
13.1 Now, so far as Civil Appeal No. 6525 of 2014, Civil Appeal No.

6526 of 2014 and Civil Appeal No. 2666 of 2022 are concerned, the High

Court has dismissed the said writ petitions preferred by the respective

assesses relying upon its earlier decision in the case of
G.D. Builders
(supra).
Once the decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of
G.D.

Builders
(supra) is held to be wholly incorrect by this Court in the case

of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra), Civil Appeal No. 6525 of 2014,

Civil Appeal No. 6526 of 2014 and Civil Appeal No. 2666 of 2022 are

also to be allowed.
13.2 So far as Civil Appeal Nos. 8673-8684 of 2013 preferred by the

assessee – M/s. Total Environment Building Systems Pvt. Ltd. are

concerned, the same are against the judgment and order passed by the

High Court of Karnataka in Writ Appeal Nos. 3481-3492 of 2009 by

which the Division Bench of the High Court has dismissed the said writ

appeals and has confirmed the judgment and order passed by the

learned Single Judge dismissing the writ petitions in which the appellant
- assessee challenged the assessment orders levying Service Tax, on

the ground of alternative remedy available by way of statutory appeal.
30
However, in view of the binding decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra), the assessee is not liable to pay

the service tax till the date of amendment of the provision on the

indivisible/composite works contracts and therefore, the said appeals

also deserve to be allowed and the assessment orders levying the

service tax are to be set aside.
13.3 Following the binding decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen

and Toubro Limited
(supra), taking the view that for the period pre-
Finance    Act,   2007
,   service   tax   was   not   leviable   on   the

indivisible/composite works contracts, the Civil Appeal Nos. 4547-4548

of 2014, Civil Appeal No. 2667 of 2022 and Civil Appeal No. 2668 of

2022 arising out of the common judgment and order passed by the

Guwahati High Court and the respective decisions of the CESTAT

passed against the respective assesses are also to be allowed.
13.4 Now, so far as Civil Appeal No. 6792 of 2010 preferred by the

Revenue against the judgment and order passed by the CESTAT, West

Zonal Bench in Appeal No. ST/275 of 2006 is concerned, in view of the

binding decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra), the same deserves to be dismissed.
14.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, Civil Appeal

Nos. 8673-8684 of 2013, Civil Appeal No. 6525 of 2014, Civil Appeal No.
31
6523 of 2014, Civil Appeal No. 6526 of 2014, Civil Appeal No. 2666 of

2022, Civil Appeal Nos. 4547-4548 of 2014, Civil Appeal No. 2667 of

2022 and Civil Appeal No. 2668 of 2022 are hereby allowed and

impugned judgments and orders passed by the respective High

Courts/Tribunals taking the view that for the period pre-
Finance Act,

2007
, the respective assesses are/were liable to pay the service tax on

indivisible/composite works contracts are hereby quashed and set aside.

Consequently, the respective assessment orders/orders in originals

levying   the     service   tax   on   the   respective   assesses   on   the

indivisible/Composite Works Contracts for the period prior to pre-2007

are hereby quashed and set aside.            Necessary consequences shall

follow.
Civil Appeal No. 6792 of 2010 is hereby dismissed.

      In the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order

as to costs.
Note :-        I have had the advantage of perusing the supplementary

               judgment and order proposed by my learned Sister, B.V.

               Nagarathna, J. As such, Her Ladyship has agreed with the

               conclusions arrived at by me in the present judgment and

               order, however, has thought it fit to give additional reasons

               for the conclusions and has dealt with the submissions made
32
by Ms. Madhavi Divan on merits. However, for the reasons

         stated above as this Court has not agreed with the prayer

         made by Ms. Divan, learned ASG to reconsider the decision

         in the case of
Larsen and Toubro Limited
(supra) on the

         principle of stare decisis and on the principle of consistency, I

         deem it proper not to deliberate further on merits, as

         observed above, the issue involved is squarely covered by

         the decision of this Court in the case of
Larsen and Toubro

         Limited
(supra), which has been subsequently followed by

         this Court as well as by various High Courts and Tribunals.
………………………………….J.
                                          [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                             ………………………………….J.
AUGUST 02, 2022.                         [B.V. NAGARATHNA]
33
I have had the advantage of perusing the judgment proposed by

His Lordship M.R. Shah J. While I agree with the conclusions arrived

at by him, I wish to supplement the reasons for the conclusions.

(2)   As already stated, the issue in these appeals relates to the levy of

service tax on composite works contract prior to the amendment made

to the
Finance Act, 1994
in the year 2007 by which
Section 65(105)

(zzzza)
was introduced which gives the definition to the expression

“works contract.”

(3)   While it is not essential to narrate the details of each of the cases

under consideration as it has been made in the judgment proposed by

M.R. Shah J., it is however necessary to answer the principal

submission made by Ms. Madhavi Diwan, learned Additional Solicitor

General appearing for the revenue with a detailed reasoning. She

contended that the judgment of this Court in
Commissioner, Central

Excise and Customs, Kerala vs. Larsen and Toubro Ltd.
[(2016) 1

SCC 170] (hereinafter referred as “Larsen & Toubro Ltd.”) requires

reconsideration as in the said case it was held that service tax on

composite works contract was not leviable prior to the amendment

made to the
Finance Act, 1994
, in the year 2007, whereas according to

her, in fact, it was leviable even prior thereto and the amendment

made to the
Finance Act, 1994
, in the year 2007 by insertion of
Section 65(105)(zzzza)
is only clarificatory in nature.
Hence, the
34
judgment in
Larsen and Toubro Ltd.
(supra) holding otherwise calls

for reconsideration.
(4)   Per contra, Sri Arvind P. Datar learned senior advocate appearing

on behalf of some of the assesses and other learned senior counsel

contended that the judgment in
Larsen and Toubro Ltd.
(supra) does

not call for reconsideration.
Further, in the said case the judgment of

the Delhi High Court in
G.D. Builders vs. Union of India
[(2013) 32

STR 673] has been held to be not correctly decided and was therefore

overruled.
(5)   Before proceeding to consider the aforesaid rival contentions, it

would be useful to discuss the evolution, meaning and content of the

expression works contract in the context of sales tax law and as well

as under the service tax regime. This is, having regard to the definition

of works contract being inserted w.e.f. 1st June, 2007 to the
Finance

Act, 1994
which seeks to impose service tax on the service aspect of a

works contract. The reason for this exercise is because works contract

by itself is not taxable. A works contract as defined by the amendment

has two components, namely, a sale component and a service

component. It is only when both the components are satisfied and co­

exist that a contract becomes a works contract as defined. Further, it

is only on the service component of the works contract that the service

tax is leviable w.e.f. 1st June, 2007. As far as the sale component in a
35
works contract is concerned, the Sales Tax laws of the respective

States would apply. It is also necessary to state that after the

enforcement of the
Central Goods and Services Tax Act
(CGST), 2017

regime the matter is covered under that Act. Therefore, it is necessary

to gather the meaning of works contract from judicial precedent in

order to answer the rival submissions in the instant case.
Section 65(105)(zzzza)
of the Finance Act, 1994 as amended by

the
Finance Act, 2007
which defines work contract, has been

extracted as under, for ease of reference:
“ ‘Works     contract’     means   a   contract
             wherein,­
transfer of property in goods involved in the
             execution of such contract is leviable to tax
             as sale of goods, and
(ii) such contract is for the purposes of
             carrying out,—
(a) erection, commissioning or installation of
             plant, machinery, equipment or structures,
             whether      pre­fabricated   or    otherwise,
             installation of electrical and electronic
             devices, plumbing, drain laying or other
             installations for transport of fluids, heating,
             ventilation or air­conditioning including
             related pipe work, duct work and sheet
             metal work, thermal insulation, sound
             insulation, fire proofing or water proofing,
             lift and escalator, fire escape staircases or
             elevators; or
36
(b) construction of a new building or a civil
                structure or a part thereof, or of a pipeline
                or conduit, primarily for the purposes of
                commerce or industry; or
(c) construction of a new residential complex
                or a part thereof; or
(d) completion and finishing services, repair,
                alteration, renovation or restoration of, or
                similar services, in relation to (b) and (c); or
(e) turnkey projects including engineering,
                procurement      and     construction    or
                commissioning (EPC) projects.”



     A reading of the aforesaid definition would indicate that two

requisites must be satisfied before service tax on works contract could

be levied. In other words, a contract in order to be works contract

must involve:
“(i) transfer of property in goods involved in
                the execution of such contract is leviable to
                tax as sale of goods, and
(ii) such contract is for the purposes of
                carrying out,—
(a) erection, commissioning or installation of
                plant, machinery, equipment or structures,
                whether      pre­fabricated  or    otherwise,
                installation of electrical and electronic
                devices, plumbing, drain laying or other
37
installations for transport of fluids, heating,
             ventilation or air­conditioning including
             related pipe work, duct work and sheet
             metal work, thermal insulation, sound
             insulation, fire proofing or water proofing,
             lift and escalator, fire escape staircases or
             elevators; or
(b) construction of a new building or a civil
             structure or a part thereof, or of a pipeline
             or conduit, primarily for the purposes of
             commerce or industry; or
(c) construction of a new residential complex
             or a part thereof; or
(d) completion and finishing services, repair,
             alteration, renovation or restoration of, or
             similar services, in relation to (b) and (c); or
(e) turnkey projects including engineering,
             procurement      and     construction    or
             commissioning (EPC) projects.”


     Thus, works contract has two essential components: firstly, sale

of goods involved in the execution of such contracts which would

attract Sales Tax or Value Added Tax (VAT) as the case may be, i.e.,

prior to the enforcement of the Goods and Services Tax regime and

secondly, a service component which is specified in clause (ii)(a)­(e) of

the definition of works contract which would attract Service Tax under

the provisions of the
Finance Act, 1994
as amended in the year 2007.
If both the above requisites are present, then Service Tax on works
38
contract is leviable on the service component. This is clear from the

use of the word “and” between components (i) and (ii) of the definition

of works contract under Clause (zzzza) of
Section 65
of the Finance

Act, 1994 which is as per the amendment in the year 2007. Thus, the

definition speaks of a composite works contract comprising of an

element of sale and an element of service.
Having regard to the specific definition of works contract

introduced in the
Finance Act, 1994
, w.e.f. 1 st June, 2007 and bearing

in mind that both clauses (i) as well as (ii) of the definition have to be

satisfied before the levy of service tax on the service component of a

works contract, it is necessary to understand the scope and ambit of

the expression “transfer of property in goods” in clause (i) of the

definition of works contract from various judgments of this Court.

Further, sales tax/VAT could also be levied on such transfer of goods

involved in the execution of such contracts and a service tax on as

specified in clause (ii) of the definition of works contract.
The evolution of the concept of works contract is noted as under
as it is on the service component of such contract that service tax is

leviable. The reference to judgments on works contract under Sales

Tax law would be pertinent.
A.   Prior to the 46th Amendment of the Constitution, levy of

       sales tax on sale of goods involved in the execution of a works
39
contract was held to be unconstitutional in Gannon Dunkerley

(I) – State of Madras vs. Gannon Dunkerley and Co.
(Madras) Ltd.     [AIR 1958 SC 560]; [1959 SCR 379]. A

Constitution Bench of this Court held that in a building

contract where the agreement between the parties was that the

contractor should construct the building according to the

specifications contained in the agreement and in consideration,

received payment as provided therein, there was neither a

contract to sell the materials used in the construction nor the

property passed therein as movables. It was held that in the

building contract which was one (entire and indivisible), there

was no sale of goods and it was not within the competence of

the concerned provincial State Legislature (Madras Legislature)

to impose tax on the supply of the materials used in such a

contract treating it as a sale. Consequently, it was held that in a

building contract which was one, entirely indivisible, there was

no sale of goods and it was not within the competence of the

Provincial State Legislature to impose tax on the supply of

materials used in such a contract treating it as a sale. This was

on the premise that the works contract was a composite

contract which is inseparable and indivisible.
40
B.   As a result of this dictum, the Law Commission of India in

its 61st Report specifically examined the taxability of works

contract and examined the particular question whether the

power to tax indivisible contract of works should be conferred

on the States. This led to insertion of Clause (29­A) to
Article

366
of the Constitution. For ease of reference, the same is

extracted as under:
“Article 366. Definitions. ­ In this
          Constitution,    unless    the   context
          otherwise    requires,   the   following
          expressions have the meanings hereby
          respectively assigned to them, that is to
          say –
          [(29­A) “tax on the sale or purchase of
          goods” includes –
(a)              X­X­X­X­X
(b)   A tax on the transfer of property
                 in goods (whether as goods or in
                 some other form) involved in the
                 execution of a works contract;”

C.   In Gannon Dunkerley (II) ­ Gannon Dunkerley and Co.
vs. State of Rajasthan [1993 (1) SCC 364], the Constitution

Bench of this Court explained the effect of the legal fiction

introduced by sub­ clause (b) of Clause (29­A) of
Article 366
of

the Constitution. The following principles were enunciated, to

outline the operation of sub­ clause (b) of Clause (29­A) of
Article 366:
41
a) That by virtue of the legal fiction in Clause 29­A,

even in a single indivisible works contract, there is

a deemed sale of goods and such sale has all the

incidents of ‘sale of goods.’
b) That the value of goods involved in the execution

of a works contract may be determined by taking

into account the value of the entire works contract

and deducting therefrom, the charges towards

labour and services.
c) That the following charges towards labour and

services were to be excluded in determining the

value of goods sold in executing a works contract:
i) Labour charges for execution of the

            works;
ii) Amount paid to a sub­contractor for

            labour and services;
iii) Charges for planning, designing and

            architect’s fees;
42
iv) Charges for obtaining on hire or

                      otherwise machinery and tools used for

                      the execution of the works contract;
v) Cost of consumables such as water,

                      electricity,   fuel,   etc.   used   in   the

                      execution of the works contract the

                      property in which is not transferred in

                      the course of execution of a works

                      contract; and
vi)   Cost     of   establishment    of   the

                      contractor to the extent it is relatable to

                      supply of labour and services;
vii) Other similar expenses relatable to

                      supply of labour and services;
viii) Profit earned by the contractor to

                      the extent it is relatable to supply of

                      labour and services.
D.   Therefore, under the regime that existed prior to the

amendment and insertion of Clause (29A) to
Article 366
of the
43
Constitution, a typical works contract would not involve sale of

goods and no sales tax was leviable on such works contract.

However, subsequently, by way of the Constitution (Forty­sixth

Amendment) Act, 1982, Clause (29­A) came to be inserted into

Article 366 of the Constitution of India, providing for an

inclusive definition of the expression “tax on the sale or

purchase of goods” in relation to various transactions and

dealings including “tax on the transfer of property in goods

(whether as goods or in some other form) involved in the

execution of a works contract.”

E.   Following the introduction of the said clause, most States

amended their Sales Tax statutes to cover ‘works contract.’ The

Constitutional validity of the aforementioned provisions by

which the legislatures of the States were empowered to levy

sales tax on certain transactions described in sub­clauses (a) to
(f) of Clause (29­A) of
Article 366
of the Constitution as also the

question, whether, the power of the State legislature to levy tax

on the transfer of property in goods involved in the execution of

works contract is subject to the restrictions and conditions

contained in
Article 286
of the Constitution, were considered by

a Constitution Bench of this Court in
Builders Association of

India vs. Union of India
[(1989) 2 SCC 645]. Therein, while
44
upholding the constitutional validity of the aforementioned

provisions, the Constitution Bench explained the unique

features of a composite contract relating to work and materials

and expounded on the meaning, effect and amplitude as also

contours of the provisions pertaining to the taxing power of the

States in relation to works contract particularly in paragraphs

38­40 of the judgment.
F.   In light of the said discussion, this Court concluded that

the transfer of any goods in Sub­clauses (a) to (f) of Clause (29A)

of
Article 366
of the Constitution is by way of a deeming

provision i.e., a deemed sale. This Court however, cautioned

that the levy of sales tax after the 46th Amendment to the

Constitution of India has to still comply with the restrictions

imposed under
Articles 286
and
269
of the Constitution.

G.   Later a three­judge bench of this Court in
State of AP v.

Kone Elevators
[(2005) 3 SCC 389] had taken the view that a

contract for manufacture, supply and installation of lifts is a

“sale” and the entire value of the consideration can therefore be

taxed under the sales tax law. However, the matter was

subsequently referred to a larger Bench to review the issue

afresh.
This Court, on re­hearing the matter referred to it, in
Kone Elevator India Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of Tamil Nadu
45
[(2014) 7 SCC 1], observed that the installation obligation in a

contract for manufacture, supply and installation of lift is not

merely incidental, but was a profound part of the entire

contract. That various components were assembled together

and installed at site as a permanent fixture to the building. The

goods, skill and labour elements are intimately connected with

one another and the contract is not divisible. Therefore, this

Court concluded that a contract for manufacture, supply and

installation of lifts was a works contract. It was also observed

that even after the 46th Amendment, if
Article 366 (29A)(b)
is to

be invoked, as a necessary concomitant, it must be shown that

the terms of the contract would lead to a conclusion that it is a

‘Works Contract’. In other words, unless a contract is proved to

be a ‘Works Contract’ by virtue of the terms agreed to as

between the parties, invocation of
Article 366 (29A)(b)
of the

Constitution, cannot be made. That in circumstances when no

definite conclusion can be made to the effect that a given

contract is a works contract, the same will have to be declared

as a ‘sale’ attracting the provisions of the relevant sales tax

enactments.
H.   In the case of
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs. Union of

India
[2006] 145 STC 91 (SC), the question that came up for
46
decision before this Court was with regard to the nature of the

transaction by which mobile phone connections were obtained,

as to, whether, it is a sale or a service or both. This Court held

that providing a telephone connection which operates by

transmission of electromagnetic waves or radio frequencies are

not   ‘goods’   for   the   purpose   of
Article   366(29A)
of   the

Constitution and that the goods in telecommunication are

limited to the handsets supplied by the service provider and as

far as the SIM cards are concerned, the issue was left for

determination by the assessing authorities.
I.    Subsequently, in
Larsen and Toubro Limited and

Another vs. State of Karnataka and Another
[(2014) (1) SCC

708], this Court deciphered the meaning of the works contract

from the earlier judgments and in para 72 opined as under:­


       “72. In our opinion, the term “works
       contract” in
Article 366(29­A)(b)
is amply
       wide and cannot be confined to a particular
       understanding of the term or to a particular
       form. The term encompasses a wide range
       and many varieties of contract. Parliament
       had such wide meaning of “works contract”
       in its view at the time of the Forty­sixth
       Amendment.
The object of insertion of
       clause (29­A) in
Article 366
was to enlarge
       the scope of the expression “tax on sale or
       purchase of goods” and overcome
Gannon
       Dunkerley (1) [State of Madras v. Gannon
       Dunkerley and Co. (Madras) Ltd.
, AIR
47
1958 SC 560 : 1959 SCR 379] . Seen
      thus, even if in a contract, besides the
      obligations of supply of goods and materials
      and performance of labour and services,
      some additional obligations are imposed,
      such contract does not cease to be works
      contract. The additional obligations in the
      contract would not alter the nature of
      contract so long as the contract provides for
      a contract for works and satisfies the
      primary description of works contract. Once
      the characteristics or elements of works
      contract are satisfied in a contract then
      irrespective of additional obligations, such
      contract would be covered by the term
      “works contract”. Nothing in
Article 366(29­
      A)(b)
limits the term “works contract” to
      contract for labour and service only. The
      learned Advocate General for Maharashtra
      was right in his submission that the term
      “works contract” cannot be confined to a
      contract to provide labour and services but
      is a contract for undertaking or bringing
      into existence some “works”. We are also in
      agreement with the submission of Mr K.N.
      Bhat that the term “works contract” in
Article 366(29­A)(b)
takes within its fold all
      genre of works contract and is not restricted
      to one specie of contract to provide for
      labour and services alone.
Parliament had
      all genre of works contract in view when
      clause (29­A) was inserted in Article 366.”
                                 (underlining by me)



J.   Further, the difference between a contract for work (or

service) and a contract for sale (of goods) was considered and by

placing   reliance   on
Commissioner     of   Sales   Tax   vs.

Purshottam Premji
[(1970) 2 SCC 287], it was observed that
48
the primary difference between a contract for work (or service)

and a contract for sale of goods is that, in the former, there is in

the person performing work or rendering service no property in

the thing produced as a whole, notwithstanding that a part or

even the whole of the materials used by him may have been his

property. In the case of a contract for sale, the thing produced

as a whole has individual existence as a sole property of the

party who produced it, at some time before delivery, and the

property therein passes only under the contract relating thereto

to other party for a price. It was also observed that the factors

highlighted to distinguish a contract for work from a contract

for sale are relevant but not exhaustive.
K.   In paragraph 89 of the
Larsen and Toubro Limited and

Another
(supra) this Court observed that three conditions must

be fulfilled to sustain the levy of tax on the goods deemed to

have been sold in execution of the works contract, namely, (i)

there must be a works contract, (ii) the goods should have been

involved in the execution of the works contract, and (iii) the

property in those goods must be transferred to a third party

either as goods or in some other form. In a building contract or

any contract to do construction, the above three things are fully

met. In a contract to build up a flat there will necessarily be a
49
sale of goods element. Works contract also includes building

        contracts and, therefore, it can be stated that building contracts

        are a species of works contract.
L.    With reference to the aspect theory, it was held that

        though the State Legislature does not have the power to tax

        services by including the cost of such service in the value of

        goods but that does not detract the State to tax the sale of goods

        element involved in the execution of works contract in a

        composite contract like contract for construction of building and

        sale of a flat therein. In light of the above discussion, the legal

        proposition was summarised in paragraph 97 of the judgment.

  Evolution of the practice in relation to the levy of service tax on

 works contract:
(6)    Service tax was introduced in India vide the
Finance Act, 1994
.
Service tax is legislated by Parliament under the residuary entry i.e.

Entry 97 of List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India

read with
Article 248
of the Constitution. The service tax provisions

have the following basic scheme:
(i)
Section 65
of the Act provides for taxable services;
50
(ii)
Section 66
of the Act provides for the charge of service tax by

    the person designated as “the person responsible for collecting the

    service tax” for the Government;
(iii) Section 67 of the Act provides for the value of taxable service

    which is to be subjected to 5% service tax; and
(iv)
Section 68
of the Act provides for the collection and payment

    mechanism for service tax.
It is necessary to trace the evolution of charging service tax on

works contract as discerned by this Court in the aforesaid judgments.

While considering the rival contentions of the parties, it is also

necessary to examine the issue of levying service tax on contracts said

to be in the nature of works contract, both prior to, and following the

introduction of an express charging provision to impose tax on works

contract although we are concerned with the period prior to the

definition of works contract w.e.f. 1 st June, 2007 to
Finance Act, 1994
.

This is with reference to the following judgments:
a)   In
Tamil Nadu Kalyana Mandapam Association vs.

      Union of India
[(2004) 5 SCC 632], this Court examined the

      question, whether, the inclusion of taxation on kalyana

      mandapams, within the tax net of
Section 66
and
67
of the

      Finance Act, 1994 as amended in the year 1996 was

      unconstitutional. It was held that a tax on services rendered by
51
mandap­keepers and outdoor caterers is in pith and substance,

a tax on services and not a tax on sale of goods or on hire­

purchase activities. The nature and character of this service tax

is evident from the fact that the transaction between a mandap­

keeper and his customer is definitely not in the nature of a sale

or hire­purchase of goods. It is essentially that of providing a

service. The manner of service provided assumes predominance

over the providing of food in such situations which is a definite

indicator of the supremacy of the service aspect. The legislature

in its wisdom noticed the said supremacy and identified the

same as a potential region to collect indirect tax.
b)   The question, whether, the charges collected towards the

services for evolution of prototype conceptual designs, on which

service tax had been paid under the
Finance Act, 1994
as

amended from time to time, were also liable to tax under the
Karnataka Value Added Tax Act, 2003
, (KVAT) for the sale of

advertisement material following the creation of the design­

concept, was considered by this Court in Imagic Creative Pvt.
Ltd. vs. The Commissioner of Commercial Taxes and Ors.
[(2008) 2 SCC 614]. This Court observed that payments of

service tax as also of KVAT are mutually exclusive. That they

should be held to be applicable having regard to the respective
52
parameters of service tax and the sales tax as envisaged in a

composite contract as contradistinguished from an indivisible

contract. Thus, a distinction was made between an indivisible

contract and a composite contract. In doing so, it was held that

a composite contract, would have to be construed such that the

legal fiction in
Article 366 (29A)
allowing tax on the sale element

of a works contract would have to be applied only to the extent

for which it was enacted, i.e., to the extent of the value of the

sale component of the contract and should not be applied in

relation to the service element of the transaction. That taxes, in

the nature of a service tax could be applied in relation only to

the service element.
c)   In
Nagarjuna      Construction     Company       Ltd.   vs.

Government of India and Ors.
[(2013) 1 SCC 721], this Court

discussed the effect of introduction of an express charging

provision to impose tax on works contract, w.e.f. 01 st June,

2007, on works contract which were entered into prior to 01 st

June, 2007. In the said case, the appellant therein was said to

be in the business of carrying out composite construction

contracts. The appellant­assessee had paid sales­tax/VAT on

those contracts under the
Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax

Act, 1957
,
Andhra Pradesh Value Added Tax Act, 2005
and
53
other State enactments. Prior to 01 st June, 2007, the assessee

had    paid   service­tax       under   the   category    of   ‘erection,

commissioning or installation service’ as appearing under
Section 65 (105) (zzd)
of the Finance Act, 1994, or, as

‘commercial or industrial construction service’ under
Section 65

(105) (zzq)
and as ‘construction of complex service’ under
Section 65 (105) (zzzh)
.
d)    With effect from 01st June, 2007, the charging provision,
Section 65 (105) (zzzza)
was introduced by defining a works

contract. The Central Government also introduced, w.e.f. 01st

June, 2007 the Works Contract (Composition Scheme for

Payment of Service Tax) Rules, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as

'the 2007 Rules'). Under this scheme, an option of composition

was offered @ 2% of the gross amount charged on the works

contract. Prior to the composition, the effective tax rate under

the   other   category     of   services   would   work    out   to   be

approximately 3.96% of the gross amount.
e)    The appellant in
Nagarjuna Construction Company Ltd.
(supra) sought to claim benefit of the Composition Scheme

under the 2007 Rules, however, the assessee was disabled to do

so because of a clause in Circular No. 98/1/2008­ST, dated

4th January, 2008 which provided that a taxable service, once
54
classified under the old regime, could not be classified

differently,   post   01st   June,      2007   simply    because    the

consideration, or a part thereof, was received post 01 st June,

2007. The vires of Circular No. 98/1/2008­ST was challenged

before this Court. In upholding the validity of the said Circular,

this Court held that the appellant, who had paid service tax

prior to 1st June, 2007 for the taxable services, was not entitled

to change the classification of the single composite service for

the   purpose    of   payment      of    service   tax   on   or   after

1st June, 2007 and hence, was not entitled to avail of the

Composition Scheme. It was observed that the appellant­

assessee had already paid service tax on the basis of

classification of service contract which was in force prior to

1st June, 2007 and the said contract could not be classified

differently following the introduction of
Section 65 (105) (zzzza)
and the 2007 Rules.
f)    Thus, Works Contract Services were brought under the

service tax net as per an amendment to of the
Finance Act,

1994
by introduction of Clause (zzzza) to
Section 65(105)
. The

said introduction was made pursuant to the
Finance Act, 2007
,

which expressly made the service component in such works

contract liable to service tax w.e.f. 1 st June, 2007. The
55
amendment was made to the said section of the
Finance Act,

      1994
by which works contract which were indivisible and

      composite could be split so that only the labour and service

      element of such contracts would be taxed as service tax.




(7)        Having noted the above developments, it is necessary to

discuss the judgment in
Larsen and Toubro Ltd.
(supra) in detail as

learned ASG, Ms. Divan has vehemently submitted that
the said

judgment
requires reconsideration. It may be noted that this judgment

concerned the position of law prior to the amendment made to the
Finance Act, 1994
, w.e.f. 1st June, 2007, incorporating the definition of

works contract as under:
a)   In the aforesaid case, this Court traced the historical

      setting within which the controversy leading up to the 46 th

      amendment in the context of levy of sales tax on works contract

      progressed. Taking up the question as to whether service tax

      could be levied on the service element of a works contract, it

      was observed that service tax was introduced by the
Finance

      Act, 1994
and various services were set out in
Section 65
thereof as being amenable to tax. The legislative competence of

      such tax is traceable to
Article 248
read with Schedule VII List I

      Entry 97 to the Constitution of India. The controversy in the
56
said case was with regard to the period prior to the 2007

Amendment made to the
Finance Act, 1994
in the year 2007

which introduced the definition and concept of works contract

as being a separate subject­matter of taxation. By the said

amendment       works     contract,   which   were    indivisible     and

composite were split so that only the labour and service element

of such contracts would be taxed under the heading service tax.
Thus, the tax was not on works contract as such. In the said

case, the Revenue raised four arguments to assail the

judgments of various Tribunals and High Courts which had

decided against the Revenue on the point. By contrast, the

assesses assailed the judgments of the Tribunal and the High

Courts against them, in particular the judgment in
G.D.

Builders vs. Union of India
[(2013) 32 STR 673], of the Delhi

High Court. According to the assesses there was no service tax

leviable   on   service   element     of   works   contract   prior    to

amendment being made in the year 2007, insofar as the

indivisible works contract were concerned and what was taxable

under the
Finance Act, 1994
was only cases of pure service in

which there was no goods element involved.
It was urged that

the judgment of the Delhi High Court in
G.D. Builders
(supra)

was wholly incorrect and the minority judgment of the judicial
57
members of a Larger Bench of the Delhi Tribunal in Larsen &

Toubro Ltd. vs. CST (in ST Appeal No.58658 of 2013,

decided on 19.03.2015), had comprehensively discussed all

the authorities that were relevant to the issue and arrived at the

correct conclusion.
Thus, the assesses assailed the judgment of

the Delhi High Court in
G.D. Builders
(supra) and considered

along with Larsen & Toubro Ltd. vs. CST (supra).
b)   Considering the definition of ‘taxable service’ in sub­
Section 105
of
Section 65
of the Finance Act, 1994 and the

relevant clauses therein, namely, (g), (zzd), (zzh), (zzq) and (zzz­
h); Charge of service tax in
Section 66
; valuation of taxable

services for charging service tax [
Section 67
and
Section

65(105)(zzzza)
] as well as the Rule 2­A of Service Tax Act

(determination of value) Rules 2006, this Court observed that

crucial to the understanding and determination of the issue at

hand was the second
Gannon Dunkerley and Co. vs. State of

Rajasthan
[(1993) 1
SCC 364] (Gannon Dunkerley II
)

(supra) . That in
the said judgment
the modalities of taxing

composite indivisible works contract was gone into which has

been
referred to above
. It was observed that the value of the

goods involved in the execution of the works contract will have

to be determined by taking into account the value of entire
58
works contract and deducting therefrom the charges towards

labour and services which would cover –


      “(a) labour charges for execution of the
      works;
(b) amount paid to a sub­contractor for
      labour and services;
(c) charges    for planning, designing and
      architect’s fees;
(d) charges   for obtaining on hire or
      otherwise machinery and tools used for the
      execution of the works contract;
(e) cost   of consumables such as water,
      electricity, fuel, etc. used in the execution of
      the works contract the property in which is
      not transferred in the course of execution of
      a works contract; and
(f) cost of establishment of the contractor
      to the extent it is relatable to supply of
      labour and services;
(g) other   similar expenses relatable       to
      supply of labour and services;
(h) profit earned by the contractor to the
      extent it is relatable to supply of labour and
      services.”
59
For the purposes of arriving at the basis for the levy of sales tax

on works contract, the amount deductible under the aforesaid

heads will have to be determined in light of the facts of a

particular case and on the basis of the material produced by the

contractor.
c)   Referring to the aforesaid eight heads of deductions it was

observed that in light of the judgment in
Gannon Dunkerley II
(supra) the same has to be indicated in the contractor’s

account. However, if it is found that the Contractor has not

maintained proper accounts or their accounts are found to be

not worthy of credence, it is left to the legislature to prescribe a

formula on the basis of a fixed percentage of the value of the

entire works contract as relatable to the labour and service

element of it. It was observed that “unless the splitting of an

indivisible works contract is done taking into account the eight

heads of deduction, the charge to tax that would be made would

otherwise contain, apart from other things, the entire costs of

establishment, other expenses and profits earned by the

contractor and would transgress into          forbidden territory,

namely, into such portion of such cost, expenses and profit as

would be attributable in the works contract to the transfer of
60
property in goods in such contract.” Therefore, it was found that

the assesses were right in contending that the service tax

charging section itself must lay down with specificity the levy of

service tax on the service element of a works contract, and the

measure of tax can only be on that portion of works contract

which contain a service element which is to be derived from the

gross amount charged for the works contract less the value of

property in goods transferred in the execution of the works

contract. Since this had not been done by the
Finance Act,

1994
, any charge to tax under the five heads in
Section 65(105)
would only be of service contracts simpliciter and not composite

indivisible works contract. Those five heads for ease of reference

are noted as under:
“(g) to a client, by a consulting engineer in relation to
      advice, consultancy or technical assistance in any
      manner in one or more disciplines of engineering but not
      in the discipline of computer hardware engineering or
      computer software engineering;
*            *                *
      (zzd) to a customer, by a commissioning and installation
      agency in relation to erection, commissioning or
      installation;
*            *                *

      (zzh) to any person, by a technical testing and analysis
      agency, in relation to technical testing and analysis;
*              *                 *

      (zzq) to any person, by a commercial concern, in relation
      to construction service;
61
*              *                 *

      (zzzh) to any person, by any other person, in relation to
      construction of a complex;
Explanation : For the purposes of this sub­clause,
      construction of a complex which is intended for sale,
      wholly or partly, by a builder or any person authorized
      by the builder before, during or after construction (except
      in cases for which no sum is received from or on behalf
      of the prospective buyer by the builder or a person
      authorized by the builder before the grant of completion
      certificate by the authority competent to issue such
      certificate under any law for the time being in force) shall
      be deemed to be service provided by the builder to the
      buyer;”
d)   Speaking about the mutually exclusive taxation and

powers of the Centre and the State, the dichotomy between the

sales tax leviable by the State and service tax leviable by the

Centre was emphasised by this Court in the aforesaid

judgment. In the context of composite indivisible works

contract, only Parliament can tax the service element contained

in these contracts and State only can tax the transfer of

property in goods element contained in these contracts. Thus, it

is important to segregate the two elements completely for the

purpose of taxation. Hence, it was held that works contract is a

separate species of contract distinct from contracts for service

simpliciter recognised in the world of commerce and law as
62
such and has to be taxed separately as such. Referring to the

decision of works contract in
Gannon Dunkerley I
, (supra)
Kone Elevator India (P) Limited
(supra),
Larsen & Toubro

Ltd. and others vs. State of Karnataka
(supra) all arising

under the Sales Tax law, it was emphasised that there was no

charging section to tax works contract in the
Finance Act, 1994
i.e. until the amendment made with the insertion of sub­clause

(zzzza) to clause 105 of
Section 65
of the Finance Act, 1994.

Ultimately, in para 23 it was observed as under:­


      “23. A close look at the
Finance Act, 1994
would show that the five taxable services
      referred to in the charging
Section 65(105)
would refer only to service contracts
      simpliciter and not to composite works
      contracts. This is clear from the very
      language of
Section 65(105)
which defines
      “taxable service” as “any service provided”.
All the services referred to in the said sub­
      clauses are service contracts simpliciter
      without any other element in them, such as
      for example, a service contract which is a
      commissioning and installation, or erection,
      commissioning and installation contract.
Further, under
Section 67
, as has been
      pointed out above, the value of a taxable
      service is the gross amount charged by the
      service provider for such service rendered
      by him. This would unmistakably show that
      what is referred to in the charging provision
      is the taxation of service contracts
      simpliciter and not composite works
      contracts, such as are contained on the
      facts of the present cases. It will also be
      noticed that no attempt to remove the non­
63
service elements from the composite works
      contracts has been made by any of the
      aforesaid sections by deducting from the
      gross value of the works contract the value
      of property in goods transferred in the
      execution of a works contract.”


      It was also observed that while introducing the concept of

service tax on service element of indivisible works contract

various exclusions are also made, such as, works contract in

respect of roads, airport, airways transport, bridges, tunnels

and dams, possibly in the national interest. The implication of

the exclusion means that such contracts were never intended to

be the subject­matter of the service tax.
e)   Further, in
Larsen & Toubro Ltd.
(supra) the correctness

of the judgment in
G.D. Builders vs. Union of India
[(2013)

32 STR 673] was also considered. In the said case, it was held

by the Delhi High Court that
Section 65(105)(g)
, (zzd), (zzh),

(zzq) and (zzzh) were good enough to tax indivisible composite

works contract and that even when rules are yet to be framed

for computation of taxes, taxes would be leviable.
This

proposition was based on the judgment in
Mahim Patram (P)

Ltd. vs. Union of India
[(2007) 3 SCC 668].
It was observed

that in
G.D. Builders
(supra) there was a misreading of
Mahim
64
Patram
(supra) which was a case related to tax under the
Central Sales Tax Act
; that in
Mahim Patram
(supra), it was

observed that under
Section 9(2)
of the Central Sales Tax Act

power is conferred on officers of various States to utilise the

machinery provided under the provisions of the States’ sales tax

statutes for the purposes of levy and assessment of Central

Sales Tax under the Central Act. That Rules could also be made

in exercise of power under
Section 13(3)
of the Central Sales

Tax Act as a result of which the necessary machinery for the

assessment of Central Sales Tax was found to be there.

Therefore, even in the absence of Rules made under the
Central

Sale Tax Act
the machinery provided under the State Sales Tax

statute for the purpose of levy and assessment Central Sales

tax under the Central Act could be utilized and the same is

different from saying that no Rules being framed at all under

the
Central Sale Tax Act
. Merely because no rules were framed

for computation under the Central sales tax Act it did not follow

that no tax was leviable under the said Act. Hence, the

observations of the Delhi High Court in G.D. Builders were not

approved.
f)   With specific reference to para 51 of the judgment of the

Delhi High Court in
G.D. Builders
case (supra), it was
65
observed that
the said judgment
had ignored the decision by

this Court in
Gannon Dunkerley II
(supra) inasmuch as the

manner of bifurcation of the service element from a composite

works contract was delineated in the said case.        That the

service element had to be deducted from the gross amount

charged thereof and not the gross amount of the works contract

as a whole from which various deductions have to be made to

arrive at the service element in the said contract.
Therefore, it

was held that
G.D. Builders
(supra) was not correctly decided

by observing in paragraph 39 as under after quoting paragraph

31 of the judgment of Delhi High Court in G.D. Builders:
“We are afraid that there are several errors
      in this paragraph. The High Court first
      correctly holds that in the case of composite
      works contracts, the service elements
      should be bifurcated, ascertained and then
      taxed. The finding that this has, in fact,
      been done by the
Finance Act, 1994
Act is
      wholly incorrect as it ignores the second
      Gannon Dunkerley [(1993) 1 SCC 364]
      decision of this Court. Further, the finding
      that
Section 67
of the Finance Act, which
      speaks of “gross amount charged”, only
      speaks of the “gross amount charged” for
      service provided and not the gross amount
      of the works contract as a whole from which
      various deductions have to be made to
      arrive at the service element in the said
      contract. We find therefore that this
      judgment is wholly incorrect in its
      conclusion that the
Finance Act, 1994
contains both the charge and machinery for
66
levy and assessment of service tax on
              indivisible works contracts.”



           It was categorically observed that since the
Finance Act,

       1994
lays down no charge or machinery to levy and assess

       service tax on indivisible composite works contract, therefore,

       service tax was not existent at all under the Act and hence any

       exemption qua service tax “levied” did not arise at all.
(8)   As already noted, the definition of works contract was brought

under the service tax net as per
Section 65(105)(zzzza)
of the Finance

Act, 1994 by the insertion of the said definition. The said introduction

was made pursuant to the Finance Act, 2007, which expressly made

the service element in such works contract liable to service tax w.e.f.
1st June, 2007. By the said amendment, works contract which were

indivisible and composite could be split so that only the labour and

service element of such contracts would be taxed under the heading

"Service Tax".
9)    It is in the above backdrop that the definition of Works contract

inserted for the first time by virtue of
Section 65(105)(zzzza)
under the
Finance Act, 2007
assumes significance and has to be applied w.e.f.

1st June, 2007. Thus, on and from the enforcement of the amendment
67
in the Financial Year 2007, i.e. 1st June, 2007 the tax on the service

component of works contract became leviable. Therefore, till then it

was not so leviable as there was no concept of works contract under

the said Act.
10)   Recognising this aspect of the matter in
Larsen and Toubro

Ltd.
(supra), this Court held that Service Tax on works contract was

not leviable, meaning thereby, that such tax on the service component

of works contract as defined above did not attract Service Tax prior to

the amendment.
11)   Further, in
Commissioner of Service Tax and Others vs.

Bhayana Builders Private Limited and Others
[(2018) 3 SCC 782],

this Court considered the correctness of the judgment of the Larger

Bench of Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal (for

short, “CESTAT”) dated 06.09.2013 in the case of Bhayana Builders

(P) Ltd. vs. CST [(2013) SCC OnLine CESTAT 1951].
In the said case,

reliance was placed on
Larsen and Toubro Ltd.
(supra) and it was

held that when there was no levy of service tax on works contract, no

question of any exemption would arise. It was further held that the

Central Government is empowered to grant exemption from the levy of

service tax either wholly or partially, only when there is any “taxable
68
service” as defined in sub­clauses of clause (105) of
Section 65
of the

Finance Act, 1994 and not otherwise. This Court agreed with the view

taken by the Full Bench of the CESTAT in the judgment dated

06.09.2013 and dismissed the appeals of the Revenue.
12) Therefore, reliance placed by the assesses in the present case on

the aforesaid judgments is just and proper. On the other hand, the

contention of Ms. Diwan, learned ASG to the effect that even prior to

the aforesaid amendment being made to the
Finance Act, 1994
service

tax on works contract was leviable is not correct. It was being levied

on purely service contract and not on service element of works

contract as there was no definition of a works contract till then.

Hence, the amendment made to the
Finance Act, 1994
by insertion of

the definition of works contract as under clause (zzzza) is not

clarificatory in nature. Having found that the Service Tax was not at

all leviable on service element of a works contract, Parliament felt the

need for the amendment and was so incorporated by the
Finance Act,

2007
.
13)   Thus, the judgment in
Larsen and Toubro Ltd.
(supra) has

been correctly decided and does not call for a reconsideration insofar

as the period prior to 1st June, 2007 is concerned. In view of the above

discussion, I agree with the result arrived at by His Lordship M.R.
69
Shah J. vis­à­vis allowing all civil appeals under consideration except

Civil Appeal no. 6792 of 2010 which is dismissed. No costs.
……………………………..J.
                                              [B.V. NAGARATHNA]


NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 02, 2022
70