[Cites
4
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Barun Kumar vs The State Of Jharkhand on 25 August, 2022
Author:
Ajay Rastogi
Bench:
Ajay Rastogi
,
Abhay S. Oka
REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                               CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 5812 OF 2022
                           (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO(S).4310 OF 2022)

          BARUN KUMAR & ORS.                                ….APPELLANT(S)

                                             VERSUS
          STATE OF JHARKHAND & ORS.                         ….RESPONDENT(S)

                                              WITH

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 5813 OF 2022
                           (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO(S).4443 OF 2022)

                              CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).5814­5817 OF 2022
                         (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO(S).5338­5341 OF 2022)

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).5818 OF 2022
                           (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO(S).5409 OF 2022)


                            TRANSFER PETITION (C) NO(S).1100 OF 2022


                                         JUDGMENT
Ajay Rastogi, J.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
Date: 2022.08.25
17:31:01 IST
Reason:
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No(s).4310 OF 2022
          Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No(s).4443 OF 2022
1
Civil Appeals @ SLP (C) No(s).5338­5341 OF 2022
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No(s).5409 OF 2022
1.   Leave granted.
2.   The present batch of appeals has been preferred by the

candidates who on qualifying the 6th Combined Civil Services

Examination, 2016, conducted by respondent no.3, Jharkhand

Public   Service   Commission   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   “the

Commission”) and having been appointed on the recommendations

made by the Commission, completed their period of probation and

got regular postings, their appointments have been cancelled

initially by the learned Single Judge by its judgment dated 7 th June,

2021, which came to be affirmed by the Division Bench of the High

Court on dismissal of the Letters Patent Appeal filed at the instance

of the present appellants by judgment and order impugned dated

23rd February, 2022.
3.   The facts in brief which may be relevant for the purpose, with

the consent of parties have been noticed from Civil Appeal @ Special

Leave Petition (Civil) No.4310 of 2022 (Barun Kumar & Ors. Versus

State of Jharkhand & Ors.).
2
4.   That in terms of the Bihar Re­
Organisation Act, 2000
, Bihar

Civil Services (Executive Branch) and Bihar Junior Civil Services

(Recruitment) Rules, 1951(hereinafter referred to as the “Rules

1951”) was adopted by the State of Jharkhand vide notification

no.6184 dated 9th November, 2002 and accordingly, the State of

Jharkhand held its Combined Civil Service Examination in terms of

the Rules 1951.
5.   That prior to the present selection process which came to be

initiated by the Commission pursuant to Advertisement no.1/2015,

the respondents held 5th Combined Civil Services Examination

conducted   by    the   Commission   pursuant    to   Advertisement

no.6/2013 dated 7th July, 2013, there was a specific note in the

advertisement that preliminary examination had two papers of 100

marks each and there shall be subject papers in the main

examination and that the marks obtained in General Hindi will not

be added in the marks obtained in the written examination and

personality test, but the candidates who failed to secure 30 marks

in compulsory General Hindi, will not be considered eligible for the

written examination and accordingly Paper­I (General Hindi) was
3
considered to be a qualifying test and before the 6 th Combined Civil

Services Examination, 2016 came to be notified, there was a series

of meetings held by the Expert Committee for revision of the

examination pattern for Combined Civil Services Examination

chaired by Mr. V.S. Dubey, IAS (Retd.) and the Expert Committee,

after           examining         the       Pattern         of     Examination,              made         the

recommendations1.
1
“65.Briefly speaking, the Expert Committee has the following recommendations to
        make :­
(a) All the optional papers, both at the level of the preliminary and main
        examinations of the Civil Services, be done away and replaced by common, compulsory
        papers.
(b) The Preliminary Examination should be conducted in two papers only, each of
        200 marks, compulsory for all candidates. The broad syllabus of these two papers could
        be the same as that of the Civil Services Aptitude Test (CSAT) of the Union Public Service
        Commission, with minor modifications to accommodate local interests. These two papers
        could be called: (i) the Civil Services Aptitude Test (CSAT) Paper I, and (ii) the Civil
        Services Aptitude Test (CSAT) Paper II. Questions to be asked in these two papers must
        be multiple choice, objective type, with no negative marking. Based on the result of the
        Preliminary Examination, the number of the candidates to be called for the written (Main)
        Examination should be around ten times of the vacancies to be filled. The cut off marks
        of the Main Examination should be decided accordingly by the Commission.
(c) The Main Examination should be conducted for a maximum of 1000
        marks, divided into six papers, compulsory for all candidates. Of the six papers,
        two should be drawn from the languages group and remaining four should be
        subject papers, as per details given below :­
(i)        Paper I should be a composite paper of General Hindi and General English of
                  Matric standard of 100 marks. This paper should have two separate segments,
                  one on Hindi and the other one on English, each of equal weightage or 50 marks.
(ii)       Paper II should be a paper on Language & Literature of 100 marks of graduate
                  standard. This paper will be set separately for each one of the following 15
                  languages, namely, (i) Hindi, (ii) Urdu, (iii) Bengali, (iv) Oriya, (v) English, (vi)
                  Sanskrit, (vii) Santhali, (viii) Mundari, (ix) Khadia, (x) Ho, (xi) Kuruk, (xii)
                  Nagpuria, (xiii) Kurumali, (xiv) Khorta, and (xv) Panch Pargania, of which every
                  candidate will have to opt for one.
(iii)      Paper III should be a paper on Social Sciences of 200 marks, comprising of two
                  distinct sections, each of equal weightage, one on History and the other one on
                  Geography.
4
6.     The report of the Dubey Committee was considered by the

Commission in the first instance and recommended the same to

Respondent No.1 for acceptance, inter alia, with the stipulations 2.
(iv)       Paper IV should be a paper on Indian Constitution & Polity, Public
               Administration & Good Governance.
(v)        Paper V should be a paper on Indian Economy, Globalization, and Sustainable
               Development, and
(vi)       Paper VI should be a paper on General Sciences, Environment & Technology
               Development.
(d)     Marks obtained in all the six compulsory papers of the written Main
     Examination should be counted and clubbed together to prepare the gradation­list.
     The candidates should be called for the Personality Test based on their position in
     the gradation list of the Main Examination. The number of candidates to be called
     for the Personality Test could be around two to three times of the vacancies to be
     filled. The cut­off marks for the candidates to be called for the Personality Test
     (Interview) should be determined accordingly by the Commission.
(e ) Marks to be kept earmarked for the Personality Test (Interview) should not
     exceed 10% of the total marks of the written (Main) Examination. This will, thus, work
     out to 100 marks, which, in the opinion of the Commission, is more than enough for this
     segment of the examination. It is to be remembered that maximum complaints of
     favouritism and arbitrariness are received only in this section of the examination. Hence,
     it is necessary to keep a cap on the marks allotted for the Personality Test.
(f) The trainee­officers should be evaluated at the end of the institutional­cum­
     field training through a formal system of examination and the marks obtained in this
     examination be added to the marks obtained by the candidates in the Civil Services
     (Main) Examination to determine their final inter­se service seniority. A maximum of 100
     marks could be kept earmarked for this purpose. The details of the areas in which the
     institutional examination is to be conducted should be left to the concerned parent
     departments to work out in consultation with their training institutions and the
     Jharkhand Public Service Commission.”
2
(1) 100 marks Language paper of mains be of qualifying nature only in which a
              candidate shall secure minimum 30 marks out of the Combined Hindi & English
              (10th standard paper of 100 marks).
(2) The Revised Examination Pattern Syllabus shall be effective from the 6 th
             Combined Civil Services Examination only so that candidates get clear 15 months to
             prepare as per the revised pattern and syllabus. The next 5 th Combined Civil
             Services Examination will be on the existing (Mains) syllabus.

              (3) Before issuing the notification of revised syllabus Jharkhand Public Service
              Commission shall get the syllabus of 9 Regional Languages and Hindi, Urdu,
              Sanskrit, Oriya, Bangla and English Language & Literature finalized by Expert
5
7.      Respondent No.1 approved the methodology and course of

the Combined Civil Services Examination as advised by the Dubey

Committee with modifications as suggested by the Commission and

made it applicable to the 6th Combined Civil Services Examination

by its notification dated 25th September, 2013.                              However, later

pursuant to the recommendations of the High­Level Committee

headed by the Minister in­charge, respondent no.1 further amended

the curriculum and methodology of the Combined Civil Services

Examination being conducted by respondent no.3 (Commission)

with change of pattern of examination vide notification dated 21 st

April 2016.
8.   Accordingly,         the      Commission             published           Advertisement

No.23/2016 holding 6th Combined Civil Services Examination, 2016

dated 6th October, 2016. Clause 12 and 13 of the advertisement

which are the cause of dispute, with which we are concerned in the

present batch of appeals, are reproduced as under:
Committee in its final meeting in which the Expert Committee Report was adopted.

            The Committee thus resolves this day i.e. 2 nd April, 2013 to forward the V.S.
       Dubey Expert Committee Report to the Chief Secretary, Government of Jharkhand
       along with the Commission’s above recommendations for acceptance as early as
       possible with a view to ensure that the Revised Pattern can be enforced from the 6 th
       Combined Civil Services Examination to be held in 2014 giving candidates at least 15
       months to prepare on the basis of revised pattern.”
6
““12. Formation of exam: Preliminary test and main exam (written & interview) will be
   organized for selection.
(A) Preliminary test: Candidates 15 times of the number of category­wise vacancies will
       be shortlisted for main exam on the basis of preliminary test. Preliminary test will
       comprise two papers having total marks of 200­200 (total Four Hundred). Their marks
       obtained will not be added with marks of main exam or interview. Exam of both papers
       will be O.M.R. based. It will be necessary to fill OMR in Preliminary Test properly
       otherwise, candidature will be cancelled. It will be compulsory to include candidates in all
       subjects/papers of Preliminary Test. Course of Preliminary Test is as under:­

   SYLLABUS FOR THE PRELIMINARY TEST OF COMBINED CIVIL SERVICES EXAMINATION­
2016
The Preliminary Examination shall consist of two compulsory papers, each of 200 marks
   namely,
(i) General Studies Paper ­ I
(ii) General Studies Paper – II
   Both the question papers shall be of multiple choices, objective type. The question papers will
   be set both in Hindi and English. However, questions set to test the comprehensive skill and
   knowledge of language and grammar shall be only in the concerned language, without
   providing Hindi or English translation thereof.
xxxx                              xxxx                            xxxx

(B) Main Exam: According to vacancies three times candidates will be invited for interview on
    the basis of main exam. Main exam will comprise 06 papers, total marks of which would be
    1050. It would be mandatory for candidates to appear in all the subjects/papers of Main
    Exam. Course of Main Exam is as follows:­
                                     MAIN EXAMINATION
                   [No optional subjects. All are common compulsory papers)
Subject                                     Duration      Full Marks              Remarks
Paper­I: General Hindi & General            3 hours          100            Descriptive     Type
English, having two separate sections                                       This     paper     is
on (i) General Hindi and (ii) General                                       qualifying in which
English, each of 50 marks                                                   minimum 30 marks
                                                                            is mandatory
Paper­II: Language and Literature:          3 hours           150             Descriptive Type
Under this paper, every candidate will
have to opt for one language and
literature out of fifteen listed by the
commission
Paper­III: Social Science, having two       3 hours    200                    Descriptive Type
distinct sections of (i) History (ii)
Geography, each of equal weightage.
Paper­IV: Indian Constitution & Policy,     3 hours    200                    Descriptive Type
Public     Administration     &     Good
Governance.
Paper­V: Indian Economy, Globalization      3 hours    200                    Descriptive Type
and Sustainable Development.
Paper­VI:       General         Sciences,   3 hours    200                    Descriptive Type
Environment         &         Technology
Development.

These papers are common to all candidates.

(c) xxxx                      xxxx                           xxxx
7
“13. Minimum qualifying marks of Preliminary & Main Exam:­

     Unreserved                                     40 percent
     Backward Class­I                               34 percent
     Backward Class­II                              36.5 percent
     Scheduled Castes/Tribes & female category      32 per cent


     The minimum qualifying marks determined as above will be applicable equally on all the written
     tests (Objective/Subjective) for various reserved categories for competitive exams of all the
     services/cadres. It would be mandatory for candidates of all the categories to obtain 30 marks in
     Paper­I of Main Exam. (General Hindi & General English).

     Note: In the light of Resolution No.8315 dated 16.09.2015 of the Department of Personnel
     Administrative Reforms & Official Language, compulsion of obtaining minimum qualifying marks
     for interview in Civil Service competitive Test has been discontinued.”
9.      Pursuant to the advertisement of 6th Combined Civil Services

Examination, all the applicants, including the appellants and the

private respondents, appeared in the first instance in preliminary

examination and the result of the preliminary examination was

published on 23rd February 2017, which was further updated on 2 nd

March, 2017 by declaring the candidates 15 times of the number of

vacancies to appear in the main examination. On 13 th April 2017,

the result of the preliminary examination was further declared and

thereafter there was a series of litigation questioning the pattern or

result of the preliminary examination declared by the Commission

and one of the issues of preliminary examination travelled to this

Court which came to be decided in Civil Appeal no.9217 of 2018 by

this Court by order dated 10th September, 20183.
3
8
10.    This Court has expressed that there appears to be an

ambiguity in the terms of advertisement disclosed to the candidates

who had intended to participate in the selection process and that

stipulation of 40% marks in the preliminary examination as

opposed to two separate papers in the examination, this Court

expressed its opinion that the candidate has to get 40% marks in

the aggregate insofar as the two papers are concerned.                                    Although it

was later indicated that what is being expressed by this Court may

not be treated as a precedent.
“O R D E R

                     Leave granted.
The controversy in the present appeal arose because certain answers that were given
       to questions were considered to be incorrect in the preliminary examination that was taken
       up by the candidates, which consisted of two general papers.
The minimum marks, as stated in the advertisement, were said to be 40 per cent for
      the unreserved category to be eligible, once the preliminary examination had been taken,
      thereafter to proceed with the main examination.
Since it is clear on a reading of the advertisement dated October, 2016 that 40 per
      cent is the marks of the preliminary examination as opposed to marks of two separate papers
      in that examination, we are of the opinion that this candidate was told that she has to get 40
      percent in the aggregate insofar as the two papers are concerned.
We have also been informed by the State Government that owning to the supposed
      ambiguity in the advertisement, a Committee has gone into the same and has since opined
      what was meant by “preliminary examination” is that 40 per cent minimum marks should be
      obtained in each paper.
We are of the view that the ambiguity, if any, in the advertisement must fall in
      favour of the candidate who goes by the advertisement as it originally stood.
Since it is clear that even without looking into the correctness of the answers, so far
      as six questions are concerned, that the petitioner has in fact obtained 40 per cent in both
      the papers taken together, the appellant shall be allowed to appear for the main examination.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Since the appellant alone is before us, we make it clear that anything said in the
      order will not be treated as a precedent.”
9
11.   So far as the preliminary examination is concerned, even what

was expressed by this Court was not taken to be a final conclusion

on the issue, the learned Single Judge of the High Court revisited

the scheme of the selection process of preliminary examination

decided the controversy in the case of Joy Guria Vs. State of

Jharkhand and others [W.P.(S) No. 4188 of 2018] under its

judgment    dated   20th   December,   2018   holding   that   in   the

preliminary examination, the candidate has to obtain qualifying

marks in both the papers and after the list of successful candidates

was published, the main written examination was conducted from

28th January, 2019 to 1st February, 2019 and the result of the main

examination was declared on 15th February, 2020 and all the

successful candidates in the written examination who fell in the

zone of consideration were called for viva voce and the result of the

candidates who qualified and successfully cleared all the stages, the

final merit list was published of the selected candidates by the

Commission on 21st April, 2020 and after the recommendations

were approved by the Government of Jharkhand, the successful

candidates of the 6th Combined Civil Services Examination, 2016
10
against 326 posts were appointed on various dates from June, 2020

to July, 2020 and so far as the appellants in the instant batch of

appeals are concerned, including other selected candidates, were

appointed by the Government vide notification dated 29 th July

2020.
12.   Several writ petitions later on came to be filed before the

learned Single Judge of the High Court assailing the result of the

main examination dated 21st April, 2020 of the 6th Combined Civil

Services Examination, 2016 and since there are contentious issues,

as alleged, came to be raised in the batch of writ petitions, the

learned Single Judge of the High Court bifurcated the issues into

four groups.
13.   Insofar as the present appellants are concerned, they belong to

the fourth group. The learned Single Judge of the High Court, after

interpreting clause 12 and 13 of the advertisement read with Rule

16 of the scheme of Rules 1951, arrived to a conclusion that so far

as the main examination is concerned, Paper­I of General

Hindi/General English, was a qualifying paper for which the

candidate has to secure 30 marks, and the merit of the candidate is
11
to be assessed on the basis of remaining 5 papers in which the

candidate has to secure minimum qualifying marks in each of the

paper and since this procedure has not been followed by the

respondents, accordingly, by a common judgment dated 7 th June,

2021, set aside the merit list prepared by the Commission with a

direction to prepare a fresh merit list with reference to the marks

obtained in the written test (5 papers) and viva­voce, without adding

the marks of Paper­I and thereafter the final select list may be

drawn in accordance with law.
14.   It may be relevant to note that during the course of pendency

of the LPAs, interim applications were disposed of by the Division

Bench by an order dated 10 th August 2021, wherein it was directed

that the parties shall maintain status­quo and it was further

recorded that the appellants have undertaken that they will not

plead equity in case any adverse decision is passed by the High

Court on the ground that the appeal remained pending and during

that period they remained in employment.
15.   The issues which were framed for consideration by the

Division Bench of the High Court and held as under:
12
“Issue no.(i)

      Whether the marks obtained in Paper­I were to be added in total
      marks?
Issue no.(i) is answered by the High Court as under:­
      that the marks obtained in Paper­I (Mains Examination) were not
      to be added in total marks while preparing merit list for declaration
      of the candidature of one or the other candidate.

      Issue no.(ii)
      Whether the merit list prepared by the JPSC based upon the
      ‘aggregate qualifying marks’ of all subjects or ‘minimum qualifying
      marks’ in each of the subjects, is considered to be correct?

      Issue no.(iii)
      Whether the stand which has been taken by the JPSC as also the
      State before the Court of law based upon which the order has been
      passed in Joy Guria (supra) or the contrary view taken while
      preparing the merit list of the successful candidate in 6 th
      Combined Civil Service Competitive Examination conducted by
      JPSC is considered to be correct?
Issue nos.(ii) and (iii) are answered by the High Court as
      under:­
(ii) ‘Minimum qualifying marks’ in each subject (Main Examination)
      is correct interpretation; and
(iii) the stand which has been taken by the JPSC as also the State
      before the Court of law based upon which the order has been
      passed in Joy Guria (supra) is correct approach.
16.   The Division Bench of the High Court held that the marks

obtained in Paper I of Written Examination were not to be added in

the total marks and in terms of clause 13 of the advertisement,

qualifying marks have to be secured by the candidates in each

subject paper (5 papers) which, according to the Division Bench,
13
was in conformity with Rule 16 of the Rules, 1951 under the

judgment and order impugned dated 23rd February 2022, which is

the subject matter of challenge in appeals before us.
17.   Learned counsel for the appellants jointly submits that there

is no ambiguity or any later amendment in Rule 16 of the Rules,

1951 and so far as the proviso appended to Rule 16 is concerned, it

has to be read with clause (a) and (b) to Rule 16. Clause (a) gives

discretion to the Commission to fix the qualifying marks in any or

all the subjects at the written examination.      At the same time,

clause (b) provides for qualifying marks which can be fixed by the

Commission in its discretion for the candidates of Scheduled

Castes/Scheduled Tribes but shall not be higher than 35% for the

Bihar Civil Service (Executive Branch). If clause (a) and (b) are read

in conjunction, it makes it explicitly clear that clause (a) is general

in nature and emphasizes on the discretion of the Commission to

fix the qualifying marks in any or all subjects in reference to the

candidate appearing in the examination. However, clause (b) carves

out an exception and only emphasizes for the Scheduled Castes and

Scheduled Tribes candidates. So far as the proviso added to Rule
14
16 is concerned, it postulates that only after crossing the threshold,

the total marks secured by the candidate would be taken into

consideration for determining the suitability of the candidate for

appointment.
18.   That apart, proviso to Rule 17 categorically empowers to relax

the norms for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes despite not

having secured the minimum qualifying marks as fixed by the

Commission under Rule 16(a) and (b) with the prior approval of the

Government. Thus, what is being observed by the Division Bench

in interpreting proviso to Rule 16 being confined to clause (b) alone

and not to clause(a) and clause (b) is a complete misreading of the

Rule 16 of the Rules 1951.
19.   So far as the qualifying Paper I and determination of merit

based on the other 5 subject papers in the written examination is

concerned, learned counsel submits that clause 12(b) of the

advertisement clearly postulates that total number of marks would

be 1050 and it will be mandatory for the candidates to appear in all

the subjects/papers of the main examination.           Although the

remarks­column in Paper­I indicates that it is a qualifying paper in
15
which minimum 30 marks are mandatory and in the remaining

subject papers, one has to secure 40% marks but there is no

indication whether it has to be in individual paper or the total

marks obtained in the written examination for adjudging the

suitability for appointment.
20.   Thus, in the given circumstances, what is being construed by

the Commission in preparing the merit list of the candidates based

on the marks secured by the candidate out of 1050 marks for

determining merit in the written examination to be called for

interview is a reasonable interpretation which ordinarily was not

open for the High Court to interfere with within the limited scope of

judicial review under
Article 226
of the Constitution.
21.   Learned counsel further submits that the interpretation which

has been afforded by the High Court after deliberation may also be

one of the plausible interpretations in reference to clause 12 and 13

of the advertisement but what is being interpreted by the

Commission    while   preparing   the   merit   list   of   the   written

examination cannot be completely ruled out. In this state of affairs,

the selection process which once has attained finality and the
16
appellants have been appointed after the recommendations were

approved by the State Government and have completed the period

of probation, merely because there was an interim order passed by

the High Court where an equity may not be claimed but for all

practical purposes, they are working for almost two years by this

time, this fact cannot be ruled out and submits that in the given

facts and circumstances, the judgment passed by the High Court is

not sustainable in law.
22.   Learned counsel further submits that if the respondents have

consistently followed the practice in the past of preparing the merit

list on the basis of total marks secured by the candidate in the

main examination held earlier and that can be reasonably

construed from clause 12 and 13 of the advertisement and there is

no amendment to Rule 16 of the scheme of Rules, 1951 and that

being so, it was an apparent error committed by the High Court in

overruling   the   settled   practice   which   was   being   followed

consistently by the Commission for sufficiently long time, in the

given circumstances, there was no justification for the High Court

to unsettle the settled past practice followed by the Commission in
17
exercise of its limited power of judicial review under
Article 226
of

the Constitution.
23.    Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents submits that

the procedure for selection for preliminary and main examination is

to be regulated in terms of clause 12 and 13 of the advertisement

and it only refers to the qualifying marks to be secured by the

candidates, and if Clause 12 and 13 are to be read in conjunction,

the only irresistible conclusion and the interpretation coming

forward would be that Paper­I of the written examination although

is a part of the scheme of the examination but one has to secure

only 30% marks to qualify and the merit list has to be determined

on the basis of the written examination of remaining subject papers

(5 papers) in which the candidate has to secure qualifying marks in

each    paper   and   that   being   the   manifest   error   which   the

Commission has committed in preparing the merit list and that has

been rectified by the High Court in the impugned judgment and the

respondents are equally qualified and they would have been placed

in the order of merit provided the Commission would have

published the list of selected candidates in conformity with clause
18
12 and 13 of the advertisement read with Rule 16 of the Rules

1951.
24.   Learned counsel further submits that there is no delay on the

part of the respondents in approaching the Court for redressal of

their grievances and at least latches, in no manner, be attributed to

them. Once their right has been safeguarded by the interim order

of which a reference has been made, at least their right of fair

consideration in revising the merit list of the written examination in

terms of the order of the Division Bench may not be interfered with

by this Court.
25.   Learned counsel further submits that so far as Rule 16 of the

scheme of the Rules, 1951 is concerned, if the punctuation mark is

noticed after Rule 16(a), the Legislature in its wisdom has put a

little full stop(.) and after clause (b), there is colon(:), and thereafter,

the proviso has been added which clearly indicates that proviso is

only related to clause (b) to Rule 16 and this being the only

irresistible interpretation of the scheme of Rule 16 of Rules, 1951

which has been confirmed by the High Court after a detailed

discussion in the impugned judgment, binds the authority to take
19
further action in publishing the merit list of the main written

examination in terms of the conditions of advertisement needs no

further interference of this Court.
26.   We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their

assistance perused the material available on record.
27.   Before we proceed to examine the questions raised in the

instant appeals, let us take the bird’s eye view of the scheme of

Rules 1951. Rules 15, 16 and 17 of the Rules 1951 relevant for the

purpose are reproduced hereinbelow:
“15. The examination shall be held according to the syllabus specified in
      Appendix D to these rules which are liable to alteration from time to time by
      the Commission with the prior approval of the State Government.
16. (a) The Commission shall have discretion to fix the qualifying marks in
      any or all the subjects at the written examination.
(b) The minimum qualifying marks for candidates belonging to the
      Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall not be higher than 35%
      for the Bihar Civil Service (Executive Branch), and 30% for the Bihar Junior
      Civil Service unless the number of such candidates qualifying at the written
      test according to the standards applied for other candidates is considerably
      in excess of the number of candidates required to fill all the vacancies
      reserved for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes:
Provided that in determining the suitability of a particular candidate for
      appointment, the total marks obtained at the written examination and not
      the marks obtained in any particular subject shall be taken into
      consideration.
(c) There shall be no qualifying marks for the viva voce test.
17. On the basis of the marks obtained at the written examination, the
      Commission shall arrange for a viva voce test of the candidates who have
      qualified at the written examination according to Rule 16 (a) or (b):
20
Provided that in exceptional circumstances and with the prior
      approval of Government, the Commission may, at their discretion, admit
      candidates of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to the viva
      voce test even though they may not have obtained the minimum
      qualifying marks at the written test prescribed in Clause (a) or (b) of Rule
16.”
28.   The undisputed facts which may be noticed for completion of

facts referred to supra clearly manifest that the 6 th Combined Civil

Services Examination was notified by the Commission on 6 th

October, 2016 for filling up of 326 posts of different services under

the State of Jharkhand and recruitment is to be made in terms of

the Bihar Civil Service (Executive Branch) and Rules, 1951 which

were adopted by the State of Jharkhand by notification dated 9 th

November 2002.
29.   Before the 6th Combined Civil Services Examination came to be

initiated, there was lot of discussion prior thereto, and after the

acceptance of Dubey Committee’s report with certain modifications

by the Commission, finally came to be approved by the State

Government vide its notification dated 25th September, 2013 and

after going through the process of selection followed with the

recommendations made by the Commission, appointments are
21
made by order dated 29th July, 2020 and after completing field

training, they have been posted to their respective places of posting.
30.   It may be apposite to note that the State of Jharkhand has

now notified the rules framed in exercise of power conferred under

proviso to the
Article 309
of the Constitution, namely, the

Jharkhand     Combined       Civil     Services   Examination     Rules,

2021(hereinafter being referred to as the “Rules 2021”) and apart

from the other provisions of the scheme of Rules, Rule 17 lays down

the criteria of prescribing the minimum qualifying/aggregate marks

to be obtained by the candidate in the main examination for

preparing the merit list for the purpose of interview and in

furtherance to the Rules 2021, selection process has been initiated

by    respondent   no.   3   holding    7th   Combined   Civil   Services

Examination, 2016 vide advertisement no. 1/2021 dated 8 th

February 2021.
31.   Thus, what is being decided by the Division Bench of the High

Court under the impugned judgment may remain confined to the 6 th

Combined Civil Services Examination alone since all future
22
selections shall be held by the State of Jharkhand under the

scheme of Rules 2021.
32.   If we look into the element of the examination pattern, the

candidates who entered into participation of the selection process

have to first qualify the preliminary examination and marks

obtained in the examination shall not be added in the main

examination as being referred to in clause 12(a) but there were

series of litigations before the preliminary examination could be

finalized and the result, in the first instance, was published on 23 rd

February, 2017 which came to be further revised on 13 th April,

2017 and thereafter, because of litigation, it was again revised on

11th August, 2017 followed by 6th August, 2018 and finally, the

second revised result of preliminary examination was published on

6th August, 2018 declaring 34,634 candidates successful for

appearing in the mains examination.
33.   One of the candidates who was not satisfied by the orders

passed by the High Court came to this Court in Civil Appeal

no.9217 of 2018 and this Court by Order dated 10 th September,

2018 disposed of the same with the observation that there is an
23
ambiguity in the conditions of advertisement and minimum

qualifying marks of 40% are for the aggregate and not for each

subject.
34.   This was not rested at this stage. The High Court, in the case

of Joy Guria and others(supra), which relates to Preliminary

Examination,     again   examined the    result   of the   preliminary

examination and by judgment dated 20 th December, 2018 held that

such of the persons who did not secure minimum qualifying marks

in both the papers of preliminary examination are not qualified to

participate in    the    main   examination   as Clause 13 of     the

advertisement applies to each subject separately.
35.   After a long battle, the Commission proceeded further and

conducted the main examination during the period 28 th January,

2019 and 1st February, 2019 and the result was finally declared on

15th February, 2020 and the recommendations were made by the

Commission to the State Government including allocation of service

on 29th June, 2020 and after approval of the recommendations

made, the appointments were made by the State Government by

Order dated 29th July 2020. At this stage, all the candidates had
24
completed their full training and have been given their respective

postings.
36.   We    have    examined    the   submissions   and    the   counter

submissions made by learned counsel for the parties.
37.   So far as Rule 16 of Rules, 1951 is concerned, it is true that if

we go through the bare punctuation marks which have been

highlighted by the counsel for the respondents, it certainly makes a

distinction between clause (a) and clause (b) but for proper

interpretation and to make the scheme of rules workable,

sometimes punctuation marks may give a different impression and

that cannot be taken in isolation for the interpretation of the

scheme of rules. If we read clause (a) and (b) of Rule 16 conjointly,

it clearly manifests that clause (a) is general and precise for the

candidates who are participating in the written examination

whereas clause (b) refers to the candidates who belong to Scheduled

Castes and Scheduled Tribes leaving the discretion of the

Commission         to   fix    qualifying   marks    for     Scheduled

Castes/Scheduled Tribes but with restriction that shall not be

higher than 35% in Bihar Civil Services(Executive Branch).
25
38.   The proviso added thereto relates to the stage for determining

the suitability of the candidate, total marks obtained in the written

examination has to be counted and not the marks obtained in any

particular subject for preparing the list of candidates who qualify

the written examination and this can be made further clear by

taking note of Rule 17 of the Rules which casts an obligation upon

the Commission to collate the marks obtained by the candidate in

the written examination and the Commission shall arrange for viva­

voce the candidates who have qualified the written examination

according to Rule 16(a) or 16(b), as the case may be, and at this

stage the Commission keeps a discretion and in exceptional

circumstances may admit a member from the Scheduled Castes or

Scheduled Tribes to the viva voce test, even if they have failed to

qualify the minimum qualifying marks with the prior approval of the

Government and this being the scheme of Rules, proviso to Rule 16

has to be read for both the clause (a) and (b) to Rule 16 and cannot

be read in reference to clause (b) alone as held by the High Court

under the impugned judgment.
26
39.   So far as the two questions which have been answered by the

High Court in reference to whether the marks obtained in Paper­I

would be added in total marks or whether the merit list is to be

prepared based on the total marks at the written examination or

minimum qualifying marks in each of the subject papers of written

examination are concerned, after examining clause 12 and 13 of the

advertisement in particular, read with Rule 16 of Rules 1951, we

are of the view that there is certainly an ambiguity in the

advertisement itself.
40.   If we examine clause 12(a) in reference to the preliminary

examination, it may indicate that according to vacancies, fifteen

times candidates will be shortlisted for main examination and as

per clause 12(b), the main examination will comprise of 06 papers,

total marks of which would be 1050 and it would be mandatory for

the candidate to appear in all the subjects/papers of Main

Examination.    But for Paper­I, minimum 30 marks as qualifying

marks has been prescribed and all the 6 papers are common and

candidate has to appear in all the papers with the minimum

qualifying marks for the respective category as indicated in clause
27
13 of the advertisement but whether it is the total marks obtained

at the written examination or qualifying marks obtained in all the

papers separately is not clear under the terms of advertisement.
41.   It is true that it can be construed in both ways.   The main

examination is comprising of 6 papers, total marks would be 1050

and candidate has to appear in all the papers of the main

examination. This could be one construction that qualifying marks

in paper­I is 30% but in other subject papers, it may be 40% or as

fixed for the respective category and whether it has to be aggregate

or qualifying marks in each paper is indeed not clear and ambiguity

is there in the conditions of advertisement, of which a detailed

reference has been made. At this stage, we take assistance of Rule

16 of the scheme of Rules, 1951 read with the proviso which gives a

different indication.
42.   This Court in
N. Suresh Nathan and Another vs. Union of

India and Others4
while examining the recruitment rules for

Assistant Engineers in the Public Works Department and taking

into consideration the procedure which has been followed by the
4
1992 Supp (1) SCC 584
28
department for sufficiently long time observed that the construction

of the scheme of rules which is in consonance with long standing

practice prevailing in the concerned department is untenable to

require upsetting it and if the past practice is based on one of the

possible constructions which can be made of the rules upsetting the

same could not be appropriate and in para 4 this Court held as

under:­

      “4. In our opinion, this appeal has to be allowed. There is sufficient
      material including the admission of respondents diploma­holders that the
      practice followed in the department for a long time was that in the case of
      diploma­holder Junior Engineers who obtained the degree during service,
      the period of three years' service in the grade for eligibility for promotion as
      degree­holders commenced from the date of obtaining the degree and the
      earlier period of service as diploma­holders was not counted for this
      purpose. This earlier practice was clearly admitted by the respondents
      diploma­holders in para 5 of their application made to the Tribunal at page
      115 of the paper book. This also appears to be the view of the Union Public
      Service Commission contained in their letter dated December 6, 1968
      extracted at pages 99­100 of the paper book in the counter­affidavit of
      respondents 1 to 3. The real question, therefore, is whether the
      construction made of this provision in the rules on which the past
      practice extending over a long period is based is untenable to require
      upsetting it. If the past practice is based on one of the possible
      constructions which can be made of the rules then upsetting the
      same now would not be appropriate. It is in this perspective that the
      question raised has to be determined”.
(emphasis supplied)
43.   In the instant case, the view which has been adopted by the

Commission and that has been considered and held by the High

Court in the impugned judgment may be better circumscribed but
29
both are equally possible views and either of the one could not be

ruled out or outrightly negated.
44.    In the given situation, when one possible view has been acted

upon     by   the   Commission     and   pursuant   to   which   the

recommendations were made and after approval of the State

Government, candidates have been appointed and are working for

almost 2 years by this time, it will be unjust for this Court to now

permit the Government to take a U­Turn in compliance of the

impugned judgment, and non­suit the candidates who are working

for sufficiently long time.
45.    Though it has been observed by the High Court that equity

may not be claimed by the candidates but this Court cannot be

oblivious of the fact that such of the candidates who are working for

sufficiently two years by this time and have completed their period

of probation were not at fault at any point of time but because the

interpretation acted upon by the Commission was not acceptable to

the High Court, they became a victim and that apart, we are also of

the view that what is being observed by the High Court may only be

confined to 6th Combined Civil Services Examination, 2016 for the
30
reason that the State has now introduced the scheme of Rules,

2021 and fresh process has been initiated under 7 th Combined Civil

Services Examination 2016. In the given circumstances, what has

been observed by the High Court may be one of the propositions in

interpreting clause 12 and 13 of the advertisement but what is

being considered by the Commission in its right earnest also cannot

be ruled out.
46.   It is well known that punctuation marks by themselves do not

control the meaning of the statute when its meaning is otherwise

obvious.    The ordinary rule is that punctuation mark is a minor

element in the interpretation of statute, more so, when it is a case

of subordinate legislation. If we go through the scheme of the Rules

1951, we are clear that proviso to Rule 16 has to be read in

conjunction to both Clause (a) and (b) and not to clause (b) in

particular as being observed by the High Court in the impugned

judgment.
47.   It may be noticed that the judgment in Joy Guria and

others(supra) referred to by the High Court is in reference to the

preliminary examination and the Division Bench under the
31
impugned judgment was influenced by those observations while

examining the scheme of the main examination held by the

Commission pursuant to 6th Combined Civil Services Examination,

2016. To the contrary, it was to be interpreted independently on

the basis of the scheme of Rules 1951 read with Clause 12 and 13

of the advertisement.
48.   Consequently, the appeals deserve to succeed and accordingly

allowed.   The impugned judgment of the High Court dated 23 rd

February, 2022 is hereby quashed and set aside. No costs.
49.   Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.


TRANSFER PETITION (C) NO(S).1100 OF 2022
50.   Having heard learned counsel for the petitioner, we find no

reason to entertain the transfer petition and the same is accordingly

dismissed.
51.   Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
……………………….J.
                                                   (AJAY
RASTOGI)
32
……………………….J.
                   (C.T. RAVIKUMAR)
NEW DELHI
AUGUST 25, 2022.
33