[Cites
5
, Cited by
10
]
Supreme Court of India
The Kangra Central Cooperative Bank ... vs State Of Himachal Pradesh on 12 August, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
Aniruddha Bose
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1


                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.5251 OF 2022
                                  (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No.1246 of 2015)

      THE KANGRA CENTRAL COOPERATIVE BANK
      PENSIONERS WELFARE ASSOCIATION (REGISTERED)                           ...Appellant

                                                         VERSUS

      STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH & ORS.                                     ...Respondents


                                                         WITH

                                 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) No.4518 of 2016



                                                   O R D E R
CIVIL APPEAL NO.5251 OF 2022
      (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No.1246 of 2015)
1.                  Leave granted.
2.                  This    appeal    challenges    the   judgment   and   order   dated

      03.09.2014 passed by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh at

      Shimla in LPA No.316 of 2012.
3.                  While dealing with the claim preferred by the Kangra

      Central                    Co-operative    Bank    Pensioners   Welfare    Association

      (“the Association”, for short) challenging the Orders dated

      21.04.2010 and 24.04.2010 stopping grant of pension to the
Signature Not Verified
Members of the Association, the Single Judge of the High
Digitally signed by Dr.
Mukesh Nasa
Date: 2022.08.18
17:52:59 IST
Reason:
Court by his judgment dated 15.05.2012 in CWP No.1679 of 2010

      directed as under:
2
”26.    In the instant case, the withdrawing of
                    the scheme by the BOD when it was
                    approved by the General House, which is
                    a final authority, is contrary to the
                    provisions of the Policy and the second
                    respondent has acted beyond his powers
                    delegated under the Act.
27.     The change of the policy and withdrawal
                    has to be made in the same process in
                    which it has been made, which lacks in
                    the present case.
28.     Thus, for the aforesaid reasons, the
                    impugned orders Annexures R-3/7 and R-
3/8 discontinuing of policy are hereby
                    quashed and set-aside.      Thus, there
                    shall be a direction to respondent No.2
                    to place the Scheme before the General
                    House for reconsideration and take a
                    final decision in the matter whether to
                    continue    the   Scheme     with     some
                    modifications,   if   required     or   to
                    completely   disband   it   or    suggest
                    alternative proposal. Such a decision
                    be taken after affording hearing to the
                    petitioners and also the respondent-
bank within four months from the
                    production   of   the   copy    of    this
                    judgment.”


4.   During    the       course    of   his   judgment,   the    Single     Judge

dealt   with       all    the     relevant    submissions       including    one
concerning maintainability of the writ petition and observed

as under:
“19.    The learned counsel for the
                    respondents admitted that the State had
                    more than 50 per cent share in the
                    capital of the bank. The Registrar of
                    the Cooperative Societies is a member
                    of   Himachal   Pradesh  Administrative
3
Services.       The    perusal    of    the
Cooperative Societies Act
reveals that
               the   respondent-Society    cannot    budge
               even an inch without his approval,
               therefore, there is deep and pervasive
               control of the State Government not
               only on its employees by the second
               respondent as ventilated by the learned
               counsel for the respondents but also on
               the working of respondents-Bank, as is
               evident from the facts in hand that the
               respondent-bank has more than 50% share
               of the Government, it is financially,
               functionally      and     administratively
               dominated by or is under the control of
               the State Government, as also the
               Government nominates members of the
               Managing Committee (BOD) under
Section
               35
of Cooperative Societies Act, also
               1/3 of the members are appointed by the
               Registrar under Rule 39 framed under
               the Act.    Even under Rule 49, he is
               empowered to inter-alia issue general
               or special orders to the Managing
               Committee     to raise and invest funds.
Therefore, the State has a deep and
               pervasive   control    on   its   working.
Hence,   the    respondent-bank    is    an
               instrumentality of the State within the
               meaning    of
Article    12
of    the
               Constitution.        Therefore,    in    my
               opinion,   the    writ   is   maintainable
               against the respondent-bank.”
5.   It   appears   that   in   a   different   context,   the   issue

concerning maintainability of a Writ Petition against Kangra

Central Co-operative Bank Ltd. (‘the Bank’, for short) again

came up before the Full bench of the High Court, which by its

judgment dated 14.05.2013 observed as under:
“15. For the view taken by us on both facets of
          the referred questions, we proceed to answer
          the Reference as under:
4
(1) The question as to whether Kangra
Bank is a State within the meaning of
Article 12
of the Constitution of India,
is no more res integra. It has been
authoritatively answered by the Apex Court
in S.S. Rana’s case (supra.)

(2) Even in the case of H.P. State
Cooperative Bank Ltd., the question has
been answered by the Division Bench of our
High Court in Chandra Kumar Malhotra’s
case (supra).    There is no conflicting
decision of coordinate Bench of this Court
necessitating   pronouncement    on   that
question by the Full Bench.
(3) In the case of Jogindra Central
Cooperative Bank, the decision in Mehar
Chand’s case (supra) is rendered by the
learned Single Judge of this Court and no
conflicting decision of the co-ordinate
Bench much less of the Division Bench or
Larger Bench of our High Court with regard
to the stated Bank has been brought to our
notice.   In any case, the said question
can be conveniently answered by the
Division Bench in appropriate proceedings
whether in the form of writ petition or
Reference made by the learned Single Judge
of this Court, as the case may be. As and
when such occasion arises, the issue can
be answered on the basis of settled legal
principles and including keeping in mind
the exposition of S.S. Rana’s case (supra)
of the Apex Court concerning another
Cooperative Bank constituted under the
Himachal Pradesh State Cooperative Act.
(4) As regards the second part of the
question as to whether a writ would lie
against the stated Cooperative Banks, we
hold that it is not appropriate to give a
definite answer to this question. For, it
would depend on several attending factors.
Further, even if the said Banks were held
to be not a State within the meaning of
Article 12
, the High Court in exercise of
5
powers   under
Article    226
of   the
                Constitution of India, can certainly issue
                a writ or order in the nature of writ even
                against any person or Authority, if the
                fact situation of the case so warrants.
                In other words, writ can lie even against
                a Corporative Society.   Whether the same
                should be issued by the High Court would
                depend on the facts of each case.
16. Accordingly, having answered the referred
           questions, we direct the Registry to place the
           concerned writ petitions and the LPA before
           the appropriate Bench for proceeding on merits
           in accordance with law.”
6.   In the Review Petition preferred against the decision of

the Single Judge, the decision rendered by the Full Bench was

relied upon and the Review Petition was rejected.
7.   The   matter    however   was   carried    in    appeal   before   the

Division Bench at the instance of the Bank.
8.   Relying    on   its   earlier   decision    in
Sanjeev    Kumar   &

Others v. State of Himachal Pradesh & Others
, C.W.P. No.6709

of 2013 the Division Bench by its judgment and order which is

presently under challenge, set aside the view taken by the

Single Judge.       The matter essentially turned on the issue of

maintainability.
9.   We have heard Mr. Kavin Gulati, learned Senior Advocate

in   support   of    the   appeal,   Mr.   Abhinav     Mukerji,   learned

Additional Advocate General for the State and Mr. Ritesh
6
Khatri, learned Advocate for the Bank.
10. The issue concerning maintainability was considered by

the Full bench and the observations made by the Full Bench

summed up the law on the point quite succinctly.           On the

facts as found by the Single Judge, which were recorded in

paragraph 19 of the judgment, without entering into any other

question, in our view, the petition as filed was perfectly

maintainable.   The Division Bench was in error in setting

aside the view taken by the Single Judge in allowing the writ

petition and in rejecting the review petition.
11. We, therefore, allow this appeal and set aside the view

taken by the Division Bench.     However,   since   the   Division

Bench had not dealt with the matter on merits, we restore LPA

No.316 of 2012 to the file of the Division Bench and request

the High Court to dispose of the same as early as possible

and preferably within three months from the receipt of this

order.
12. The Civil Appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent,

without any order as to costs.
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) No.4518 OF 2016
1.   This Special Leave Petition challenges the judgment and
7
order dated 04.08.2014 passed by the High Court of Himachal

Pradesh at Shimla in Civil Writ Petition No.6709 of 2013.
2.    Though the issue raised in this matter also pertains to

the maintainability of a writ petition filed in the High

Court; and the instant matter was tagged with the Special

Leave Petition from which the aforestated appeal arose, in

the   facts      and   circumstances    of    the   case,   we   refuse   to

entertain this Special Leave Petition.
3.    It   has    been   brought   to   our    notice   that     the   Joint

Registrar        (Credit)   Cooperative       Societies,     H.P.,     while

disposing of the action initiated before him had observed as

under:
“24. In  view   of   the   findings   recorded
            hereinabove,   the   respondent   bank   shall
            consider the applicants/petitioners along
            with other similarly situated subordinate
            category employees for promotion to vacant
            post of junior clerks/ Gr.IV under specified
            promotion quota earmarked under bank service
            rules for them subject to their eligibility
            and fitness for promotion as and when
            vacancies under promotion quota or otherwise
            are filled by the respondent bank in near
            future.    Further, the period of service
            rendered by the applicants/petitioners as
            sub-helpers on contract/ad hoc basis shall
            be considered as qualifying service by the
            bank for determining their length of service
            in   feeder/subordinate   category   for   the
            purpose of promotion to junior clerks/ Gr.IV
            as per rules and settled principles of
            service jurisprudence and in view of the
            fact that bank had extended their contract
8
period till 2011 as per terms of the scheme
                 of appointment and rules etc.
25. In     the     aforesaid      terms,     the
                 representations/ references
u/s 72
of the
                 Act      ibid       preferred        by      the
                 applicants/petitioners stand disposed of in
                 compliance of the orders of Hon’ble High
                 Court, H.P. these findings made before the
                 parties present today on 18.8.2012 at Shimla
                 shall also be kept on record in concerned
                 files of the applicants/petitioners as those
                 are preferred on similar grounds before
                 Registrar Cooperative Societies, H.P. and
                 stood   clubbed   as    discussed    above   and
                 accordingly    disposed     of     along    with
                 applications filed for stay etc. if any.
These case files be returned along with
                 findings   to   the    Registrar     Cooperative
                 Societies, H.P. for record and further
                 appropriate action after due completion.”
4.      The further action initiated by the present petitioners

in the form of a Writ Petition did not meet with success on

the ground of maintainability.                              However, as indicated in the

Additional Affidavit filed by the respondents, out of six

petitioners presently before this Court, four of them were

granted the benefit of regularization1 to the next higher

post.         Ms. Pragati Neekhra, learned Advocate appearing for

the H.P. State Cooperative Bank Ltd. submits that since the

filing of the additional affidavit, other two petitioners

have also been afforded the similar benefit.




1 Shri Suresh Kumar Mehta, petitioner No.1 by office order dated 02.09.2019; Shri Rajinder Kumar, petitioner No.2
by order dated 20.06.2020; Shri Anil Prakash, petitioner no.4 by office order dated 28.01.2020; and, Shri Kuldeep
Singh, petitioner No.5 by order dated 28.01.2021.
9
5.   In   the   circumstances,   we   refuse   to   entertain   this

Special Leave Petition which is thus disposed of.
............................J.
                                       (UDAY UMESH LALIT)



                                      ............................J.
                                       (ANIRUDDHA BOSE)



                                      ............................J.
                                      (SUDHANSHU DHULIA)
New Delhi,
August 12, 2022.