[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sandhya Pant vs Deepak Ruwali on 11 August, 2022
Author:
Indira Banerjee
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
,
Indira Banerjee
REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.                    2022
                                 [ARISING OUT OF S.L.P. (C) NO. 1119 OF 2021]


                      SANDHYA PANT                                        …Appellant (s)

                                                        Versus

                      DEEPAK RUWALI & ORS.                                    ...Respondent (s)

                                                         WITH

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.                    2022
                                 [ARISING OUT OF S.L.P. (C) NO. 15775 OF 2020]


                                                   JUDGMENT
Indira Banerjee, J.
Leave granted.
2.   These appeals are against a final judgment and order dated 19 th

                      November 2020 passed by the High Court of Uttarakhand in a Public

                      Interest Litigation being Writ Petition (PIL) No.131 of 2018 without hearing

                      the Appellant and without deciding the Appellant’s application being CLMA

                      No.7758 of 2020 for impleadment, pending before the High Court.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
GULSHAN KUMAR
ARORA
Date: 2022.08.11
15:56:35 IST
Reason:
3.   According to the Appellant, Chitai Golu Devta Temple in Almora was

                      constructed in 1919 by late Pandit Keshav Dutt Pant and late Bhola Dutt
1
Pant. As per a Report prepared by the Village Pradhan of Gram Sabha,

Chitai Khasparja Tehsil Almora, the original rights in the temple vested

with late Jaikishan Pant.         The Appellant is the daughter-in-law of late

Chaturanan Pant, a descendant of the said Jaikishan Pant. The Appellant

claims to be the Vice President of the Mandir Samiti which was formed in

2012. A translated copy of the said Report of the Village Pradhan of Gram

Sabha, Chitai dated 8th September 1976 is enclosed to the Paperbook.
4.     According to the Appellant, the shebait rights of the Chitai Golu

Devta Temple are as under:
LATE SHRI JAIKISHAN PANT
                       (Started worshiping Lord Golu Devta under a tree)

                                LATE HARIBALLABH PANT



LATE LAKSHMI KANT PANT                                    LATE SHIV SHANKAR PANT


LATE PREM BALLABH PANT                                     LATE PARMANAND PANT




LATE KESHAV DUTT PANT       LATE BHOLA DUTT PANT              LATE GANGADUTT PANT
(Founded/constructed the temple in 1919)


LATE GOVIND BALLABH PANT                                     LATE HARI DUTT PANT


LATE CHATURNAND PANT                                         LATE DAMODAR PANT


LATE NALIN PANT                                            (Res. Nos.7 to 10 herein)


Smt. SANDHYA PANT
(W/o Late Shri Nalin Pant Appellant herein)
5.     In compliance of Ordinance No.16 issued by the Government of Uttar

Pradesh on 6th October 1986, extending the UP Hindu Public Religious

Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) Act 1962, Chaturanan
2
Pant, since deceased made an application for registration of the Chitai

Golu Devta temple in the statutory form. In the said form it was stated

that the Chitai Golu Devta temple not being a public temple, the provisions

of the said Act may not apply to the Chitai Golu Devta temple.
6.    On or about 29th October 1985, all the three main idols of the temple

were registered under the Antiquities and Art Treasures Rules, 1973 in the

name of late Chaturanan Pant, father-in-law of the Appellant.
7.    The Appellant has stated that, after the death of late Chaturanan

Pant, his son Nalin Pant, since deceased, husband of the Appellant took

over the management of the temple along with other family members,

that is, the Respondent Nos. 7 to 10, who are sons of late Damodar Pant.

After the death of her husband Nalin Pant, the Appellant stepped into his

shoes.
8.    On 5th June 2015, the Appellant and Respondent Nos.7 to 10 opened

a Saving Bank Account in the IDBI Bank in the name of Golu Devta Mandir

Samiti, Chitai, Almora. It is claimed that an amount of Rs.8.56 lakhs is

lying in deposit in the said account.
9.    The Respondent No.1, Deepak Ruwali, an Advocate and a resident of

Nainital engaged in social work, filed a Writ Petition in public interest,

being W.P. (PIL) No.131 of 2018, seeking a Writ of Mandamus directing the

Respondent Authorities to constitute a registered society or trust for

management of the temple.
10.   According to the Appellant, Ashutosh Pant, Smt. Lajja Pant, Sh.
3
Paritosh Pant and other family members of the Appellant got the Public

Interest Litigation (PIL) filed through the Respondent No.1 for oblique

reasons. According to the Appellant, an application made by the Appellant

along with the Respondent Nos.7 to 10 for registration of the Golu Devta

Mandir Samiti has been kept pending because of the Public Interest

Litigation.
11.   On 11th September 2018, Ashutosh Pant and other family members

filed objections before the Registrar of Societies, Almora and District

Magistrate, Almora, hereinafter referred to as the “District Magistrate”,

stating that objections should be considered before registration of the

Mandir Samiti and other persons may be included in the Mandir Samiti.
12.   On 18th September 2018, the District Magistrate constituted a Five

Member Committee for inquiry with regard to the complaint made by

Ashutosh Pant and others.        On 1 st October, 2018, the Members of the

Committee constituted by the District Magistrate called for a meeting to

look into the issues raised by Ashutosh Pant in his complaint. According to

the Appellant, only Ashutosh Pant, Paritosh Pant, Vasudha Pant and Lajja

Pant were called to the meeting. The Appellant states that the Appellant

and the Respondent Nos.7 to 10 who were discharging the duties of

shebait of the temple were not called for the meeting.
13.   On      8th   October   2018,   the   District   Magistrate   allowed   the

representation of Ashutosh Pant and others for constitution of a temple

committee like the Jageshwar Temple Committee.
14.   On 30th November 2018, the District Magistrate filed his reply in the
4
Public Interest Litigation (PIL) in the High Court.     On 7 th January 2020,

Vasudha Pant, wife of Ashutosh Pant filed an intervention application in the

PIL which was numbered CLMA No.285 of 2018.             The application was

allowed by an order dated 10th January 2020.
15.     On 27th February 2020, the Respondent No.1 moved an application

for impleadment of the Respondent Nos.7 to 10 but excluded the Appellant

who claims to be Vice President of the Mandir Samiti.
16.     According to the Appellant, a copy of the Writ Petition filed by the

Respondent No.1 was served on the Respondent Nos. 7 to 10 on 1 st March

2020.     However, by an order dated 4 th March 2020, the High Court

disposed of the PIL, without giving the Respondent Nos. 7 to 10 any

opportunity to file their response. The High Court directed the Respondent

No.6 to consider the report of District Magistrate and take decision for the

constitution of an independent Managing Committee for administration of

the non-religious activities of the temple.
17.     On 26th June 2020, the Appellant, as daughter-in-law of late

Chaturanan Pant filed a Review Application being MCC No.257 of 2020 in

the High Court, seeking review of the said order dated 4 th March 2020

passed in the PIL. While the Review Application was pending on 4 th July

2020, the District Magistrate constituted a new Management Committee of

the temple on 9th July 2020.
18.     On 14th July 2020, the Appellant filed an independent Writ Petition

(M/S) No.1096 of 2020 before the High Court. According to the Appellant,
5
the Writ Petition was filed in view of some observations made by the High

Court when the Counsel mentioned the Review Application, which had not

been called on for hearing on 9 th July 2020, though it had been listed on

that day. The Single Bench of the High Court however, dismissed the Writ

Petition on the ground that an independent committee had been

constituted in compliance of the order of the Division Bench dated 4 th

March 2020 and the Appellant should move an application before the

Division Bench. On 5th August 2020, the Appellant filed a Special Appeal

No.140 of 2020 against the order dated 27th July 2020 passed by the Single

Judge dismissing the Writ Petition (M/S) No.1096 of 2020.
19.   By an order dated 16th September 2020, the Division Bench allowed

an Application being CLMA No.4534 of 2020 filed by the Respondent Nos.7

to 10 and recalled its order dated 4th March 2020. In view of the order

dated 16th September 2020, Special Appeal No.140 of 2020 filed by the

Appellant became infructuous and was accordingly disposed of on 18 th

September 2020. The Review Application being MCC No.257 of 2020 filed

by the Appellant was, however, dismissed on the ground that it had been

filed by a third party, who was not party to the proceedings.
20.   The Appellant submitted that the judgment and order dated 4th

March 2020 had been recalled on 16 th September 2020 before the District

Administration could take over the management of the temple. The Chitai

Golu Devta Temple is being managed by the Mandir Samiti in existence

since 2011-2012.
21.   On 22 September 2020, the Appellant filed an application for
6
impleadment being CLMA No.7758 of 2020 in the PIL filed by the

Respondent No.1.     The said application for impleadment was listed on

diverse dates in September, October and November, 2020, but the same

was not heard or decided. By the impugned judgment and order dated

19th November 2020, the Division Bench disposed of the PIL without

deciding the application for impleadment filed by the Appellant.
22.   By the impugned judgment and order, the Division Bench disposed

of the Public Interest Litigation, directing the Managing Committee

constituted pursuant to the order of the High Court dated 04.03.2020 to

continue, observing that there were serious disputes with regard to

shebait rights in the temple. According to the Appellant, the impugned

judgment and order was passed without hearing the Appellant. The High

Court observed and held:
“11.      The claim of respondent nos.5 to 8 cannot be said to be
         a mere bald assertion or a pleading, not backed by facts. They
         have produced substantial material to prove their interest. The
         material produced by them date back to more than 100 years.
         Whether these documents are valid, appropriate or not, cannot be
         decided in a proceeding under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
         India. These are material that have to be tested and proved in an
         appropriate civil court. Therefore, it is suffice to hold that the
         claim of respondent nos.5 to 8 are prima facie backed by material
         and, therefore, cannot be brushed aside. The material produced
         by the respondents, require to be proved by them in a court of
         law.
12.       Therefore, considering the rival contentions and the
         material available, we are of the considered view that these are
         not matters that could be determined in a public interest litigation
         under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. There are serious
         rights which have to be agitated before an appropriate forum.
The rights of the parties cannot be determined merely through
         affidavits filed before this Court. The plea of the writ petitioner
         that a selected family is misusing its powers and conducting the
         Pooja etc. the hereditary rights, as claimed by respondent nos.5
         to 8 based on the various documents produced by them as well as
         the stand of the State with regard to the status of the land etc.,
         are serious matters of dispute of right and interest. The same can
         only be determined before an appropriate civil court through
7
adequate evidence, or otherwise. It is for anyone to establish the
           fact that it is they who have an interest or a right in the temple. It
           is, therefore not proper for this Court, to record any finding, based
           on the affidavit filed, not only by the petitioner but even by
           respondent nos.5 to 8 as well as the State to hold that the land
           belongs to the State or not, whether respondent Nos.5 to 8 have a
           shebait right or not, whether the temple funds have been misused
           or not, etc. These are all issues to be determined only through a
           full fledged trial.
13.       The fact of the magnitude of the number of devotees
           who are attracted by this temple, cannot be overlooked. It is not
           a temple that has been created recently. It is undisputed by all,
           that this is a very ancient temple which attracts lakhs of devotees
           every year. Unimagined faith is deposed in the deity, Public
           sentiments are also issues to be considered delicately by the
           Court. These are not just matters of interpretation of law that is
           called for. The sensitive rights of the devotees vis-à-vis the rights
           of persons to exercise the shebait rights etc. have all to be
           considered minutely. It is therefore just and appropriate, that this
           Court refrains from granting any declaration as to who is the
           actual person who has a right to exercise the shebait rights or not
           etc. Therefore, we leave open the question for determination
           before an appropriate civil court. Whichever party claims its
           rights over the shebait rights or any other right, pertaining to the
           temple or any other right relatable to the temple, is entitled to
           approach the civil court for necessary relief. They would have to
           establish and succeed before the trial court to obtain any decree
           in their favour.”
23.     A Counter Affidavit has been filed on behalf of the Respondent State

wherein it is stated that pursuant to the High Court’s direction and the

findings of the Inquiry Committee, the District Magistrate proposed to form

a Temple Management Committee with the following members :-
(i)     District Magistrate, Almora as the Chairman
(ii)    Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Almora as the Deputy Chairman
(iii)   Chief Treasurer, Almora as the Ex-officio Member
(iv)    District Tourism Development Officer as Ex-officio Member
(v)     Prabandhak/Manager, Chitai Golu Devta Mandir Samiti as a member
(vi)    A representative of the priest as a member
(vii)   A specially invited member.
8
24.   It is stated that a detailed criteria of eligibility was laid down for non-

government members. The order stated that the Committee would make

bye-laws for development of the temple and for sharing the donations with

the priests. The Committee would also work to develop religious tourism

by developing facilities relating to health, education, electricity, drinking

water and hygiene in or around the temple precincts.
25.   It is further stated that the State has set up the Committee only to

manage the non-religious affairs of the temple.           The Pant family/the

Appellant and the Respondent Nos.7 to 10 are continuing to conduct

‘Pooja’ in the temple, as per their rites, tradition and internal arrangement.
26.   By an order dated 15th June 2020, the Secretary, Tourism,

Government of Uttarakhand being the Respondent No.6, in compliance of

the order of the High Court dated 4th March 2020, directed the District

Magistrate to constitute the Committee of the Chitai Golu Devta Temple in

line of Jageshwar Temple Management Committee.
27.   On 4th July 2020, a Trust Deed was executed by the District

Magistrate for constituting the Temple Management Committee for the

purpose of management, administration and governance of the temple.

The Trust Deed was duly registered with the office of the Sub-Registrar

Office, Almora.
28.   On 6th July 2020, the District Magistrate convened a meeting of

members of the Temple Management Committee where it was decided:
9
(i)     Toilets would be constructed for the devotees
(ii)    Parking space at the temple would be improved
(iii)   a tank for rainwater harvesting would be constructed
(iv)    Sub-Divisional Magistrate would initiate proceeding for appointment

        of the representative of the Priest in the Temple Committee.
(v)     Sub-Divisional Magistrate would appoint Manager of the Temple

        Committee as per the procedure adopted in the Jageshwar Temple.
29.     On 8th July 2020, the Sub-Divisional Magistrate conducted a public

meeting at the premises of the temple which was attended by nearly 67

people including Government Officers, Pujaris and local residents.        The

Appellant and the Respondent Nos. 7 to 9 also attended the meeting.
30.     The minutes of the meeting were drawn up taking note of the

suggestions of those who attended the meeting for improvement of the

temple and the adjoining areas. Secondly, the suggestions were to make

arrangements for availability of water at the temple, to put up solar panels

at the temple premises, to lay down a detailed system for waste

management and to make the temple plastic free.          It was also decided

that action would be taken to generate self-employment, particularly of

local Kumaon women, by promoting local handicrafts, sale of organic

‘prashad’ made of local sourced fruits, eco-friendly bags for carrying

‘prashad’ and also to develop a library. Thirdly, it was decided that an

arrangement would be made to set up a budget dharamshala, CCTV

cameras, marriage hall, live telecast of the arti at the temple.       Further

meeting was held on 23rd July 2020. A decision was taken with regard to
10
appointment of Manager of the temple and opening of bank account.
31.   By the impugned judgment and order dated 19 th November 2020,

the High Court declined to record any finding on shebait rights or

misappropriation of funds by those in management, based on the

affidavits filed by the parties.   The High Court directed that any person

claiming a right, title or shebait rights could file a suit before May 2021.

The independent Management Committee formed pursuant to the High

Court’s order dated 4th March 2020 was directed to continue, unless an

order/interim order application was filed in any civil suit.
32.   On behalf of the State, it was submitted that, given the importance

and sanctity of the Chitai Golu Devta Temple, and in view of a letter

alleging mismanagement received from Ashutosh Pant and various

residents of the nearby village, the District Magistrate had formed a five-

member Inquiry Committee, which had submitted its Report on 8 th October

2018, with the recommendation that a Committee similar to a Committee

of Jageshwar Temple be constituted to administer the Chitai Golu Devta

Temple and a detailed set of regulations should be made for proper

management of the temple. It was emphasized on behalf of the State that

priests and pujaris, the Appellant and the Respondent Nos.7 to 10 were to

continue to conduct Pooja in the temple as per their rites and rituals. The

State would not interfere in the religious activities of the temple or the

shebait rights of the shebaits.
33.   On behalf of the State, it is also contended that the Chitai Golu

Devta Temple is a public temple and it is within the realm of the State to
11
regulate its non-religious affairs. As noted by the High Court, the temple is

visited by thousands of people and the manner in which the non-religious

affairs are managed are within the realm of executive control. The funds

received by the temple cannot be misappropriated and must be used for

the development of the temple and for providing amenities to those who

visit the temple.
34.     On behalf of the State reliance has been placed on the judgment of

this Court in
Goswami Shri Mahalaxmi Vahuji v. Ranchhoddas

Kalidas      and Ors.1
where this Court laid down the criteria for

differentiating between a private temple and a public temple. This Court

held:
“15. Though most of the present day Hindu public temples have
           been founded as public temples, there are instances of private
           temples becoming public temples in course of time. Some of the
           private temples have acquired a great deal of religious reputation
           either because of the eminence of its founder or because of other
           circumstances. They have attracted large number of devotees.
           Gradually in course of time they have become public temples.
           Public temples are generally built or raised by the public and the
           deity installed to enable the members of the public or a section
           thereof to offer worship. In such a case the temple would clearly
           be a public temple. If a temple is proved to have originated as a
           public temple, nothing more is necessary to be proved to show
           that it is a public temple but if a temple is proved to have origi-
           nated as a private temple or its origin is unknown or lost in antiq-
           uity then there must be proof to show that it is being used as a
           public temple. In such cases the true character of the particular
           temple is decided on the basis of various circumstances. In those
           cases the courts have to address themselves to various questions
           such as:
“(1) Is the temple built in such imposing manner that it may
           prima facie appear to be a public temple?
           (2) Are the members of the public entitled to worship in that
           temple as of right;
(3) Are the temple expenses met from the contributions made
           by the public?
(4) Whether the Sevas and Utsavas conducted in the temple
           are those usually conducted in public temples?
1 (1969) 2 SCC 853
12
(5) Have the management as well as the devotees been
            treating that temple as a public temple?”
35.    It is submitted that the Chitai Golu Devta Temple has acquired fame,

and has a daily footfall of thousands of worshippers per day. People come

in huge numbers to pray for fulfilment of their wishes and desires and offer

bells which are hung at the temple.         Furthermore, the land on which the

temple is located, as well as the land surrounding the temple belongs to

the State.      As argued on behalf of the State, the appointment of an

independent Managing Committee for managing the temple is a secular

matter and can be regulated by the State.
In
Jagdish Prasad v. Mahant

Tribhuwan Puri2
, this Court held:-
“6. We heard counsel on both sides and also gave our anxious
            consideration to the various questions raised in this appeal. We
            are of the view that the finding recorded by the High Court that
            Ram Mandir is a public temple is correct and does not call for
            interference. The High Court has however, not gone into the other
            questions raised in the suit as to the mismanagement of the
            temple and the right of the persons to act as shebait of the
            temple. In the view that we propose to take, it may not be
            necessary to go into all these questions. Ram Mandir has been
            declared to be a public temple. There is no deed conferring the
            right on any person to manage the temple exclusively. There is a
            rival claim for the right of management. It would be, therefore,
            proper to frame a scheme for management. We therefore, direct
            the District Judge to frame a scheme for proper management of
            the temple. In that scheme, Plaintiff 1 since deceased by his LRs
            and the defendant be given equal rights in the management. If
            they are not able to cooperate with each other, they may be
            given such exclusive rights in the alternate periods of six months
            or one year. The scheme also may provide the right to nominate
            the successor of Plaintiff 1 and the defendant for management of
            the temple. We, however, make it clear that the directions given
            by the trial court against the defendant in regard to the missing
            articles of the temple is kept undisturbed and the defendant shall
            be asked to restore all the articles to the temple. The court will
            also take care to see that the temple premises or any other
            building appertaining thereto is not utilised for the private use of
            the parties or their relations. These are only some of the
            suggestions. The District Judge will take into consideration other
            aspects also while framing a proper scheme. The scheme shall be
            framed within six months from the date of receipt of this order.”
2 (1987) Supp SCC 482
13
36.    On the face of the averments made in the pleadings in the High

Court and/or in this Court, it is apparent that there are inter se disputes

between members of the Pant family over the management of the Chitai

Golu Devta Temple.       Prior to the formation of the Temple Management

Committee, even the non-religious affairs of the Chitai Golu Devta Temple,

such as temple upkeep, maintenance, sanitation etc. were looked after by

the Pant family members. The donations received from pilgrims were

allegedly used by the Pant family for their personal use and not for

improving the facilities at the temple.      It was also argued that the

Appellant owns and runs a marriage hall adjacent to the temple and also

runs a shop. The Appellant is, therefore, not facing any financial hardship

as such.    Whether the Appellant has any financial hardship or not is

however irrelevant to the issues involved in this appeal.
37.    In passing the impugned order the Division Bench took note of the

following factors:
(i)    The contention of the State that as per the Khatauni of Fasli Year

       1411-1416, that the land occupied by the Golu Devta Temple at

       Chitai had been recorded in the revenue records, as Non Z.A.

       Khatauni Category 10(2), which is government land;
(ii)   There was a serious dispute with regard to the shebait rights of the

       persons who conduct the pooja in respect of the temple. Whether

       the documents produced by the Respondent Nos.7 to 10 were valid

       or genuine documents, would have to be tested and proved in an

       appropriate Civil Court.
14
(iii)   The magnitude of the number of devotees is overlooked. The temple

        is an ancient temple. Public sentiments are involved.
38.     There can be no doubt that the State has the right to control the

non-religious affairs of the temple situated on Government land and

ensure that donations received from the public are not misappropriated or

wasted.
39.     It is the contention of the Appellant that the descendant/founder of

the temple has the right to manage the temple. However, when prayers

are being conducted for generations and there are many branches of the

family, disputes inter se between the members of the family have to be

settled. The High Court rightly found that this could be done by institution

of a suit.
40.     Mr. Gupta appearing on behalf of the Appellant submitted that when

an idol is installed and a temple is constructed, shebaitship is vested in the

founder and unless the founder himself has disposed of the shebaitship in

a particular manner, or there is some usage or custom or circumstance

showing different mode, the shebaitship like any other species of heritable

property follows the line of inheritance from the founder; and it is not open

to the Court to lay down a new rule of succession or alter the rule of

succession.
In support of his submission, Mr. Gupta cited
Sri Marthanda

Varma Anr. v. State of Kerala & Ors.3
.
41.
In
Marthanda Varma
(supra), this Court held:-
3 (2021) 1 SCC 225
15
“152. Consistent with the stand that the Temple is a public
Temple and that no remuneration at any stage was derived in the
past or would be aimed at in future, a suggestion was made on
behalf of the appellants in the form of a note in response to the
affidavit-in-reply filed on behalf of the State. In the said note,
which is set out in detail in para 64 hereinabove, the appellants
have suggested the composition of an Administrative Committee,
and of an Advisory Committee. Broadly, it is suggested that the
Administrative Committee be formed comprising of five Members,
the Chairperson being a retired Indian Administrative Service
Officer of the rank of Secretary to the Government of Kerala; the
other four members being:
(i) a nominee of the trustee;
(ii) the Chief Thantri of the Temple;
(iii) a nominee of the Government of Kerala; and
(iv) a Member to be nominated by the Ministry of Culture, the
Government of India.
In terms of Para 8 of the note, the trustee that is to say the
Manager or shebait of the Temple would be guided by the advice
given by the Advisory Committee.
153. On the other hand, the suggestion made on behalf of the
State is to follow the model statutorily enacted for Guruvayoor
Devaswom, and thus the Managing Committee would be of eight
Members comprising of two ex-officio members, namely,
Padmanabhadasa and the Senior Thantri; while the other six
members would be nominated by the Hindus among the Council
of Ministers; one of them being member of the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes while one being a woman, and the other
being a representative of the employees of the Temple.
***
157. The provisions of the TC Act with respect to the
administration of the Temple are clear:
157.1. Under Section 18(2), the administration shall be
conducted. “Subject to the control and supervision of the ruler of
Travancore, by an Executive Officer appointed by him.”

157.2. “Sree Padmanabhaswamy Temple Committee” comprised
of three members nominated by the ruler of Travancore in terms
of Section 20 is to advise the ruler of Travancore in the discharge
of his functions.
158. The statute has thus vested the power of appointing the
Executive Officer and of forming the Advisory Committee, in the
ruler of Travancore. In the note, the appellants have stated:
158.1. “The trustee shall delegate his powers of administration
under Section 18(2)” to the Administrative Committee which
“shall administer the Temple through an Executive Officer to be
appointed by the Committee”.
158.2. On all policy matters, the trustee shall be guided by the
16
advice of the Advisory Committee.
159. Having given our anxious consideration to the rival
suggestions, the composition of the Committees as suggested by
the appellants deserves acceptance, especially in light of the
conclusions arrived at by us that the Managership or the
shebaitship of the Temple continues with the Family. As against
the administration contemplated by Chapter III of Part I of the TC
Act in the hands of the ruler of Travancore in absolute terms, the
course now suggested by the appellants is quite balanced. The
composition of the Administrative Committee as suggested is
broadbased and would not be loaded in favour or against the
trustee. However, considering the fact that the present interim
Administrative Committee headed by the District Judge is in seisin
for the last more than five years, and various District Judges as
Chairpersons of the Committee conducted themselves quite well,
in our view, a minor change in the Administrative Committee
suggested by the appellants in their note is called for. Instead of a
retired Indian Administrative Service Officer of the rank of
Secretary to the Government of Kerala as the Chairperson of the
Administrative Committee, in the interest of justice, the District
Judge, Thiruvananthapuram shall be the Chairperson of the
Administrative Committee. Needless to say that the present
Chairperson of the Interim Administrative Committee shall
continue to be the Chairperson so long as he holds the post of the
District Judge, Thiruvananthapuram. The composition of the
Advisory Committee will ensure that the administration of the
Temple is conducted in a fair and transparent manner.
160. We, therefore, accept the suggestions made by the
appellants in their note adverted to in detail in para 64
hereinabove with regard to the constitution of the Administrative
Committee and the Advisory Committee subject to the
modification with respect to the Chairperson of the Administrative
Committee as stated in the preceding paragraph. Appellant 1
shall file an appropriate affidavit of undertaking within four weeks
of this judgment in terms of Para 1 of the note and also agreeing
to the modification as stated above. The affidavit of undertaking
so filed shall be binding on Appellant 1 and all his successors.
***
162. In terms of the note submitted by the appellants, the powers
of “the ruler of Travancore” under Section 18(2) of the TC Act shall
stand delegated to the Administrative Committee while the
Advisory Committee shall be deemed to be the Committee
constituted in terms of Section 20 of the TC Act. It is made clear
that all the members including the Chairpersons of the
Administrative Committee and the Advisory Committee must be
Hindus and fulfil the requirements in Section 2(aa) of the TC Act.
All the other Committees constituted in terms of various orders
passed by this Court shall continue for four months, and it shall
be up to the Advisory Committee to consider whether the services
of those Committees are required or not. It must also be stated
that the present security arrangements as deployed by the State
Government shall be continued, but the expenses in that behalf
shall be borne by the Temple hereafter.
17
42.    There is a difference in the traditional mode and manner of

management of the Padmanabhaswamy Temple at Thiruvananthapuram in

respect of which the right of management is vested with the Ruler of

Travancore and the Chitai Golu Devta Temple administered by the

Appellant and the Respondents. Be that as it may, even in the case of the

Padmanabhaswamy Temple, the Court vested the Temple Committee

constituted in terms of its order, with all the powers of management of the

Ruler of Travancore.
43.    In the instant case, it is not exactly clear as to which heirs of the

Pant family are entitled to shebaitship rights in respect of the Chitai Golu

Devta Temple and there appears to be disputes in this regard amongst

members of the Pant family.
44.    The judgment in
Guruvayoor Devaswom Managing Committee

and Another v. C. K. Rajan and Others
4, cited by Mr. Gupta was

rendered in the facts and circumstances of the case of Guruvayoor Temple.

In this case, the Court held:-
“56. The case at hand does not fall in any of the aforementioned
            categories, where a PIL could be entertained.
57. No reported decision has also been brought to our notice
            where a public interest litigation was entertained in a similar
            matter.
58. We have also not come across any case so far where the
            functions required to be performed by statutory functionaries had
            been rendered redundant by a court by issuing directions upon
            usurpation of statutory power. The right of a person belonging to
            a particular religious denomination may sometimes fall foul of

4 (2003) 7 SCC 546
18
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution of India. Only whence the
         fundamental right of a person is infringed by the State an action
         in relation thereto may be justified. Any right other than the
         fundamental rights contained in
Articles 25
and
26
of the
         Constitution of India may either flow from a statute or from the
         customary laws. Indisputably, a devotee will have a cause of
         action to initiate an action before the High Court when his right
         under statutory law is violated. He may also have a cause of
         action by reason of action or inaction on the part of the State or a
         statutory authority; an appropriate order is required to be passed
         or a direction is required to be issued by the High Court. In some
         cases, a person may feel aggrieved in his individual capacity, but
         the public at large may not.
59. It is trite, where a segment of the public is not interested in
         the cause, a public interest litigation would not ordinarily be
         entertained.
60. It is possible to contend that the Hindus in general and the
         devotees visiting the temple in particular are interested in proper
         management of the temple at the hands of the statutory
         functionaries. That may be so but the Act is a self-contained code.
Duties and functions are prescribed in the Act and the Rules
         framed thereunder. Forums have been created thereunder for
         ventilation of the grievances of the affected persons. Ordinarily,
         therefore, such forums should be moved at the first instance. The
         State should be asked to look into the grievances of the aggrieved
         devotees, both as parens patriae as also in discharge of its
         statutory duties.
***
63. The High Court should not have proceeded simply to
         supplant, ignore or bypass the statute. The High Court has not
         shown any strong and cogent reasons for an Administrator to
         continue in an office even after expiry of his tenure. It appears
         from the orders dated 7-2-1993 that the High Court without
         cogent and sufficient reason allowed the Administrator to
         continue in office although his term was over and he was posted
         elsewhere. He also could not have been conferred powers wider
         than Section 17 of the Act. The High Court took over the power of
         appointment of the Commissioner bypassing the procedure set
         out in the Act by calling upon the Government to furnish the
         names of 5 IAS officers to the Court so that it could exercise the
         power of appointment of the Commissioner.”
45.   Unlike the Guruvayoor Temple which was governed by Guruvayoor

Devaswom Managing Committee constituted under the
Guruvayoor

Devaswom Act, 1978
, there is no specific statute governing the Chitai Golu

Devta Temple.
19
46.   In our considered view, the High Court has not committed any error

in passing the impugned order.    The only question is, whether the order

should have been passed in the absence of the Appellant, without deciding

the Appellant’s application for impleadment.          On a perusal of the

judgment and order, it does not appear that anyone drew the attention of

the Court to pending impleadment application of the Appellant.         The

Appellant could have appeared and made submissions if she had so

chosen, even without being added as party.       In any case, other members

of the Pant family including the Respondent Nos.7 to 10, who, according to

the Appellant were in the Mandir Samiti of which the Appellant claims to

be Vice President were duly given an opportunity of hearing. We are not

inclined to interfere with the judgment and order impugned.
47.   The appeals are, accordingly, dismissed.
.………………………………….J.
                                             [ INDIRA BANERJEE ]




                                              …………………………………..J.
                                             [ J.K. MAHESHWARI ]
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 11, 2022
20