[Cites
17
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Mahadeo vs Sovan Devi on 30 August, 2022
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
Hemant Gupta
REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5876 OF 2022
                                   (ARISING OUT OF S.L.P. (C) NO. 20839 OF 2021)



          MAHADEO & ORS.                                                     .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                             VERSUS

          SMT. SOVAN DEVI & ORS.                                             .....RESPONDENT(S)




                                                      JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.             The challenge in the present appeal is to a judgment dated 19.04.2021

                         passed by the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan whereby the order

                         passed by the learned Single Judge on 13.11.2018 was upheld.
2.             Shri Bheru Lal while serving as a Sepoy in the Indian Army suffered an

                         injury on the right leg due to mine blast in the Indo-Pak war of 1965

                         which led to the amputation of his right foot. He was thereafter

                         invalidated out of service.
3.             The State has framed the Rajasthan Special Assistance to Disabled Ex-
Signature Not Verified
Servicemen            and   Dependants   of   Deceased   Defence   Personnel
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2022.08.30
18:15:36 IST
Reason:
(Allotment of Lands) Rules, 19631. Shri Bheru was a disabled ex-
          1           For short, ‘the Rules’
1
serviceman within the meaning of Rule 2(a) of the said Rules. Rule 6

     contemplated allotment of land upto 25 Bighas of irrigated or 50

     Bighas of unirrigated land. Rule 3 contemplated that these Rules shall

     apply only to the Government lands falling within the Bhakra, Chambal

     or Rajasthan Canal Project Colonies and already reserved or to be

     reserved by notification in the Official Gazette for allotment to the

     disabled ex-servicemen. Further, Rule 7 contemplated the terms and

     conditions of allotment. Sub Rule 4 was inserted on 16.02.1967 in Rule

     7 which reads thus:
“4. In case the allottee fails to take possession of the land
           allotted to him within six months from the date of allotment, the
           allotment shall be deemed to have been cancelled and the land
           shall thereupon be available for re-allotment to any other person
           under these Rules.”
4.   It appears that Shri Bheru Lal applied for allotment of land in the

     category of disabled war personnel. The Soldier Welfare Section of the

     Revenue Department of the State sent a letter to the District Collector,

     Udaipur on 19.3.1971 wherein it was conveyed that it has been

     decided to allot 25 Bighas in Village Rohikhera, Tehsil Vallabhanagar

     comprising in Khasra Nos. 133, 135 and 137. The letter reads thus:
“Rajasthan Government
                               Revenue (G) Department


     The District Collector
     Udaipur
     No: Letter No. 77, F-9(15) of Raj. Dated ….March, 1971
     Soldier Welfare Officer,
2
Office of the District Soldier Board,

        Sub – Allotment of land and possession to permanently disabled soldier Sh.
        Bharon Lal S/o Govinda Bhonyee, R/o Bhayon Ki Pancholi, Tehsil Girva,
        Ballabhgarh.
Ref : Letter No. F12(2) 22/70

        Sir,

               On the basis of recommendations and directions, approval for grant of
        land vide circular No. DS Rav. LR SS Read dated 30.09.65, out of the land
        situated at Rohi Kheda Tehsil Ballabh Garh Nagar bearing Khasra No. 133,
        135, 137 land 25 Bigha non irrigated land is allotted to permanently disabled
        soldier Sh. Bharon Lal S/o Govinda Bhonyee, R/o Bhayon Ki Pancholi, Tehsil
        Girva, Ballabhgarh.
With Regards
                                                                                          Sd/-
S.K. Bhat
                                                                              Section Officer
        Shekhawat
        19.03.71”
5.      There is no letter of allotment of land issued to the husband of the writ

        petitioner or to the writ petitioner on record in pursuance of the above

        communication. The above letter is inter-departmental communication

        and not a communication to the disabled soldier. In fact, an affidavit

        was sought from the Revenue Secretary of the Government of

        Rajasthan and in such affidavit dated 06.05.2022, it was stated as

        under:
“23. I further state that the original copy of the sanctioning letter
                  dated 19.03.1971 is not available in the office of record room of
                  the Respondent State.”
6.      Shri Bheru Lal died on 17.07.1998. The wife, Sovan Devi 2 succeeded

2    For short, the ‘writ petitioner’
3
the estate of her husband. It appears that she is working in the

Headquarters of Director General, NCC. The writ petitioner submitted a

representation while working in the Headquarters of DGNCC on

12.01.2010 that the possession of the land has not been handed over

either to her husband or to her. The writ petitioner said to the following

effect:
“To,
      Secretary
      Distt – SS & A Board
      Udaipur
      Rajasthan

             SUB: ALLOTMENT OF LAND TO DISABLED SOLDIER LATE
             SEP BHERU LAL S/O GOVIND BAOMOLI

      Sir,
            I have the honour to request that I Smt. Sovan Devi W/o
      Ex Late Sep Bheryu Lal r/o village – Boyaki Pachauli, Dist-
      Udaipur, Rajasthan.
A piece of land measuring 25 Bigha was allotted to my
      husband by Revenue Deptt Soldier Welfare of Udaipur in village
      Rohi-Ka-Khera. The Batlgar of Khasra No. 133, 134 and 135 vide
      revenue Deptt. letter No. F 12 (2) 22/70 dated 07-04-1970 but
      neither my husband (when he was alive) nor me get the
      possession of land till today.
Recently when, I visited to the site and enquired about the
      land, I found that it was sold to different people of different
      places and they got registered in the Tehsil also. I met with
      Patwari of the area and shown my paper to him, he shown me
      the records of the land sold to different people and given me a
      copy of ‘Intkal’ of different people (copy att.).
Now, through your record, I request that the case may be
      taken up with revenue Deptt, Udaipur for getting the possession
      of the land which will help me who is a widow and poor lady.
4
I shall be thankful to you for this act of kindness and
            highly obliged through out of my life.
Yours faithfully,

                                                           (Sovan Devi)
                                                           HQ DGNCC
                                                           MS(B)
                                                           WB-IV, R.K. Puram
                                                           New Delhi-110066
                                                           12 Jan 2010”
7.   On the basis of such letter, the comments of the Report of the Tehsildar

     were asked by the District Collector on 11.06.2010. The Tehsildar

     reported that land measuring 125 Bighas has been allotted to 20

     persons as mentioned in the said communication. It was also pointed

     out that remaining land measuring 31 Bighas 11 Biswas is unoccupied

     which is in Nadi (pond), i.e., land which is always filled with water. The

     District Collector communicated to the Sub-Divisional Officer on

     07.01.2011 that the land has not been registered in the name of the

     husband of the writ petitioner, nor such case was found at the level of

     Sub-Division and Tehsil. It was proposed that the case be put up in the

     Vigilance Sub-Division Level Committee in view of the fact that the

     land   stood   allotted   to   different   persons.     The    writ       petitioner

     communicated on 27.06.2011 that she has no objection if alternative

     land is allotted to her. There are subsequent communications in the

     affidavit filed by the Secretary, Revenue discussing the question of

     allotment of land to the writ petitioner. It was on 04.06.2012 that the

     District Collector communicated to the District Soldier Welfare Officer
5
that the question of allotment of land to the writ petitioner in Pancholi,

      Tehsil Girva, District Udaipur is under consideration.
8.    The writ petitioner thus filed a Writ Petition No. 4513 of 2013 raising a

      grievance that the possession of the land allotted on 19.3.1971 has not

      been handed over to her husband or to her. She averred the following:
“3. That the petitioner is at present working with HQ, DGNCC, MS
            (B), WB-IV, R.K. Puram, New Delhi-110066.
xxx                xxx                xxx
5. That on account of being invalidated out of service for his
            disability sustained during 1965 operation, the respondent no.1
            through his letter dated 19.03.1971 informed the respondent
            no.3 than as per circular no. DS/Rev LR-SSB dated 30.09.1965 as
            per legitimate recommendation Shri Bheru Lal has been
            sanctioned to be allotted 25 bighas of un-irrigated agricultural
            land of Khasra No. 133, 135 & 137 of village Rohi-kheda Tehsil
            Vallabh Nagar, District-Udaipur.”
9.    The High Court passed various orders to ensure possession of the land

      given to her. In an affidavit filed by the Sub-Divisional Officer,

      Vallabhanagar, District Udaipur, before the High Court, it was stated

      that the request of the writ petitioner for allotment of alternative land

      was considered by the Allotment Advisory Committee on 19.08.2015

      wherein, Survey No. 209 measuring 25 Bighas out of total 101.15

      Bighas, Village Sagatpura was recommended to be allotted to the writ

      petitioner. The allotment letter was attached with the affidavit.
10.   The learned Single Judge found that the alternative land offered to the

      writ petitioner is located at a very remote/far off area and is not
6
cultivable and therefore, a direction was issued to give possession of

the land originally allotted to the writ petitioner. It was held as under:
“……. Manifestly, with efflux of time, the Khasras Nos. 133, 135
      and 137 have gained proximity with the National Highway and as
      a consequence, the value thereof must have spiralled up
      significantly. The alternate land offered to the petitioner vide
      order dated 19.08.2015 is located in a very remote/far off area
      and is not cultivable. Thus, the petitioner is perfectly justified in
      claiming that the original allotment letter should be honoured
      and enforced. The allotment was made to an Ex-serviceman who
      became disabled in the war filed and thus, technicalities and
      pedantic approach of the government officials can in no manner
      be appreciated or allowed to come in way of his widow i.e. the
      petitioner herein while considering her lawful claim for the land
      allotted to her husband. The initial opposition to the petitioner’s
      claim for allotment of land in the self-same Khasras as put forth
      by the respondents was that it was falling within the catchment
      area. The said plea is totally falsified from the Tehsildar’s letter
      dated 03.08.2018 (reproduced supra) Shri Sunil Joshi associate
      to Shri Rajesh Panwar, AAG candidly conceded during arguments
      that the report of the revenue authorities was misunderstood by
      the concerned Government Counsel who made this inadvertent
      admission in the Court on 19.09.2018. Manifestly, this approach
      of the State Counsel in presenting twisted facts for opposing the
      plea of the petitioner is absolutely depreciable. On a plain
      reading of various reports/communications of the revenue
      authorities, it is clear that the remaining land of the subject
      Khasras is not reserved as catchment area in the revenue
      record. It is only because of natural contours of the terrain, water
      gets collected thereupon and thus, casual description is given to
      the remaining 31 bighas land of Khasra Nos. 133, 135 and 137
      as a nadi. However, it is not the case of the respondents that
      water remains accumulated on the chunk of land in question all
      year around. This accumulation is reported only during the
      monsoon period. This problem can be resolved easily by
      pumping the water out. Otherwise also, since the petitioner
      insists that she is ready to accept the plot of land in the same
      condition it exists, manifestly, the respondents have no business
      to deprive the petitioner from her lawful claim thereupon on
      frivolous premises.
In view of the fact that there is no legal impediment so as
7
to deprive the petitioner from seeking possession of the land
            allotted to her late husband (a war disabled ex-serviceman) and
            as, 31 bighas of vacant land is admittedly available in the
            disputed Khasras, this Court is of the firm view that the
            respondents should be directed to hand over possession of 25
            bighas of land from the subject Khasras to the petitioner as per
            her lawful entitlement.”
11.   An intra-court appeal preferred by the State remained unsuccessful. It

      has come on record that the land in question was allotted to the writ

      petitioner. The allottees who were allotted the land as mentioned in the

      report have challenged the order passed by the High Court when an

      attempt was made to evict the appellants from the said land which was

      cultivated by them allegedly for more than 60 years.
12.   The appellants came to know about the order passed by the High Court

      for the first time on 27.09.2021 when they filed a civil suit before the

      Court of Senior Civil Judge, Vallabhanagar. Since the order was passed

      by the High Court allotting land to the writ petitioner, the appellants

      approached this Court for challenging the order passed by the High

      Court.
13.   The High Court had gone out of the way to order possession of land

      which was never proceeded with letter of allotment in favour of the

      writ petitioner. The approach of the High Court is most unfortunate.
14.   It is well settled that inter-departmental communications are in the

      process of consideration for appropriate decision and cannot be relied

      upon as a basis to claim any right. This Court examined the said
8
question in a judgment reported as
Omkar Sinha v. Sahadat Khan3
.
Reliance was placed on
Bachhittar Singh v. State of Punjab4
to hold

       that merely writing something on the file does not amount to an order.

       Before something amounts to an order of the State Government, two

       things are necessary. First, the order has to be expressed in the name

       of the Governor as required by clause (1) of
Article 166
and second, it

       has to be communicated. As already indicated, no formal order

       modifying the decision of the Revenue Secretary was ever made. Until

       such an order is drawn up, the State Government cannot, in our

       opinion, be regarded as bound by what was stated in the file.
The said

       judgment was followed in
K.S.B. Ali v. State of Andhra Pradesh5
,

       and
Dyna Technologies Pvt. Ltd. v. Crompton Greaves Limited6
.

       In Bachhittar Singh, it has been held as under:
“8. What we have now to consider is the effect of the
                    note recorded by the Revenue Minister of PEPSU upon
                    the file. We will assume for the purpose of this case that
                    it is an order. Even so, the question is whether it can be
                    regarded as the order of the State Government which
                    alone, as admitted by the appellant, was competent to
                    hear and decide an appeal from the order of the Revenue
                    Secretary.
Article 166(1)
of the Constitution requires that
                    all executive action of the Government of a State shall be
                    expressed in the name of the Governor. Clause (2) of
Article 166
provides for the authentication of orders and
                    other instruments made and executed in the name of the
                    Governor. Clause (3) of that article enables the Governor
                    to make rules for the more convenient transaction of the
                    business of the Government and for the allocation among

3   2022 SCC OnLine SC 601
4    AIR 1963 SC 395
5   (2018) 11 SCC 277
6   (2019) 20 SCC 1
9
the Ministers of the said business. What the appellant
calls an order of the State Government is admittedly not
expressed to be in the name of the Governor. But with
that point we shall deal later. What we must first
ascertain is whether the order of the Revenue Minister is
an order of the State Government i.e. of the Governor. In
this connection we may refer to Rule 25 of the Rules of
Business of the Government of PEPSU which reads thus:
“Except as otherwise provided by any other Rule,
    cases shall ordinarily be disposed of by or under
    the authority of the Minister in charge who may
    by means of standing orders give such directions
    as he thinks fit for the disposal of cases in the
    Department. Copies of such standing orders shall
    be sent to the Rajpramukh and the Chief
    Minister.”

According to learned counsel for the appellant his appeal
pertains to the department which was in charge of the
Revenue Minister and, therefore, he could deal with it.
His decision and order would, according to him, be the
decision and order of the State Government. On behalf of
the State reliance was, however, placed on Rule 34 which
required certain classes of cases to be submitted to the
Rajpramukh and the Chief Minister before the issue of
orders. But it was conceded during the course of the
argument that a case of the kind before us does not fall
within that rule. No other provision bearing on the point
having been brought to our notice we would, therefore,
hold that the Revenue Minister could make an order on
behalf of the State Government.
9. The question, therefore, is whether he did in fact make
such an order. Merely writing something on the file does
not amount to an order. Before something amounts to an
order of the State Government two things are necessary.
The order has to be expressed in the name of the
Governor as required by clause (1) of
Article 166
and
then it has to be communicated. As already indicated, no
formal order modifying the decision of the Revenue
Secretary was ever made. Until such an order is drawn
up the State Government cannot, in our opinion, be
regarded as bound by what was stated in the file. As long
as the matter rested with him the Revenue Minister could
10
well score out his remarks or minutes on the file and
                      write fresh ones.
xxx               xxx                     xxx
11. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the remarks or
                       the order of the Revenue Minister, PEPSU are of no avail
                       to the appellant.”
15.      This Court in
Municipal Committee v. Jai Narayan & Co.7
held that

         a noting recorded in the file is merely a noting simpliciter and nothing

         more. It merely represents expression of an opinion by the particular

         individual. It was held as under:
“16. This Court in a judgment reported as
State of
                  Uttaranchal v. Sunil Kumar Vaish
, (2011) 8 SCC 670 held that a
                  noting recorded in the file is merely a noting simpliciter and
                  nothing more. It merely represents expression of opinion by the
                  particular individual. By no stretch of imagination, such noting
                  can be treated as a decision of the Government. It was held as
                  under:
“24. A noting recorded in the file is merely a noting
                      simpliciter and nothing more. It merely represents
                      expression of opinion by the particular individual. By no
                      stretch of imagination, such noting can be treated as a
                      decision of the Government. Even if the competent
                      authority records its opinion in the file on the merits of
                      the matter under consideration, the same cannot be
                      termed as a decision of the Government unless it is
                      sanctified and acted upon by issuing an order in
                      accordance with
Articles 77(1)
and
(2)
or
Articles 166(1)
and
(2).
The noting in the file or even a decision gets
                      culminated into an order affecting right of the parties
                      only when it is expressed in the name of the President or
                      the Governor, as the case may be, and authenticated in
                      the manner provided in
Article 77(2)
or
Article 166(2).
A
                      noting or even a decision recorded in the file can always
                      be reviewed/reversed/overruled or overturned and the
                      court cannot take cognizance of the earlier noting or

7     2022 SCC OnLine SC 376
11
decision for exercise of the power of judicial review.
(See
State of Punjab v. Sodhi Sukhdev Singh
AIR 1961 SC
                493, Bachhittar Singh v. State of Punjab,
AIR 1963 SC
                395, State of Bihar v. Kripalu Shankar
(
1987) 3 SCC
                34, Rajasthan Housing Board v. Shri Kishan
(
1993) 2 SCC
                84, Sethi Auto Service Station v. DDA
(
2009) 1 SCC
                180 and Shanti Sports Club v. Union of India
(2009) 15
                SCC 705).”
17. Thus, the letter seeking approval of the State
                Government by the Deputy Commissioner is not the
                approval granted by him, which could be enforced by the
                plaintiff in the court of law.”
16.   The basis of the claim of the writ petitioner is a letter written by the

      Secretary of the Soldier Welfare Department to the District Collector,

      Udaipur on 19.03.1971 for allotment of land. The Rules contemplate

      that if the possession is not taken within 6 months, the allotment shall

      be deemed to have been cancelled. Firstly, the inter-departmental

      communication dated 19.03.1971 cannot be treated to be a letter of

      allotment. Alternatively, even if it is considered to be a letter of

      allotment, the writ petitioner could not claim possession on the basis of

      such communication after more than 30 years in terms of the Rules

      applicable for allotment of land to the disabled ex-servicemen.
17.   The disabled ex-serviceman had not taken any action for almost 27

      years after the so-called letter of allotment during his life time. It

      appears that the writ petitioner was appointed at the office of Director

      General of NCC and thereafter, the process of possession was initiated

      by her. Still further, the alternative land was allotted to the writ

      petitioner on the strength of the interim orders passed by the Court
12
from time to time calling upon the officers of the State in Court. The

      proceedings show an extra interest taken by the High Court, and not in

      respect of mere allotment of land but also of the land which was once

      allotted and is now close to the National Highway. The manner in which

      the matter has been dealt with by the High Court under the guise of

      help to disabled ex-serviceman is wholly unwarranted.
18.   Therefore, we find that the writ petition filed by the writ petitioner is

      wholly misconceived, mischievous with collateral motives and may be

      having the patronage of the officers/officials.
19.   Consequently, the appeal is allowed. The order passed by the High

      Court is set aside with no order as to costs.
.............................................J.
                                                                (HEMANT GUPTA)



                                           .............................................J.
                                                                   (VIKRAM NATH)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 30, 2022.
13