[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Gopal Meena on 10 August, 2022
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
Hemant Gupta
REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3314 OF 2010



          UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                              .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                           VERSUS

          GOPAL MEENA & ORS.                                            .....RESPONDENT(S)


                                                        WITH

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5933 OF 2010

                                                          AND

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9436 OF 2010




                                                   JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.             The present three appeals have been preferred by the Union of

                         India; two appeals viz. Civil Appeal No. 3314 of 2010 and Civil

                         Appeal No. 5933 of 2010 arise out of an order passed by the Central

                         Administrative Tribunal1, affirmed by the High Court of Delhi and

                         High Court of Punjab & Haryana, directing separate zone of
Signature Not Verified   consideration for promotion of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
candidates to the post of Superintendent in the Customs and
Date: 2022.08.10
17:10:58 IST
Reason:
1           For short, the ‘Tribunal’
1
Central Excise Commissionerate from the post of Inspector, whereas

        the Civil Appeal No. 9436 of 2010 is directed against a similar

        direction by the High Court of Delhi but in respect of Indo-Tibetan

        Border Police for promotion to the post of Assistant Commandant

        from the post of Subedar Major Stenographer.
2.      For the sake of brevity, the facts are quoted from the Civil Appeal

        No. 3314 of 2010. The grievance of the applicants 2, belonging to the

        Scheduled Tribes, was that there is backlog of vacancies for the post

        of Superintendent which have not been filled up for the reason that

        the candidates are not available within the zone of consideration.

        Therefore, to fill up the 29 posts of Superintendent, it was prayed

        that a separate zone of consideration be created for the Scheduled

        Tribe      candidates      so    that     the    vacancies       in    the    cadre   of

        Superintendent meant for them could be filled up.
3.      The Tribunal found that the Office Memorandum dated 30.9.1983

        which restricted the zone of consideration to five times of the posts

        to be illegal. Reliance was placed upon the orders passed by this

        Court in U.P. Rajya Vidyut Parishad SC/ST Karamchari Kalyan

        Sangh v. U.P. State Electricity Board & Ors.3;
C.D. Bhatia &

        Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.4
; and,
Basudeo Anil & Ors. v.

        Union of India & Ors.5
wherein the Office Memorandum dated

        30.9.1983 restricting the zone of consideration was found to be

        illegal.
2    For short, the ‘candidates’
3    Civil Appeal No. 4026 of 1988 decided on 23.11.1994
4    Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 14566 of 1995 decided on 20.10.1995
5    Civil Appeal No. 1194 of 1992 decided on 7.9.2000
2
4.   The attention of the Court was drawn to the earlier Office

     Memorandum dated 24.12.1980 which contemplated that the zone

     of consideration can be extended to five times the number of

     vacancies and the Scheduled Tribe candidates (and not any other)

     coming within the extended field of choice, should also be

     considered against the vacancies reserved for them. The relevant

     extract reads thus:
“(a) The Department Promotion Committee (DPC) shall for
           'the purpose of determining the number of officers who
           should be considered from out of those eligible officers in the
           feeder grade(s) restrict the field of choice as under, with
           reference to the number of clear regular vacancies proposed
           to be filled in the year.
No. of vacancies       No. of officers to be considered
           (1)                    (2)
1                      5
2                      8
3                      10
4 or more              three times the number of vacancies
(b) Where, however, the number of eligible officer in the
           feeder grade(s) is less than the number in Col. (2) above, all
           the officers so eligible should be considered.
(c)Where adequate number of SC/ST candidates are not
           available within the normal field of choice as above, the field
           of choice may be extended to 5 times the number of
           vacancies and the SC/ST candidates (and not any other)
           coming within the extended field of choice, should also be
           considered against the vacancies reserved for them.
Officers belonging to SC/ST selected for promotion against
           vacancies reserved for them from out of the extended field of
           choice under sub para (e) above, would however be placed en
           bloc below all the other officers selected from within the
           normal field of choice.”
5.   It is thereafter, an Office Memorandum was issued on 30.4.1983 for
3
regulating   ad-hoc promotions for consideration of cases for

     Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe candidates with reference to

     an earlier Office Memorandum dated 6.4.1979. The relevant clauses

     read thus:
“3. Since ad hoc promotions are made on the basis of
           seniority-cum-fitness, all the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
           Tribes candidates covered in the relevant seniority list within
           the total number of such vacancies against which ad hoc
           promotions are to be made, should be considered in the order
           of their general seniority as per the gradation list, on the
           principle of seniority-cum-fitness and if they are not adjudged
           unfit, they should all be promoted on adhoc basis.
4. If, however, the number of SC/ST candidates found fit
           within the range of actual vacancies is less than the number
           of vacancies identified as falling to their share if the
           vacancies were filled on a regular basis vide (2) above then
           additional SC/ST candidates to the extent requested should
           be located by going down the seniority list, provided they are
           eligible and found fit for such ad hoc appointment. This
           procedure should be adopted on every occasion on which ad
           hoc appointment is resorted to.
xx                  xx                   xx
7. For regular promotions when eventually made the
           procedures and instructions
laid down in
the Brochure will
           continue to apply.”
6.   Another Office Memorandum was issued on 30.9.1983 pertaining to

     ad-hoc   promotion      by   the    Department      of    Personnel     and

     Administrative Reforms wherein the zone of consideration for

     Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe candidates was restricted up

     to five times. The relevant clause reads thus:
“2. It has not been decided that the Scheduled
           Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidates who are within the
           number of actual vacancies should be considered in
           accordance with their general seniority on the principle of
4
seniority cum fitness and if they are not adjudged unfit, they
           should all be promoted on ad hoc basis. If, however, the
           number of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidates
           found fit within the range of actual vacancies is less than the
           number of vacancies identified as falling to their share, than
           additional Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidates to
           the extent required should be located by going down the
           seniority list but within 5 times the number of vacancies
           being filled on a particular occasion, subject, of course, to
           their eligibility and fitness.”
7.   The order in Basudeo Anil dealt with Office Memorandums dated

     30.4.1983 and 30.9.1983 wherein the appeal was allowed and it was

     held that the condition of restricting the number of Scheduled Caste

     and Scheduled Tribe candidates to five times of the total number of

     such vacancies as provided in Office Memorandum dated 30.9.1983

     is not legal. It was observed as under:
“In the aforesaid premises, the question for consideration is
           whether by the subsequent Office Memorandum dated 30 th
           September, 1983 can it be said that the rights of the reserved
           category candidates to get their due has been taken away. It
           is undisputed that in the service in question there has been a
           specified percentage of reservation, and in fact that was
           reflected also in the Office Memorandum of April, 1983, which
           provided for the procedure to be adopted for appointment of
           the Vice-Principal on ad-hoc basis. We see no reason for
           issuance of the second Memorandum of the 30 th September,
           1983, which in fact taken away the rights conferred upon the
           reserved category candidates under the Office Memorandum
           of the 30th April, 1983, and which is also in accordance with
           the constitutional mandate. In that view of the matter, we
           quash the subsequent Office memorandum dated 30th
           September, 1983 issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs in the
           Department of Personnel and allow this appeal.”
8.   The Office Memorandum dated 30.9.1983 was thus withdrawn on

     15.3.2002 in view of the judgment of this Court in Basudeo Anil

     and it was held that ad-hoc promotions would be regulated as per
5
instructions   dated   30.4.1983.   The    relevant   clause   of   Office

     Memorandum dated 15.3.2002 reads thus:
“2. The Supreme Court in its judgement dated 7 .9.2000 in
           the case of Union of India and others Vs. Shri. Basudeo Anil
           and others (Civil Appeal No.1194/1992) has quashed the
           Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms O.M.
           No.36011/14/83- Estt.(SCT) dated 30.9.1983.         It has,
           therefore, been decided to withdraw the Department of
           Personnel and Administrative Reforms' O,M. No.36011/14/83-
           Estt.(SCT) dated 30.9.1983 with immediate effect. Thus
           claims of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribe candidates in
           the matter of ad hoc promotions would henceforth be
           regulated as per instructions contained in Department of
           Personnel and Administrative Reforms' O.M.No.36011/14/83-
           Estt.(SCT) dated 30.4.1983.”
9.   An Office Memorandum was issued on 22.4.1992 wherein zone of

     consideration of officers for promotion by selection was prescribed

     in continuation of Office Memorandum dated 24.12.1980.                 The

     relevant extract reads thus:
“In this Department's O.M. No. 2201 1/3/76-Estt. (D) dated
           the 24th December, 1980 the zone of consideration of officers
           for promotion by selection was prescribed as under:-
No. of vacancies        No. of officers to be considered
1                       5
2                       8
3                       10
4 or more               three times the number of vacancies

           It was also laid down that where adequate number of SC/ST
           candidates are not available within the normal field of choice
           as indicated above, the field of choice may be extended to
           five times the number of vacancies and the SC/ST (and not
           any other) coming within me extended field of choice be
           considered against the vacancies reserved for them. This
           provision relating to an extended zone of five times the
           number of vacancies in respect of SC/ST has been retained in
           O.M. No, 22011/5/86-Estt. (D) dated 10.3.89 and 10.4.89 and
           also in O.M No 22011/1/90-Estt. (D) dated 12.10.90 in which
           the normal zone of consideration for general category was
           reduced for vacancies numbering 5 and above,
6
2. It is hereby clarified that the intention is to have an
           extended zone of five times the number of vacancies in all
           cases where adequate number of SC/ST candidates are not
           available in the normal zone of a smaller size. For a single
           vacancy, since the normal zone itself is 5 i.e. five times the
           number of vacancies there is no intention to extend the zone.
The normal zone and the extended zone for vacancies will
           accordingly be as follows :
No. of vacancies    Normal Zone              Zone           for
                                                        consideration for
                                                        SC/ST
1                   5                        5
2                   8                        10
3                   10                       15
4                   12                       20
5 and above         Twice the number of      5    times    the
                               vacancies + 4            number          of
                                                        vacancies
                                                                              ”
10.   Subsequently, another Office Memorandum was issued on 6.1.2006.
It was communicated after review of                the size of zone of

      consideration as under:
“The size of zone of consideration for, promotion by
           'selection' as prescribed vide DoPT O.M. No. 22011/1/90-
           Estt.D dated 12th October 1990 read with O.M. No. 22011 /
           1/90-Estt- (D) dated 22nd April 1992 is as under:
No. of vacancies    Normal size of zone      Extended Zone of
                               of consideration         consideration for
                                                        SC/ST
1                   5                        5
2                   8                        10
3                   10                       15
4                   12                       20
5 and above         Twice the number of      5    times    the
                               vacancies + 4            number         of
                                                        vacancies

                      xx                   xx                    xx
2.          ...............Accordingly, a need has arisen for review
           of the size of zone of consideration. Having a size of zone of
7
consideration larger than is necessary in the revised context
            would lead to unnecessary paper work, which may also lead
            to delay in convening DPCs. However, the zone of
            consideration has still to be wide enough to cater to the
            needs of the Department/cadre authorities for giving an
            extended panel against empanelled officers who are on
            deputation or are expected to proceed shortly; who have
            retired or will be retiring in the course of the vacancy year or
            who have refused promotion and are under debarment. The
            size should also be sufficient to take care of officers in the
            feeder grade whose cases are to be placed in 'sealed cover'
            and also of those who do not meet the prescribed benchmark.
Thus, there is a need for optimizing the size of zone of
            consideration.
3. The matter has been considered carefully. Keeping in view
            the considerations in para-2 above, it has been decided to
            modify the existing provisions relating to size of zone of
            consideration as under:”
11.   The argument of Ms. Bhati is that the order in U.P. Rajya Vidyut

      Parishad SC/ST Karamchari Kalyan Sangh is a consent order,

      which cannot be treated as precedent, which is evident from the

      following operative part of the order:
“In view of the averments made in the affidavit quoted above,
            it is not necessary for us to go into the various questions
            canvassed before us. The contentions of the appellants before
            us have been substantially met with by the Board. In view of
            the stand taken by the Board in its aforesaid affidavit, the
            judgement of the High Court was become redundant and it
            shall not be operative. The appeal is disposed of with no order
            as to costs.”
12.   In C.D. Bhatia, this Court had passed an order based upon the

      order in U.P. Rajya Vidyut Parishad SC/ST Karamchari Kalyan

      Sangh giving liberty to the petitioner to approach the Government

      in order to seek enforcement of the law laid down. The operative
8
part of the said order is as under:
“We are, however, of the view that the law laid down by this
                Court in U.P. Rajya Vidyut Parishad's Case is binding on all the
                authorities including the Union of India. The petitioner may, if
                so advised, approach the Government seeking enforcement
                of the law laid by this Court. Special leave petitions are
                disposed of.”
13.      It is contended that the order in C.D. Bhatia is an order in a Special

         Leave Petition affirming an order passed by the Tribunal, thus

         cannot be treated to be a precedent. Reliance is placed upon an

         order passed by this Court in
Kunhayammed v. State of Kerala
6,

         and
Khoday Distilleries Ltd. v. Sri Mahadeshwara Sahakara

         Sakkare Karkhane Ltd.7
. It was further argued that both orders,

         as
referred above
, were referred to in Basudeo Anil, but the fact

         that order in U.P. Rajya Vidyut Parishad SC/ST Karamchari

         Kalyan Sangh was based upon a concession and the order in C.D.

         Bhatia was an order in Special Leave Petition was not brought to

         the notice of the Court. Moreover, the Office Memorandums dated

         24.12.1980,     and    dated    22.4.1992     dealing    with   substantive

         promotion by the Departmental Promotion Committee were not

         brought to the notice of the Court.
14.      It has been further contended that there cannot be a separate zone

         of consideration for each category of the officials. The zone of

         consideration is in respect of the candidates falling in the seniority

         list. The candidates belonging to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled

         Tribe were given relaxation to extend zone of consideration up to

6     (2000) 6 SCC 359
7     (2019) 4 SCC 376
9
five times of the vacancies. It is argued that the effect of the order

      passed by the High Court would be that all eligible candidates, at

      whatever position in the seniority list, would fall within the zone of

      consideration, though they may be lowest in the list. Such creation

      of zone of consideration is not in consonance with the efficiency in

      the service.   Still further, enlarging the zone of consideration for

      Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe to five times cannot be said to

      be arbitrary, irrational or illegal, which could be struck down in

      exercise of power of judicial review.
15.     The issue in     Basudeo Anil was restricted to the Office

      Memorandum dated 30.9.1983 which was a clarification to the

      Office   Memorandum      dated   30.4.1983   in   respect   of   ad-hoc

      promotions. The regular or substantive promotions have to be

      carried by Office Memorandum dated 24.12.1980 or other Office

      Memorandums issued from time to time.
16.   The Office Memorandum dated 30.4.1983 was not to amend the

      Office Memorandum dated 24.12.1980. This OM was in reference to

      Office Memorandum dated 16.4.1979 asking the Departments to

      resort to ad-hoc promotions, when it becomes inescapable in public

      interest. For regular promotions, the procedural instructions
laid

      down in
the brochure was to apply (Clause 7 of the OM dated

      30.4.1983). Therefore, the Office Memorandum dated 30.4.1983

      was only dealing with ad-hoc promotions and not with substantive

      promotions. Hence, the office Memorandum dated 24.12.1980

      would continue to apply in respect of substantive promotions.
10
17.      On the other hand, Dr. M.P. Raju, learned counsel for the candidates

         quoted the order passed by the High Court and contended that

         there are about 29 posts of Superintendent in the Custom and

         Central Excise Commissionerate which are required to be filled up

         by Scheduled Tribe candidates. The said posts have not been filled

         up only for the reason that reasonable number of Scheduled Tribe

         candidates do not come within the zone of consideration. Therefore,

         the order of the High Court is fair and reasonable so as to give

         effective meaning to the policy of reservation for the Scheduled

         Caste and Scheduled Tribe. Reliance is based upon the three orders,

         as mentioned above.
In addition thereto, reliance has been placed

         upon a judgment of this Court reported as
R.K. Sabharwal & Ors.

         v. State of Punjab & Ors.8
to contend that filling of posts or

         vacancies through reservation has to be post-based and that the

         roster points meant for Scheduled Tribes should only be filled by the

         Scheduled Tribes alone. Thus, applying the principle of reservation,

         general category and reserved category have to be treated

         separately and without clubbing. It was thus argued that there has

         to be a separate zone for each category i.e., for general, Scheduled

         Caste and Scheduled Tribe, rather than the common seniority list

         which is prevalent for determining zone of consideration for

         promotion. Accordingly, a separate zone of consideration for the

         Scheduled Tribe candidates is in fact the only way to give effect to

         the reservation policy.
8     (1995) 2 SCC 745
11
18.      It is also contended that after the year 2002, if the backlog

         vacancies are not filled up, the Union can de-reserve those

         vacancies, thus, jeopardizing the interests of the reserved category

         candidates. It is argued that a joint zone of consideration is thus a

         gross violation of
Article 16 (4A)
of the Constitution. The basic

         reason for non-filing of backlog vacancies in promotion quota is the

         application of a common zone of consideration which is prepared as

         field of choice for promotion. It is also averred that present matter

         is a case of a special drive to fill the backlog vacancies reserved for

         Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe candidates in promotion

         quota, therefore, the inclusion of general category candidates while

         preparing zone of consideration for promotion seems to be illogical

         and against the very purpose of reservation. Therefore, separate

         non-joint zone of consideration should be prepared for each

         Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe category without including

         general category candidates.     Reliance is placed upon
Chebrolu

         Leela Prasad Rao & Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors.9
wherein the classification limiting the zone of consideration was

         found to be illegal, unreasonable and arbitrary.
Reference was also

         made to Ajit Singh & Ors. (II) v. State of Punjab & Ors.10,
S.B.

         Mathur & Ors. v. Chief Justice of Delhi High
Court &
Ors. 11 and

         Duddilla Srinivasa Sharma & Ors. v. V. Chrysolite12
to contend

         that limiting the zone of consideration and shortlisting the
9     (2021) 11 SCC 401
10    (1999) 7 SCC 209
11    1989 Supp (1) SCC 34
12    (2013) 16 SCC 702
12
candidates has to be reasonable, non-arbitrary, rational and having

      a nexus with the objective sought to be achieved.
Dr. Raju has also
placed reliance upon
P. Sheshadri v. Union of India & Anr.13
to

      contend that joint select lists for Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe

      and general category would defeat the purpose of reservation by

      pushing the eligible Scheduled Tribe candidate out of the zone of

      consideration.
19.   We have heard learned counsel for the parties and find that the

      entire case of the candidates has been projected in untenable

      manner.
20.   In P. Sheshadri, the Office Memorandum dated 24.12.1980,

      referred to by the learned counsel for the appellant, along with the

      other     Office   Memorandums        were     the   subject    matter    of

      consideration. This Court held as under:
“11. …..Further clause (ii) of para 2.3.2. of OM dated 10-3-
              1989 contemplates that selection against vacancies reserved
              for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes will be made only
              from those Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe officers who are
              within the normal zone of consideration prescribed by the
              Department of Personnel and AR vide OM No. 22011 dated
              24-12-1980. It further contemplates that where (sic adequate)
              number of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidates are
              not available within the normal field of choice, it may be
              extended to five times the number of vacancies and
              Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidates (and not any
              other) coming within the extended field of choice, should also
              be considered against the vacancies reserved for them. If
              candidates from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
              obtained on the basis of merit with due regard to seniority, on
              the same basis as others, are less than the number of
              vacancies reserved for them, the difference should be made
              up by selecting candidates of these communities, who are in
              the zone of consideration, irrespective of merit and

13 (1995) 3 SCC 552
13
benchmark but who are considered for promotion and officers
              belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes selected
              for promotion against vacancies reserved for them from
              within the extended field of choice would however be placed
              en bloc below all the other officers selected from within the
              normal field of choice….”
21.   We find that the Tribunal and the High Courts have missed the real

      controversy. The Government of India had issued an Office

      Memorandum dated 26.8.2004 to fill backlog vacancies reserved for

      Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe in promotion quota as a

      special drive.    Such Office Memorandum was not relating to the

      Customs and Central Excise Commissionerate or the Indo Tibetan

      Border Police but to all the employees of the Central Government.

      The candidates in the Office of Customs and Central Excise

      Commissionerate submitted representations for consideration for

      promotion to the grade of Superintendents.          Such representations

      were rejected on 4.2.2005.           The reason for rejection of the

      representation was that the officers had joined Central Excise Delhi

      Zone as Inspectors on inter-Commissionerate on transfer basis in

      2003.    Therefore, they are too juniors to be included even in the

      extended zone of consideration.
22.   Such communication was challenged by the candidates by an

      application under
Section 19
of the Administrative Tribunal Act,

      1985.    The reliance was placed upon the three orders in U.P. Rajya

      Vidyut     Parishad     SC/ST    Karamchari      Kalyan    Sangh; C.D.

      Bhatia; and, Basudeo Anil.           Considering the said orders, the

      Tribunal returned the following findings:
14
“27. However, we find that DoPT is not made as a party
           before us. Be that as it may, the fact remains that applicants
           who had not been in the zone of consideration, yet in the
           wake of unfilled quota for ST de-reservation or thereafter
           backlog vacancies is not a correct procedure followed by
           respondents.
28. We have also in mind the law
laid down by
the Apex
           Court that total reservation should not exceed 50%.
Accordingly, when the requisite percentage of quota of each
           reserved category is satisfied then post-based roster shall
           come into effect. The above methodology shall also hold
           good while filling up the quota for ST.
29. In the result, for the foregoing reasons, this OA is partly
           allowed. Impugned order is set aside. Respondents are
           directed to take up the matter of extension of same treatment
           which has been meted out to SC/ST candidates in ad hoc
           promotions vide DoPT OM dated 15.3.2002 to be extended in
           regular promotions as well and on forwarding a copy of this
           order to the DoPT after consideration of our observations and
           decisions of the Apex Court and on a decision taken by the
           DoPT respondents shall consider applicants for promotion to
           the posts of Superintendents in their reserved quota and till
           then, if not already done, shall neither de-reserve the backlog
           vacancies meant for ST categories nor fill up these posts in
           any manner whatsoever. No costs.”
23.   The order impugned in the Original Application was the order dated

      4.2.2005 rejecting the representations of some of the candidates for

      promotion that the candidates have joined Central Excise (Delhi

      Zone) as Inspector on Inter Commissionerate transfer basis in the

      year 2003. The Tribunal has not examined the question of seniority

      on account of Inter Commissionerate transfer.          The order dated

      4.2.2005 was set aside and a direction was issued to grant same

      treatment to SC/ST candidates in ad hoc promotions as well as in

      regular promotions.
24.   After
the said decision
of the Tribunal, DoPT issued revised
15
guidelines for optimizing the size of zone of consideration on

      6.1.2006 independent of the order of the Tribunal dated 19.10.2005,

      which has been adversely commented upon by the Tribunal.
25.   We find that there are three situation of promotion which are

      required to be examined.    One is backlog vacancies for which an

      Office Memorandum dated 26.8.2004 was issued. Second is ad hoc

      promotions for which an Office Memorandum dated 30.4.1983 was

      issued followed by 30.9.1983 and 7.9.2000. Clause 7 of the Office

      Memorandum of 30.4.1983, as reproduced above, specifically states

      that, for regular promotions, procedures and instructions
laid down

      in
the Brochure will continue to apply.
For regular promotions, Office

      Memorandum has been issued on 24.12.1980, 22.4.1992 and

      6.1.2006 wherein zone of consideration was prescribed keeping in

      view the number of vacancies which are to be filled up.
26.   In the Original Application later filed, the candidates challenged the

      Office Memorandum dated 6.1.2006 which is in relation to regular

      promotions. There is no parity between backlog vacancies covered

      in Office Memorandum dated 26.8.2004 and the regular promotion

      covered in Office Memorandum dated 24.12.1980 and/or 6.1.2006.

      Therefore, the Tribunal as well as the High Court have completely

      missed the issue involved in the subsequent applications filed by

      the candidates.   The grievance of the candidates, first in Original

      Application No. 688 of 2005 was only filling up of backlog vacancies

      and not regular or ad hoc promotions. The Tribunal and the High

      Court had missed the distinction between ad hoc promotions and
16
the regular promotions to be made through Departmental Promotion

      Committee (DPC).
27.   The validity of Office Memorandum dated 24.12.1980 has been

      upheld by this Court in P. Sheshadri.       Since the validity of the

      Office Memorandum has been upheld, the validity cannot be put to

      test again on the basis of Office Memorandum for filling up the

      backlog vacancies or ad hoc promotion.
28.   The distinction between a special drive for filling up backlog

      vacancies and regular promotion to candidates both from the

      reserved and the unreserved categories, is too obvious. While filling

      up vacancies by way of promotion on regular basis, a DPC is

      constituted and the profile of the candidates coming within the zone

      of consideration is prepared. But in a special drive for filling up the

      backlog vacancies meant for reserved category candidates, such an

      exercise become redundant. This is because all candidates who will

      be considered for promotion, in a special drive, will invariably belong

      to the same reserved category, as otherwise it will cease to be a

      special drive.
29.   Similarly, the exercise undertaken for filling up vacancies on ad hoc

      basis, stands on a different footing from the exercise undertaken for

      the grant of regular promotions.     The High Court as well as the

      Tribunal fell into error on two aspects namely: -
(i)   They did not address the issue whether there was a special

            recruitment drive for filling up of backlog vacancies and

            whether there was a failure to consider the case of the
17
respondents; and
(ii)   They applied the yardstick meant for ad hoc promotions to the

            case of regular promotions, though the case of the candidates

            was for unfilled backlog vacancies. This fundamental error of

            focus has resulted in the Tribunal and the High Court

            answering a question that did not arise.
1.   Therefore, we find the orders of the High Courts are clearly

     erroneous and not sustainable in law.         Consequently, the orders

     passed for regular promotion by extending the zone of consideration

     do not arise. The same are set aside and the appeals are allowed.
.............................................J.
                                                            (HEMANT GUPTA)



                                       .............................................J.
                                                               (VIKRAM NATH)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 10, 2022.
18