[Cites
5
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Dibaker Nunia vs The State Of Assam on 30 August, 2022
Author:
Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
,
Dinesh Maheshwari
REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 962 OF 2011


     DIBAKER NUNIA & ANR.                                                   .....Appellant(s)


                          Vs.

     THE STATE OF ASSAM                                                     ....Respondent(s)


                                                 J U D G M E N T
DINESH MAHESHWARI,J.
1.                   This appeal is directed against the judgment and order

     dated 17.09.2009, as passed by the Gauhati High Court in Criminal

     Appeal No. 79 of 2006, whereby the High Court has dismissed the

     appeal              filed   by   the    present   appellants     and   has     affirmed    the

     judgment             and    order   dated     16.02.2006,   as   passed   by    the   Session

     Court, Cachar, Silchar, Assam in Sessions Case No. 37 of 2003

     convicting the appellants of offence under
Sections 302
/
34
Indian

     Penal Code, 1860 (‘
IPC
’) and awarding the sentence of rigorous

     imprisonment for life and fine of Rs.1,000/- each with default

     stipulations.
2.                   Briefly     put,   the    relevant     background    aspects     of   the

     matter are as follows:
2.1.
Signature Not Verified
On 01.10.1999, at about 10 a.m., PW-1 Amrit Tanti lodged
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2022.09.02
an F.I.R. at the Ghungoor Police Outpost, stating that on the
10:34:45 IST
Reason:
previous day, at about 12:30 midnight, while he was returning home
1
from Sonai after an election campaign, he found a man lying in

front of Congress Party's election office near the shop of PW-5

Joynarayan.        According       to   the   informant,   from    the    light   of   an

electric lamp, he could identify the man lying on the ground to be

his younger brother Amar Tanti.                He went home and came to know from

his parents that the two accused persons Dibakar and Babul (the

appellants) had assaulted the deceased in the evening hours. Hence,

PW-1 Amrit Tati 1odged the written FIR whereupon, GD Entry No. 604

dated 01.10.1999 of Ghungoor Police Outpost was recorded and the

FIR    was    forwarded       to    the   Officer-in-Charge       of   Silchar    Police

Station.          Accordingly, Silchar P.S. Case No. 1362 of 1999 under
Section 302
/
34
IPC was registered.
2.2.          The case was investigated mainly by PW-10 Dipen Paul.
Inquest was held on the dead body which was sent for postmortem

examination. The statements of various persons acquainted with the

incident were also recorded. At the conclusion of investigation,

charge-sheet was submitted against the accused-appellants.

2.3.          In view of the nature of offence, the case was committed

to the Court of Sessions. In relation to the charge of offence

under
Section 302
/
34
IPC, the appellants pleaded not guilty and

claimed trial. In the course of trial, ten witnesses were examined

on behalf of the prosecution. The appellants did not examine any

witness      in    defence.    However,       the   statements   of    appellants   were

recorded under
Section 313
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

At the conclusion of trial, the accused-appellants were convicted

and sentenced as aforesaid.
2
3.           The prosecution case mainly rested on the testimony of

PW-2 Sukhram, father of the deceased and PW-3 Menoka Tati, mother

of the deceased, both of whom were said to be the eye-witnesses to

the occurrence.
3.1.         PW-2 Sukhram stated that on the date of occurrence, he

was    returning        home    at   about    8       p.m.     along    with    his    wife     from

Silchar.     At Shilcoorie market, he heard cries of his son Amar and

rushed towards the place of occurrence.                           He saw profuse bleeding

from the head of his son.               He found accused Babul over-powering his

son    and   the    other      accused      Dibakar        assaulting        him    with   a    dao.

Seeing    blood     from       the   injuries         of   his   son,       this    witness     fell

unconscious        and    he    regained      consciousness            in    the    night.       The

witness stated that he could identify both the accused persons in

the street light. He reported the incident to his son (PW-1) in the

night of occurrence.
In     cross-examination,            this       witness        PW-2    stated      that

though some persons came to the place of occurrence, they left

immediately.             He    stated      that       though     Silchar       Medical     College

Hospital was at a distance of about 5 k.m. from the place of

occurrence,        he     could      not    remove         his    son       there     as   he    was

unconscious.
3.2.         PW-3 Menoka Tati is the wife of PW-2 and step-mother of

the deceased.           She stated that at the time of occurrence, she was

coming home from Silchar town with her husband.                             While they arrived

Shilcoorie market at about 7/8 p.m., they heard the deceased crying
3
for    help.      Along     with   her    husband,      she   went   to    the    place   of

occurrence and saw the accused Babul holding the hands of the

deceased and the other accused Dibakar assaulting him by means of a

dao.    Her husband tried to resist, but the accused persons did not

pay any heed to it.              She further stated that she witnessed the

incident       from   a   distance   of    about       16   feet   and    could    properly

identify the accused persons in the electric lights.                        This witness

also stated that seeing the blood from the body of the deceased,

her husband fell unconscious and she took her husband home.                              This

witness also stated that on the night of occurrence itself, she

reported the incident to PW-1 at about 3 a.m. when PW-1 returned

home with police.
This witness stated in the cross-examination that she saw the

quarrel between the accused persons and the deceased.                            She denied

the    defence        suggestion     that        the    deceased     always        remained

intoxicated and used to keep himself involved in quarrel with other

persons.        She stated that she saw about 100/150 persons at the

place of occurrence in the electric light.
4.             So far the injuries on the person of the deceased are

concerned,      they      were   established      by    the   testimony     of    PW-7    Dr.

Homeswar Sharma who testified to the postmortem report, wherein the

injuries were stated in the following manner:
“Injuries:
1) Incised wound on the neck in the upper part
           placed obliquely measuring 11 x 6 x 6 cms
           cutting all the structures from the skin upto
           the   second   cervical   vertebrae which   is
           completely cut alongwith the blood vessels on
           the right side (see diagram).
4
2) Incised wound- two numbers- placed parallel
         to each other and 0.5 cm apart over the left
         temple measuring 5 x .5 x 1 cm each.
3) Punctured wound of semi-lunar shape measuring
         4 x .5 x thoracic cavity deep over the left side
         of the thorax at inferior angle of the scapula.
4) Incised wound 4 cm long skin deep only over
         the anterior surface of the right shoulder.
5) Two incised wounds placed 1 cm apart
         measuring 5 x .5 x 1.5 cm over the left temporal
         region cutting upto the outer table of temporal
         region cutting upto the out table of temporal
         bone and the wounds placed obliquely. Larynx
         found incised and exposing the vocal cord under
         injury No.1.
Rest of the organs in the body were healthy and
         pale.”
5.       The other alleged private witnesses did not support the

prosecution case but, the Trial Court proceeded to rely upon the

statements of PW-2 and PW-3 while, inter alia, observing as under:
“22. ……There is clear evidence of P.W .2
         and P.W .3 that there was profuse bleeding
         from the body of the deceased, at the sight
         of which P.W .2 fell down on the ground
         being unconscious. There are many people
         who cannot see nascent human blood and gets
         fainted. This situation happened in case of
         P.W.2. Some how he was removed home and he
         regained his senses at the dead of night
         and he reported the incident to P.W.1.
         Upon careful perusal of the evidence of
         P.W.2 and P.W.3 I find no ground to
         disbelieve their testimony. Their evidence
         has been properly accepted by the defence
         through cross-examination to be that of
         eye-witnesses. Hence, the clear finding is
         that P.W.2 and P.W.3 were the actual eye-
         witnesses to be occurrence.
23. There     is   no   ground   of   false
         implication by P.W.2 and P.W. 3. There is
5
no defence case that the two witnesses had
         any inimical relationship with the accused
         persons. There was no previous grudge with
         the accused persons.    They had no axe to
         grind due to such previous grudge.     There
         is no suggestion in this respect from the
         defence of P.W.2 and P.W. 3. The deceased
         was their own son, though P.W. 3 was the
         step mother.      They would not go to
         implicate    the   innocent    persons    by
         exonerating the real culprits. Thus, there
         is no plea of giving false evidence by P.W.
         2 and P.W.3, and I find that being actual
         eye-witnesses to the occurrence the parents
         of the deceased came forward to rope in the
         real culprits and the assailants of their
         son.
24. It is a fact that there were many
         people in the market and shop keepers were
         there when the incident took place at about
         8 p.m. in the light of electricity. It has
         been submitted that none of those perons
         came to support the prosecution case.
Through such a submission the defence has
         admitted that there was sufficient light at
         the place of occurrence to clearly identify
         the accused persons.     Hence, identity of
         the accused persons through P.W. 2 and P.W.
         3 is not a matter of doubt or dispute.
6.       The   Trial   Court   rendered   the   finding   against   the

appellants in the following manner:
“31. From what has been discussed above, I
         find that on the evening of 30.09. 99 the
         two accused persons Dibakar and Babul,
         attacked the deceased at Shilcoorie bazar
         under Silchar P.S. with deadly weapon. It
         was witnessed by the parents of the
         deceased who were P.W. 2 and P.W. 3. The
         deceased died of these injuries soon after
         the incident. The accused persons have been
         well identified by prosecution witnesses.
         The accused persons in furtherance of their
         common intention, due to previous dispute,
         attacked the deceased with deadly weapon
         over the vital parts. So, they clearly
6
intended   to  cause   the  death   of  the
          deceased. One of the accused caught hold of
          the deceased so that there was no scope for
          the deceased to escape from the place of
          occurrence, and the other accused attacked
          him mercilessly. The defence failed to
          discard   the   prosecution   witnesses   -
          particularly P.W. 2 and P.W .3 in any
          manner. So, this is a clear case of murder
          of the deceased by the accused persons.
32. However, I find that as per evidence of
          P.W. 2 and P.W.3, at first there was a
          quarrel between the deceased and the
          accused persons.     But the deceased was
          totally unarmed and the accused persons
          were armed with deadly weapons.    There is
          no evidence that the accused persons were
          first attacked by the deceased. They were
          the accused persons who without any ground
          attacked the deceased.       There was no
          provocation from the deceased at the place
          of occurrence. Hence, I find that this is
          a clear case of murder punishable U/S 302
I.P.C
.    The defence failed to bring the
          case to any of the exceptions U/S 300
I.P.C
. There is no excuse or exception for
          the accused persons in committing the
          crime.   They attacked the deceased on the
          public road with deadly weapons over the
          vital parts of the body.     As such, they
          intended to cause the death of the deceased
          and caused the same.
7.        Before the High Court, the reliability of PW-2 and PW-3

was seriously put to question.   The High Court, however, rejected

the contentions urged on behalf of the appellants in the following

manner:
“16. It is correct, as contended by the
          learned counsel for the appellants, that
          PW.2 in his statement before the police had
          stated that after the incident he along
          with his wife (P.W.3) had gone home and had
          taken their meal, whereafter, they had gone
          to bed. Such conduct, in the normal course,
          would    have    been   unreasonable    and
          unacceptable, particularly when the son of
          P.W 2, and P.W.3 was facing assault by the
7
two accused-appellants who were armed with
         'dao'. However, the aforesaid aspect of the
         matter is capable of - being understood by
         the defence version offered in the cross-
         examination of P.W.3 which is to the effect
         that the deceased used to be in a state of
         intoxication and he had been involved
         earlier in several quarrels with other
         people. If that be so, the exit/ departure
         of P.W.2 and P.W.3 after the quarrel and
         even after seeing the assault is fully
         understandable. That apart, it is in the
         evidence of P.W.3 that on seeing the
         deceased smeared in blood P.W.2 had fallen
         unconscious, whereafter, he was taken home
         and had regained his senses while at home.
         The departure of P.W. 2 and P.W. 3 from the
         place of occurrence and their going to
         sleep can also be explained and reasonably
         understood on the aforesaid testimony of
         P.W.3. It is, therefore, our considered
         view that notwithstanding what has been
         contended   on  behalf   of   the  accused-
         appellants, the evidence of P.W.2 and
         P.W.3, on the most material part of the
         incident is acceptable and we are inclined
         to act on the basis of the testimony of the
         two eye witnesses.”
8.       Learned counsel for the appellants has strenuously argued

that the Sessions Court as also the High Court in this matter have

proceeded on irrelevant considerations and have ignored significant

shortcomings in the prosecution case.    According to the learned

counsel, conviction of the appellants is essentially based on the

testimony of PW-2 and PW-3 but their statements not only carry

serious contradictions but also carry inherent improbabilities; and

while taking their version on face value, it is against the natural

and normal conduct for any person to go home after having seen his

son in pool of blood on being assaulted by two persons and then, to

take the meal and go to sleep.
8
9.             Learned counsel has contended that this unnatural conduct

of the parents of the deceased has been ignored by the learned

Sessions Judge altogether. Further, the High Court has provided

justification to this unnatural conduct with reference to the fact

that the deceased had allegedly been involved in quarrels with

other people.         Learned counsel would contend that even if it be

assumed that the deceased was involved in quarrels, his parents

would    not    be   so    unconcerned       about    their    son   when   he   had     been

assaulted by two persons and was badly injured with blood oozing

from his head.
10.            Learned counsel would further argue that when testimony

of PW-2 and PW-3 is removed out of consideration for being of

entirely unnatural conduct, the fact of the matter remains that

none of the independent witnesses have supported the prosecution

story.     In this view of the matter, the appellants deserves to be

acquitted.       Learned counsel has also argued that the incident took

place at about 7-8 p.m. on 30.09.1999 whereas the FIR was lodged

only on 10 a.m. on 01.09.1999 by PW-1, brother of the deceased.

This    inordinate        delay   in   FIR    had    remained    unexplained       and    the

prosecution case could not have been believed on such an FIR.
11.            The learned counsel for the State has duly supported the

judgment       and   order    impugned       and     has    submitted   that     when     the

totality of circumstances are taken into account, the statements of

PW-2 and PW-3 cannot be said to be totally unreliable and the

concurrent      findings      based    on    the     said    statements     call   for     no

interference.
9
12.         We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have

examined the material placed on record.
13.         In this case, both the Trial Court and the High Court

have agreed in their appreciation of evidence and have arrived at

concurrent findings of fact; and ordinarily, in an appeal by

special leave against concurrent findings of fact, this Court

would not enter into reappreciation of evidence.               However, if the

assessment of the Trial Court and the High Court is vitiated by

any error of law or procedure or misreading of evidence or any

disregard to the norms of judicial process leading to serious

prejudice or injustice, this Court may consider interference in

an appropriate case so as to prevent miscarriage of justice.
14.         After having examined the present matter in its totality,

we    are   impelled    to   consider    interference     herein     because   the

findings     as   returned   by   the   Trial    Court   and   the    High   Court

apparently suffer from an entirely erroneous approach leading to

miscarriage of justice.
15.         As noticed, the findings in question are based essentially

on the testimony of PW-2 and PW-3, who were alleged to be the eye-

witnesses    to   the   incident.       No    other   independent    witness   has

testified in support of the prosecution case. The High Court took

note of the fact that PW-2 in his statement before police had

stated that after the incident, he along with his wife PW-3 went

home, took their meal and slept.                The High Court had rightly

observed that such a conduct in the normal course, would have been

unreasonable and unacceptable, particularly when the son of these

witnesses was facing assault by two persons.                However, the High
10
Court took into account the facts emerging on record that the

deceased had been involved in several quarrels with other people

to the knowledge of his parents.                     According to the High Court,

such background of the deceased would explain the exist/departure

of PW-2 and PW-3 from the place of occurrence and also of their

going   to   sleep.     With   respect,     we        are    unable    to   accept    this

approach.
16.          As per the assertion of PW-2 and PW-3, they had seen

their son being assaulted by two persons with weapon. PW-2 had

allegedly fallen unconscious after seeing the blood oozing from

the   body   of   his   son.   In   that        situation      and    scenario,      it    is

difficult to appreciate that these witnesses would go home, take

meal and go to bed without bothering about the welfare of their

injured son.       This aspect is coupled with the fact that they had

allegedly narrated the incident to PW-1 only when he reached home

after having seen the dead body of his brother.                       Then, the FIR was

lodged next day morning at 10 a.m.
17.          Taking all the circumstances into account, in our view,

testimony of PW-2 and PW-3 could not have been accepted as that of

eye-witnesses to the incident from any standpoint.                       Moreover, PW-4

Biren Patra, PW-5 Joynarayan Kalewar, PW-8 Dilip Kheira and PW-9

Sudama Bari, who were projected by the prosecution as independent

witnesses, did not support the prosecution case at all.
18.          Aforesaid being the position, the appellants, even if

named in the FIR, could not have been convicted in this case.
19.          It   remains   trite   that        in    such    a   criminal    case,       the

prosecution is expected to prove its case and to substantiate the
11
charge beyond reasonable doubt. A reasonable doubt is not a mere

possible doubt but a fair doubt based upon reasons and common

sense. It must grow out of the evidence in the case 1. When a

reasonable doubt arises in a matter, benefit of doubt must be

given to the accused. In the present case, the doubts reasonably

arising in the matter had been brushed aside by the High Court on

the logic that itself remains unacceptable. The approach of the

Trial Court in accepting the testimony of PW-2 and PW-3 with the

observations that there was no reason for them to implicate anyone

except the real culprit, again, remain that of assumptions which

are not compatible with the given set of facts and circumstances.
20.        It is true that the deceased had been brutally assaulted

and had received multiple injuries on vital parts but, on the

evidence   as    adduced    by    the   prosecution,         it   is    difficult    to

conclude beyond reasonable doubt that the appellants alone were

the authors of such injuries. In view of above, we find it to be a

fit case for interference in the concurrent findings of the Trial

Court and High Court.
21.        Accordingly      and    in   view      of   the    above,     this   appeal

succeeds and is allowed.
22.        The   impugned    judgment     and     order      dated     17.09.2009,   as

passed by the Guahati High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 79 of 2006

as also the judgment and order dated 16.02.2006, as passed by the

Sessions Judge, Cachar at Silchar            in   Sessions Case No. 37 of 2003




1 Vide:
Bhaskar Ramappa Madar & Ors. v. State of Karnataka
: (2009) Cri. L.J. 2422
(SC) (at pg. 2431)
12
are set aside; and the appellants are acquitted as such.    If the

appellants are in custody, they be released immediately.
...................J.
                                            (DINESH MAHESHWARI)




                                            ....................J.
                                            (BELA M. TRIVEDI)

New Delhi;
August 30, 2022.
13
ITEM NO.108                   COURT NO.11                          SECTION II

                  S U P R E M E C O U R T O F             I N D I A
                          RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Criminal Appeal     No.   962/2011
DIBAKER NUNIA & ANR.                                              Appellant(s)

                                     VERSUS

THE STATE OF ASSAM                                                Respondent(s)
Date : 30-08-2022 This appeal was called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE DINESH MAHESHWARI
          HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE BELA M. TRIVEDI

For Appellant(s)       Mr. Varinder Kumar Sharma, AOR
                       Mr. Parul Sharma, Adv.
Mr. Shantanu Sharma, Adv.
For Respondent(s)      Mr. Debojit Borkakati, AOR


            UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R

            The Appeal is allowed in terms of signed reportable
judgment.
The   impugned   judgment    and      order   dated    17.09.2009,    as

passed by the Guahati High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 79 of 2006

as also the judgment and order dated 16.02.2006, as passed by the

Sessions Judge, Cachar at Silchar            in   Sessions Case No. 37 of 2003

are set aside; and the appellants are acquitted as such.                    If the

appellants are in custody, they be released immediately.
All pending applications stand disposed of.
(SNEHA DAS)                                (BEENA JOLLY)
SENIOR PERSONAL ASSISTANT                    COURT MASTER (NSH)
(Signed reportable judgment is placed in the file)
14
ITEM NO.108                 COURT NO.11                       SECTION II

                S U P R E M E C O U R T O F          I N D I A
                        RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Criminal Appeal    No.   962/2011
DIBAKER NUNIA & ANR.                                         Appellant(s)

                                    VERSUS

THE STATE OF ASSAM                                           Respondent(s)

Date : 30-08-2022 This appeal was called on for hearing today.
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE DINESH MAHESHWARI
          HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE BELA M. TRIVEDI

For Appellant(s)     Mr. Varinder Kumar Sharma, AOR
                     Mr. Parul Sharma, Adv.
Mr. Shantanu Sharma, Adv.
For Respondent(s)    Mr. Debojit Borkakati, AOR


          UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R


          The appeal is allowed.
The   impugned   judgment    and   order   dated    17.09.2009,    as

passed by the Guahati High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 79 of 2006

as also the judgment and order dated 16.02.2006, as passed by the

Sessions Judge, Cachar at Silchar in Sessions Case No. 37 of 2003

are set aside; and the appellants are acquitted as such.               If the

appellants are in custody, they be released immediately.
(NEETA SAPRA)                                          (BEENA JOLLY)
COURT MASTER (SH)                                     COURT MASTER (NSH)
15