[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sultan vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 3 August, 2022
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
SLP(Crl.)   No(s).   6882/2021 etc



                                                                             NON-REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1133 OF 2022
                                       (SLP (Crl.) No.    6882/2021)


                         SULTAN                                           APPELLANT

                                                     VERSUS

                         THE STATE OF KARNATAKA                           RESPONDENT

                                                     WITH

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1134 OF 2022
                                        (@SLP(Crl) No. 6004/2022)


                                          J U D G M E N T
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
Leave granted.
2.               Appellants,    Noori    –   sister-in-law   of   the   deceased

                      Khushboo, and Sultan Akhtar – husband of Noori, have

                      been convicted under Section 302 read with
Section 34
of

                      the Indian Penal Code, 18601 and sentenced to undergo

                      imprisonment for life, pay fine of Rs 30,000/- and in

                      default to undergo additional imprisonment for one year.
3.               The impugned judgment dated 11.01.2021 passed by the

                      High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, dismissed the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2022.08.13
12:14:44 IST
Reason:
appeal and upheld their conviction by relying on the

     1 For Short, “
IPC
”.
1
SLP(Crl.)   No(s).    6882/2021 etc

     dying    declaration     marked      as    Exhibit   Ka-3,    statedly
recorded on 28.05.2011 at 6.20 P.M. by Satish Kumar

     Kushwaha, the Naib Tehsildar, who had deposed as PW-5.

     As per the dying declaration, the incident had occurred

     at     about   1.00-1.30    p.m.,     when     Ashraf,     husband     of

     Khushboo, had gone to the city to procure articles for

     their children. Noori, Sultan and Rukhsana (mother-in-

     law) had poured kerosene oil on Khushboo and had set her

     on fire. Noori and Rukhsana believed that Khushboo was

     characterless, and they would often tell Khushboo to

     leave the house. For this reason, Noori and Rukhsana

     would daily quarrel with her. Khushboo had got married

     to Ashraf 7 years back, and her husband was not involved

     in setting her on fire. On being set to fire, Khushboo

     had shouted and the neighbours came to save her.
4.   Rukhsana has not filed any appeal before this court. We

     are informed that she has been released due to her old

     age.
5.
Section 32
of the Evidence Act, 1872, which makes dying

     declaration admissible, is an exception to the general

     rule of hearsay evidence. While in terms of
Section 32
,

     dying declarations are admissible, but the weight and

     evidentiary      value     to   be        attached   to    the      dying

     declarations would depend upon facts of each case. In

     cases where dying declaration is reliable and inspires
2
SLP(Crl.)        No(s).   6882/2021 etc

     confidence as to its correctness, being a substantive

     piece of evidence, the dying declaration can form basis

     of conviction. These are cases where there are reasons

     and     grounds      to    accept      veracity           of    the       statement,

     coupled      with    the      factor      that       a    person       who       is    on

     deathbed is not likely to falsely implicate an innocent

     person. However, the court, when in doubt as to the

     veracity        or      correctness,            can       and        should           seek

     corroboration,          keeping      in    mind          the    fact       that       the

     accused have no chance of cross-examination. Further,

     it is necessary to guard and ensure that the statement

     made    by     the   deceased     is      not    a       result      of     tutoring,

     prompting or imagination. In the facts of the present

     case,     we     find      that     there       are       several          gaps       and

     contradictions in the present case which makes us doubt

     the     veracity        and    the     correctness              of        the      dying

     declaration insofar as it implicates the two appellants

     before us.
6.   As noted above, it is the case of the prosecution that

     the dying declaration, Exhibit Ka-3, was recorded at

     about 6:20 p.m. on 28.05.2011 by Satish Kumar Kushwaha

     (PW-5), albeit the First Information Report (FIR) No.

     261/2011,      Exhibit      Ka-8,    registered            at   Police          Station

     Kotwali Dehat, District Saharanpur, recorded at about

     10:35 p.m. on the same date, does not refer to the dying
3
SLP(Crl.)    No(s).   6882/2021 etc

     declaration, Exhibit Ka-3. No reasons are forthcoming

     why and how the investigating officer Suresh Babu Itoria

     (PW-11) was unaware of the dying declaration, Exhibit

     Ka-3, recorded in the hospital earlier in day.
7.   The investigating officer Suresh Babu Itoria (PW-11),

     had learnt about Exhibit Ka-3, recorded by Satish Kumar

     Kushwaha (PW-5) only on 30.05.2011. Suresh Babu Itoria

     (PW-11)    has    affirmed       that    he     had    not    received      any

     information      regarding       the    dying       declaration     from    the

     S.D.M., City Magistrate or any order of the District

     Magistrate. On 30.05.2011 it was brought to Suresh Babu

     Itoria’s (PW-11) notice that Satish Kumar Kushwaha (PW-
5) had filed the dying declaration, Exhibit Ka-3, before

     the City Magistrate. Till then Satish Kumar Kushwaha

     (PW-5) also had not bothered to get in touch with the

     investigating          officer     Suresh           Babu     Itoria(PW-11).

     Thereupon,    Suresh      Babu     Itoria       (PW-11)      had    moved    an

     application      for    furnishing       of     a     copy   of    the     dying

     declaration.
8.   Suresh    Babu    Itoria    (PW-11),       in       his    deposition,      has

     accepted   that    Noori     and       Sultan       Akhtar   were    residing

     separately at Saint Zahria Academy School, Idgah Road,

     Nadeem Colony, Saharanpur. Khushboo used to reside with

     her husband Ashraf, mother-in-law Rukhsana and her three

     children at Rasulpur. In his cross-examination, Suresh
4
SLP(Crl.)      No(s).   6882/2021 etc

        Babu Itoria(PW-11) has accepted as correct that Noori

        and      Sultan     Akhtar    were   not    found   at   the     place    of

        occurrence and it was also true that time of arrival of

        Noori and Sultan Akhtar at the place of occurrence was

        not noted or stated by the witnesses.
9.      Rashid Naeem, a resident of Noor Basti, who used to do

        the work of cleaning and maintaining 25 steps away from

        the house of Rukhsana, and had deposed as PW-10, in his

        examination-in         chief,    had   testified     that   on     hearing

        noise coming from the house of Rukhsana at about 3:00-

        4:00 P.M. on 28.05.2011, he had seen Khushboo outside

        the house, in a burnt condition. He and others had then

        tried to quell the fire. At that time, Rukhsana was

        inside the room. Rukhsana subsequently came out of the

        house and left on a motorcycle. Rashid Naeem (PW-10) has

        not deposed that he had seen the appellants. Rashid

        Naeem (PW-10) was not declared hostile and was not cross

        examined. Thus, Rashid Naeem (PW-10) had not seen Noori

        and Sultan Akhtar at the spot.
10.     Noori        and   Sultan    Akhtar,   in   their   statements          under
Section 313
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19732

        have claimed that they had not visited the residence of

        Khushboo on the date of occurrence. At that time, they

        were present at the Saint Zahria Academy School located


2 For short, “
Cr.P.C
.”
5
SLP(Crl.)   No(s).     6882/2021 etc

      at Nadeem Colony. The fact that Noori and Sultan Akhtar

      were   running          the    Saint          Zahria       Academy     School      and

      residing     at     Nadeem          Colony           was     accepted       by     the

      Investigating Officer Suresh Babu Itoria (PW-11).
11.   Suresh Babu Itoria (PW-11), in his deposition did not

      state that he had informed or asked the Naib Tehsildar

      to record the dying declaration of Khushboo. On the

      other hand, Satish Kumar Kushwaha (PW-5) is his cross

      examination       has   testified             that    on    28.05.2011       he    was

      deputed to record the dying declaration but they do not

      make any entry in the office or register for the said

      purpose    in     the     office         of    the     city     magistrate.         On

      28.05.2011,       there       was    a    written          order     of    the    city

      magistrate      that     Satish       Kumar          Kushwaha      (PW-5)     should

      record the dying declaration, but the direction/order

      was not brought on record. On the other hand Suresh Babu

      Eloria (PW-11) in his cross-examination has testified

      that      the      order            of         dying         declaration           was

      received/furnished through ‘Charlie’, which implies from

      the police control room. No such order was received from

      the    office      of     the       city        magistrate           or     District

      Magistrate. Satish Kumar Kushwaha (PW-5) could not tell

      whether    the      police          personnel          who     had        taken    the

      cognizance of offence was on duty or not at the time

      when he visited the hospital. The doctor on duty at the
6
SLP(Crl.)   No(s).   6882/2021 etc

      emergency ward, who had purportedly signed on the dying

      declaration Exhibit Ka-3, was not produced as a witness.
12.   Satish Kumar Kushwaha (PW-5) deposed that he had reached

      the hospital at 6.15 P.M. and contacted the doctor on

      duty in the emergency ward and had thereupon recorded

      the dying declaration of Khushboo, Exhibit Ka-3. The

      doctor has not been examined.
13.   Yousuf    Ali   (PW-1),   the   informant   and   the    father    of

      Khushboo, who was declared hostile, has stated that he

      came to know from the local people that his daughter

      Khusboo   had died     due to     burning from    the stove.       He

      however accepted that he had given the written report

      marked as Exhibit Ka-1 to the police station, on which

      he had put his thumb impression. He claimed that he did

      not know what was written in it.
14.   Mirza Hussain (PW-2), nephew of Yousuf Ali (PW-1), has

      deposed    that   on   learning   about   the   incident    he    and

      Liyakat Ali (PW-4), another nephew of Yousuf Ali (PW-1)

      had visited the burns ward in the district hospital at

      Saharanpur, where Khushboo was admitted. Khushboo had

      then told them that Noori and Sultan Akhtar had set her

      on fire after pouring kerosene oil on her. In his cross-

      examination, Mirza Hussain (PW-2), had accepted that in

      his statement under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C., he had
7
SLP(Crl.)     No(s).   6882/2021 etc

      also mentioned the name of the Khushboo’s husband Ashraf

      and one other person named Haider. Liyakat Ali (PW-4),

      in   his   examination-in-chief    testified       that    he,     along

      with his     uncle Yousuf Ali (PW-2,) had met Khushboo in

      the hospital. Khushboo had informed them that she had

      been burnt to death by the appellants because of dowry.

      They had then proceeded to the police station and given

      the report. Thereafter they had returned to the District

      Hospital, Saharanpur. Khushboo had three children, the

      eldest being a girl aged about 8-9 years. Suresh Babu

      Itoria (PW-11) has also accepted that the deceased had

      three children and the eldest daughter was about 7 years

      of age at the time of the incident. The daughter and

      children of Khushboo have not been examined. The dying

      declaration, Exhibit Ka-3, does not state that dowry was

      the cause of death. In fact, dying declaration, Exhibit

      Ka-3, completely exonerates and states that Ashraf is

      completely innocent. Ashraf was not charge-sheeted and

      prosecuted. We do not know who is Haidar, who again was

      not charge-sheeted and prosecuted.
15.   As per the FIR recorded on the statement made by Yousuf

      Ali(PW-1), he (Yousuf Ali) had come               to know that the

      in-laws    of   Khushboo   had    burnt     her    alive     and     the

      neighbours      had   admitted   her   to    the     hospital        and

      thereupon he had requested          Mirza Hussain (PW-2) and
8
SLP(Crl.)     No(s).   6882/2021 etc

      Liyakat Ali (PW-4) to immediately visit the district

      hospital at Saharanpur.(It appears that Ashraf had taken

      Kushboo     and   had    got   her    admitted     in    the    hospital).

      Kushboo, it is stated in the FIR, at that time was

      conscious and had told Mirza Hussain                (PW-2) and Liyakat

      Ali (PW-4) that her husband-Ashraf, her mother-in-law-

      Rukhsana, her sister-in-law-Noori and her husband-Sultan

      Akhtar and one Haider had poured kerosene oil on her and

      set her ablaze. Khushboo had died at about 7 P.M.. The

      time   of   death       is   corroborated    from       the    post-mortem

      report marked as Exhibit Ka-10.
16.   For the aforesaid dichotomies and contradictions, we are

      of the opinion that Noori and Sultan Akhtar are entitled

      to the benefit of doubt and hence, we set aside their

      conviction under Section 302 read with
Section 34
of the

      IPC.
17.   We   however,     clarify      that   we   have     not       examined    the

      conviction of Rukhsana, the mother-in-law who has not

      preferred     any   appeal      against     the     impugned       judgment

      upholding her conviction. As noted above, we have been

      informed that Rukhsana, on account of her old age, has

      already been released.
18.   The appellants-Noori and Sultan Akhtar would be released

      immediately unless they are required to be detained in
9
SLP(Crl.)   No(s).   6882/2021 etc

       any other case. The impugned judgment(s) and conviction

       are set aside and accordingly, the appeals are allowed.
19.    Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
……………………………………………. .J.
                                                 [SANJIV KHANNA]



                                          ……………………………………………. .J.
                                              [ BELA M. TRIVEDI]

      NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 03, 2022.
10