[Cites
4
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Ayillyath Yadunath Nambiar vs P. Sreedharan on 18 August, 2022
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
Hemant Gupta
1



                                                              Non­Reportable
                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              CIVIL APPEAL NO(s).4943 OF 2022
                         (arising out of SLP (Civil) Nos. 19087 of 2018)


          AYILLYATH YADUNATH NAMBIAR                        ...APPELLANT(S)
                                             VERSUS
          P. SREEDHARAN                                    ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                              WITH
                               CIVIL APPEAL NO.4944 OF 2022
                          (Arising out of SLP (Civil)No.6476 of 2019)



                                        JUDGMENT
VIKRAM NATH, J.
1.             These two appeals assail the correctness of same

          judgment             and   order   of   Kerala   High   Court   dated

          12.04.2018 passed in RFA No.269 of 2008 between
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2022.08.18
16:33:41 IST
Puthiyonnan Sreedharan versus Ayillyath Yadunath
Reason:
2
Nambiar, whereby the said first appeal filed by the

defendant was partly allowed; the decree of the Trial

Court for specific performance of contract was set aside,

however, the defendant was held liable to pay an amount

of Rs.50 lakhs with interest @12% per annum from

20.01.2005 till realization and also to bear entire cost of

proceedings both at the trial level and at the appellate

level.
2.   Civil Appeal No.4943 of 2022 has been filed by the

plaintiff with the prayer to restore the decree of the Trial

Court whereas Civil Appeal No.4944 of 2022 has been

filed by the defendant praying for dismissal of the suit. In

view of the cross appeals, the parties are referred to as

the plaintiff and the defendant hereinafter.
3.   The defendant is the owner of both the properties

mentioned in the schedule of the property appended to

the plaint. According to the plaintiff, the defendant

required substantial amount of cash urgently to liquidate
3
his loans which he had taken from certain banks. The

defendant had advertised for the sale of his properties

but as he did not get any good buyer upon mediation of

common acquaintance, he agreed to sell both the

properties mentioned in the schedule of properties to the

plaintiff and in view of the same, a written agreement

was executed on 20.01.2005. As per the agreement, item

No.1 of plaint schedule property was settled for a

consideration of Rs.70,000/­ per cent and the item No.2

of   the   plaint      schedule     property    was   settled   for

Rs.75,000/­ per cent. The total sale consideration came

to Rs.64,60,600/­. It was also agreed as per the

agreement that the sale deed would be executed within a

period of four months after receiving the balance

consideration.
4.   Soon after the execution of agreement to sell dated

20.01.2005,      the    plaintiff   came   to   know    that    the

defendant was likely to assign the plaint schedule
4
properties   to   third   parties   thereby    frustrating   the

agreement to sell. Although four months’ time stated in

the agreement to sell had not expired but in order to

protect his interest, the plaintiff on 02.02.2005 instituted

a suit for injunction in the Court of Munsiff, Kannur,

registered as O.S. No.69 of 2005, against the defendant

impleading him as defendant No.1 and one P. Mohanan

impleaded as defendant No.2 in whose favour it was

apprehended that the assignment would be made.
Following reliefs were claimed:
“Prayer:
It is therefore, respectfully prayed that this
     Honourable Court may be pleased to pass a decree
     and judgment;
a) Restraining the first defendant, his men and
            agent and any person claiming through or
            under him from assigning or transferring
            the plaint schedule property to the 2nd
            defendant or to any other person that the
            plaintiff;
b) Restraining the defendants, their men and
           agent any person or in any way interfering
           with the peaceful possession of the same by
           the plaintiff;
c) To pay the cost of the suit; and
5
d)    To grant such other relief as may be
              necessary during the pendency of this
              proceedings at the request of the plaintiff.”
5.   In the said suit for injunction, the defendant filed

objections. The Court of Munsiff, Kannur, vide order

dated   15.03.2005       disposed    of   the   application   for

temporary injunction restraining the defendant from

alienating plaint schedule properties in favour of the

defendant No.2 or others before the expiry of term

provided in the agreement dated 20.01.2005.
6.   The plaintiff thereafter communicated his interest to

pay the balance sale consideration and requesting to

execute the sale deed. He also gave a legal notice dated

25.04.2005. The defendant gave a reply through his

counsel to the aforesaid notice on 07.05.2005 denying

the execution of agreement to sell and also stating that

he had never received any amount from the plaintiff. The

plaintiff thereafter instituted suit for specific performance

of contract on 17.05.2005. Following reliefs were claimed
6
in the said suit registered as O.S. No.111 of 2005 in the

Court of Munsiff, Kannur:
“Prayer:
It is therefore, respectfully prayed that this
     Honourable Court may be pleased to pass a decree
     and judgment;
a) Directing the defendant to execute and
            register the sale deed in respect of the plaint
            schedule property in favour of the plaintiff
            receiving the balance consideration with
            possession.
b) If the defendant fails to do so, get it done
            through the officer of this Honourable Court
            at the expense of the defendant.
c) Alternatively directing the defendant to pay
            an amount of Rs.51,64,658/­ with interest
            @12% per annum from the date of suit till
            realization being the advance amount paid
            by the Plaintiff and damages with interest.
d) Restraining the defendant from culminating
            the plaint schedule property to any other
            person than the plaintiff.
e) To pay the cost of the suit.
f) To grant such other relief as may be
            necessary during the pendency of this
            proceeding at the request of the plaintiff.”
7
7.   The defendant filed written statement whereupon

based upon the pleadings the Trial Court framed

following five issues:
“1. Whether, the plaintiff is entitled for a decree for
     specific performance of contract?
2. Whether the defendant has received the advance
     sale consideration and after executing agreement
     and promised to execute the sale deed within the
     given time?
3. Whether the agreement relied by the plaintiff is
     forged and concocted?
4. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to get the
     advance sale consideration?
5. Relief and cost.”
8.   Both the parties led evidence documentary as well

as oral. Trial Court upon consideration and analysis of

the evidence on record decreed the suit vide judgment

and order dated 30.07.2007 in the following terms:
“1. Defendant is directed to execute the sale deed
     in respect of plaint schedule item No.1 and 2 in
     favour of the plaintiff after receiving the balance
     sale consideration as stated in Ext.A­1.
2. In case, the defendant fails to execute the
     document, plaintiff shall be at liberty to approach
     the court for getting the document executed.
3. Defendant shall also pay the cost of the suit to
     plaintiff.”
8
9.   Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and decree, the

defendant   preferred   appeal before   the   High   Court

registered as RSA No.269 of 2008. The Division Bench of

the High Court analyzed the entire evidence on record

and came to the conclusion that the defence taken by the

defendant of not receiving any amount from the plaintiff

and also its denial of executing the agreement to sell

dated   20.01.2005      is   not   acceptable.   However,

considering various other facts and circumstances of the

case, did not think it appropriate to decree the suit for

specific performance and rather thought it fit to award

the alternative relief (c) as claimed by the plaintiff for

refund of the advance along with interest. In paragraph

40 of the judgment, the High Court gave ten reasons why

it thought it proper not to decree the suit for specific

performance of contract rather award refund of the

advance money with interest @ 12 % per annum from the
9
date of the execution of the agreement till the realization

of the same. It would be appropriate to reproduce

paragraph 40 along with its sub­paragraphs:
“40. The question to be considered is whether
     Court below was justified in exercising the
     jurisdiction to grant specific performance in the
     facts and circumstances of the case. As we have
     already observed, defendant has a case that Ext.A1
     agreement is not genuine and he has not received
     the consideration. The said contention is not
     accepted by us. But despite the said fact, certain
     circumstances which has evolved in this case tends
     us to deny specific performance on account of the
     following reasons:
i)    That a huge sum of Rs.50 lakhs was paid
                as cash to the defendant which covers
                almost major portion of the sale
                consideration.         Under        normal
                circumstances when huge amounts are
                involved, some payments are paid either
                by cheque or demand draft.
ii)   Plaintiff is a person who is capable of
                purchasing the entire property by paying
                the entire sale consideration at one
                stretch. If he could pay fifty lakhs on
                20.01.2005, he could have paid the
                balance amount within a short time.
iii) It is not known under what circumstance
                a period of four months had been stated
                for complying with the terms of contract.
iv) Plaintiff claims that he was put in
                possession of the property which appears
                to be incorrect. There is no evidence to
                prove the said fact.
v)    Plaintiff is a person who does not know to
                read Malayalam, but still the agreement
                is executed in Malayalam.
10
vi)   The agreement is written by PW3 who is
               an interested party to the transaction. He
               claims to have received commission from
               both the parties which is not the practice
               followed in such situations.
vii) Defendant has a contention that his
               intention was only to get a loan for which
               he had signed certain papers. But he
               further states that he did not receive the
               loan. According to him, he had not
               received any amount from the plaintiff
               which of course we don’t agree.
viii) The actual amount paid by the plaintiff to
               defendant can only be discerned from the
               agreement, the genuineness of which is
               doubted by the defendant.
ix) Exts. A5 and A5(a) though had been
               relied upon by the Court below, the
               manner in which the said documents are
               executed and the purpose is doubtful.
x)    The intention of the defendant was to sell
               only one item of property as is evident
               from Exts.B1 and B2 advertisements. The
               advertisements were published on 1st
               January, 2005. A person who is in dire
               need of finances will either sell his
               property or he may take loan. Taking into
               account the factual circumstances, it is
               possible that a loan was arranged by the
               plaintiff for which a document in the
               nature     of  Ext.A1    was    prepared.”
10.   The High Court further in paragraphs 41 and 42

gave further reasons for not approving the reliefs granted

by the Trial Court. The said two paragraphs also are

reproduced hereunder:
11
“41. Defendant’s case is that market value of
property will come to Rs.8 crores. But there is no
evidence to substantiate the said contention. A
criminal complaint has been filed by the defendant
before the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court,
Kannur on 16.02.2005(Ext.B14), the investigation
of which is still pending. Ext.B13 is the First
Information Report. It relates to an allegation that
he was threatened and attacked by a group of
people on 04.02.2005 at 6 pm and the assailants
which includes plaintiff and PW3 and certain
others had threatened him asking him to vacate
the property and he was threatened that he will be
killed. Ext.B15 is the chargesheet dated
16.02.2005 wherein the plaintiff along with PW3
and PW6 were made accused. Charge was under
Sections 417, 420,465,467, 471 r/w
S.34
I.P.C.
Final report had been filed alleging fabrication of
the agreement. Ext.B19 is the certified copy of a
complaint filed by plaintiff against the defendant
and PW3 alleging offences
u/s 420
,
406
r/w 109
I.P.C
. This was filed before JFCM, No.II Kannur on
18.05.2005. Ext.B24 is the certified copy of the
order dated 23.03.2005 in IA No.358 of 2005 in OS
No.69 of 2005. Though an order of injunction was
granted against alienation of the property, the
Court below did not grant any injunction
restraining the defendant from interfering with the
peaceful possession of the plaint schedule. The suit
OS No.69 of 2005 was withdrawn by filing IA
No.219 of 2006 on 17.01.2006. The suit was
dismissed as withdrawn as per order dated
17.01.2006.
42.    Taking   into    account    the    substantial
contentions urged on behalf of either side,
especially when an allegation regarding fabrication
of document is being prosecuted by the defendant,
it is not appropriate to grant specific performance.
The Court below had failed to consider the above
aspect of the matter in the light of the settled legal
12
principles. Court below proceeded on the basis that
     when execution of Ext.A1 document is proved, the
     suit has to be decreed. As already stated, there is
     sufficient material before this Court to doubt the
     respective contentions of the parties. Under such
     circumstances, it is only taking into account the
     preponderance of probabilities, Court below had
     found that Ext.A1 agreement is genuine based on
     sufficient material and such finding is not
     perverse.”
11. In paragraph 43 of the judgment, the High Court

decreed the suit directing the defendant to pay the

plaintiff an amount of Rs.50 lakhs along with interest @

12%per annum from 20.01.2005 till realization and also

to bear the entire cost of the suit before the Trial Court

as also the High Court.
12. The above two appeals one by the plaintiff and other

by the defendant have questioned the correctness of the

said judgment.
13. Learned counsel for the parties made detailed

submissions referring to the relevant pieces of evidence

on record in support of their submissions. Having heard

the learned counsel for the parties and having perused
13
the material on record, we find that the High Court has

advanced substantial justice between the parties by

accepting the alternate relief claimed by the plaintiff of

refund of the advance amount along with the interest @

12% per annum. The High Court found suspicious

circumstances and doubtful situations being raised by

both the sides. The reasons given by the High Court as

contained in paragraph 40, in our opinion, were

sufficient to arrive at a conclusion of not awarding the

relief of specific performance of contract rather directing

for refund of advance amount at adequate interest rate.
14. In the facts and circumstances of the case, we are

not inclined to interfere with the judgment and order of

the High Court. Accordingly, both the appeals are

dismissed.
…………..........................J.
                                           [HEMANT GUPTA]
14
.………….........................J.
                               [VIKRAM NATH]


NEW DELHI
AUGUST 18, 2022.