[Cites
23
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sandeep Alias Kala vs Supreme Court Of India Through ... on 16 August, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
A S Bopanna
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Reportable


                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                                          Writ Petition (Criminal) No 143 of 2018

                Sandeep alias Kala                                                     .... Petitioner(s)

                                                           Versus

                Supreme Court of India                                                ....Respondent(s)




                                                      JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J


     1                   In Sessions Case 9 of 2005, four accused were put up for trial, inter alia, for the

     commission of offences punishable under Section 302 read with
Section 34
of the

     Indian Penal Code 18601 and
Section 25
of the Arms Act 1959. The criminal case arose

     out of FIR No 59 dated 15 February 2005 lodged at PS Civil Lines, Sonepat, which was

     committed upon the filing of the charge-sheet, for trial to the Sessions Court by an order
Signature Not Verified
dated 6 June 2005 of the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sonepat. The petitioner -
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2022.08.24
22:28:30 IST
Reason:
Sandeep alias Kala was tried as the second accused.                         By a judgment dated 1
1
“
IPC
”
2
September 2006, the Additional Sessions Judge, Sonepat held that the prosecution had

established the guilt of two of the accused, Arun (A-1) and Sunil (A-3), beyond

reasonable doubt and held them guilty of offences under Section 302 read with
Section

34
IPC. The Additional Sessions Judge, however, acquitted the petitioner (A-2) and

Ravi Kant (A-4). The Additional Sessions Judge made the following observations while

acquitting the petitioner and Ravi Kant:
“43.   Thus, the plea of alibi set up by accused Ravi Kant is
              corroborated by the inquiry conducted by the Deputy
              Superintendent of police concerned and his subsequent
              exoneration.
44.    As regards accused Sandeep, the oral testimony of witnesses
              produced by the accused in his defence stands corroborated by
              the documentary medical evidence. It can be reasonably held
              that accused Sandeep remained admitted in the Government
              Hospital, Mehrauli (Delhi) w.e.f. 12.2.2005 to 16.2.2005.
Thus, in this manner, the prosecution has failed to bring home
              the guilt of these two accused persons namely Ravi Kant and
              Sandeep by not proving their presence on the date and time at
              the place of occurrence.”

2     Besides the appeals which were filed by the co-accused, the acquittal of the

petitioner was challenged by the State of Haryana in CRM No 53-MA of 2007 (O&M).

The acquittal of the co-accused Ravi Kant was also challenged by the State of Haryana

in CRM No 604-MA of 2007 (O&M). The appeals against the conviction of two accused

as well as the appeals against the acquittal of the petitioner and Ravi Kant were heard

and disposed of by a common judgment dated 2 September 2013 of a Division Bench

of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana. The High Court upheld the conviction of Arun

(A-1) and Sunil (A-3), while dismissing their appeals. The appeals filed by the State of

Haryana against the acquittal of the petitioner and Ravi Kant were allowed and both

these accused were held guilty of offences punishable under Section 302 read with
3
Section 34
IPC and sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life along with a fine of Rs

20,000/- each. The High Court made the following observations while examining the

plea of alibi by the petitioner and Ravi Kant:
“Before going through the plea of alibi set up by Ravi Kant and
             Sandeep, the evidence led by them has to be examined. The
             defence had examined Raj Singh whose son is said to have got
             married on 14.02.2005. It is their case that Ravi Kant had
             attended that function. But the testimony is neither convincing
             nor can be relied upon. The accused were unable to show that
             any such function was held on that da. It is their admitted case
             that no invitation cards were printed nor any video was prepared.
             Even the tent was not set up. The witnesses have come forward
             only because Ravi Kant's father was Sarpanch of the village. It is
             clear that during the course of inquiry conducted earlier, the
             name of the Ravi Kant had been dropped because of the
             influence of his father. He was given a clean chit. But
             subsequently, the DSP held an inquiry and submitted a challan
             against him. The witnesses of the defence are not reliable and
             their evidence is not acceptable and hence rejected.
In the case of Sandeep, the Medical Officer posted at
             Mehrauli has created documents to show that Sandeep was
             admitted in the primary health centre from 12.02.2005 to
             16.02.2005 . All the proceedings have been drawn up on plain
             papers. It is strange that no other doctor had attended to
             Sandeep. Sandeep was suffering from gastroenteritis for which
             admission is not necessary. Only oral tablets had been
             prescribed. The record shows that there were two - three other
             patients with similar complaints but they were treated as outdoor
             patients. No admission was given to them. Whereas in the case
             of Sandeep he was admitted. Surprisingly Dr. A.K. Pandey was
             the only doctor, who attended to him in the morning and at night
             during his so call admission in the govt. hospital. The falsity of
             the evidence is apparent from the record. The documents had
             been prepared. The father of the accused had sent a complaint
             to the Chief Minister but he did not mention in his complaint that
             in which hospital he was admitted. It seems that the record on
             plain papers was prepared with the assistance of Dr. A.K.
             Pandey to help the accused, which was intentionally kept back
             as the inquiry would have revealed the falsehood.”
3     A criminal appeal was instituted before this Court by the co-accused, Ravi Kant

(A-4), whose acquittal, like the petitioner, was reversed by the High Court. In the appeal
4
filed by Ravi Kant, notice was issued on 4 April 2014. The appeal 2 has been dismissed

in a detailed judgment dated 27 March 2019. The court held


                   “The prosecution case stands proved in view of the fact that
                   Prem Singh (PW-5) and Rakesh Chaudhary (PW-11) are found
                   to be reliable and it was a priority for them to first take the injured
                   to the hospital at Sonepat and thereafter to Jaipur Golden
                   Hospital, Rohini and at Rohini itself the statement has been
                   recorded as the police had been informed. In the first police
                   statement that has been recorded by Sunil Kumar, names of the
                   assailants have been mentioned clearly. In fact, Ravi Kant's role
                   has been clearly mentioned. Even if the first information report
                   recorded subsequently is discarded, no dent is caused in the
                   prosecution case. In the facts and circumstances of the case, we
                   are not inclined to interfere in the judgment and order of
                   conviction and sentence imposed by the High Court.”

4         The conviction of the petitioner was called into question in Criminal Appeal Diary

No 8073 of 2014. The appeal was dismissed by a three-Judge bench of this Court on 5

May 2014 in terms of the following order:
“1.     Delay in filing and refiling the appeal is condoned.
2.     The Criminal Appeal, being devoid of any merit, deserves
                           to be dismissed and is dismissed accordingly.
Ordered accordingly.”

5         A review petition, being Review Petition (Criminal) No 469 of 2014 in Criminal

Appeal No 1135 of 2014 was filed before this Court on 2 June 2014. The same was

dismissed by the three-Judge bench on 21 August 2014.
6         The conviction and sentence imposed upon the petitioner have attained finality

following the dismissal of the appeal as well as the review petition.
2
Criminal Appeal No 471 of 2014
5
7        The petitioner instituted the present Writ Petition under
Article 32
of the

Constitution seeking:
(i)      a declaration that the deletion of clause (c) and clause (d) from sub-rule (1)

         of Rule 15 of Order XXI of the Supreme Court Rules 1966 3 by the Supreme Court

         (2nd Amendment) Rules 19814 was contrary to the law laid down by a Constitution

         Bench of this Court in
Sita Ram v State of Uttar Pradesh
;5
(ii)     a declaration that in the absence of any guidelines in Order XX, Rule 21 of

         the Supreme Court Rules 20136 for the preliminary hearing of appeals under

         Section 2(a) of the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate

         Jurisdiction) Act 1970,7 the provision is unconstitutional as offending the right to

         life under Article 21 of the Constitution; and
(iii)    a direction restraining the respondent from giving effect to Order XX, Rule

         21 of the 2013 Rules.
8        The Supreme Court is impleaded as the respondent through the Secretary

General. A counter affidavit has been filed. Notice was issued on 9 July 2018.


9        We have heard Mr Shivendra Singh, counsel appearing on behalf of the

petitioner and Mr Vikramjit Banerjee, Additional Solicitor General,8 counsel for the

respondent.
3
“1966 Rules”
4
“Amendment Rules 1981”
5
(1979) 2 SCC 656
6
“2013 Rules”
7“
   Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act”
8
“ASG”
6
10    The submission which has been articulately urged on behalf of the petitioner by

Mr Shivendra Singh is that the judgment of the Constitution Bench in
Sita Ram
(supra)

considered the challenge to the vires of Rule 15(1)(c) of Order XXI of the 1966 Rules in

the context of the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act. It has been submitted that while

affirming the validity of Rule 15(1)(c) of Order XXI, Justice Krishna Iyer, speaking for the

majority, held that while the provision is valid, this does not mean that all appeals falling

within its fold should be routinely disposed of at the preliminary hearing. According to

this Court, if every appeal under
Article 134(1)(a)
or (b) or Section 2(a) of the

Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act were to be set down for preliminary hearing and

summary disposal, the difference between
Article 134
and
Article 136
, between right

and leave, may be obliterated. However, the Constitution Bench did recognize that in an

exceptional category of cases where there is no point at all, an appeal which falls within

the purview of either
Article 134(1)(a)
or (b) or Section 2(a) of the Enlargement of

Jurisdiction Act can be disposed of at the preliminary hearing.
In this backdrop, it has

been submitted that the deletion of the provisions of Rule 15(1)(c) of Order XXI by the

Amendment Rules 1981 is not consistent with the judgment in
Sita Ram
(supra).
11    On the other hand, Mr Vikramjit Banerjee, ASG, submitted that the deletion of

Rule 15(1)(c) and (d) of Order XXI of the 1966 Rules in 1981 does not run afoul of the

judgment of the Constitution Bench in
Sita Ram
(supra). Mr Banerjee has adverted to

the basis of the deletion in the amended rules of 1981, as explained in the counter

affidavit.
The learned Additional Solicitor General submitted that the Constitution Bench

in
Sita Ram
(supra) recognized that the Court does possess the power to dismiss an

appeal, which is instituted either under
Article 134(1)(a)
or (b) or
Section 2
of the
7
Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act, at a preliminary hearing.
It has been submitted that in

terms of the decision in
Sita Ram
(supra), there is a discretion left with this Court to

summarily dismiss a criminal appeal before it on an ex parte basis without calling for

records in certain exceptional circumstances on a case-to-case basis. The ASG

submitted that besides the fact that the appeal and the review filed by the petitioner

have been dismissed, the appeal by the co-accused has been dealt with in a

comprehensive judgment dated 27 March 2019 where the case of the prosecution

based on the testimony of the eye-witnesses has been upheld while confirming the

conviction which was recorded by the High Court in the case of the co-accused (Ravi

Kant - A4).
Moreover, it was urged that the absence of guidelines in Rule 21 of Order

XX of the 2013 Rules would not make it unconstitutional as the guidelines indicated in
Sita Ram
(supra) continue to hold force.
12
Article 134
of the Constitution confers appellate jurisdiction on this Court in

criminal matters. The provision is in the following terms:
“134. Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in regard to criminal
             matters.—

       (1)   An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment,
             final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in
             the territory of India if the High Court
(a)   has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused
             person and sentenced him to death; or
(b)   has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court
             subordinate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the
             accused person and sentenced him to death; or
(c)   certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme
             Court:
Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) shall lie subject to
             such provisions as may be made in that behalf under clause (1)
8
of
Article 145
and to such conditions as the High Court may
           establish or require.
(2)   Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court any further
           power to entertain and hear appeals from any judgment, final
           order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the
           territory of India subject to such conditions and limitations as may
           be specified in such law.”
13   Sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of
Article 134
provides for an appeal to this Court

     where the High Court has, on appeal, reversed an order of acquittal of an

     accused and sentenced him to death. Sub-clause (b) provides for an appeal to

     this Court where the High Court has withdrawn for trial before itself any case

     from a court subordinate to its authority and in the course of such a trial

     convicted the accused and sentenced him to death. Sub-clause (c) deals with a

     certification by the High Court that the case is fit for appeal to the Supreme

     Court. Clause (2) of
Article 134
empowers Parliament by law to confer on the

     Supreme Court any further power to entertain and hear appeals from a judgment,

     final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court subject to such

     conditions and limitations as may be specified in law.
14   In exercise of the jurisdiction vested in it by
Article 134(2)
of the Constitution,

     Parliament expanded the jurisdiction of this Court to entertain appeals in criminal

     cases by enacting the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act.
Section 2
of the statute

     provides as follows:
“2.    Enlarged appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in
                  regard to criminal matters.—Without prejudice to the
                  powers conferred on the Supreme Court by clause (1) of
Article 134
of the Constitution, an appeal shall lie to the
                  Supreme Court from any judgment, final order or
                  sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the
                  territory of India if the High Court—
9
(a)    has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an
                          accused person and sentenced him to imprisonment for,
                          life or to imprisonment for a period of not less than ten
                          years;
(b)    has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any
                          court subordinate to its authority and has in such trial
                          convicted the accused person and sentenced him to
                          imprisonment for life or to imprisonment for a period of
                          not less than ten years.”
15           By virtue of clause (a) of Section 2 of the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act, an

appeal lies before this Court where the High Court has, while reversing the acquittal of

an accused, sentenced him to suffer imprisonment for life or to imprisonment for a

period of at least ten years. Clause (b) provides for an appeal to this Court where the

High Court has withdrawn for trial before itself any case and in the course of such a trial

either sentenced the accused to suffer imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less

than ten years.
16
Section 379
of the Code of Criminal Procedure 19739 provides for an appeal to

this Court where the High Court has, on appeal, reversed an order of acquittal of an

accused and, while convicting him, sentenced him to death or to imprisonment for life or

to imprisonment for a term of ten years or more. The Joint Select Committee by its

report dated 4 December 1972 suggested the incorporation of                      provision to bring the

position in line with the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act. Section 379 is in the following

terms:
“379. Where the High Court has, on appeal, reversed an order of
                          acquittal of an accused person and convicted him and
                          sentenced him to death or to imprisonment for life or to
                          imprisonment for a term of ten years or more, he may
                          appeal to the Supreme Court.”
9
“
CrPC
”
10
17
Article 145
of the Constitution empowers the Supreme Court, with the approval of

the President, to make Rules regulating its practice and procedure, including various

matters which are spelt out thereunder.
Article 145
provides as follows:
“145. Rules of Court, etc.—(1) Subject to the provisions of any law made by
                  Parliament, the Supreme Court may from time to time, with the approval of the
                  President, make rules for regulating generally the practice and procedure of
                  the Court including:
(a)     ***

                  (b)     rules as to the procedure for hearing appeals and other matters
pertaining to appeals including the time within which appeals to the Court are
                  to be entered;
(c)     ***

                  (d)     rules as to the entertainment of appeals under sub-clause (c) of clause
                  (1) of
Article 134;

                  (e)
to (h)     ***

                  (i)     rules providing for the summary determination of any appeal which
appears to the Court to be frivolous or vexatious or brought for the purpose of
                  delay;”
18        The Supreme Court (Amendment) Rules 197810 inserted an amendment into

Rule 15(1)of Order XXI of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966 on 13 March 1978. Order

XXI, Rule 15(1) of the Supreme Court Rules as amended in 1978 provided as follows:
“15. (1) The petition of appeal shall be registered and numbered as soon as it
                  is lodged. Each of the following categories of appeals, on being registered,
                  shall be put up for hearing ex parte before the Court which may either dismiss
                  it summarily or direct issue of notice to all necessary parties, or may make
                  such orders, as the circumstances of the case may require, namely:
(a)     an appeal from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal
                          proceeding of a High Court summarily dismissing the appeal or the
                          matter, as the case may be, before it;
(b)     an appeal on a certificate granted by the High Court under
Article
                          132(1)
and/or 134(1)(c) of the Constitution, or under any other provision
10
“Amendment Rules 1978”
11
of law if the High Court has not recorded the reasons or the grounds for
                   granting the certificate;
(c)   an appeal under sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) of clause (1) of
Article
                   134
of the Constitution, or under the Supreme Court (Enlargement of
                   Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1970 (28 of 1970) or under
Section
                   379
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);
(d)   an appeal under
Section 476B
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898
                   (5 of 1898);
(e)   an appeal under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
Section 19
of the
                   Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 (70 of 1971).”

19    In
Sita Ram
(supra), the constitutional validity of Rule 15(1)(c) of Order XXI of

the 1966 Rules and
Section 384
CrPC was called into question.


20    Justice Krishna Iyer, speaking for a majority of three learned Judges of the

Constitution Bench, upheld the validity of Rule 15(1)(c) of Order XXI of the 1966 Rules

and of
Section 384
of CrPC “by reading down their scope, substance and intendement”.

The Could held that ordinarily, save where nothing is served by a fuller hearing, “notice

must go”. The premise of the decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court is that if

every appeal under
Article 134(1)(a)
and (b) or Section 2(a) of the Enlargement of

Jurisdiction Act were to be set down for preliminary hearing and summary disposal, the

meaningful difference between
Article 134
and
Article 136
may stand eroded and the

intent of Parliament would be stultified. The Court held that if the punishment which

was being imposed for the first time in the appeal was not a death sentence, there can

be no constitutional infirmity in the disposal of the appeal at the preliminary hearing

where the appeal belongs to an exceptional category in which “there is no point at all”.


21    In order to appreciate the ambit of the judgment of the Constitution Bench, it

would be necessary to extract the illustrative examples which are furnished in
12
paragraph 50 of the judgment, that is, when an appeal could be conceivably disposed

of at the preliminary hearing itself:
“50.   What are those cases where a preliminary hearing is a
                     worthwhile exercise? Without being exhaustive, we may
                     instance some. Where the only ground urged is a point of
                     law which has been squarely covered by a ruling of this
                     Court to keep the appeal lingering longer is survival after
                     death. Where the accused has pleaded guilty of murder
                     and the High Court, on the evidence, is satisfied with the
                     pleas and has awarded the lesser penalty, a mere
                     appeal ex misericordia is an exercise in futility. Where a
                     minor procedural irregularity, clearly curable under the
                     Code, is all that the appellant has to urge, the full panoply
                     of an appellate bearing is an act of supererogation.
                     Where the grounds, taken at their face value, are
                     frivolous, vexatious, malicious, wholly dilatory or blatantly
                     mendacious, the prolongation of an appeal is a premium
                     on abuse of the process of court. Maybe other cases can
                     be conceived of, but we merely illustrate the functional
                     relevance of Order 21 Rule 15(1)(c).”
22    Having said this and observed that the instances which were adverted to in

paragraph 50 were illustrative and not exhaustive, the Court nonetheless held that its

decision to uphold Rule 15(1)(c) of Order XXI could not be construed as a charter for

the disposal of all appeals routinely on a preliminary hearing. This, the Court held,

would obliterate the difference between
Article 134
and
Article 136
, “between right and

leave”. Consequently, the Court held that the rule in cases of appeals under
Article

134(1)(a)
and (b) or Section 2(a) of the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act was “notice,

records and reasons”. The exception would be a preliminary hearing on all such

materials as may be placed by the appellant and brief grounds for dismissal.


23    In paragraphs 53 to 55 of the judgment, the Court has formulated the principle in

the following terms:
13
“53.   The common embankments applicable to Order 21, Rule
                    15(1)(c) and Section 384 of the Code to prevent
                    unconstitutional overflow may now be concretised, not as
                    rigid manacles but as guidelines for safe exercise. We are
                    hopeful that the Supreme Court will if found necessary,
                    make- clarificatory rules in this behalf.
54.    To conclude, we uphold the vires of Order 21, Rule
                    15(1)(c) of the Supreme Court Rules and also
Section
                    384
of the Criminal Procedure Code but hold that in their
                    application both the provisions shall be restricted-by
                    certain criteria as a permissible exercise in
                    constitutionalisation.
55.    Order 21 Rule 15(1)(c) in action does not mean that all
                    appeals falling within its fold shall be routinely disposed
                    of, as far as possible, on a preliminary hearing. Such a
                    course, as earlier mentioned, obliterates the difference
                    between
Articles 134
and
136
, between right and leave.
The rule, in cases of appeals under Article 134(1)(a) and
(b) and
Section 2(a)
is notice, records and reasons, but
                    the exception is preliminary hearing on all such materials
                    as may be placed by the appellant and brief grounds for
                    dismissal. This exceptional category is where, in all
                    conscience, there is no point at all. In cases of real doubt
                    the benefit of doubt goes to the appellant and notice goes
                    to the adversary — even if the chances of allowance of
                    the appeal be not bright. We think it proper to suggest
                    that with a view to invest clarity and avoid ambiguity.
Order 21, Rule 15(1)(c) may be suitably modified in
                    conformity with this ruling.”

24    The Constitution Bench has considered the challenge to Rule 15(1)(c) of Order

XXI of the 1966 Rules from the perspective of
Article 21.
Procedure established by law,

it is well-settled, must be fair, just and reasonable. The Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act

was enacted by Parliament in pursuance of the power conferred by clause (2) of
Article

134
of the Constitution. The object of Parliament in enacting the law was, inter alia, that

where the High Court has, on appeal, reversed an acquittal and sentenced the accused

to a sentence of imprisonment of life or to imprisonment for not less than ten years, a

right of appeal should be made available to the Supreme Court. A parity of principle
14
applies where the High Court has withdrawn for trial before itself any case pending

before a court subordinate to its authority and sentenced the accused to either

imprisonment for life or to a term of not less than ten years. There is a doctrinal parity

between the conferment of a right to appeal by
Article 134(1)(a)
and (b) and
Sections

2(a)
and (b) of the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act, save and except for the fact that the

former deals with a case where the High Court has imposed a sentence of death, while,

the latter deals with a situation where the High Court has, while reversing an order of

acquittal, imposed a sentence of either imprisonment for life or for a term of not less

than ten years.
25
Article 136
of the Constitution deals with the power of this Court to grant special

leave to appeal. The Constitution Bench in
Sita Ram
(supra) has noted the distinction

between the right of appeal which is provided by
Article 134
, on the one hand, and

Section 2 of the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act, on the other, while distinguishing this,

from the special leave provisions which are embodied in
Article 136.
The Constitution

Bench has cautioned that if all appeals were to be heard and disposed of routinely on a

preliminary hearing, the distinction between the right of appeal and the grant of leave

would stand obliterated contrary to the intent of Constitution makers and of Parliament,

while formulating the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act.
It is from this perspective that in
Sita Ram
(supra), the Constitution Bench has observed that the rule in cases which are

governed by
Article 134(1)(a)
and (b) or Section 2 of the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act

is “notice, records and reasons”. The dismissal of an appeal at a preliminary hearing is

by way of an exception. The exceptional situations which the Court contemplated,
15
without being exhaustive, have been elucidated in paragraph 50 of the judgment of the

Constitution Bench.
26    The judgment of the Constitution Bench lays down the invariable principle that

where the Constitution, on the one hand, as in the case of
Article 134(1)(a)
and (b) and

Parliament, on the other hand, as in the case of Section 2 of the Enlargement of

Jurisdiction Act, confer a right of appeal, a meaningful substantive content must be

imported to the conferment of that right of the accused. The Court, as the Constitution

Bench held, may undoubtedly have the power to dispose of the appeal at a preliminary

hearing, but, this again is in the nature of an exception. It is in the nature of an

exception because the conferment of a right of an appeal is intended to facilitate and

protect the right under
Article 21
of the Constitution. The Constitution Bench

emphasized that the right of appeal under
Article 134
is “a part of the procedure

established by law for the protection of life and personal liberty”. Consequently, not

only would a notice have to be issued, but the Court would be well advised to go

through the record and indicate reasons for its decision. In paragraphs 28 to 31 of the

judgment, the Court observed that the right of appeal in criminal cases is protected

under
Article 21
of the Constitution and that no provision, that renders this right illusory,

can interfere with the mandate of
Article 21:
“28.   It is just as well that we remind ourselves of a value-setter
                    here. Life and liberty have been the cynosure of special
                    constitutional attention in
Article 21
, the fuller implications
                    whereof have been unravelled in Maneka Gandhi case.
                    When we read the signification of the right of appeal
                    under
Article 134
we must remember that it is a part of
                    the procedure established by law for the protection of life
                    and personal liberty. Surely, law, in this setting, is a
                    pregnant       expression.    Bhagwati,      J.,    in Maneka
16
Gandhi stated the position emphatically and since then
this Court has followed that prescription and even
developed it in humane directions, a striking example of
which is the recent judgment in Presidential Reference
No. 1 of 1978. “Is the prescription of some sort of
procedure enough or must the procedure comply with any
particular requirements?” asks Bhagwati, J., (SCC p. 281,
para 5) in the leading opinion, and answers: (SCC p. 281,
para 5 and p. 284, para 7)

       “Obviously, the procedure cannot be arbitrary,
       unfair or unreasonable.... The principle of
       reasonableness, which legally as well as
       philosophically, is an essential element of equality
       or non-arbitrariness pervades
Article 14
like a
       brooding omnipresence and the procedure
       contemplated by
Article 21
must answer the test
       of reasonableness in order to be in conformity
       with
Article 14.
It must be „right and just and fair‟
       and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive;
       otherwise, it would be no procedure at all and the
       requirement of
Article 21
would not be satisfied.
Holding that natural justice was part of Indian
Constitutional jurisprudence the learned Judge quoted
Lord           Morris          of         Borthy—Gest
in
Wiseman v. Borneman
[1971 AC 297 : (1961) 3 All ER
275] :
“... that the conception of natural justice should at
       all stages guide those who discharge judicial
       functions is not merely an acceptable but is an
       essential part of the philosophy of the law.”

Bhagwati, J., brought out the essence of the concept of
natural justice as part of reasonable procedure when he
observed: (SCC p. 291)

       “The core of it must, however, remain, namely,
       that the person affected must have a reasonable
       opportunity of being heard and the hearing must
       be a genuine hearing and not an empty public
       relations exercise. That is why Tucker, L.J.,
       emphasised in Russel v. Duke of Norfolk [(1949)
       1 All ER 109] that „whatever standard of natural
       justice is adopted, one essential is that the person
       concerned should have a reasonable opportunity
       of presenting his case‟. What opportunity may be
       regarded as reasonable would necessarily
17
depend on the practical necessities of the
             situation. It may be a sophisticated full-fledged
             hearing or it may be a hearing which is very brief
             and minimal.”

      One of us (Krishna Iyer, J.) emphasised the fundamental
      fairness required by
Article 21
in every law that abridges
      life or liberty: (SCC p. 337, para 81)

             „Procedure established by law‟, with its lethal
             potentiality, will reduce life and liberty to a
             precarious       plaything    if   we      do     not ex
             necessitate import into those weighty words an
             adjectival rule of law, civilised in its soul, fair in its
             heart and fixing those imperatives of procedural
             protection absent which the processual tail will
             wag the substantive head.... An enacted
             apparition is a constitutional illusion. Processual
             justice is writ patently on Article 21.”
29.   We have set out the sweep of
Article 21
because the
      rule framed by this Court, namely. Order 21, Rule
      15(1)(c), cannot transcend this obligation, nor indeed
      can Section 384 of the Code. On the contrary, as
      Bhagwati, J., has observed in Maneka Gandhi case (SCC
      p. 314):
“It is a basic constitutional assumption underlying
             every statutory grant of power that the authority
             on which the power is conferred should act
             constitutionally and not in violation of any
             fundamental rights.”
30.   We have made these general remarks to set the
      interpretative tone when translating the sense of the
      expression “appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court”.
Nothing which will render this right illusory or its
      fortune chancy can square with the mandate of
Article 21.
What applies to the right of appeal under
      Section 2(a) of the Enlargement Act must apply to an
      appeal under
Article 134(1)(a)
and (b) and, therefore,
      it is wiser to be assumed of what comports with
      reasonableness and fairplay in cases covered by the
      latter category.
31.   When an accused is acquitted by the trial court, the initial
      presumption of innocence in his favour is reinforced by
      the factum of acquittal. If this reinforced innocence is not
      only reversed in appeal but the extreme penalty of death
      is imposed on him by the High Court, it stands to reason
18
that it requires thorough examination by the Supreme
                    Court. A similar reasoning applies to cases falling under
Article 134(1)(b).
When the High Court trying a case
                    sentences a man to death a higher court must examine
                    the merits to satisfy that a human life shall not be haltered
                    without an appellate review. The next step is whether a
                    hearing that is to be extended or the review that has to be
                    made by the Supreme Court in such circumstances can
                    be narrowed down to a consideration, in a summary
                    fashion, of the necessarily limited record then available
                    before the Court and total dismissal of the appeal if on
                    such a prima facie examination nothing flawsome is
                    brought out by the appellant to the satisfaction of the
                    Court. A single right of appeal is more or less a
                    universal requirement of the guarantee of life and
                    liberty rooted in the conception that men are fallible,
                    that Judges are men and that making assurance
                    doubly sure, before irrevocable deprivation of life or
                    liberty comes to pass, a full-scale re-examination of
                    the facts and the law is made an integral part of
                    fundamental fairness or procedure.”
                                                          (emphasis supplied)

27    Rule 15(1)(c) of Order XXI of Rules 1966, inter alia, provided that an appeal

under
Article 134(1)(a)
or (b) or under the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act or
Section

379
of CrPC could be placed for ex parte hearing before the Court and which the Court

may either dismiss summarily or direct the issuance of notice to all necessary parties.

The Rule also contemplated that the Court may make such orders as the circumstances

of the case may require. The decision of the Constitution Bench regarded a summary

dismissal without the issuance of notice as an exception, the ordinary rule being „notice,

record and reasons‟. The Constitution Bench, after having laid down the principles of

law, observed that in order to invest clarity and to avoid ambiguity, Order XXI, Rule

15(1)(c) may be suitably modified in conformity with the judgement. The purpose of the

Constitution Bench in doing so was to bring greater clarity to the provisions of Rule

15(1)(c) by ensuring that the power which would confer was duly channelized in

conformity with the principles embodied in
Article 21.
In fact, that is the perspective from
19
which the Court observed that it was hopeful that the Supreme Court would, if found

necessary, make clarificatory rules in this behalf and that Order XXI, Rule 15(1)(c) may

be suitably modified in conformity with the ruling. The clarity which it sought in the

provisions of the rule was in order to streamline the power of a summary dismissal

without the issuance of a notice.
28     After the decision of the Constitution Bench in
Sita Ram
(supra), the provisions

contained in Rule 15(1)(c) of Order XXI were deleted on 21 May 1981 by the

Amendment Rules 1981.
29     In the counter affidavit, which has been filed in these proceedings by the

Registrar (Judicial) of the Supreme Court, the basis for the deletion has been sought to

be explained. A note was put up by the then Registrar (Judicial) of the Supreme Court

on 22 June 1979 submitting that the decision in
Sita Ram
(supra) basically enunciated

three criteria:
“(i)    Ordinarily the records shall be sent for and are available.
Counsel‟s assistance apart, the Court itself must apply its
                      mind. (Page 21)
(ii)    The appeal shall not be dismissed summarily or after a
                      mere preliminary hearing even with the records on hand
                      but only after notice and debate at the Bar. (Page 21)
(iii)   The reasons for decision be given. (Page 23)”
30     Having set out the above criteria, the note of the Registrar states:
“The above three criteria taken as a whole, could only
                      mean that an appeal can be listed for so-called
                      preliminary hearing only after the records are called for
                      and the respondent is given notice there of which
                      amounts to final hearing and not a preliminary hearing,
                      which is usually ex parte on the papers filed by the
                      appellant. Since the rule has been held to be intra vires,
20
the appeals under
Article 134(1)(a)
& (b) may be listed for
                  preliminary hearing as they are being done now but the
                  Judges hearing the matter may apply the above criteria
                  and call for the records and order notice to the
                  Respondent and pass suitable orders after perusing the
                  records and hearing the respondent. If the appeal is
                  admitted, the paper-book of the appeal will be prepared
                  subsequently.”
31    Following the above note of the Registrar (Judicial), a Committee of three Judges

was set up by the then Chief Justice of India to consider the matter and examine

whether the amendments proposed by the office were in order. The minutes of the

meeting of the Committee of Judges recorded the following view:
“A meeting of the Committee consisting of the Hon‟ble
                  Mr. Justice V.D. Tulzapurkar, Hon‟ble Mr. Justice D.A.
                  Desai and the Hon‟ble Mr. Justice E.S. Venkataramiah,
                  was held in the Chamber of the Hon‟ble Mr. Justice V.D.
                  Tulzapurkar on Wednesday the 25th July 1979 at 1:30
                  P.M. in order to consider the amendments to the
                  Supreme Court Rules suggested in the note of the
                  Registrar dated 22.06.1979, pursuant to the Constitution
                  (44th
Amendment) Act, 1978
, etc. The Committee
                  unanimously      recommended        that   the   proposed
                  amendments to the Rules should not be made. It was
                  further of the opinion that the Full Court should consider
                  the question whether the majority view in Sita Ram‟s case
                  (Criminal Appeal No.264 of 1978 decided on 24.01.1978)
                  should be reflected in the Rules by adding the following
                  proviso to clause (c) of rule 15(1) of Order XXI of the
                  Supreme Court Rules:-
“Provided that before summarily dismissing such appeal,
                  the records of the case shall be called for and the
                  appellant be heard.”
32    Following the report of the Committee, the amendment was placed before a

meeting of the Full Court on 6 August 1979, when the following decision was recorded:
“As regards clause (c) of rule 15(1), which provides for
                  the ex parte hearing of an appeal under sub-clause (a) or
                  sub-clause (b) of clause (1) of
Art.134
of the Constitution
                  or under the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal
21
Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1970 (28 of 1970) or under
section 379
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of
                       1974), after discussion, it was decided that the aforesaid
                       clause shall be deleted.”
33    From the above narration, what emerges is that the primary reason for deleting

the provisions of Rule 15(1)(c) of Order XXI was that the sub-rule, as it was framed,

envisaged that certain categories of appeals would be put up for hearing ex parte when

it was open to the Court to either dismiss summarily or, as the case may be, direct the

issuance of notice. In view of the decision of the Constitution Bench that the issuance of

a notice must follow, the Full Court decided to delete Rule 15(1)(c) of Order XXI (we are

not concerned in these proceedings with the other amendments which were made). The

Full Court possibly contemplated that the judgment of the Constitution Bench in
Sita

Ram
(supra) contained sufficient guidance in regard to the procedure to be followed in

the case of appeals arising under
Article 134(1)(a)
or (b) or Section 2 of the

Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act.
34    The 1966 Rules have since given way to the 2013 Rules which were published in

the Gazette of India on 29 May 2014 and came into force on 19 August 2014. Order

XX contains provisions with respect to the procedure for preliminary hearing of certain

categories of criminal appeals before this Court. Rule 5(1) of Order XX contains the

following provision:
“5.(1) The petition of appeal shall be registered and
                       numbered as soon as it is found to be in order. Each of
                       the following categories of appeals, on being registered,
                       shall be put for hearing ex parte before the Court, which
                       may either dismiss it summarily or direct issue of notice to
                       all necessary parties, or may make such orders, as the
                       circumstances of the case may require, namely:
22
(a)    an appeal from any judgment, final order or
                   sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court
                   summarily dismissing the appeal or the matter, as the
                   case may be, before it;
(b)      an appeal on a certificate granted by the High
                   Court under
Article 134-A
of the Constitution being a
                   certificate of the nature referred to in clause (1) of
Article
                   132
or sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of
Article 134
of the
                   Constitution or under any other provision of law if the
                   High Court has not recorded the reasons or the grounds
                   for granting the certificate;
(c)     an appeal under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
Section 19
of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 (70 of
                   1971).”

35    Rule 5(1) of Order XX indicates the categories of appeals which, on being

registered, shall be put up for hearing ex parte. The category of appeals specified in

clauses (a), (b) and (c) does not cover appeals falling under
Article 134(1)(a)
or (b) or

Section 2 of the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act. Hence and even otherwise as a matter

of precept, the principles which have been
laid down by
the Constitution Bench in
Sita

Ram
(supra) must govern the procedure to be followed while disposing of appeals

under
Article 134(1)(a)
or (b) or Section 2 of the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act.

Ordinarily in all such appeals, notice must be issued. The issuance of notice would

facilitate a proper examination by the Court of the dimensions of the appeal with the

assistance of both the sides on whether the judgment of the High Court, which is the

subject matter of the appeal, would warrant further consideration. While disposing of the

appeal, it is only appropriate and proper that the Court must record reasons. The

recording of reasons, in a matter where the accused has a constitutional or statutory

right of appeal against the conviction, lends assurance to the judicial process. The

liberty of the accused is fundamentally impacted by the outcome of the appeal. The

recording of reasons lays confidence to the process that a statutory appeal which
23
impinges upon the liberty of the accused has been considered judiciously. Our

insistence on recording of reasons emanates from the principles of natural justice and

fairness in decision-making, which serve the precept that justice must not only be

done, but must also appear to be done.
36    The decision of the Constitution Bench in
Sita Ram
(supra) has enunciated the

following principles which it would be worthwhile to recapitulate:
(i)     An appeal falling within the ambit of
Article 134(1)(a)
or (b) or Section 2 of

              the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act should ordinarily not be disposed of at

              a preliminary hearing without the issuance of notice to the opposite party

              and calling for the record;
(ii)    A hearing should be afforded in presence of both parties and with records

              on hand; and
(iii)   Reasons should be indicated while disposing of the appeal.
37    With the deletion of Rule 15(1)(c) of Order XXI of the 1966 Rules, appeals falling

within the ambit of
Article 134(1)(a)
or (b) or under the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act

were specifically taken out of the purview of appeals which would be put up for ex parte

hearing upon registration and which the Court may either dismiss summarily or direct

the issuance of notice to the parties. The object and intendment of the deletion was to

ensure that such appeals are not disposed of summarily ex parte without the issuance

of a notice. The deletion must be so construed as to give effect to the fundamental

postulate underlying the judgment of the Constitution Bench in
Sita Ram
(supra). The

deletion of a provision in the 2013 Rules akin to Rule 15(1)(c) of Order XXI of the 1966
24
Rules should not be interpreted to confer an uncharted discretion to dismiss an appeal

of that description summarily at an ex parte hearing without the issuance of a notice.

To the contrary, the deletion of the provision, as the material in the counter affidavit

indicates, was in order to fulfil the mandate of the decision of the Constitution Bench.
The principles propounded in
Sita Ram
(supra) continue to hold effect and guide

preliminary hearing of certain categories of criminal appeals under Order XX, including

Order XX, Rule 21 of the 2013 Rules. The principle enunciated by the Constitution

Bench that reasons should be recorded while dismissing appeals falling within the ambit

of the above provisions has not been introduced by way of an amendment to the Rules

since it is expected that on the judicial side, the Court would follow the principles which

have been enunciated by the Constitution Bench.
38    In the present case, the acquittal of the petitioner of the charge of committing

offences punishable under Section 302 read with
Section 34
of the IPC was reversed

by the High Court and he was sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life. The appeal,

under Section 2(a) of the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act read with
Section 379
CrPC,

which was filed by the present petitioner was listed before this Court for a preliminary

hearing on 5 May 2014 and was dismissed in limine. The judgment of this Court

dismissing the appeal does not evidently furnish reasons. The difficulty in granting any

relief to the petitioner in these proceedings is that an appeal having been dismissed on

the judicial side and a review having been since dismissed against that judgment, it

would not be open for this Court while exercising jurisdiction under
Article 32
of the

Constitution to issue any contrary direction. The petitioner would be at liberty to pursue

the remedies available in law. The view which we have taken would, it is hoped, set at
25
rest the modalities to be followed while entertaining appeals under Article 134(1)(a) or
(b) or Section 2 of the Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act. Before concluding, we may note

that we have not made any specific finding in regard to the consequence of the

dismissal of the appeal by the co-accused (A4) by a reasoned judgment dated 27

March 2019 on the remedies available to the petitioner in law.


39    The petition is accordingly disposed of.
40    Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                             [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                 …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                  [A S Bopanna]


New Delhi;
August 16, 2022
-S-