[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Manjit Singh Sodhi vs The Custodian on 4 August, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Reportable
                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                               Civil Appeal No 5126 of 2022
                                          (Arising out of SLP(C) No 10572 of 2020)


      Manjit Singh Sodhi                                                         .... Appellant(s)


                                                          Versus


      The Custodian & Ors                                                        ....Respondent(s)



                                                     JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J


  1                      Leave granted.
2                      The appeal arises from a judgment dated 6 March 2020 of the Special Court

      constituted under the
Special Court (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions in

      Securities) Act
19921. The decision of the Special Court arises out of an execution

      application filed by the Custodian, the first respondent, being Execution Application No

      1 of 2019.
3                      Fairgrowth Financial Services Ltd2, the second respondent, is a company

      registered under the provisions of the
Companies Act
1956.                        Raviraj Housing

      Corporation, the third respondent, had availed a short term loan of Rupees Twenty five
Signature Not Verified
lakhs from FFSL and agreed to repay it after 180 days with interest at the rate of 20
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2022.08.10
14:21:32 IST
Reason:
percent per annum. The first respondent is the custodian appointed by the Central


      1                  “Act of 1992”
      2                  “FFSL”
2
Government under the provisions of the Act of 1992. The custodian notified the second

    respondent as a “notified person” under the provisions of
Section 3(2)
of the Act of

    1992.3      The assets of FFSL stood attached with effect from 2 July 1992. The case of

    FFSL was that the third respondent had executed a promissory note on 14 October

    1991 for the repayment of the loan and a letter of undertaking-cum-indemnity reiterating

    its commitment to repay Rupees twenty five lakhs. FFSL instituted Miscellaneous

    Petition No 15 of 2000 against the third respondent for the recovery of an amount of

    Rupees twenty five lakhs, together with interest at the rate of twenty per cent. On 28

    March 2003, the Special Court directed the third respondent to pay to FFSL a sum of

    Rs 63.86 lakhs, together with interest at twenty per cent on the principal sum of Rupees

    twenty five lakhs from the date of the institution of the petition till payment and/or

    realization.
4            On 28 April 2003, a notice was issued by FFSL to the third respondent for the

    payment of the decretal amount. This was followed by a notice dated 16 December

    2011 by the first respondent.                   On 22 February 2018, the appellant addressed a

    communication to the first respondent stating that the erstwhile trustee of Raviraj

    Housing Corporation, who was looking after its affairs, died in 2004 and that the

    appellant became a trustee after his death. By the said communication, the appellant

    offered to pay the principal amount of Rupees twenty five lakhs and sought a waiver of

    the interest. By a communication dated 10 July 2018 the first respondent stated that the

    decision on waiver of interest on the decretal sum rests with the Special Court under

    the Act of 1992. The Custodian stated that pending the filing of an application before

    the Special Court seeking a waiver of interest, the principal amount be sent to FFSL

    expeditiously. Pursuant to his offer, the appellant admittedly paid an amount of Rupees
3
Section 3(2)
“ The custodian many, on being satisfied on information received that any person has been involved in any
                                                              st                                        th
    offence relating to transactions in securities after the 1 day of April 1991 and on and before the 6 June, 1992, notify the
    name of such person in the Official Gazette.”
2
3
one lakh.           However, the advocate for Raviraj Housing Corporation sent another

    communication on 19 October 2018 stating that since the appellant became a trustee

    only in 2005 after the death of Mr. LV Whabhi who used to conduct the affairs of the

    Corporation, he is not liable to pay the dues of the third respondent. It was also stated

    that the third respondent trust does not have any income. A copy of a nil annual income

    tax return for the year 2002-2003 was furnished to substantiate the claims.

5              The first respondent moved an execution application4 before the Special Court.

    The Execution Application was contested by the appellant on the ground that it was

    barred by limitation. The appellant submitted that though the decree was made in 2003,

    the first demand by the custodian was made sixteen years later on 16 December 2011

    and the delay has not been explained. On 14 June 2019, the Special Court passed an

    ad-interim order directing the disclosure of assets of the appellant and the third

    respondent. The Special Court, by its judgment dated 6 March 2020 observed that the

    appellant has been attempting to delay the proceedings. The Special Court held that

    the claim of the first respondent is not barred by the law of limitation because:
(i)      The appellant in the letters addressed to the Custodian on 22 February

                        2018 and 11 August 2018 acknowledged the liability to pay the dues and

                        sought a waiver of interest. The appellant also remitted a sum of Rs

                        1,00,000 by demand draft drawn from the bank account of Raviraj Housing

                        Corporation in which the balance is alleged to only be in the amount of Rs.
15,036. The Bank account has been selectively used to show minimal

                        balances but funds are made available for issuing Demand Drafts. Thus,

                        the appellant clearly acknowledged liability; and
(ii)     Even otherwise, the execution application has been filed by the Custodian
4
Execution application no. 1 of 2019
3
4
who is entitled and liable to recover the amounts in accordance with the

                  Act of 1992.
6         Appearing on behalf of the appellant, Mr Huzefa A Ahmadi, learned senior

    counsel, submitted that:
(i)     The appellant was not part of the trust when the decree was passed, since

                  he had become a trustee only in 2005 and that, in any event, the personal

                  properties of the appellant cannot be attached in satisfaction of the decree;
(ii)    The appellant‟s letter dated 22 February 2018 does not acknowledge

                  liability, but, in substance, is only a „without prejudice‟ offer to pay; and
(iii)   In any event, the acknowledgement which was issued on 22 February

                  2018 is beyond the period of limitation since the decree is of 2003 and the

                  limitation which is prescribed by
Article 136
of the
Schedule to the

                  Limitation Act
19635 would be applicable.
7         On the other hand, Mr Arvind Kumar Tewari, learned counsel appearing on

    behalf of the first respondent has relied on a decision of a three-Judge Bench of this

    Court in
L S Synthetics Ltd v. Fairgrowth Financial Services Ltd and Another6
in

    which it has been held that the provisions of the Act of 1963 would apply only when a

    suit is filed or a proceeding is initiated for recovery of an amount. The judgment holds

    that the Act of 1963 would have no application towards claims pending before the

    Special Court for the purpose of the discharge of liabilities of a notified person in terms

    of
Section 11
of the Act of 1992.
8         Responding to this submission, Mr Ahmadi has urged that the decision in L S

    5      “Act of 1963”
    6      (2004) 11
SCC 456
4
5
Synthetics
(supra) has been explained by a two-judge bench in
Fairgrowth

     Investments Ltd v. Custodian7
, where the observations in the earlier decision have

     been limited to the provisions of
Section 11
of the Act of 1992 and to the proceedings

     by the Special Court under that provision.
9         At this stage, it would be material to note that Mr Tewari appearing on behalf of

     the first respondent has sought to challenge the maintainability of the appeal on the

     ground that
Section 10
of the Act of 1992 excludes an appeal to this Court against an

     interlocutory order.
Section 10
is extracted below:
“10.    Appeal - (1) Notwithstanding anything in the Code (or
the
                          Code of Civil Procedure
1908 or the
Arbitration Act
1940,
                          an appeal shall lie from any judgment [decree] sentence
                          or order, not being interlocutory order, of the Special
                          Court in the Supreme Court both on facts and law.”
10         Responding to the preliminary objection to the maintainability of the appeal, it has

     been urged on behalf of the appellant that the Special Court has, in the present case,

     concluded the aspect of limitation by holding that there was an acknowledgement of

     liability by the appellant on 22 February 2018. Learned senior counsel submitted that

     since the issue of limitation has been concluded against the appellant, the decision of

     the Special Court cannot, in substance, be regarded as interlocutory in nature.

11         The order which has been passed by the Special Court is for the disclosure of

     assets. For convenience of reference, the operative part of the directions of the Special

     Court is extracted below:
“(i).   Respondent nos. 1 and 2 are directed to disclose their
                          assets. Respondent no. 2 is directed to disclose all
                          personal assets, shares held in jointly and with others as
                          also stocks of limited companies bonds, Mutual Funds,
                          National Savings Certificates, Post Office Savings and
                          other securities all of which will be disclosed in affidavit
                          to be filed within a period of two weeks from today.
7     (2004) 11 SCC 472
5
6
(ii)    Meanwhile respondent no. 2 shall also disclose his
                               Permanent Account number as registered with the
                               Income Tax Authorities within two weeks from today. If
                               such disclosure is not forthcoming the concerned
                               Commissioner of Income Tax shall provide the Custodian
                               with the PAN based on which Custodian is directed to
                               make all necessary inquires and seek disclosure of
                               assets from the aforesaid parties.
(iii)   The Custodian shall address letters to NSDL and CDSL
                               calling upon them to furnish copies of statement of
                               accounts of all transactions in shares and stocks and
                               bonds and Mutual funds that may be held in the name of
                               respondent no. 2 in his own name and jointly with any
                               third party, respondent no. 1 and 2 jointly and separately
                               or with any third party, respondent no. 2. The NSDL and
                               CDSL are directed to comply with the request of the
                               Custodian within a period of one week of receipt of such
                               demand along with authenticated copy of this order for
                               further directions.
(iv)    In the meantime there will be an ad-interim order in terms
                               of prayer clause( c) which reads as follows :
(c)     that pending the final hearing and disposal of the present
                               Application, the Respondent No. 1 and Respondent No.
                               2 and /or his agents, attorneys be injuncted by an order
                               of this Hon'ble Special Court from selling or transferring
                               or alienating or in any manner dealing with or disposing
                               or encumbering or parting with possession or creating
                               any third party rights in respect of all or such of his
                               properties and other movable and immovable assets as
                               are sufficient to satisfy the decretal amount.
(v)     List on 20th March, 2020 for compliance.”

12             A Constitution bench of this Court in Mohan Lal Magan Lal Thacker v. State of
Gujarat8 differentiated between a „final order‟ and „interlocutory order‟ as follows:
“4. The question as to whether a judgment or an order is final
                       or not has been the subject-matter of a number of decisions; yet
                       no single general test for finality has so far been laid down. The
                       reason probably is that a judgment or order may be final for one
                       purpose and interlocutory for another or final as to part and
                       interlocutory as to part. The meaning of the two words “final” and
                       “interlocutory” has, therefore, to be considered separately in
                       relation to the particular purpose for which it is required.
                       However, generally speaking, a judgment or order which
                       determines the principal matter in question is termed final. It may
                       be final although it directs enquiries or is made on an
                       interlocutory application or reserves liberty to apply [Halsbury's
                       Laws of England (3rd Edn.) Vol. 22, 742-43] . In some of the
8
AIR 1968 SC 733
6
7
English decisions where this question arose, one or the other of
                        the following four tests was applied.
1. Was the order made upon an application such that a
                        decision in favour of either party would determine the main
                        dispute?
2. Was it made upon an application upon which the main
                        dispute could have been decided?
3. Does the order as made determine the dispute?
4. If the order in question is reversed, would the action have
                        to go on?”

13             An “interlocutory order” denotes an interim or temporary order which does not

     decide the important rights or liabilities of the parties.9 The Special Court in its order

     dated 6 March 2020 has conclusively held that the execution petition is not barred by

     limitation. The determination of the issue of limitation affects the rights and liabilities of

     the parties. Thus, the argument of the first appellant that the appeal is not maintainable

     in view of
Section 10
of the Act of 1992 is rejected.
14             The Special Judge has specifically held against the appellant on the ground that

     there was an acknowledgement of liability within the meaning of
Section 18
of the Act of

     1963. The finding that there was an acknowledgement of liability within the meaning of

     Section 18 is premised on the hypothesis that the Act of 1963 would stand attracted.
However, it has also been held in the judgment of the Special Court that in any event

     the Custodian is entitled and liable to recover the amount under the Act of 1992 in view

     of the decision of this Court in
L S Synthetics Ltd
(supra).
15             In
L S Synthetics Ltd
(supra), the appellant had obtained short term loans from

     a notified party. The Custodian had called upon the appellant to furnish details of the

     loan. The notified party initiated proceedings before the Special Court seeking a

     direction to the appellant to pay the Custodian on his behalf. The contention of the

     appellant was that the claim was barred by limitation since he had furnished the full

     details of the amount in question to the Custodian in 1993.
On the question of whether
9
Amar Nath v. State of Haryana
, (1977) 4 SCC 137
7
8
the claim of the notified party is barred by limitation, the three-Judge Bench of this Court

held that provisions of the
Limitation Act
have no application, “in so far as directions

required to be issued by the Special Court relating to the disposal of the attached

property are concerned”. The relevant extract of the judgment reads as follows:
“37. We may, however, add that the attachment of the
                    properties of the notified party being for specific
                    purposes, i.e., for the purpose of discharging his
                    liabilities, the Special Court is bound to pass appropriate
                    orders in relation thereto. A property once attached shall
                    remain under attachment till an appropriate order is
                    passed. It is, therefore, idle to contend that even in
                    respect thereof the provisions of the
Limitation Act
would
                    apply. The Court while issuing directions to the
                    Custodian in relation to the attached property for the
                    purpose of discharge of the liability of the notified person
                    must pass an appropriate order. So long the claims or
                    other proceedings initiated before the Special Court
                    as regard discharge of liability of the notified person
                    continue, the attachment remains in force. A
                    proceeding before the Special Court is not a suit for
                    recovery of an amount. The proceedings before the
                    Special Court are extraordinary in nature. Distribution of
                    the assets of a notified person may take a long time but it
                    would bear repetition to state because all the claims filed
                    before the Special Court are disposed of, the property of
                    the notified person stands attached. In other words, the
                    provisions of the
Limitation Act
would inter alia apply only
                    when a suit is filed or a proceeding is initiated for
                    recovery of an amount and not where a property is
                    required to be applied towards the claims pending before
                    the tribunal for the purpose of discharge of the liabilities
                    of the notified person in terms of
Section 11
of the said
                    Act.
[…]

                    41 […] We are, therefore, of the opinion that the
                    provisions of the
Limitation Act
have no application, so
                    far as directions required to be issued by the Special
                    Court relating to the disposal of the attached property,
                    are concerned.”

                                                        (emphasis supplied)
Section 29(2)
of the Limitation Act stipulates that where a special law prescribes a

period of limitation for an application different from the period prescribed in the
Schedule of Act
of 1963, then
Section 3
of the Act of 1963 shall apply as if such period
8
9
was prescribed by the schedule, and the provisions of
Sections 4
to
24
shall apply to

     the extent that it is not expressly excluded by the special Law. The three-Judge Bench

     in
L S Synthetics Ltd
(supra) observed that
Section 29(2)
of the Limitation Act is not

     applicable to the Act of 1992 since in „terms of the provisions of the Act, no period of

     limitation is prescribed‟.
16          In
Fairgrowth Investments Ltd
(supra), the issue before this Court was

     whether the Special Court constituted under the Act of 1992 has the power to condone

     the delay in filing a petition under
Section 4(2)
of the Act. In that case, on 23 November

     2001, the appellant was notified under
Section 3(2)
of the Act of 1992. On 8 October

     2002, the appellant filed a petition of objection to the notification under
Section 4(2)
of

     the Act of 1992. The Special Court rejected the application on the ground that it was

     filed beyond the period of limitation prescribed by
Section 4(2)
.
Section 4(2)
provides

     that any person aggrieved by a notification issued under
Section 3(2)
, may file an

     objection within thirty days of such notification. This Court rejected the contention of the

     appellant that the limitation prescribed under
Section 4(2)
is directory and not

     mandatory and held that
Section 4(2)
is unequivocal and unqualified and there is no

     scope to read in a power of the Court to dispense with the time limit.
Consequently, in
Fairgrowth Investments Ltd
(supra), this Court concurred with the final conclusion in
L S Synthetics Ltd
(supra) to the extent that the provisions of the Act of 1963 have no

     application in relation to a petition under
Section 4(2)
of the Act of 1992.
It was

     observed that the decision of this Court in
LS Synthetics
(supra), was limited to a

     consideration of
Section 11
of the Act of 1992:
“23. The decision by a larger bench in L.S Synthetics Ltd.
                          holding that the provisions of the
Limitation Act, 1963
do
                          not apply to the Act may not have, by itself, concluded
                          the question formulated by us at the outset. That case
                          was, as has been rightly contended by learned counsel
9
10
appearing on behalf of the appellant, limited to a
                         consideration of
Section11
of the Act and the
                         proceedings by the Special Court thereunder. It was in
                         that context that the Court had said that the Act had not
                         provided for any period of limitation. But for the reasons
                         already stated by us we concur in the final conclusion
                         reached by the Court in L.S Synthetics to the extent that
                         the provisions of the
Limitation Act
1963 have not
                         application in relation to a petition under
Section 4(2)
of
                         the Act.
24. Finally,
Section 29(2)
of the Limitation Act speaks of
                         application of the provisions contained in
Sections 4
to
24
“only insofar as, and to the extent to which, they are
                         not expressly excluded by such special or local law”. This
                         language, together with our earlier reasoning, particularly
                         with regard to L.S. Synthetics [(2004) 11 SCC 456:
(2004) 7 Scale 427] would answer the further question
                         raised by the appellant, namely, whether the question of
                         exclusion of the provisions of the
Limitation Act
must be
                         separately considered with reference to different
                         provisions of a special/local Act or in connection with the
                         provisions of the special/local Act, as a whole, by
                         affirmation of the first alternative. We are therefore not
                         called upon to decide whether claims either preferred for
                         the first time before the Special Court or transferred to
                         the Special Court under Section 9-A(2) would attract the
                         provisions of
Sections 4
to
24
of the Limitation Act. It is
                         enough for the purpose of this appeal to hold that
Section 29(2)
of the Limitation Act, 1963 does not apply
                         to proceedings under
Section 4(2)
of the Special Court
                         (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions in Securities)
                         Act, 1992. Since the appellant's petition of objection had
                         been filed much beyond the period prescribed under that
                         section, the Special Court was right in rejecting the
                         petition in limine. The appeal is accordingly dismissed
                         but without any order as to costs.
17         At this juncture,
Section 18
of the Act of 1963 also needs to be noted.
Section 18
of the Act of 1963 stipulates that if an acknowledgment of liability in writing is made

     before the expiration of the prescribed period for a suit or application in respect of any

     right, a fresh period of limitation shall be computed from the time when the

     acknowledgment was signed. Explanation (c) to
Section 18
states that an application

     for the execution of a decree or order shall not be deemed to be an application in

     respect of any property or right.
10
11
18          In the present case, the Special Court has proceeded on the basis that there was

     an acknowledgement of liability by the letter of the appellant dated 22 February 2018.

     That finding is sought to be assailed by the appellant by urging that the

     acknowledgement of liability under
Section 18
of the Act of 1963 has to be within the

     period of limitation and in the present case this test is not satisfied. On the other hand,

     as we have already noted, it has been urged on behalf of the first respondent that the

     premise of the judgment of the Special Court that the Act of 1963 would stand attracted

     would run contrary to the decision of this Court in
L S Synthetics Ltd
(supra).
19          Based on the decision of this Court in
L S Synthetics Ltd
(supra), the ultimate

     directions which have been issued by the Special Court cannot be interfered with. The

     observations contained in the impugned order were for the purpose of issuing the

     directions for a disclosure of assets and would not preclude the Custodian from urging

     that the Act of 1963 had no application to the Execution Application which was filed for

     enforcement of the decree dated 28 February 2003.        The directions for the disclosure

     of assets and other consequential directions which have been issued are not interfered

     with in this appeal.
20          The appellant is granted four weeks to file his disclosure of assets subject to his

     right to urge his submissions in the execution application. In the meantime, the Court

     has been apprised of the fact that an application has been filed for the arrest of the

     appellant. Conditional on the appellant making the disclosure of assets within four

     weeks as directed above, the application for arrest shall not be pursued until the

     Execution Application is decided. We request the Special Judge to dispose of the

     Execution Application preferably within a period of two months of the date of receipt of a

     certified copy of this order.
11
12
21        The appeal is disposed of in the above terms.
22        Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]



                                                    …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                     [J B Pardiwala]
     New Delhi;
August 04, 2022
-S-
12