[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sau Rajani vs Sau Smita on 8 August, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
A S Bopanna
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Reportable


                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                              Civil Appeal No 5216 of 2022
                                          (Arising out of SLP(C) No 1580 of 2021)


      Sau Rajani                                                                    .... Appellant(s)


                                                         Versus


      Sau Smita & Anr                                                               ....Respondent(s)




                                                     JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J


  1                      Leave granted.
2                      By a judgment dated 11 December 2019, a Single Judge of the Nagpur Bench of

      the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, held in the course of deciding a second appeal

      under
Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure 19081 that the suit instituted by the

      appellant is barred by
Sections 71
and
177
of the Maharashtra Housing and Area

      Development Act 1976 2.The High Court reversed concurrent findings of the trial court in
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2022.08.16
the suit and of the first appellate court.
10:59:30 IST
Reason:
1                  “
CPC
”
      2                  “the Act”
2
3           In order to appreciate the nature of the controversy, it would, at the outset, be

    necessary to advert to the plaint in the suit - Regular Civil Suit No 775 of 1993-
instituted by the appellant before the Court of the Civil Judge (Junior Division),

    Amravati. The appellant has pleaded that the second respondent (Amravati Housing

    and Area Development Board) allotted Block No 4/6 situated on the first floor at Tope

    Nagar, Amravati to her on 16 July 1986. The appellant claims to be in possession of

    the residential tenement. The first respondent is stated to be in occupation of a ground

    floor tenement in the same building bearing Block No 4/2. According to the appellant,

    the first respondent made an illegal and unauthorized construction in an open vacant

    site situated in the northern and eastern side of the block. This has been depicted in a

    plan, which is annexed to the plaint. The first respondent is alleged to have constructed

    four rooms, as a consequence of which the appellant claims that her easements have

    been affected. The appellant has alleged the following disturbances to her easements:
i.    The privacy, light, and air of the appellant’s block have been affected;
ii.   The first respondent is alleged to have constructed a stair case to gain access

            to the terrace, as a consequence of which the appellant’s privacy is stated to be

            disturbed;
iii.     The first respondent has removed a water pipeline, as a result of which the

            water supply to the property of the appellant is affected; and

     iv.    The first respondent has locked the service line for the cleaning of the septic

            tank.
4           It is contended by the appellant that she had raised complaints against the illegal

    construction by the first respondent to the second respondent and that she also issued
3
notices to the first and second respondents for removing the construction. The first and

the second respondents did not respond to the complaints and notices. The appellant

instituted a suit seeking the following reliefs:
“PRAYER

                     It is, therefore, most humbly prayed that this Hon'ble
                     Court may kindly be pleased to pass a decree in
                     mandatory forms giving directions to both the defendants
                     to remove the illegal and unauthorized construction
                     made by the defendant no. 1 on the open site, which is
                     situated towards the east and north to the plaintiffs and
                     defendants No. 1's tenant as shown by letters A B C D in
                     the map and further be pleased to grant permanent
                     prohibitory injunction restraining the defendants from
                     making any constructions over this open site and be
                     directed to keep open the said open site as it was.
2.     The defendants be directed to restore the water
                     connections as it was prior to its removal for the plaintiffs
                     tenement and further be directed to grant to temporary
                     injunction to remove by obstruction which have been
                     created in the service line and the defendant be
                     restrained by grant of permanent injunction in the service
                     line.
3.     The defendant no. 1 further be restrained by grant of
                     permanent injunction from making encroachment or
                     making any construction in this open site and causing
                     any nuisance to the plaintiff in respect of to occupy her
                     tenement on first floor.
4.     Costs of this suit be added on the defendants.”

5      The first respondent filed a written statement contending that the civil court does

       not have the jurisdiction to entertain the suit under the provisions
Section 71
read

       with
Section 177
of the Act. The Civil Judge (Junior Division), Amravati held that
(i) the first respondent made an unauthorized construction; (ii) the first

       respondent shifted the water pipeline in the course of the illegal construction,

       resulting in shortage of water to the appellant; (iii) the suit is maintainable since
4
the dispute does not relate to the business of the co-operative society but the

      legal rights of the appellant. The following order was passed, while decreeing the

      suit:
“Plaintiff’s suit is hereby decreed.
Defendants are hereby directed to remove the illegal and
                    unauthorized construction made by the defendant No. 1
                    on the open space towards the eastern and northern side
                    of Block No.4/2 which is shown in the map which is
                    produced along with inspection report Ex. 73 by letters A
                    B C D A and D H I J K L D.

                    Both the defendants are hereby directed to restore the
                    water connection to the plaintiff's house by removing the
                    obstructions which are made in the service line.
Defendant No. 1 or anybody on her behalf is hereby
                    permanently restrained from making encroachment as
                    well as making any construction on the open site causing
                    any nuisance to the plaintiff's tenement.
Plaintiff and defendant are residing in the same building.
                    Taking into consideration the relationship in between
                    them, parties to bear their own costs, if any.
The map which is produced along with inspection Note
                    Ex. 73 will form the part of the decree.
Decree be drawn accordingly.”

6 The judgment of the trial court was assailed by the first respondent under
Section 96
of the CPC in Regular Civil Appeal No 37 of 1999, which was dismissed on 21

   November 2003. The District Court affirmed the finding of the trial Judge that it had

   the jurisdiction to entertain the suit. The District Judge held that the appellant – who

   is the plaintiff in the suit – is affected by the encroachment which has been made by

   the first respondent on premises belonging to the Authority.                  In the view of the

   District Judge, since the individual rights of the appellant were affected by the
5
unauthorized construction, the suit was maintainable and was not barred by the

  provisions of
Section 71
. It was observed:
“ 20. […] Due to the construction made by the defendant no. 1,
           the plaintiff had lost her right to privacy so also the drainage line
           and water pipe line to her premises have been damaged and
           destroyed, which has put her to material loss, We have come to
           the conclusion that plaintiff has sufficient[ly] proved that her
           valuable rights have been infringed due to the construction made
           by defendant no.1. So when the rights of plaintiff are infringed,
           she is certainly entitled to seek relief from the Civil Court to get
           reinstated her rights. […] So this is a case in which plaintiff is
           interested in safe guarding her right and to get them restored.
           The removal of encroachment is a consequence thereof. So we
           cannot construe the present suit as a suit for removal of
           encroachment on the authority premises, as envisaged under
MHADA Act
so as to hold that the suit is barred under
Section 71
or 177 of the
MHADA Act
.”

7 The Single Judge of the Bombay High Court allowed the appeal against the

  judgment of the District Judge holding that the suit was barred in terms of the

  provisions of
Sections 71
and
177
of the Act. Referring to
Section 66(1)(a)(iv)
, the

  High Court observed that the Competent Authority has the power to evict persons

  from Authority premises if it is satisfied that material alterations have been made

  without its previous permission. The High Court held that since the remedy of

  eviction is provided for in the Act, the Civil Court does not have jurisdiction to

  entertain a suit on a cause of action on which the Competent Authority is

  empowered to take action.
8 We have heard Mr Somiran Sharma, counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant,

  Mr Satya Kam Sharma, counsel appearing on behalf of the first respondent and Mr

  Sanjay Kharde, counsel appearing on behalf of the second respondent.
6
9
Sections 71
and
177
are extracted below:
“71. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts.—No civil court
             shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in
             respect of the eviction of any person from any Authority
             premises under this Chapter, or the recovery of the arrears of
             rent, compensation, amount or damages for use and occupation
             of such premises, or in respect of any order made or to be made
             or any action taken or to be taken by the Competent Authority or
             the appellate officer in the exercise of any power conferred by or
             under this Chapter, or to grant any injunction in respect of such
             order or action.
177. Bar of jurisdiction.—Save as otherwise expressly
             provided in this Act, no civil court shall have jurisdiction in
             respect of any matter which the Authority or the Tribunal is
             empowered by or under this Act, to determine; and no
             injunction or stay shall be granted by any court or other authority
             in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any
             power conferred or duty imposed by or under this Act.”

                                                         (emphasis supplied)

10
Section 66
forms a part of Chapter VI which is titled “Power to evict persons from

   authority premises and to recover dues”. Sub-section (1) of
Section 66
empowers

   the competent authority to order a person who is in occupation of the whole or any

   part of the premises to be evicted for unauthorized occupation.
Section 66(1)
is in

   the following terms:
“66.    Power to evict certain persons from Authority premises.
(1)     If the Competent Authority is satisfied—

            (a)     that the person authorised, to occupy any Authority premises has—

                    (i)     not paid rent or compensation or amount lawfully due from
him in respect of such premises for a period of more than
                            two months, or
(ii)    sub-let, without the previous permission of the Authority, the
                            whole or any part of such premises, or
(iii)   committed, or is committing any act which is destructive or
                            permanently injurious to such premises, or
7
(iv)   made, or is making, material addition to, or alteration in,
                            such premises without the previous permission of the
                            Authority, or
(v)    otherwise acted in contravention of any of the terms,
                            express or implied, under which he is authorised to occupy
                            such premises, or
(vi)   failed to vacate the premises required by the Authority for
                            the purpose of implementing any plan or project for the sale
                            of tenements and to accept the alternative accommodation
                            offered by the Authority.
(b)     that any person is in unauthorised occupation of any Authority
                     premises, the Competent Authority may, for reasons to be recorded
                     in writing, by notice served (i) by post, or (ii) by affixing a copy of it
                     on the outer door or some other conspicuous part of such premises,
                     or (iii) in such other manner as may be prescribed, order that
                     person, as well as any other person, who may be in occupation of
                     the whole or any part of the premises, to vacate the premises in
                     unauthorised occupation, within 24 hours of the date of service of
                     notice, and in any other case within a period of seven days of the
                     date of such service.”

                                                                      (emphasis supplied)

11
Section 71
provides for the bar of jurisdiction of civil courts.                     In terms of the

   provision, no civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceedings (i)

   “in respect of the eviction of any person from any Authority premises under this

   Chapter”; or (ii) for the recovery of the arrears of rent, compensation or damages for

   the use and occupation of such premises; or (iii) in respect of any order made or to

   be made or any action taken or to be taken by the competent authority in exercise of

   the power conferred by or under the Chapter; or (iv) to grant an injunction in respect

   of such order or action.
Section 177
bars the jurisdiction of a civil court in respect of

   any matter which the Authority or Tribunal is empowered by or under the Act, to

   determine.      Similarly, no injunction or stay can be granted by a Court or other

   authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of the power
8
conferred or duty imposed by or under the Act.
12 Section 66(1)(b) of MHAD Act entrusts the competent authority with a power to order

   eviction on the grounds which are set out in the provision. Among them in sub-
clauses (iii), (iv) and (v) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
Section 66
are:
(a)    The commission of an act which is destructive of or permanently injurious

             to the premises;
(b)    Making a material addition or alteration to the premises without prior

             permission; and
(c)    Acting in contravention of the terms on which a person is authorized to

             occupy the premises.
Under clause (b), where a person is in unauthorized occupation of any ‘Authority

   premises’, the competent authority may proceed to order the person to be evicted

   from the premises.
13 The appellant did not seek the eviction of the first respondent in the suit. On the

   contrary, the plaint proceeds on the basis that both the appellant and the first

   respondent are allottees under the second respondent. The plea against the first

   respondent is that she has made an unauthorized construction of rooms on a vacant

   site, as a result of which the access to light and air, and the right to privacy of the

   appellant have been affected. Besides this, it has been submitted that the first

   respondent has shifted a water line and caused an obstruction to be made to the
9
drainage line in the premises.
14 Under
Section 9
of CPC, the civil court has the jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil

      nature, except those in respect of which the jurisdiction is barred either expressly or

      impliedly by a specific provision of law.
In
Dhulabhai v. State of Madhya Pradesh
3,

      a Constitution Bench laid down the law on ouster of jurisdiction of civil courts. Chief

      Justice M Hidayatullah writing for the Bench laid down the principles on bar of

      jurisdiction of the civil courts as follows:
(1) Where the statute gives a finality to the orders of the
                     special Tribunals the civil courts' jurisdiction must be held to be
                     excluded if there is adequate remedy to do what the civil courts
                     would normally do in a suit. Such provision, however, does not
                     exclude those cases where the provisions of the particular Act
                     have not been complied with or the statutory Tribunal has not
                     acted in conformity with the fundamental principles of judicial
                     procedure.
(2) Where there is an express bar of the jurisdiction of
                     the court, an examination of the scheme of the particular Act
                     to find the adequacy or the sufficiency of the remedies
                     provided may be relevant but is not decisive to sustain the
                     jurisdiction of the civil court.
Where there is no express exclusion the examination of the
                     remedies and the scheme of the particular Act to find out the
                     intendment becomes necessary and the result of the inquiry may
                     be decisive. In the latter case it is necessary to see if the statute
                     creates a special right or a liability and provides for the
                     determination of the right or liability and further lays down that all
                     questions about the said right and liability shall be determined by
                     the Tribunals so constituted, and whether remedies normally
                     associated with actions in civil courts are prescribed by the said
                     statute or not.
[…]
                         (7) An exclusion of the jurisdiction of the civil court is not
                     readily to be inferred unless the conditions above set down
                     apply.
(emphasis supplied)
3
AIR 1969 SC 78
10
15 In
Ramesh Gobindram v. Sugra Humayun Mirza
4, a two-Judge Bench of this

    Court observed that the jurisdiction of the civil courts to try suits of a civil nature is

    expansive and the onus to prove the ouster of the jurisdiction is on the party that

    asserts it. The court observed that even in cases where the jurisdiction of the civil

    court is barred by a statute, the test is to determine if the authority or tribunal

    constituted under the statute has the power to grant reliefs that the civil courts would

    normally grant in suits filed before them. The relevant observations are extracted

    below:
“12. The well-settled rule in this regard is that the civil courts
                 have the jurisdiction to try all suits of civil nature except those
                 entertainment whereof is expressly or impliedly barred. The
                 jurisdiction of the civil courts to try suits of civil nature is very
                 expansive. Any statute which excludes such jurisdiction is,
                 therefore, an exception to the general rule that all disputes shall
                 be triable by a civil court. Any such exception cannot be readily
                 inferred by the courts. The court would lean in favour of a
                 construction that would uphold the retention of jurisdiction of the
                 civil courts and shift the onus of proof to the party that asserts
                 that the civil court's jurisdiction is ousted.”
13. Even in cases where the statute accords finality to the orders
                 passed by the Tribunals, the court will have to see whether the
                 Tribunal has the power to grant the reliefs which the civil courts
                 would normally grant in suits filed before them. If the answer is in
                 the negative, exclusion of the civil court's jurisdiction would not
                 be ordinarily inferred.
In
Rajasthan SRTC v. Bal Mukund Bairwa
(2) [(2009) 4 SCC 299 : (2009) 1 SCC (L&S) 812] a three-Judge
                 Bench of this Court observed: (SCC pp. 302h-303a)

                     “There is a presumption that a civil court has jurisdiction.
Ouster of civil court's jurisdiction is not to be readily inferred. A
                 person taking a plea contra must establish the same. Even in a
                 case where jurisdiction of a civil court is sought to be barred
                 under a statute, the civil court can exercise its jurisdiction in
4
(2010) 8 SCC 726; Also see Competent Authority, Calcutta under the
Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act
1976 v.
David Manthosh, (2020) 12 SCC 542
11
respect of some matters particularly when the statutory authority
             or tribunal acts without jurisdiction.”


16 The preamble to the Act states that it is an Act to “unify, consolidate and amend the

   laws relating to housing, repairing and reconstructing dangerous buildings and

   carrying out improvement works in slum areas”. The scheme of the statute provides

   that the Board constituted under the statute would have the power to repair and

   reconstruct dilapidated buildings, conduct structural repairs and evict persons from

   authority premises, among others. The objective of the bodies and authorities

   constituted under the Act is to ensure repairing and reconstructing buildings to

   provide housing. Undoubtedly, the competent authority has the jurisdiction to order

   eviction in terms of the provisions of
Section 66
. But that is not the frame of the suit

   or the relief which has been claimed by the appellant in the suit. The reliefs sought

   by the appellant in the plaint are: (i) the removal of the unauthorized construction; (ii)

   a permanent prohibitory injunction restraining the defendants from constructing over

   the open site and causing ‘nuisance’; and (iii) restoration of the water connection as

   it was prior to the construction.        The appellant instituted the suit for injunction

   because her easements were infringed by the illegal construction which the first

   respondent had erected on the open space. The reliefs claimed by the appellant are

   beyond the scope of the Act. A suit of this nature will be maintainable before the

   civil court and would not be barred by
Section 71
or
Section 177
of the Act.

17 For the above reasons, we are of the view that the Single Judge of the High Court

   was in error in upholding the plea that there was a bar of jurisdiction and reversing

   the findings of the trial Judge and the first appellate court. Since, however, the
12
Single Judge of the High Court has only ruled on the absence of jurisdiction, a view

      which has been disapproved above, the second appeal is restored to the file of the

      High Court for consideration on merits. We allow the appeal and set aside the

      impugned judgment and order of the Single Judge of the Nagpur Bench of the High

      Court of Judicature at Bombay dated 11 December 2019 in Second Appeal No 111

      of 2004. Second Appeal No 111 of 2004 is restored to the file of the High Court for

      disposal on merits.
18 Since the appeal pertains to the year 2004, we request the High Court to take it up

      for admission expeditiously and to endeavor a disposal within a period of three

      months from the date on which a certified copy of this order is produced before it on

      the record.
19 Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                               [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                  …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                  [A S Bopanna]
New Delhi;
August 08, 2022
-S-