[Cites
18
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Ramchandra on 11 August, 2022
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
Hemant Gupta
REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 5006-5010 OF 2022
                         (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NOS. 36299-36303 OF 2017)


          UNION OF INDIA                                                 .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                         VERSUS

          RAMCHANDRA & ORS.                                            .....RESPONDENT(S)


                                                       WITH


                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5031 OF 2022
                               (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 13137 OF 2018)




                                                 JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.             These appeals arising out of judgment dated 29.6.2017 are being

                         taken up for decision together. Civil Appeal Nos. 5006-5010 of 2022 are

                         filed by the Union of India to reduce the amount of compensation from

                         Rs.19 per square feet and also challenging the grant of compensation
Signature Not Verified
for the entire land owned by the Company - Sagar Maize Products Ltd. 1,
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2022.08.11
16:53:15 IST
Reason:                  who is owner of 2.038 hectares in Village Maksi. Civil Appeal No. 5031


          1           For short, the ‘Company’
1
of 2022 is preferred by the Company claiming enhancement of

        compensation of the acquired land to Rs.40/- per square feet.
2.      The Company purchased an area of 0.361 hectares of Survey

        Nos.1927/2, 1928/2 and an area of 1.317 hectares of Survey No. 1929

        on Ujjain Road in Village Maksi in the year 1986-87. After purchase of

        the land, the Company got permission to convert the agricultural land

        to use for industrial purposes and has also started civil work for

        installation of the factory for which certain pillars were raised.
3.      A notification under
Section 4
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 2 was

        published on 9.3.1990 for the purpose of acquisition of 6.500 hectares

        of land situated in Village Maksi and 0.700 hectares of land situated in

        Village Jhokar, total 7.200 hectares of land for Dewas - Maksi Railway

        Line.     The notification under
Section 6
of the Act was published on

        8.6.1990.
4.      The land measuring 0.244 hectares of land owned by the Company

        was actually acquired for the railway line comprising in Survey No.

        1929. The Company has laid the claim before the Land Acquisition

        Collector as under:
Value     of    Proposed     Land         Rs.1,01,90,000/-
                 measuring 203800 sq. ft.
                 For Plantation                              Rs.20,00,000/-
                 Cost for setting up industry                 Rs.2,82,634/-
                 Industry Management                          Rs.7,20,000/-
                 Total                                     Rs.1,37,50,634/-



2    For short, the ‘Act’
2
5.   The Land Acquisition Collector passed an award on 2.6.1992 awarding

     a compensation of Rs.30,000/- per hectare i.e., @ Rs.5/- per square

     feet as the market value of the land acquired. In addition thereto, the

     land owner was awarded a compensation of Rs.72,320/- on account of

     expenditure incurred on construction of 40 pillars, 19 situated within a

     periphery of 30 meters from the proposed railway line and other 21

     lying outside the 30 meters periphery, apart from the statutory

     benefits.
6.   Aggrieved by the determination of the market value of the land

     acquired, the land owners including the Company sought reference

     under
Section 18
of the Act. The Reference Court awarded a

     compensation of Rs.40/- per square feet for the land acquired and also

     for the entire land of the Company admeasuring 2.038 hectares on the

     ground that the unacquired land cannot be utilized for the purpose

     intended to be used by the Company.
7.   Such compensation was arrived at by the Reference Court on the basis

     of statement of PW 11 Pawan Damade, Manager working with Madhya

     Pradesh     Housing   Development    Board.   He   deposed    that   an

     advertisement (Ex.P/23) for the sale of residential plots @Rs.45/- per

     square feet was issued by the Board in the year 1984. He also stated

     that the value of commercial plots was Rs. 50/- per square feet. The

     Reference Court held that the sale price of the residential plot was @

     Rs.45/- per square feet in the year 1984, but the sale price of the
3
residential plot included some other charges, therefore, the Reference

     Court determined Rs.40/- per square feet as the market value.
8.   In respect of 26,325 square feet land for laying of the railway line, the

     Reference Court awarded compensation of Rs.10,53,000/-. For the

     remaining land of 1,93,077 square feet, the Reference Court held that

     it is not possible to establish the industry as the railway line passes

     through Survey Nos. 1928 and 1929. It was held that the distance of 30

     meters is required from the railway line for development work, hence

     as no construction work could be carried out, therefore, the entire land

     cannot be utilized for any purpose. Thus, compensation @ Rs.40/- per

     square feet was awarded for the entire land purchased by the

     Company, apart from the statutory benefits awarded to the Company

     and to the other land owners.
9.   The Company as well as the Union assailed the order of Reference

     Court by way of separate appeals before the High Court. The High

     Court affirmed the finding of the Reference Court that the entire land

     cannot be utilized by the Company, but reduced the amount of

     compensation to Rs.19/- per square feet. The High Court also referred

     to the statement of Pawan Damade (PW-11). Further, reliance was

     placed upon the statement of Rajesh Rathi (PW-1) representing the

     Company who deposed that he has spent Rs.14,29,800/- for setting up

     the industry over an area in question. The land owners also produced

     Awdhesh Sharma (PW-2), Naib Tehsildar who deposed that market
4
value of the land acquired was Rs.25-30/- per square feet. R.C. Dhakad

      (PW-3), District Registrar, Shajapur deposed that Ex.15 is sale deed

      dated 7.11.1991 and the market value was Rs.250/- per square meter.

      Similarly, some of the land owners have appeared who have deposed

      that the market value of the land was Rs.15-20 per square feet. The

      High Court assessed the market value of the land in question as Rs.25/-

      per square feet, but in view of large track of agricultural land acquired,

      deduction of 25% was applied and the market value was assessed as

      Rs.19/- per square feet.
10.   We have heard learned counsel for the parties and find the entire

      process of determination of the market value is based upon surmises

      and conjectures.
11.   As per the map produced by the Company, on the left side of the

      railway line (East), the land measures 42940 + 10497 = 53437 square

      feet, whereas the remaining land measures 58892 + 80271 = 139163

      square feet on the right side of the railway line (west). This is a

      compact piece of land abutting the road from Maksi to Ujjain. The first

      question which is required to be determined is as to what extent, land

      on both sides of the railway line would be part of acquisition. As per

      the Company, the land of 30 meters on both sides of railway line is the

      land required by the railways as a part of the acquisition after leaving

      15 feet area on both sides of railway track. Such argument is based

      upon a communication dated 19.12.1991 from the Urban & Rural
5
Investment Department, Madhya Pradesh that it is necessary to leave

      a minimum distance of 30 meters as regard to any other development

      works from demarcation of railway line. Learned counsel for the

      Company relies upon Para 3718 of the Indian Railways Way and Works

      Manual wherein the fencing is to be provided on 30 meters of actual

      busy station yards on either side. As per the Company, the

      demarcation of railway line is after 15 meters of the railway line,

      meaning thereby 45 meters from the railway track.
12.   The stand of the Union is that 30 meters from the railway track is

      restricted area where construction will be permissible but with the

      consent of the railway and in the manner prescribed in the Circular

      dated 8.9.1988 and 25.6.2015. The reliance is placed upon Indian

      Railways Way and Works Manual, Para 827, which reads as under:
“827. Construction of Government and private buildings near
           Railway land
a) 1. While it may be realised that Railways have a prior right of
           acquisition and utilisation of land adjacent to Railway
           boundaries, the Railway Administration can only insist on
           previous intimation being given by the revenue authorities or the
           local Govt. when such lands are assigned for specific purposes.
For the prevention of encroachments on railway land such as by
           the erection of buildings and platforms and the gradual accrual
           of easements such as right of way and a right to discharge
           sullage or storm water over Railway land, it is desirable that
           sufficient open space be provided between the railway boundary
           and the nearest face of any structure erected on adjoining land.
2.The interest of the Railways will be suitably safeguarded by
           providing for:
i) an open space of approximately 30m being left between the
6
railway boundary and the nearest edge of a building constructed
           on adjacent land, the exact space to be left being governed by
           local conditions; and
ii) intimation regarding proposed construction on lands adjacent
           to the railway boundary being given to the railway authorities at
           least 90 days before the commencement of erection work.”
13.   The relevant extract from the Circular dated 8.9.1988 is reproduced as

      under:
“Railway Board under their letter No. 5456-W dated 24.4.96
           addressed to all Provincial Government Local Administrations
           had stipulated that an open space of 100 ft. (30m)
           approximately on both side of the Railway land should be left
           and the exact space should be governed by local conditions.
           This has been accepted by all the State Governments.
2. In the cities and towns where the land is valuable and the
           cost is high it may not be possible for the owners to leave a large
           space (30m) between the Railway boundary and the nearest
           edge of the building. At the same time it is necessary that the
           Railway’s interests are adequately safe-guarded.
3. There has been a case in the past when a building which was
           class to the Railway boundary collapsed and caused obstruction
           to Railway traffic. Therefore in order to safe guard Railway’s
           interest and also in view of the Tambe Committee’s report
           (Committee appointed by Govt. of Maharashtra) following
           guidelines are issued for consideration of issue of ‘No objection
           certificate’ to the owners for construction of their
           buildings/structure in the vicinity of Railway land within 30m
           (100 ft.) from the existing boundary:-
xx                   xx                  xx
(iii) The height of the building should be restricted so that a clear
           space equal to half the height of the building is available
           between the nearest edge of the building and the Railway
           boundary.”
14.   A perusal of the Indian Railways Way and Works Manual (para 827) and
7
also the Circular dated 8.9.1988 shows that 30 meters of land on both

      sides of railway line can be said to be restricted area but it does not

      mean that the land cannot be utilized for any purpose. The

      communication dated 19.12.1991 on behalf of the Urban and Rural

      Department of the State is to the effect that distance of 30 meters of

      land is to be kept. Firstly, the distance norms are of the Railways and

      not of the State. Still further, the distance of 30 meters from the

      railway track can be left unoccupied but not 15 + 30 meters. However,

      since the land was purchased by the Company for the purpose of

      setting up of an industrial unit, therefore land to the extent of 30

      meters on both sides cannot be put to effective use by the Company.
Therefore, we deem it appropriate to grant compensation to the

      Company for the land on both sides of railway track to the extent of 30

      meters from middle of the railway track.
15.   As per the plan produced by the Company, land measuring 26400

      square feet that is 49.3 square meters on both sides of railway track

      has actually been utilized for the purpose of railway track. Thus,

      additional 15 meters on both sides of the railway track would be

      subject to award of compensation @ Rs. 19 per square feet. Thus, land

      up to extent of 30 meters from the center of railway track is the land

      acquired for the railway track.
16.   In respect of amount of compensation, the statement of Pawan

      Damade (PW-11) is in respect of residential plots sold in the year 1984.
8
The sale price of residential plots @ 45/- per square feet is after

       carrying the development activity such as laying of roads, electricity,

       and provision of sewerage disposal, therefore, Rs.45/- could not be in

       any case the market value of the agricultural land. However, the

       Reference Court, without any basis, arrived at Rs.50/- per square feet,

       as the land for commercial purpose would be more expensive. The said

       process of reasoning led the Reference Court to determine the market

       value at Rs. 40/- per square feet. The judgment of this Court reported

       as
Lal Chand v. Union of India & Anr.3
held that the brochure issued

       by the Development Authority of fully developed plots cannot form

       basis for award of compensation for acquisition of undeveloped lands.

       This Court held as under:
“12. On careful consideration, we are of the view that such
              allotment rates of plots adopted by development authorities like
              DDA cannot form the basis for award of compensation for
              acquisition of undeveloped lands for several reasons. Firstly,
              market value has to be determined with reference to large tracts
              of undeveloped agricultural lands in a rural area, whereas the
              allotment rates of development authorities are with reference to
              small plots in a developed layout falling within urban
              area. Secondly, DDA and other statutory authorities adopt
              different rates for plots in the same area with reference to the
              economic capacity of the buyer, making it difficult to ascertain
              the real market value, whereas market value determination for
              acquisitions is uniform and does not depend upon the economic
              status of the land loser. Thirdly, we are concerned with market
              value of freehold land, whereas the allotment “rates” in the DDA
              brochure refer to the initial premium payable on allotment of
              plots on leasehold basis. We may elaborate on these three
              factors.
13. The percentage of “deduction for development” to be made
3   (2009) 15 SCC 769
9
to arrive at the market value of large tracts of undeveloped
            agricultural land (with potential for development), with reference
            to the sale price of small developed plots, varies between 20%
            to 75% of the price of such developed plots, the percentage
            depending upon the nature of development of the layout in
            which the exemplar plots are situated.”
17.   Thus, the entire process of determination of the market value by the

      Reference   Court    is   contrary   to   the   established    principles   of

      determination of the market value of the acquired land as the sale of

      developed land for the purpose of residential plots cannot be made

      basis for acquisition of undeveloped agricultural land. Still further, the

      acquired land can be said to be 41,771.32 square feet but the

      compensation has been awarded for the entire land of the Company as

      against the small area which was acquired for the railway line, though

      the balance land is owned and is in possession of the Company.
18.   The market value of Rs.25/- per square feet by the High Court has been

      arrived at on the basis of statements of some of the witnesses. No sale

      instance of the acquired land has been produced, not even the sale

      deed by which the Company has purchased the land almost 3 years

      prior to the acquisition. Such sale instance would have been the best

      yardstick to arrive at the market value of the acquired land. The High

      Court awarded Rs.19/- per square feet as the compensation of the

      entire land acquired. Though we are unable to agree with the

      reasoning, but in the absence of any other alternative to determine

      market value, we do not wish to interfere with the market value
10
assessed by the High Court.
19.   One cannot understand that how such large chunk of land can be said

      to be unsuitable for any industry or any evidence suggesting that

      industry could not be set up in such large piece of land abutting road.

      The Company has not produced any drawings to say that their factory

      cannot be put up in the remaining compact land measuring more than

      130000 square feet.      Therefore, compensation for the entire land

      owned by the Company is wholly unwarranted, illegal and unduly

      advantageous to the Company.
20.   Even in respect of land on the eastern side of the railway line, it is not

      that such land cannot be utilized for any purpose. There is land of the

      other land owners on the other side, therefore, the same can be used

      for different purposes, may not be for industry. Therefore, the

      compensation of Rs.19/- per square feet awarded for such land is not

      sustainable on any principle of law. The compensation of land on the

      western side of the railway track is to be awarded only as the

      agricultural land.
21.   Now we shall deal with the amount of compensation for the land

      situated on the eastern side of the railway track on account of

      severance of the same from the rest of the land.
Section 23
of the Act

      specifies the factors to determine the amount of compensation to be

      awarded for the land acquired. Clause thirdly is for determining

      damages sustained by the person interested at the time of the
11
Collector’s taking possession of the land by reason of severing such

land from other land. Such provision has to be read along with
Section

49
of the Act. The relevant provisions read thus:
“23.   Matters      to    be    considered  in determining
      compensation.—(1)         In   determining the  amount    of
compensation to be awarded for land acquired under this Act,
      the Court shall take into consideration—

      first,     the market-value of the land at the date of the publica-
tion of the notification under
Section 4
, sub-section (1);

      sec-       the damage sustained by the person interested, by
      ondly,     reason of the taking of any standing crops or trees
                 which may be on the land at the time of the Collector's
                 taking possession thereof;
thirdly,   the damage (if any) sustained by the person inter-
ested, at the time of the Collector's taking possession
                 of the land, by reason of severing such land from his
                 other land;
fourthly, the damage (if any) sustained by the person inter-
ested, at the time of the Collector's taking possession
                of the land, by reason of the acquisition injuriously af-
                fecting his other property, movable or immovable, in
                any other manner, or his earnings;
fifthly,   if, in consequence of the acquisition of the land by the
                 Collector, the person interested is compelled to change
                 his residence or place of business, the reasonable ex-
                 penses (if any) incidental to such change; and

      sixthly,   the damage (if any) bona fide resulting from diminu-
tion of the profits of the land between the time of the
                 publication of the declaration under
Section 6
and the
                 time of the Collector's taking possession of the land.

      In addition to the market-value of the land, as above provided,
      the Court shall in every case award an amount calculated at the
      rate of twelve per centum per annum of such market-value for
      the period commencing on and from the date of the publication
      of the notification under
Section 4
, sub-section (1), in respect of
      such land to the date of the award of the Collector or the date of
12
taking possession of the land, whichever is earlier.

Explanation.—In computing the period referred to in this sub-
section, any period or periods during which the proceedings for
the acquisition of the land were held up on account of any stay
or injunction by the order of any court shall be excluded.

(2) In addition to the market-value of the land, as above
provided, the Court shall in every case award a sum of thirty per
centum on such market-value, in consideration of the
compulsory nature of the acquisition.
xx                  xx                     xx
49. Acquisition of part of house or building.—(1) The
provisions of this Act shall not be put in force for the purpose of
acquiring a part only of any house, manufactory or other
building, if the owner desires that the whole of such house,
manufactory or building shall be so acquired:
Provided that the owner may, at any time before the
Collector has made his award under
Section 11
, by notice in
writing, withdraw or modify his expressed desire that the whole
of such house, manufactory or building shall be so acquired:
Provided also that, if any question shall arise as to
whether any land proposed to be taken under this Act does or
does not form part of a house, manufactory or building within
the meaning of this section, the Collector shall refer the
determination of such question to the Court and shall not take
possession of such land until after the question has been
determined.
In deciding on such a reference the Court shall have
regard to the question whether the land proposed to be taken is
reasonably required for the full and unimpaired use of the house,
manufactory or building.
(2) If, in the case of any claim under
Section 23
, sub-section (1),
thirdly, by a person interested, on account of the serving of the
land to be acquired from his other land, the appropriate
Government is of opinion that the claim is unreasonable or
excessive, it may, at any time before the Collector has made his
award, order the acquisition of the whole of the land of which the
land first sought to be acquired forms a part.
13
(3) In the case last hereinbefore provided for, no fresh
                declaration or other proceedings under
Sections 6
to
10
, both
                inclusive, shall be necessary; but the Collector shall without
                delay furnish a copy of the order of the appropriate Government
                to the person interested, and shall thereafter proceed to make
                his award under
Section 11
.”
22.      Such provision has been examined recently by this Court in a judgment

         reported as
Walchandnagar Industries Limited v. State of

         Maharashtra & Anr.4
wherein, this Court held as under:
“35. It may be noted that clause thirdly of
Section 23(1)
relates
                only to land, as it speaks only about the severance of the
                acquired land from the unacquired land and the damage
                sustained as a consequence. In contrast, clause fourthly of
Section 23(1)
deals with the damage sustained by the person
                interested, due to the injurious affection, ( i) of his other movable
                property; (ii) of his other immovable property; and ( iii) of his
                earnings. In other words what is injuriously affected at the time
                of Collector's taking possession of the land, may either be the
                unacquired portion of the immovable property or other movable
                property or even the earnings of the person interested.
xx                   xx                  xx
37. Coming to
Section 49
, it deals with two contingencies. They
                are,
(i) cases where what is sought to be acquired is only a part of
                any house, manufactory or other building; and
(ii) cases where a claim for compensation under the head
                “severance” under clause thirdly of
Section 23(1)
arises.
37.1. Insofar as the first contingency is concerned there is a bar
                under sub-section (1) of
Section 49
for the acquisition of a part
                only of any house, manufactory or other building, if the owner
                desires that the whole of such house, manufactory or building
                shall be so acquired.
4     (2022) 5 SCC 71
14
37.2. Insofar as the second contingency is concerned, there is a
choice given to the appropriate Government to order the
acquisition of the whole of the land, if the appropriate
Government is of the opinion that the claim for severance
compensation is unreasonable or excessive.
38. The distinction between the scope of sub-section (1) and the
scope of sub-section (2) of
Section 49
was brought out by this
Court in Harsook Das Bal Kishan Das v. LAO [Harsook Das Bal
Kishan Das v. LAO, (1975) 2 SCC 256] as follows : (SCC pp. 259-
60, para 12)

    “12. The object of
Section 49(1)
of the Act is to give to
    the owner the option whether he would like part to be
    acquired. The Government cannot take the other part
    under
Section 49(1)
of the Act unless the owner says so.
Section 49(2)
of the Act has nothing to do with
Section
    49(1)
of the Act.
Section 49(2)
of the Act gives the option
    to the Government only where the claim under the third
    clause of
Section 23(1)
of the Act is excessive. Reference
    to the third clause of
Section 23(1)
of the Act makes it
    clear that the claim under the third clause of
Section
    23(1)
is for severance. The Government in such a case of
    acquisition of the remaining portion of the land under
    Section 49(2) of the Act saves the public exchequer
    money which otherwise will be the subject-matter of a
    claim for severance.”

            xx                  xx                  xx
40.
Section 49(2)
also may not have any application for the
reason that the appropriate Government did not think fit to seek
acquisition of the whole of the land on which the remaining
portion of the trolley line existed, on the ground that the claim
for severance compensation was unreasonable or excessive.
Therefore,    it  is    enough     for    us   to   go    back  to
clauses thirdly and fourthly of   Section    23(1)    without  the
constraints of sub-sections (1) or (2) of
Section 49
.
41. As we have indicated earlier, clause thirdly relates to the
damage sustained by the person interested, by reason of
severance of the acquired land from the unacquired land, at the
time of Collector's taking possession of the land. In contrast,
15
clause fourthly of
Section 23(1)
deals with the damage sustained
            by reason of the acquisition injuriously affecting, ( i) the other
            movable property; (ii) the other immovable property; and/or (iii)
            the earnings of the person interested.”
23.   A reading of the abovesaid judgment shows that there was an option

      with the appropriate Government to acquire the entire land without

      publication of any fresh notification if the appropriate Government was

      of the opinion that the claim of compensation on account of severing of

      the land is unreasonable or excessive. The Union has not exercised

      such option. Therefore, the compensation has to be determined

      keeping in view of the fact that the land is continued to be owned by

      the Company but its effective use stands diminished to large extent.
24.   As discussed above, we have found that the land situated on the

      western side is 139163 square feet (1.29 Hectare), which is not a small

      area from any angle, therefore, the appropriate Government was

      justified in not acquiring the said land and for the reason that the claim

      of compensation of such land is unreasonable or excessive. In fact, the

      Company had no claim in respect of the land situated on the western

      plank of the railway line.
25.   In respect of the land situated on the eastern side, the first impression

      is that the land is severed but if the plan produced by the Company is

      examined, there is land of other land owners as well. Therefore, it is

      not the entire land which has become unapproachable or land locked.

      Because of the railway line, may be the Company has to take a detour
16
to approach such land but not that the substantial portion of the land

         cannot be used for any of the ancillary works of the Company. On

         account of the fact that the Company can approach the land on the

         eastern side by taking a detour, the Company will incur an additional

         cost, therefore, the Company is entitled to such additional cost.
26.      The Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Tehal Singh & Ors. v. The

         State of Punjab
through the Collector, Land Acquisition,

         Drainage Circle, Patiala & Ors.5granted additional compensation on

         account of severance of land in the case of water channels and that

         statutory benefits are not payable on such compensation on account of

         severance. It was held as under:
“11. Taking all the above factors into account. I consider the
                following compensation to be appropriate for severance of land
                to the concerned land-owners:—

                (1) Where the S.Y.L. Canal intervenes between the land served
                and the village abadi and it is two acres or less in area,
                compensation for severance shall be 60% of the market value of
                the land so acquired.
(2) Where the severed land is no the abadi side of the village
                and S.Y.L. Canal is being constructed beyond it and it is two
                acres or less in area, compensation for severance shall be 40%
                of the market value of the land so acquired.
(3) Where the severed land is more than two acres in area but is
                less than 5 acres, and is located on either side of the S.Y.L.
                Canal, compensation at the rate of 10%- of the market value for
                its severance shall be payable.
12. The land-owners shall, however, be not entitled to soletium
                under
Section 23(2)
and the amount under
Section 23
(1-
A) of
                the Act
on the amount of compensation on account of
                severance, but they shall be entitled to interest as indicated in
5     1987 SCC OnLine P&H 269 : 1987 RRR 495
17
the following paragraph.”
27.      We find that in respect to the land on the eastern side, after leaving

         land up to the extent of 30 meters from the center of railway track, the

         Company shall be entitled to Rs.9.5 per square feet, i.e., 50% of the

         compensation acquired for the railway track.
28.      Still further, in terms of the judgment of this Court in
State of Punjab

         v. Amarjit Singh & Anr.6
, compensation on account of severance is

         not entitled to the benefit of
Section 23
(1-A) and
Section 23(2)
of the

         Act, as the market value is determined in terms of
Section 23(1)
firstly,

         whereas the compensation on account of severance of land is

         determined under
Section 23(1)
thirdly. This Court held as under:
“11. Sub-section (1-A) of
Section 23
, inserted by Act 68 of 1984
                provides that in addition to the market value of the land, as
                provided under
Section 23(1)
, the court shall, in every case,
                award an amount calculated at the rate of 12% per annum on
                such market value for the period commencing on or from the
                date of publication of the notification under
Section 4(1)
in
                respect of such land to the date of award of the Collector or the
                date of taking possession of the land, whichever is earlier. The
                additional amount under
Section 23
(1-A) and solatium under
Section 23(2)
are both payable only on the market value
                determined under
Section 23(1)
of the Act and not on any other
                amount. Solatium under
Section 23(2)
is not payable on the
                additional amount nor is additional amount under
Section 23
(1-
                A) payable on solatium. Solatium and additional amount are also
                not payable on the damages/expenses that may be awarded
                under the second to sixth factors under
Section 23(1)
of the
                Act.”
29.      The process of determining compensation by the Reference Court is

         wholly    fallacious.   Thus,   the   appeal   of   the   Company    claiming

6     (2011) 4 SCC 734
18
enhancement of the compensation @ Rs.40/- per square feet is

      untenable. Even the compensation determined by the High Court is

      questionable but we do not find any reason to interfere in the present

      appeal under
Article 136
of the Constitution. Furthermore, the

      Company shall be entitled to Rs.9.5 per square feet in respect of land

      situated on the eastern side after leaving 30 meters of the buffer zone

      but without any benefits under
Section 23
(1-A) and
Section 23(2)
of

      the Act.
30.   The   reference    court   determined   compensation     on   account   of

      construction in the shape of pillars raised now forming part of

      unacquired land situated on the western side of railway track as Rs.

      14,34,300/- is not in dispute. Thus, the said amount is maintained.

      Consequently, Civil Appeal No. 5031 of 2022 filed by the Company is

      dismissed whereas Civil Appeal Nos. 5006-5010 of 2022 filed by the

      Union are allowed in the following manner:
(i)        The land owners including the Company shall be entitled to

                 compensation of their land situated within 30 meters from the

                 middle of the railway track on both sides @ Rs.19 per square

                 feet. The Company shall be entitled to compensation on

                 account of pillars raised amounting to Rs. 14,34,300/- as well.
The land owners including the Company shall be entitled to

                 statutory benefits under
Section 23
(1-A) and
Section 23(2)
of

                 the Act on such land.
19
(ii)    In respect of land after the extent of 30 meters on the western

            side of the railway track and abutting the road from Maksi to

            Ujjain, no compensation would be payable.
(iii)   In respect of remaining land after the extent of 30 meters on

            the eastern side of the railway track, the Company shall be

            entitled to compensation on account of severance of land

            @Rs.9.5 per square feet but such compensation shall be

            without any benefits under
Section 23
(1-A) and
Section 23(2)
of the Act.
.............................................J.
                                                            (HEMANT GUPTA)



                                       .............................................J.
                                                               (VIKRAM NATH)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 11, 2022.
20