[Cites
60
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Independent Schools Federation Of ... vs Union Of India on 29 August, 2022
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
REPORTABLE

                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8162 OF 2012


                          INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS’ FEDERATION
                          OF INDIA (REGD.)                                 ...     APPELLANT

                                                       VERSUS

                          UNION OF INDIA AND ANOTHER                       ...   RESPONDENTS

                                                                    WITH

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8684 OF 2012

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2229 OF 2013

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9406 OF 2013

                                            CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6316-6329 OF 2017

                                            CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6330-6331 OF 2017

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3870 OF 2018

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7457 OF 2018

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7458 OF 2018

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7459 OF 2018

Signature Not Verified
                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7460 OF 2018
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2022.08.29
17:07:35 IST
Reason:                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7461 OF 2018

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7462 OF 2018
                         Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                     Page 1 of 35
                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.                    OF 2022
     (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 12535 OF 2014)

                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.                    OF 2022
     (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 15069 OF 2015)

                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.                    OF 2022
     (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 19930 OF 2017)

                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.                    OF 2022
     (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 3293 OF 2019)

                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.                    OF 2022
     (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 2235 OF 2020)

                   WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 44 OF 2016

                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1158 OF 2019

                                           AND

                 TRANSFER CASE (CIVIL) NO. 104 OF 2015




                               JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
Leave granted in the special leave petitions.
2.      The civil appeals by way of special leave, which impugn the

        judgements of the High Court of Allahabad- Lucknow Bench1, the




1 City Montessori School and Another v. Union of India and Others., Miscellaneous Bench No.
3075/2015; and
City Montessari School v. Appellate Authority, Misc
. Single No. 4583/2017.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                       Page 2 of 35
High Court of Gujarat2, the High Court of Delhi3, the High Court of

        Bombay- Aurangabad Bench4, the High Court of Punjab and

        Haryana5, the High Court of Chhattisgarh- Bilaspur Bench6 and the

        High Court of Madhya Pradesh,-Indore Bench7, as well as a batch

        of writ petitions under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India, were

        heard together as they involve a common question – constitutional

        validity of the amendment to Section 2(e) and insertion of Section

        13A to the Payment of Gratuity Act, 19728, with retrospective effect

        from 3rd April 1997 vide the Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Act,

        20099.
3.      The PAG Act enacted and enforced with effect from 16th September

        1972, requires payment of gratuity to an employee after he has

        rendered continuous service for not less than 5 years, on his



2 Saraswati Vidya Mandal v. Ashaben Vinubhai Majmudar and Another, S.C.A. No. 17839/ 2011 and
11 other cases; Jain Citizens Education Society, Surendranagar and Another v. Union of India and
Others, S.C.A. No. 9022/2011 and 1 other Case; and
Nalanda Kelavani Mandal v. Shri Amrutbhai
Nathudas Patel and Another
, S.C.A. No. 18772/2015, and 5 other cases.
3 Independent Schools’ Federation of India (Regd.) v. Union of India & Anr., W.P. (C) No. 6168/2010;

and Maharishi Shiksha Sansthan Registered Society v. Union of India and Another., W.P(C)
4696/2012.
4
Saint Xaviers High School v. Shailaja Vishnu Deshpande., Writ Petition No.
15344/2017; and
Saint

Xaviers High School v. Jayashree Shamal Ghosh, Writ Petition No.
15282/2019.
5
The Sonipat Hindu Educational & Charitable Society v. Union of India and Another
, C.W.P. No.

17643/2010 (O&M);
Maharishi Dayanand Education Society and others v. Union of India and Others
,
C.W.P. 16884/2012; and
Independent Schools Association, Chandigarh v. Union of India and Others
,
C.W.P. No. 23489/2011.
6
The Secretary, Board of Secondary Education and Others v. Union of India and Others
, W.P.L. No.

138/2012 and 1 other case.
7 Bal Niketan Sangh through Smt. Meena Phadke v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Others., Writ Petition

No. 5508/ 2014.
8 For short, “PAG Act”.
9 For short, “
Amendment Act, 2009
”.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                              Page 3 of 35
superannuation, retirement or resignation or on his death or

        disablement due to accident or disease.10 However, sub-section (3)

        to Section 1 of the PAG Act restricts its applicability to the following

        establishments :
“1. Short  title,               extent,        application         and
                   commencement. –

                              xx                      xx                     xx

                   (3) It shall apply to –
(a) every factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port and
                   railway company;
(b) every shop or establishment within the meaning of
                   any law for the time being in force in relation to shops
                   and establishments in a State, in which ten or more
                   persons are employed, or were employed, on any day
                   of the preceding twelve months;
(c) such other establishments or class of
                   establishments, in which ten or more employees are
                   employed, or were employed, on any day of the
                   preceding twelve months, as the Central Government
                   may, by notification, specify in this behalf.”

                In the present case, we are only concerned with clause (c)

        and not clauses (a) and (b) to sub-section (3) to Section 1 of the

        PAG Act. As per clause (c), the PAG Act applies to an

        establishment or a class of establishments in which ten or more

        employees are employed, as the Central Government may, by

        notification, specify on this behalf.11


10Section 4 of the PAG Act.
11Sub-section 3A to
Section 1
, inserted by the Payment of Gratuity (Second Amendment) Act, 1984
with effect from 18th May 1984, states that a shop or establishment to which the PAG Act applies, shall
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                                 Page 4 of 35
4.     In exercise of powers conferred by clause (c) to Section 1(3) of PAG

       Act vide notification No. S.O. 239, the provisions of the PAG Act

       were made applicable to the “local bodies” in which ten or more

       persons are employed, as a class of establishments, with effect

       from 8th January 1982. As a result, the schools under the local

       bodies with ten or more employees became liable to pay gratuity to

       their employees. However, the notification did not apply to private

       schools.
5.     By Notification No. S-42013/1/95-SS.(II) issued by the Ministry of

       Labour and Employment, Government of India on 3rd April, 1997,

       the provisions of the PAG Act have been made applicable to the

       educational institutions with ten or more employees. The private

       schools being educational institutions, in which ten or more persons

       are employed, became liable to pay gratuity to their employees as

       per the provisions of the PAG Act.
6.     However, some private schools raised a dispute claiming that the

       teachers in educational institutions or schools are not “employee”

       as defined in Section 2(e) of the PAG Act. The expression




continue to be governed by the enactment, notwithstanding the number of persons employed therein,
at any time after the PAG Act has become applicable, falls below ten.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                            Page 5 of 35
“employee” in clause (e) to
Section 2
, post the
Payment of Gratuity

       (Amendment) Act, 1994
, which came into effect from 24th May

       1994, at that time, read thus:
“2. Definitions. –

                            xx                      xx                    xx
(e) employee means any person (other than
                  apprentice) employed on wages, in any establishment,
                  factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company
                  or shop, to do any skilled, semi-skilled, or unskilled,
                  manual, supervisory, technical or clerical work, whether
                  the terms of such employment are express or implied,
                  and whether or nor such person is employed in a
                  managerial or administrative capacity, but does not
                  include any such person who holds a post under the
                  Central Government or a State Government and is
                  governed by any other Act or by any rules providing for
                  payment of gratuity.”

               The contention that the teachers did not fulfil the description

       of the employees, who are skilled, semi-skilled or unskilled persons

       employed on wages, was accepted by the Full Bench of the High

       Court of Gujarat vide judgment dated 4th May 200112. Thus, the

       teachers were denied the benefit of gratuity, but other employees

       of the private schools, were entitled to the benefit of gratuity.
7.     This decision of the High Court of Gujarat was impugned by an

       association of teachers – Ahmedabad Private Primary Teachers’

       Association, before this Court, but their challenge was rejected vide
12Shantiben L. Christian v. Administrative Officer, Ahmedabad Municipal School Board, Special Civil
Application No.
5272 of 1987.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                              Page 6 of 35
judgment dated 13th January 200413. Applying the doctrine of pari

       materia, this Court held that the expression “employee”, as defined

       vide clause (e) to
Section 2
, is restrictive and not expansive. Relying

       on decisions in
A. Sundarambal v. Government of Goa, Daman

       and Diu and Others14
and
Haryana Unrecognised Schools’

       Association v. State of Haryana15
, while interpreting the definition

       of an “employee” under the
Minimum Wages Act, 1948
, and the
Payment of Bonus Act, 1965
, as also the definition of “workmen”

       under the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
, this Court pointed to the

       difference in the definition of word “employee” in the Employees’

       Provident       Fund and          Miscellaneous          Provisions       Act,    1952.

       Accordingly, teachers who impart education to students were held

       not to be an “employee” under Section 2(e) of the PAG Act as they

       do not perform any kind of skilled, unskilled, semi-skilled, manual,

       supervisory, managerial, administrative, technical or clerical work.
Reasoning          in
Ahmedabad            Private       Primary        Teachers’

       Association
(supra) is crystalized in paragraph 25 of the judgment,

       which reads:
“25. The legislature was alive to various kinds of
                  definitions of the word “employee” contained in various
                  previous labour enactments when the Act was passed
                  in 1972. If it intended to cover in the definition of

13
Ahmedabad Private Primary Teachers’ Association v. Administrative Officer and Others
, (2004) 1
SCC 755.
14 (1988) 4 SCC 42.
15 (1996) 4 SCC 225.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                            Page 7 of 35
“employee” all kinds of employees, it could have as well
                 used such wide language as is contained in
Section 2(f)
of the Employees' Provident Funds Act, 1952 which
                 defines “employee” to mean “any person who is
                 employed for wages in any kind of work, manual or
                 otherwise, in or in connection with the work of an
                 establishment …”. Non-use of such wide language in
                 the definition of “employee” in
Section 2(e)
of the Act of
                 1972 reinforces our conclusion that teachers are clearly
                 not covered in the definition.”

              Nevertheless, being conscious that the teachers would be

       thereby deprived of the benefit of gratuity, the Court had observed

       and clarified:
“26. Our conclusion should not be misunderstood that
                 teachers although engaged in a very noble profession
                 of educating our young generation should not be given
                 any gratuity benefit. There are already in several States
                 separate statutes, rules and regulations granting
                 gratuity benefits to teachers in educational institutions
                 which are more or less beneficial than the gratuity
                 benefits provided under the Act. It is for the legislature
                 to take cognizance of situation of such teachers in
                 various establishments where gratuity benefits are not
                 available and think of a separate legislation for them in
                 this regard. That is the subject-matter solely of the
                 legislature to consider and decide.”
8.     On 26th November 2007, the Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Bill,

       2007, was introduced in the Parliament seeking to amend the

       definition of the word “employee” and thereby rectify the error or

       lacuna identified by this Court in
Ahmedabad Private Primary

       Teachers’ Association
(supra). The object and reasons, as stated

       and obvious, were to extend the benefit of gratuity to teachers of

       private educational institutions. The bill was referred to the
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                Page 8 of 35
Standing Committee on 10th December 2007. After due

       deliberations and in-depth consideration, the Standing Committee

       deemed it appropriate to suggest changes vide the 26th Standing

       Committee Report. The report, on the aspect of grant of gratuity to

       teachers with effect from 3rd April, 1997 states:
“36…The Committee feel that implementing the law
                 from the year 2004 will cause irreparable loss to a large
                 number of teachers of the country, particularly to those
                 who have already retired. The Committee, therefore,
                 call upon the Government to make the law applicable
                 with retrospective effect, i.e. from the date of notification
                 in the year 1997. This will provide the needed succour
                 as well as justice to all those affected persons who were
                 denied their rightful benefits due to some technical
                 flaw/legal lacuna in the definition of the term ‘employee’
                 as contained in
Section 2 (e)
of the Payment of Gratuity
                 Act, 1972.”
9.     Accepting the said recommendation of the 26th Standing Committee

       Report,     the Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Bill, 2009 was

       introduced in the Parliament on 24th February 2009 and was passed

       on 31st December 2009. Clause (e) to Section 2 of the PAG Act was

       amended with retrospective effect from 3rd April, 1997, and reads:
“2. Definitions. –

                           xx                 xx                 xx
(e) "employee" means any person (other than an
                 apprentice) who is employed for wages, whether the
                 terms of such employment are express or implied, in
                 any kind of work, manual or otherwise, in or in
                 connection with the work of a factory, mine, oilfield,
                 plantation, port, railway company, shop or other
                 establishment to which this Act applies, but does not
                 include any such person who holds a post under the
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                   Page 9 of 35
Central Government or a State Government and is
                 governed by any other Act or by any rules providing for
                 payment of gratuity;”

              Further, Section 13A was inserted also with effect from 3rd

       April 1997 and reads :
“13A. Validation of payment of gratuity.–
                 Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgement,
                 decree or order of any court, for the period commencing
                 on and from the 3rd day of April, 1997 and ending on
                 the day on which the
Payment of Gratuity (Amendment)
                 Act, 2009
, receives the assent of the President, the
                 gratuity shall be payable to an employee in pursuance
                 of the notification of the Government of India in the
                 Ministry of Labour and Employment vide number S.O.
                 1080, dated the 3rd day of April, 1997 and the said
                 notification shall be valid and shall be deemed always
                 to have been valid as if the
Payment of Gratuity
                 (Amendment) Act, 2009
had been in force at all material
                 times and the gratuity shall be payable accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall
                 extend, or be construed to extend, to affect any person
                 with any punishment or penalty whatsoever by reason
                 of the non-payment by him of the gratuity during the
                 period specified in this section which shall become due
                 in pursuance of the said notification.”
10.     The object and reasons for the
Amendment Act, 2009
refers to the

       judgment in
Ahmedabad Private Primary Teachers’ Association
(supra), and states that the legislature, to cover the definition of

       “employee” to all kinds of employees, has used language similar to

       the wide language of clause (f) of
Section 2
of the Employees’
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952
. It is also

       crystal clear that the Parliament has passed and enacted the
Amendment Act, 2009
to confer, with retrospective effect from the
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                              Page 10 of 35
date of the notification on 3rd April 1997, benefit of gratuity to the

       teachers who have rendered continuous service for not less than 5

       years, on their superannuation, retirement or resignation, or on their

       death or disablement due to accident or disease.
11.    Several private schools challenged the constitutional validity of the

       amendments, which writ petitions have been dismissed by seven

       High Courts, as mentioned in the first paragraph of this judgment.

       These appeals by way of special leave impugn these judgments.

       Some private schools have also filed writ petitions under Article 32

       of the Constitution of India before us.
12.    The power of the Parliament and State Legislatures under
Articles

       245
, 246
and
248
of the Constitution of India, as held by this Court

       in
State of Tamil Nadu v. Arooran Sugar Ltd.16
and several other

       decisions of this Court, including
State of Gujarat and Another v.

       Raman Lal Keshav Lal Soni and Others17
,
T.R. Kapur and

       Others v. State of Haryana and Others18
and
Union of India and

       Others v. Tushar Ranjan Mohanty and Others19
, to legislate,

       embraces the power to amend, delete or obliterate the statute or

       enact a statute prospectively or retrospectively. To be fair, the


16 (1997) 1 SCC 326.
17 (1983) 2 SCC 33.
18 (1986) Supp SCC 584.
19 (1994) 5 SCC 450.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                          Page 11 of 35
appellants and the writ petitioners do not contest the competency,

       and that the legislature has the power to amend an already enacted

       law or enact a new law with retrospective effect. They also do not

       dispute that the amendment to
Section 2(e)
, and the insertion of

       Section 13A have been given retrospective effect. The two main

       grounds of challenge raised and required to be considered in

       nutshell can be summarised as:
(a) The legislation vide the Amendment Act 2009
                 overrules the judicial decision in
Ahmedabad
                 Private Primary Teachers’ Association
(supra)
                 and violates the doctrine of separation of powers.
(b) The      retrospective  amendments       are
                 unreasonable, excessive and harsh, and therefore,
                 unconstitutional.
13.    The first ground should not hold us for long, as the legislation in

       question rectifies the infirmities and defects pointed out by the

       Court, and the amended clause (e) to
Section 2
, defining the word

       “employee” and the newly inserted Section 13A with retrospective

       effect from 3rd April 1997, effectuate and catalyse the object and

       purpose of the Notification No. S-42013/1/95-SS.(II). This power to

       legislate with retrospective effect, which vests in every sovereign

       legislature, is not taken away by a court decision. However, a court

       decision cannot be overruled by the legislature. The legislature can

       amend the language of the provision that was the subject matter of
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                        Page 12 of 35
the court decision, and such an amendment does not overrule the

          court decision. Overruling assumes a decision based on the same

          law. Where the law, as in the present case, has been amended,

          and the defects have been removed or cured, the law changes, and

          therefore, the earlier interpretation is no longer applicable and

          becomes irrelevant. Doctrine of separation of powers demarcates

          the exclusive domains of the legislature, which enacts the laws, and

          the courts’, which interpret the law as enacted. The earlier decision

          in
Ahmedabad Private Primary Teachers’ Association
(supra)

          by this Court had interpreted the law, that is, Section 2(e) of the

          PAG Act, as it then existed in the statute. The judgment even

          acknowledged and prompted the legislature to enact a legislation

          granting the benefit of gratuity to teachers, who had been excluded

          because of the legal flaw. When the legislature acts within its power

          to usher in a valid law and rectify a legal error, even after a court

          ruling, the legislature exercises its constitutional power to enact the

          law and does not overrule an earlier court decision.
This principle

          is too well settled to require elaborate quotations, albeit reference

          can be made amongst other cases to
Shri Prithvi Cotton Mills

          Ltd. and Another v. Broach Borough Municipality and Others20
,




20   (1969) 2 SCC 283
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                             Page 13 of 35
Ujagar Prints and Others (II) v. Union of India and Others21 and

          National Agricultural Cooperative Marking Federation of India

          Ltd. and Another v. Union of India and Others22.
14.       The second ground is again devoid of any merit and substance.
The legislature, vide the
Amendment Act, 2009
, has given

          retrospective effect to the amended provision of
Section 2(e)
and

          the newly inserted Section 13A with effect from 3rd April 1997, which

          is also the date of the notification issued by the Government under
Section 1(3)(c)
, making the PAG Act applicable to the educational

          institutions with ten or more employees. The amendment enforces

          and gives effect to what was intended by the notification, but could

          not be achieved on account of the technical and legal defect. The

          lacuna, a distortion in the language that had the unwitting effect of

          leaving out teachers, has been rectified so as to achieve the object

          and purpose behind the issuance of the notification, making the

          PAG Act applicable to all educational institutions. The argument of

          the educational institutions that they have been taken by surprise is

          incorrect and unacceptable as the legislation had cured the

          inadvertent defect in a statute, as pointed out by this Court, through

          legislative repair. Private schools, when they claim a vested right


21   (1989) 3 SCC 488.
22   (2003) 5 SCC 23.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                             Page 14 of 35
arising from the reason of defect, should not succeed, for

          acceptance would be at the expense of teachers who were denied

          and deprived of the intended benefit. Marginal inconvenience in the

          form of financial outgo or difficulty is of little weight, when curing of

          an inadvertent defect is made retrospectively in greater public

          interest, which consideration will overrule the interest of one or

          some institutions.23 We find little merit in this argument also for the

          reason, that the observations of this Court in
Ahmedabad Private

          Primary Teachers’ Association
(supra) in paragraph 26 were

          sufficient to indicate that a legislation should intervene to grant the

          benefit of gratuity to teachers. The contention that the private

          schools were sure to succeed as to deny the teachers the benefit

          of the Notification No. S-42013/1/95-SS.(II) dated 3rd April 1997, is

          questionable and farfetched to be accepted. The challenge was

          contested and had remained pending before the High Courts and

          then this Court. The private schools had relied on some judgments

          of this Court, but these judgments have interpreted the word

          “employee” under other enactments. The law is subject to

          uncertainty ex-ante when two or more views are possible, but there

          may be certainty ex-post litigation in view of the law of precedents,

          which reduces uncertainty.
23   See paragraph 69 in
Ujagar Prints and Others (II) v. Union of India and Others
, (1989) 3 SCC 488.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                               Page 15 of 35
15.     A secondary argument on behalf of the private educational

        institutions that they would be liable to pay gratuity for a period of

        service prior to 3rd April 1997, and, therefore, the amendments are

        unconscionable and tyrannous, is equally fallacious for several

        reasons. A somewhat similar controversy had arisen in the case of

        Management of Goodyear India Limited. v. Shri K.G.

        Devessar24,           wherein the employee was in service from 24th

        January 1961 to 31st December 1974. On 16th September 1972, the

        date when the PAG Act came into effect, he was drawing a salary

        of more than Rs. 1,000/- per month and hence, in terms of the then

        definition of the word “employee” under the PAG Act, which

        excluded those drawing salary of more than Rs. 1,000/- per month,

        as per the employer- management, the employee was not entitled

        to gratuity. Rejecting the contention, this Court held that the gratuity

        is payable to an employee as per the mandate of Section 425 of the

24(1985) 4 SCC 45.
25 4. Payment of gratuity.––(1) Gratuity shall be payable to an employee on the termination of his
employment after he has rendered continuous service for not less than five years,––
(a) on his superannuation, or
(b) on his retirement or resignation, or
(c) on his death or disablement due to accident or disease:
Provided that the completion of continuous service of five years shall not be necessary where
the termination of the employment of any employee is due to death or disablement:
Provided further that in the case of death of the employee, gratuity payable to him shall be
paid to his nominee or, if no nomination has been made, to his heirs, and where any such nominees
or heirs is a minor, the share of such minor, shall be deposited with the controlling authority who shall
invest the same for the benefit of such minor in such bank or other financial institution, as may be
prescribed, until such minor attains majority.
Explanation.–– For the purposes of this section, disablement means such disablement as
incapacitates an employee for the work which he was capable of performing before the accident or
disease resulting in such disablement.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                                  Page 16 of 35
PAG Act, after he has rendered continuous service for not less than

        5 years on his superannuation, retirement or resignation or on his

        death or disablement due to accident or disease, when such event

        has occurred post the enforcement of the PAG Act. The Court

        rejected the submission on behalf of the employer-management

        that an employee is entitled to gratuity only when, both on the date

        when the PAG Act came into force, and on the date when the

        employee retired, he/she was drawing wages not exceeding



         (2) For every completed year of service or part thereof in excess of six months, the employer
shall pay gratuity to an employee at the rate of fifteen days’ wages based on the rate of wages last
drawn by the employee concerned:
Provided that in the case of a piece-rated employee, daily wages shall be computed on the
average of the total wages received by him for a period of three months immediately preceding the
termination of his employment, and, for this purpose, the wages paid for any overtime work shall not
be taken into account:
Provided further that in the case of an employee who is employed in a seasonal establishment
and who is not so employed throughout the year, the employer shall pay the gratuity at the rate of
seven days’ wages for each season.
Explanation.–– In the case of a monthly rated employee, the fifteen days’ wages shall be
calculated by dividing the monthly rate of wages last drawn by him by twenty-six and multiplying the
quotient by fifteen.
(3) The amount of gratuity payable to an employee shall not exceed such amount as may be
notified by the Central Government from time to time.
(4) For the purpose of computing the gratuity payable to an employee who is employed, after
his disablement, on reduced wages, his wages for the period preceding his disablement shall be taken
to be the wages received by him during that period, and his wages for the period subsequent to his
disablement shall be taken to be the wages as so reduced.
(5) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of an employee to receive better terms of gratuity
under any award or agreement or contract with the employer.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),––
(a) the gratuity of an employee, whose services have been terminated for any act,
                  wilful omission or negligence causing any damage or loss to, or destruction of,
                  property belonging to the employer shall be forfeited to the extent of the damage or
                  loss so caused;
(b) the gratuity payable to an employee may be wholly or partially forfeited
(i) if the services of such employee have been terminated for his riotous or
                           disorderly conduct or any other act of violence on his part, or
(ii) if the services of such employee have been terminated for any act which
                           constitutes an offence involving moral turpitude, provided that such offence is
                           committed by him in the course of his employment.
        (7). *********
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                                      Page 17 of 35
Rs.1,000/- per month. The Court observed that to approve the

       submission of the employer-management would render a whole

       class of workers, who were during the course of their employment

       drawing salary less than Rs. 1,000/- per month but on the eve of

       their retirement were getting wages of Rs. 1,000/- per month,

       without the benefit of gratuity. This could not have been the

       intention of the Parliament. The reasonable way to construe
Section

       4
in the light of Section 2(e) of the PAG Act would be to hold that

       when the employees’ services are terminated for any reason

       mentioned in
Section 4
after coming into force of the PAG Act, the

       employee would be entitled to the payment of gratuity if he has

       rendered continuous service for not less than 5 years and for that

       period during which he satisfied the definition of “employee” under
Section 2(e)
. It does not matter whether that period comes before

       the commencement of the PAG Act. Once that condition is satisfied,

       the next and only question would be regarding the amount of

       gratuity payable.
16.    The argument of unreasonableness and that the amendment is

       financially confiscatory, predicated on past liability, which may pre-

       date the notification effective from 3rd April 1997, apart from the

       other reasons, is to be rejected as there are upper-cap limits on

       payment of gratuity. Therefore, though gratuity is computed with
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                          Page 18 of 35
reference to the years of service, in view of the upper-cap limit, the

          payment towards gratuity cannot exceed the specified amount,

          even if the employee would be entitled to higher amount in view of

          the years of the service rendered to the employer.
17.       In the context of applicability of an enactment, the courts have

          drawn difference between retroactive effect and retrospective

          operation.
Shanti Conductors Private Limited and Another v.

          Assam State Electricity Board and Others26
refers to earlier case

          law and elucidates:
“64. The opinion of Gowda, J. dated 31-8-2016
                    although holds that the Act is not retrospective but he
                    holds the Act retroactive. The word “retroactive” has
                    been defined in Black's Law Dictionary in the following
                    words:
“Retroactive, adj.(17c) (Of a statute, ruling, etc.)
                          extending in scope or effect to matters that have
                          occurred in the past. —Also termed retrospective.
                          Cf. Prospective (1).–retroact, vb.”
65. The two-Judge Bench of this Court in State Bank's
Staff Union (Madras Circle) v. Union of India
, had
                    occasion to examine the concept of retroactive and
                    retrospective. In paras 20 and 21 of the judgment the
                    following has been laid down: (SCC p. 593)

                          “20. Judicial Dictionary (13th Edn.) by K.J. Aiyar,
                          Butterworth, p. 857, states that the word
                          “retrospective” when used with reference to an
                          enactment may mean (i) affecting an existing
                          contract; or (ii) reopening up of past, closed and
                          completed transaction; or (iii) affecting accrued
                          rights and remedies; or (iv) affecting procedure.
Words and Phrases, Permanent Edn., Vol. 37-A,

26   (2019) 19 SCC 529.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                         Page 19 of 35
pp. 224-25, defines a “retrospective or retroactive
                    law” as one which takes away or impairs vested
                    or accrued rights acquired under existing laws. A
                    retroactive law takes away or impairs vested
                    rights acquired under existing laws, or creates a
                    new obligation, imposes a new duty, or attaches a
                    new disability, in respect to transactions or
                    considerations already past.
21. In Advanced Law Lexicon by P. Ramanatha
                    Aiyar (3rd Edn., 2005) the expressions
                    “retroactive” and “retrospective” have been
                    defined as follows at p. 4124, Vol. 4:
‘Retroactive.—Acting backward; affecting what is
                    past.
(Of a statute, ruling, etc.) extending in scope or
                    effect to matters that have occurred in the past. —
                    Also termed retrospective. (Black's Law
                    Dictionary, 7th Edn., 1999)

                    “Retroactivity” is a term often used by lawyers but
                    rarely defined. On analysis it soon becomes
                    apparent, moreover, that it is used to cover at
                    least two distinct concepts. The first, which may
                    be called “true retroactivity”, consists in the
                    application of a new rule of law to an act or
                    transaction which was completed before the rule
                    was promulgated. The second concept, which will
                    be referred to as “quasi-retroactivity”, occurs
                    when a new rule of law is applied to an act or
                    transaction in the process of completion … The
                    foundation of these concepts is the distinction
                    between completed and pending transactions …
                    [T.C. Hartley, The Foundations of European
                    Community Law, p. 129 (1981)].
xx               xx                xx

                    Retrospective.—Looking       back;   contemplating
                    what is past.

                    Having operation from a past time.
“Retrospective” is somewhat ambiguous and that
                    good deal of confusion has been caused by the
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                  Page 20 of 35
fact that it is used in more senses than one. In
                         general, however, the courts regard as
                         retrospective any statute which operates on cases
                         or facts coming into existence before its
                         commencement in the sense that it affects, even
                         if for the future only, the character or
                         consequences of transactions previously entered
                         into or of other past conduct. Thus, a statute is not
                         retrospective merely because it affects existing
                         rights; nor is it retrospective merely because a
                         part of the requisite for its action is drawn from a
                         time antecedent to its passing.’ (Vol. 44,
                         Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edn., p. 570,
                         para 921.)”
66. Further in
Jay Mahakali Rolling Mills v. Union of
                       India
, explaining retroactive and retrospective the
                       following has been laid down: (SCC p. 200, para 8)

                         “8. “Retrospective” means looking backward,
                         contemplating what is past, having reference to a
                         statute or things existing before the statute in
                         question. Retrospective law means a law which
                         looks backward or contemplates the past; one,
                         which is made to affect acts or facts occurring, or
                         rights occurring, before it comes into force.
Retroactive statute means a statute, which
                         creates a new obligation on transactions or
                         considerations or destroys or impairs vested
                         rights.”
67. Retroactivity in the context of the statute consists of
                       application of new rule of law to an act or transaction
                       which has been completed before the rule was
                       promulgated.”
18.
Vineeta Sharma v. Rakesh Sharma and Others27
observes that

          retrospective statute operates backwards and takes away vested

          rights accrued under law. The retroactive statute does not operate

          retrospectively, but it operates in future, albeit it does not become


27   (2020) 9 SCC 1.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                         Page 21 of 35
retrospective in operation when the operation is based on the

        character and status that arose earlier. Character or event which

        has happened in past or requisites which have been drawn from

        antecedent events cannot be necessarily construed as having

        retrospective effect. A retrospective statute means a statute which

        creates a new obligation on transactions or considerations already

        past or destroyed or impaired vested rights on and from the

        retrospective date.28 The judgment in
Vineeta Sharma
(supra)

        relies on and quotes from an earlier decision in
Darshan Singh v.

        Ram Pal Singh and Another,29
which portion we would also like

        to quote:
“35. Mr Sachar relies on Gokal Chand v. Parvin Kumari,
Garikapati Veeraya v. N. Subbiah Choudhry
,
Jose Da
                   Costa v. Bascora Sadasiva Sinai Narcornim
,
Govind
                   Das v. CIT
, Henshall v. Porter , United Provinces v.
                   Atiqa Begum, in support of his submission that the
                   Amendment Act was not made retrospective by the
                   legislature either expressly or by necessary implication
                   as the Act itself expressly provided that it shall be
                   deemed to have come into force on 23-1-1973; and
                   therefore there would be no justification to giving it
                   retrospective operation. The vested right to contest
                   which was created on the alienation having taken place
                   and which had been litigated in the court, argues Mr
                   Sachar, could not be taken away. In other words, the
                   vested right to contest in appeal was not affected by the
                   Amendment Act. However, to appreciate this argument
                   we have to analyse and distinguish between the two
                   rights involved, namely, the right to contest and the right
28 In the present case, the constitutional mandate of
Article 20(1)
is not required to be examined and
considered.
29 1992 Supp. (1) SCC 191.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                               Page 22 of 35
to appeal against the lower court's decision. Of these
                 two rights, while the right to contest is a customary right,
                 the right to appeal is always a creature of statute. The
                 change of the forum for appeal by enactment may not
                 affect the right of appeal itself. In the instant case we are
                 concerned with the right to contest and not with the right
                 to appeal as such. There is also no dispute as to the
                 propositions of law regarding vested rights being not
                 taken away by an enactment which is ex facie or by
                 implication not retrospective. But merely because an Act
                 envisages a past act or event in the sweep of its
                 operation, it may not necessarily be said to be
                 retrospective. Retrospective, according to Black's Law
                 Dictionary, means looking backward; contemplating
                 what is past; having reference to a statute or things
                 existing before the Act in question. Retrospective law,
                 according to the same dictionary, means a law which
                 looks backwards or contemplates the past; one which is
                 made to affect acts or facts occurring, or rights
                 occurring, before it came into force. Every statute which
                 takes away or impairs vested rights acquired under
                 existing laws, or creates a new obligation, imposes a
                 new duty, or attaches a new disability in respect to
                 transactions or considerations already past. Retroactive
                 statute means a statute which creates a new obligation
                 on transactions or considerations already past or
                 destroys or impairs vested rights.
36. In Halsbury's Laws of England (4th Edn., Vol. 44, at
                 para 921) we find:
“921. Meaning of “retrospective”.—It has been
                    said that “retrospective” is somewhat ambiguous
                    and that a good deal of confusion has been
                    caused by the fact that it is used in more senses
                    than one. In general, however, the courts regard
                    as retrospective any statute which operates on
                    cases or facts coming into existence before its
                    commencement in the sense that it affects, even
                    if for the future only, the character or
                    consequences of transactions previously entered
                    into or of other past conduct. Thus a statute is not
                    retrospective merely because it affects existing
                    rights; or is it retrospective merely because a part
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                   Page 23 of 35
of the requisites for its action is drawn from a time
                    antecedent to its passing.’
37. We are inclined to take the view that in the instant
                 case the legislature looked back to 23-1-1973 and not
                 beyond to put an end to the custom and merely because
                 on that cut-off date some contests were brought to
                 abrupt end would not make the Amendment Act
                 retrospective. In other words, it would not be
                 retrospective merely because a part of the requisites for
                 its action was drawn from a time antecedent to the
                 Amendment Act coming into force. We are also of the
                 view that while providing that “no person shall contest
                 any alienation of immovable property whether ancestral
                 or non-ancestral or any appointment of an heir to such
                 property”, without preserving any right to contest such
                 alienations or appointments as were made after the
                 coming into force of the Principal Act and before the
                 coming into force of the Amendment Act, the intention of
                 the legislature was to cut off even the vested right; and
                 that it was so by implication as well. There is no dispute
                 as to the proposition that retrospective effect is not to be
                 given to an Act unless, the legislature made it so by
                 express words or necessary implication. But in the
                 instant case it appears that this was the intention of the
                 legislature. Similarly courts will construe a provision as
                 conferring power to act retroactively when clear words
                 are used. We find both the intention and language of the
                 Amendment Act clear in these respects.”
19.    The provisions of the PAG Act, even post the retrospective

       amendments, will apply only to those teachers who were in service

       as on 3rd April 1997, and at the time of termination have rendered

       service of not less than 5 years. The period of 5 years may be partly

       before 3rd April 1997, as the date on which the person was

       employed does not determine the applicability of the PAG Act. The

       date of termination of service, in the form of superannuation,
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                    Page 24 of 35
retirement, or resignation, or death or disablement due to accident

       or disease, should be post the enforcement date, which in the

       present case is 3rd April 1997. The entire length of service, including

       the service period prior to 3rd April 1997, is to be counted for the

       purpose of computing the entitlement condition of 5 years of

       service. This is the correct effect of the ratio and decision in

       Management of Goodyear India Limited. (supra) and the

       decisions explaining retroactive effect of a statute. This legal

       position would be equally true and correct when the PAG Act was

       first enforced with effect from 16th September 1972, and when

       Notification No. S-42013/1/95-SS.(II) under Section 1(3)(c) of the

       PAG Act was issued and enforced with effect from 3rd April, 1997.

       It would be the position in case of all notifications issued under

       Section 1(3)(c) of the PAG Act, unless a contrary intention is

       expressed, which is not the situation in the present case and thus

       need not be examined.
20.    The schools have claimed violation of
Articles 14
, 19(1)(g)
, 21
and
300-A
of the Constitution of India which, in our opinion, are not

       violated as, to deny gratuity benefits to the teachers upon

       enforcement of the notification No. S-42013/1/95-SS.(II) dated 3rd

       April 1997 was itself an anomaly which mandated correction. The

       effect of the decision in
Ahmedabad Private Primary Teachers’
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                          Page 25 of 35
Association
(supra) was that although private educational

          institutions were covered under the PAG Act, gratuity benefits could

          not be extended to teachers in view of the legal flaw in the definition,

          consequent to which they were not treated as employees. The

          teachers were discriminated to be denied benefit of gratuity, a

          terminal benefit, which was payable to other employees of the

          private schools/educational institutions, including those engaged in

          administrative and managerial work.
The amendment with

          retrospective effect remedies the injustice and discrimination

          suffered by the teachers on account of a legislative mistake, which

          was understood after the pronouncement of the judgment in
Ahmedabad Private Primary Teachers’ Association
(supra).

          The amendment was necessary to ensure that something which

          was due and payable to the teachers is not denied to them due to

          a defect in the statute. Payment of gratuity cannot be categorized

          as a windfall or a bounty payable by the private schools as it is one

          of the minimal conditions of service.30 In this background, the

          argument of the private schools that they do not have capacity and

          ability to pay gratuity to the teachers is unapt and parsimonious. All

          establishments are bound to follow the law, including the PAG Act.

          As observed earlier, the private schools were certainly aware of the


30   See Bakshish Singh v. M/s Darshan Engineering Works and Others, (1994) 1 SCC 9.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                           Page 26 of 35
intent of the Government that the educational institutions, as an

          establishment, would be covered and must pay gratuity upon issue

          of notification No. S-42013/1/95-SS.(II) dated 3rd April 1997.
Some

          schools have raised an argument relying upon decision of this Court

          in
T.M.A. Pai Foundation and Others v. State of Karnataka and

          Others31
, which observes that as a matter of principle, charging of

          capitation fee or profiteering by educational institutions is

          impermissible. However, the judgment does not state that the

          teachers should not be paid gratuity. In fact, the judgment holds that

          the educational institutions are entitled to reasonable surplus to

          meet the cost of expansion and augmentation of the facilities and

          this does not amount to profiteering. It is possible that in some

          States there are fee fixation laws which will have to be complied

          with. But compliance with these laws does not mean that the

          teachers should be deprived and denied gratuity, which they were/

          are entitled to receive as other employees of an educational

          institution. Regulation of fee is to ensure that there is no

          commercialisation and profiteering, and the effect is not to prohibit

          a school from fixing and collecting “just and permissible school fee”,

          as has been held by this Court in Indian School, Jodhpur and




31   (2002) 8 SCC 481.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                             Page 27 of 35
Another v. State of Rajasthan and Others.32
21.       Reliance placed on the dissenting opinion of Amarendra Nath Sen,

          J. in
Lohia Machines Ltd. and Another v. Union of India and

          Others33
is misplaced. The majority opinion of the Constitution

          Bench Judgment of Five Judges, authored by P.N. Bhagwati, J.,

          had upheld the constitutional validity of Rule 19-A of the Income

          Tax Rules, 1962, enacted vide
Finance Act
(No.2 of 1980) with

          retrospective effect from 1st April 1972, thereby restricting the

          deduction available under
Section 80-J
of the Income Tax Act,

          1961. In paragraph 78, Amarendra Nath Sen, J., in his dissenting

          opinion, has observed that a validating act validating any fiscal

          provision with retrospective operation is usually held not to be

          unreasonable and arbitrary, as they are generally made to clarify

          an ambiguity or rectify some flaw or defect. Such validating act

          should not be construed as having the effect to impose fresh tax

          with retrospective effect. Thereafter, Amarendra Nath Sen, J., in the

          context of the amendment, observed that it had the effect of

          withdrawal of benefit, unequivocally granted by the main provision,

          which reason has not been accepted and did not find favour with

          the majority judgment. In the present case, there is no withdrawal


32   (2021) 10 SCC 517.
33   (1985) 2 SCC 197.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                            Page 28 of 35
of benefit unequivocally granted.
22.    A supplementary submission of the private schools was that the

       judgments of this Court upholding retrospective amendments are

       valid only when there is a tax implication as the Government has to

       refund the paid taxes, is unfounded and irrational. The power to

       amend, which includes the power to amend the statute with

       retrospective effect, is a constitutional power vested with the

       legislature, which is not confined and restricted to any particular

       type of statutes, namely, tax statutes. We would not accept any

       attempt to circumscribe and limit the power vested with the

       sovereign legislature, thereby putting fetters when such fetters are

       not prescribed by the Constitution. When and which cases to

       exercise the power has to be left to the legislature. In case the

       constitutional validity of the amendment act is challenged, the court

       is entitled to examine the relevant circumstances which prompted

       the legislature to make retrospective amendment. Judicial review,

       when validity of an amendment act is challenged, is decided on the

       grounds of lack of legislative competence, violation of the

       fundamental rights or any other provisions of the Constitution of

       India. In the present case, the notification No. S-42013/1/95-SS.(II)

       dated 3rd April 1997 had ensured that the benevolent provisions

       requiring payment of gratuity should be extended to the
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                         Page 29 of 35
“employees” of the educational institutions. The amendment with

          retrospective effect is to make the benevolent provisions equally

          applicable to teachers. The amendment seeks to bring equality and

          give fair treatment to the teachers. It can hardly be categorised as

          an arbitrary and high-handed exercise.
23.       The last contention raised by the private schools and writ petitioners

          is predicated on the enactment of the
Repealing and Amending Act
201634, by virtue of which the Amendment Act 2009 was repealed.

          The argument, in our opinion, overlooks
Section 6A
of the General

          Clauses Act, 1897 and
Section 4
of the Repealing and Amendment

          Act, which read thus:
“
Section 6A
of The General Clauses Act, 1897

                    6A. Repeal of Act making textual amendment in Act
                    or Regulation.–– Where any Central Act or Regulation
                    made after the commencement of this Act repeals any
                    enactment by which the text of any Central Act or
                    Regulation was amended by the express omission,
                    insertion or substitution of any matter, then, unless a
                    different intention appears, the repeal shall not affect
                    the continuance of any such amendment made by the
                    enactment so repealed and in operation at the time of
                    such repeal.
xx                 xx             xx
Section 4
of The Repealing and Amendment Act, 2016
4. Savings.–– The repeal by this Act of any enactment
                    shall not affect any other enactment in which the
                    repealed enactment has been applied, incorporated or
                    referred to,
34   For short, “
Repealing and Amendment Act
”.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                 Page 30 of 35
and this Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity,
                    effect or consequences of anything already done or
                    suffered, or any right, title, obligation or liability already
                    acquired, accrued or incurred, or any remedy or
                    proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or
                    discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation,
                    liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity already
                    granted, or the proof of any past act or thing;
nor shall this Act affect any principle or rule of law,
                    or established jurisdiction, form or course of pleading,
                    practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom,
                    privilege, restriction, exemption, office or appointment,
                    notwithstanding that the same respectively may have
                    been in any manner affirmed or recognised or derived
                    by, in or from any enactment hereby repealed;
nor shall the repeal by this Act of any enactment
                    revive or restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, liability,
                    right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage,
                    practice, procedure or other matter or thing not now
                    existing or in force.”
24.
Section 4
of the Repealing and Amendment Act states that the

          repeal shall not affect any of the enactment in which the repealed

          enactment has been applied, incorporated or referred to. It also

          states that the
Repealing Act
shall not affect the validity, invalidity,

          effect or consequences of anything already done or suffered, or any

          right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or

          incurred etc. This Court in
Jethanand Betab v. State of Delhi35
had examined a similar provision of the Repealing and Amendment

          Act, 1952, whereby the Indian Wireless Telegraph (Amendment)

          Act, 1949 was repealed in its entirety. Reference was made to the

          decision of the Judicial Committee in Secretary of State for India

35   (1960) 1 SCR 755.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                      Page 31 of 35
in
Council v. Hindusthan Co-operative Insurance Society,

          Ltd.36
and the principle that, where the repealing act states that the

          enactment thereof shall not affect any act in which the enactment

          has been applied, incorporated or referred to, means that there is

          an independent existence of the two acts and, therefore, even on

          the death of the amending act, its offspring survives in the

          incorporating act.
This Court also referred to Halsbury’s Law of

          England on the said aspect and the decision of the Calcutta High

          Court in
Khuda Bux v. Manager, Caledonian Press37
.
Relevant

          extract from the judgment in
Jethanand Betab
(supra) reads thus:
“6. The general object of a repealing and amending Act
                   is stated in Halsbury's Laws of England, 2nd Edn., Vol.
                   31, at p. 563, thus:
“A statute Law Revision Act does not alter the law,
                      but simply strikes out certain enactments which
                      have become unnecessary. It invariably contains
                      elaborate provisos.”

                   In
Khuda Bux v. Manager, Caledonian Press,
                   Chakravartti, C.J.
, neatly brings out the purpose and
                   scope of such Acts. The learned Chief Justice says at p.
                   486:
“Such Acts have no Legislative effect, but are
                      designed for editorial revision, being intended only
                      to excise dead matter from the statute book and
                      to reduce its volume. Mostly, they expurgate
                      amending Acts, because having imparted the
                      amendments to the main Acts, those Acts have
                      served their purpose and have no further reason
                      for their existence. At times, inconsistencies are
                      also removed by repealing and amending Acts.
36   1931 SCC OnLine PC 37.
37   1954 SCC OnLine Cal 132.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                     Page 32 of 35
The only object of such Acts, which in England are
                    called Statute Law Revision Acts, is legislative
                    spring-cleaning and they are not intended to make
                    any change in the law. Even so, they are guarded
                    by saving clauses drawn with elaborate care,….”

                 It is, therefore, clear that the main object of the 1952 Act
                 was only to strike out the unnecessary Acts and excise
                 dead matter from the statute book in order to lighten the
                 burden of ever increasing spate of legislation and to
                 remove confusion from the public mind. The object of
                 the
Repealing and Amending Act
of 1952 was only to
                 expurgate the amending Act of 1949, along with similar
                 Acts, which had served its purpose.
7. The next question is whether
Section 4
of the Act of
                 1952 saved the operation of the amendments that had
                 been inserted in the Act of 1933 by the repealed Act.
                 The relevant part of
Section 4
only saved other
                 enactments in which the repealed enactments have
                 been applied, incorporated or referred to. Can it be said
                 that the amendments are covered by the language of the
                 crucial words in
Section 4
of the Act of 1952, namely,
                 “applied, incorporated or referred to”. We think not.
Section 4
of the said Act is designed to provide for a
                 different situation, namely, the repeal of an earlier Act
                 which has been applied, incorporated or referred to in a
                 later Act. Under that section the repeal of the earlier Act
                 does not affect the subsequent Act. The said principle
                 has been succinctly stated in Maxwell on Interpretation
                 of Statutes, 10th Edn., p. 406:
“Where the provisions of one statute are, by
                    reference, incorporated in another and the earlier
                    statute is afterwards repealed the provisions so
                    incorporated obviously continue in force so far as
                    they form part of the second enactment.”

                 So too, in Craies on Statute Law, 3rd Edn., the sama
                 idea is expressed in the following words, at p. 349:
“Sometimes an Act of Parliament, instead of
                    expressly repeating the words of a section
                    contained in a former Act, merely refers to it, and
                    by relation applies its provisions to some new
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                  Page 33 of 35
state of things created by the subsequent Act. In
                    such a case the rule of construction is that where
                    a statute is incorporated by reference into a
                    second statute, the repeal of the first statute by a
                    third does not affect the second”.
The Judicial Committee in Secretary of State for India in
Council v. Hindusthan Co-operative Insurance Society,
                 Ltd.
endorsed the said principle and restated the same,
                 at p. 267, thus:
“This doctrine finds expression in a common-form
                    section which regularly appears in the amending
                    and repealing Acts which are passed from time to
                    time in India. The section runs: “The repeal by this
                    Act of any enactment shall not affect any Act…. in
                    which such enactment has been applied,
                    incorporated or referred to”. The independent
                    existence of the two Acts is therefore recognized;
                    despite the death of the parent Act, its offspring
                    survives in the incorporating Act. Though no such
                    saving clause appears in the General clauses Act,
                    Their Lordships think that the principle involved is
                    as applicable in India as it is in this country.”

                 It is, therefore, manifest that
Section 4
of the 1952 Act
                 has no application to a case of a later amending Act
                 inserting new provisions in an earlier Act, for, where an
                 earlier Act is amended by a later Act, it cannot be said
                 that the earlier Act applies, incorporates or refers to the
                 amending Act. The earlier Act cannot incorporate the
                 later Act, but can only be amended by it. We cannot,
                 therefore, agree with the view expressed by the Punjab
                 High Court in Mohinder Singh v. Mst. Harbhajan Kaur
                 and Darbara Singh v. Shrimati Karnail Kaur that
Section
                 4
of the Repealing and Amending Act of 1952 applies to
                 a case of repeal of an amending Act.
25.    In most cases, the prayer for stay, as in Civil Appeal No. 8162 of

       2012, was not accepted, albeit in some cases, stay has been

       granted for payment of gratuity for the period prior to 3rd April 1997.
As explained above and applying the principle of retroactivity and
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                   Page 34 of 35
as also following the judgment of this Court in Management of

       Goodyear India Limited. (supra), this argument raised on behalf

       of the private schools should fail and is rejected. The partial stay

       order dated 31st January 2020 passed in SLP (C) No. 2235 of 2020,

       titled
Saint Xaviers High School v. Jayashree Shamal Ghosh
, or

       in any other case, is vacated.
26.    For the reasons mentioned above, the aforesaid appeals, transfer

       case and the writ petitions are dismissed. The stay orders, as stated

       above, are vacated. The private schools would make payment to

       the employees/teachers along with the interest in accordance with

       the provisions of the PAG Act within a period of 6 weeks from today

       and in case of default, the employees/teachers may move the

       appropriate forum to enforce payment in accordance with the

       provisions of the PAG Act. In the facts of the case, there will be no

       orders as to costs.
......................................J.
                                                        ( SANJIV KHANNA )



                                                 ......................................J.
                                                        ( BELA M. TRIVEDI )
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 29, 2022.
Civil Appeal No. 8162 of 2012 and Others                                Page 35 of 35