[Cites
11
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Parvez Parwaz vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 26 August, 2022
Author:
C.T. Ravikumar
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
Hima Kohli
,
N.V. Ramana
NON-REPORTABLE


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1343 OF 2022
                            (Arising out of SLP(Crl.)No.6190/2018)


          PARVEZ PARWAZ & ANR.                                       ……APPELLANTS

                                                VERSUS

          STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS.                              ……RESPONDENTS


                                           J U D G M E N T
C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J.
1.             Leave granted.
2.             This appeal by special leave is directed against

          the judgment and order dated 22.02.2018 passed by the

          High             Court     of   Judicature        Allahabad     in    Criminal

          Miscellaneous Writ Petition No. 21733 of 2008. The

          unsuccessful petitioners are the appellants herein.

          At the instance of the first appellant, for having

          made
Signature Not Verified    (allegedly)      a   hate       speech   that   led     to    the
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
Date: 2022.08.26
incidents described as ‘2007 Gorakhpur Riots’ and for
15:11:31 IST
Reason:
such            other     offences    related       to   the    same,        Crime
1
No.2776/2008           was        registered             against        Sh.        Yogi

Adityanath, who was then a Member of Parliament and

some others. After                registration of FIR No.764/2008

(Crime No.2776/2008), the State Government directed

investigation           by        the            Crime     Branch,          Criminal

Investigation          Department            (CB     CID)       of    UP        Police.

Raising       grievances          against          the    investigation,              the

appellants       filed       the       abovementioned             Writ      Petition

under
Article    226
of        the     Constitution           of     India

seeking, inter alia, the following reliefs:
“(i)      Issue       a    writ,          order    or     direction           the

        nature of mandamus directing and commanding the

        respondents to investigate case crime no. 2776

        of    2008     in    fair       and       impartial       manner         by    an

        independent          investigating               agency      and    not        by

        Crime        Branch            of         Criminal           Investigation

        Department as per Order dt. 3.11.2008.
(ii)      Issue a writ, order or direction in the

        nature of mandamus directing and commanding the

        respondents         to    include          appropriate         section         of
Indian Penal Code
e.g. 120-B, 121, 121-A, 122,

        112
I.P.C
. and
Section 3
/
4
Prevention of Damages
2
to Public Property Act, 1984 and provision of
Religious       Institution        (Prevention      of    Misuse)

       Act,     1988
in   crime    no.    2776    of    2008   and   to

       investigate the issue of conspiracy also.
(iii)      Issue a writ, order or direction in the

       nature of mandamus directing and commanding the

       respondents to take disciplinary action against

       the officers who at the relevant point of time

       failed to act in accordance with law and had not

       taken     any   action   to       initiate    criminal    action

       against the culprits.
(iv)       Issue a writ, order or direction in the

       nature of mandamus directing and commanding the

       respondent no. 1 to provide adequate security to

       the petitioners.”
3.     During the hearing, the Division Bench of the

High    Court    framed     three    issues    for       determination,

which are as follows:
(1) When the State fails to perform its statutory

       and constitutional duty to investigate a crime in

       a fair and impartial manner, whether the High

       Court in exercise of its jurisdiction conferred
3
by
Article 226
of the Constitution is vested with

     the power to transfer the investigation to be

     conducted by any other investigating agency.

     (2) Whether in the facts and circumstances of the

     instant case, the State has failed to perform its

     statutory duty to conduct a fair investigation in

     the     matter     and     the        same   is     liable          to    be

     transferred to some other independent agency to

     ensure fair investigation.
(3) Whether the State can pass an order under
Section     196
Cr.P.C.       in    respect      of    a    proposed

     accused in a criminal case who in the meantime

     gets elected as the Chief Minister and is the

     Executive Head as per the scheme provided under
Article 163
of the Constitution of India.
4.   After      hearing       both        sides   and     perusing            the

relevant     records,     the    Division         Bench    of      the        High

Court extensively dealt with all the issues and came

to   specific    conclusions         with     respect     to       the    same.

Ultimately,      the   Division           Bench   of    the    High       Court

dismissed the Writ Petition and held as follows:-
4
“In view of the facts and discussions, we

      do not find any procedural error either in

      the conduct of the investigation or in the

      decision making process of refusal to grant

      sanction      or    any     other    illegality    in    the

      order which may require any interference by

      this     Court      while     exercising     its       extra-

      ordinary      power    under
Article   226
of    the

      Constitution of India.”
5.    Aggrieved by the impugned judgment, the present

appeal by way of special leave has been filed by the

appellants who were the original petitioners before

the High Court.
6.    Heard learned counsel for the parties.
7.    Mr. Fuzail Ahmad Ayyubi, learned counsel for the

appellants fairly conceded at the outset that he did

not   intend    to       press    any     submissions    relating     to

prayer numbers (i) & (ii), as sought in the writ

petition. The sole contention he sought to advance

before   us    is    in     respect       of   issue   no.    (iii)   as

identified by the High Court, relating to denial of

sanction for prosecution of the accused under
Section
5
196
of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The foundation

for such a grievance is that the accused no. 1, who

was then a Member of Parliament and had allegedly

made a hate speech, had later on became the Chief

Minister of the State of Uttar Pradesh and thereby,

the Executive Head of the State. It is contention of

the appellants that in such a situation, it is the

Governor of the State who is empowered to consider

the question of grant of sanction in terms of the

Rules of Business. He submits that the Division Bench

of the High Court has failed to consider this issue

in an appropriate manner, including the Constitution

Bench judgment of this Court in
M.P. Special Police

Establishment v. State of M.P.
, (2004) 8 SCC 788.
8.     On   the   other   hand,   Mr.    Mukul   Rohatgi      learned

Senior counsel for the State contends that nothing

survives in this matter except for a mere academic

exercise, as a closure report has already been filed

by the investigating agency. Additionally, he submits

that    the   judgment    of   this     Court    in
M.P.   Special

Police      Establishment
(supra)    does        not   have   any

relevance in the facts of this case as the underlying
6
material       did    not     amount          to    anything,       let        alone

establish a case for issuance of sanction. Learned

Senior counsel submits that the first CD containing

the recording in 2008 which was in a broken condition

while    the     second       CD    which          was    provided        by    the

appellants       after        a     lapse          of     five     years,        was

determined      to    be    tampered          by    the       Central   Forensic

Science Laboratory (CSFL). The third CD only provided

a voice sample. All these facts have been extensively

dealt with by the High Court before rejecting the

prayers of the appellants.
9.    Having     heard      the      parties            and    considered        the

material placed on record, we are in agreement with

learned Senior counsel appearing for the respondent

that the subsequent events have rendered the present

appeal into a purely academic exercise. We will now

explain the raison d’etre for such a conclusion.
10. The    words        “No       Court       shall       take     cognizance”

employed   in
Section       196
of    the    Code     of   Criminal

Procedure (for short ‘
CrPC
’) and the consequential

bar     created        under        the           said        provision        would

undoubtedly show that the bar is against ‘taking of
7
cognizance by the Court’. In other words, it creates

no     bar        against         registration             of        a        crime     or

investigation by the police agency or submission of a

report by the police on completion of investigation

as    contemplated            under
Section          173
,        CrPC      [Refer:-
State of Karnataka v. Pastor P Raju, (2006) 6 SCC
728)].
11. It       appears         from     the       record     that       the      forensic

report       of     the      CD     which       forms      the       basis      of     the

prosecution was found to be tampered and edited as

per    the    report          dated    13.10.2014,            submitted          by    the

CFSL    which       position          has   not      been       disputed         by    the

appellants herein.
12. In the instant case, a short affidavit was filed

on    behalf      of      the     second        respondent        wherein         it    is

stated       that      the      investigation           was      closed        vide     FR

No.1/17       dated          06.05.2017.            This    position            is     not

disputed       by      the      appellants.         Thus,       as       of    now,    the

position that emerges is that the investigation has

culminated          in    a     closure         /   refer        report.        Learned

counsel for the appellants has informed us that a
8
protest    petition     has   been    filed   which   is   pending

consideration before the trial Court.
13. In the aforesaid circumstances, we do not think

it necessary to go into the contentions raised by

both sides on the issue of denial of sanction for

prosecution and the legal pleas sought to be raised

in relation to the said issue. However, we think it

appropriate that the legal questions on the issue of

sanction    be   left     open   to    be     considered   in   an

appropriate case.
14. Consequently, this appeal is dismissed subject to

the above observations. Pending applications, if any,

stand disposed of.
....................CJI.
(N.V. RAMANA)



                                        ....................J.
                                            (HIMA KOHLI)



                                        ....................J.
                                          (C.T. RAVIKUMAR)

NEW DELHI;
August 26, 2022
9