[Cites
4
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Sanju vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 29 August, 2022
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
NON-REPORTABLE

                                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1981 OF 2014


                             SANJU AND OTHERS                                  .....    APPELLANTS

                                                       VERSUS

                             STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH                            .....   RESPONDENT



                                                       JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
The impugned judgment dated 18th December 2012 passed

                                    by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Criminal Appeal No.

                                    5036 of 2005 upheld the conviction of Bhagwati Singh and his three

                                    sons, Bhoop Singh, Balwant Singh and Sanju Singh, for murder of

                                    Chandrapal Singh outside his residence in Village Sahnaul, District

                                    Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh, on 11th August 2003 at about 4:30 p.m. The

                                    appellants have been sentenced, for the offence under
Section 302
of the Indian Penal Code, 18601, to imprisonment for life and fine of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2022.08.29
17:07:33 IST
Rs.5,000/- and in default of payment of fine to undergo simple
Reason:
1   For short, ‘
IPC
’
Criminal Appeal No. 1981 of 2014                                      Page 1 of 10
imprisonment for one month. The appellants have also been

           convicted under
Section 307
of the IPC for attempt to murder the

           brother of the deceased Chandrapal Singh, namely, Rakesh

           Kumar, who is also the informant and has deposed as PW-1. The

           appellants have been sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for

           seven years with fine of Rs.3,000/- and in default of payment of fine,

           additional simple imprisonment for fifteen days for the offence

           under
Section 307
of the IPC. The sentences are to run

           concurrently.
2.          Having considered the evidence on record, for the reasons stated

           below, we are inclined to uphold the conviction, albeit we would

           discard and not rely upon the testimony of Ramphal Singh (PW-2),

           as an eye witness to the occurrence.
3.         The appellants have questioned the place of occurrence as well as

           the presence of Rakesh Kumar (PW-1) at his home located in

           Village Sahnaul, District Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh, on 11th August

           2003. These facts, in our opinion, are not only proved from the

           testimony of Rakesh Kumar (PW-1), but are also established from

           the depositions of Special Sub-Inspector2 Veerpal Singh (PW-6)



2   For short, ‘SSI’
Criminal Appeal No. 1981 of 2014                                       Page 2 of 10
and Dr. Anil Kumar Purwani (PW-5) who had conducted the

       medical examination of Rakesh Kumar (PW-1) on 12th August 2003

       and had deposed about the injuries caused on his body.
4.     Rakesh Kumar (PW-1) has testified that, on the date of the incident,

       he had come to his village from Aligarh, where he and his brother

       were working, on account of the Rakshabandhan festival. They had

       reached the house separately, within 5-10 minutes, as deceased

       Chandrapal Singh had gone to drop his children to his in-laws’

       house. At about 4:30 p.m. on 11th August 2003, the appellants had

       come to their house. Bhagwati Singh was armed with a lathi while

       the three brothers were armed with country-made pistols. Bhagwati

       Singh had asked deceased Chandrapal Singh as to why he had

       stored bricks on his land. He had also hurled abuses at Chandrapal

       Singh. Chandrapal Singh had replied that he would remove the

       bricks in 2-3 days, but Bhagwati Singh was not convinced by the

       explanation and consequently raised an alarm calling other

       appellants to fire and kill Chandrapal Singh. Bhoop Singh had then

       fired a shot at Chandrapal Singh with the country-made pistol.

       Balwant Singh and Sanju had also fired at Rakesh Kumar (PW-1)

       with their country-made pistols, but the latter managed to save

       himself by taking shelter behind a wall. Rakesh Kumar (PW-1) did
Criminal Appeal No. 1981 of 2014                                 Page 3 of 10
not receive any firearm injury, but when he had tried to run inside

       his house, he was assaulted by Bhagwati Singh with the lathi.

       Chandrapal Singh died on the spot. Before his death, he had taken

       two-three steps from the place he had received a bullet injury and

       then fell on the ground. The blood had spilled at that place where

       he fell. Rakesh Kumar (PW-1) had proceeded to the Police Station,

       Atrauli, Uttar Pradesh, where his statement (Exhibit Ka-1) was

       recorded and the First Information Report (FIR) No. 136 dated 11th

       August 2003 (Exhibit Ka-2) was registered. The FIR mentions the

       names of the four appellants as the perpetrators. It states that the

       deceased Chandrapal Singh had died due to firearm injury and that

       the informant, that is, Rakesh Kumar (PW-1), had also suffered

       injuries inflicted by lathi.
5.     Rakesh Kumar (PW-1) was subjected to a very lengthy cross-
examination, and was questioned on the motive or the reason for

       the occurrence. He has deposed that the bricks were brought by his

       brother Chandrapal Singh, but Rakesh Kumar (PW-1) could not tell

       how many days before the occurrence the bricks were brought, as

       he resided in Aligarh due to his job, and the bricks were stored near

       the village well on the land of the Gram Sabha. Relying on the

       cross-examination, during the course of arguments, it was
Criminal Appeal No. 1981 of 2014                                  Page 4 of 10
suggested that the site plan/spot map, relied upon by the

       prosecution, marked as Exhibit Ka-12, did not show the location of

       the well or the stored bricks. In our opinion, the argument does not

       have any merit as the written complaint (Exhibit Ka-1) does refer to

       the well and states that the bricks were stored on the platform of

       the well, which existed on the Gram Sabha/Samaj land, but does

       not state that the well was located near the house. The questions

       put to Rakesh Kumar (PW-1) have been answered with great clarity

       and conviction. Rakesh Kumar (PW-1) deposed that the police

       station was located at a distance of 6-7 kilometres from his village.

       They had left the village at about 5:30 p.m. on 11th August 2003 to

       reach the police station. There, they met the SSI Veerpal Singh

       (PW-6), and the written complaint (Exhibit Ka-2) was given. They

       returned from the police station to the house, and at about 12:00

       midnight, they had proceeded to Atrauli Hospital, where Rakesh

       Kumar (PW-1) had got his medical examination conducted. The

       dead body of Chandrapal Singh was also taken to Aligarh, located

       at a distance of 32-33 kilometres from the village, and the post-

       mortem examination was conducted. At the end of the lengthy

       cross-examination, the defence gave two suggestions to Rakesh

       Kumar (PW-1). First, that Rakesh Kumar (PW-1) had been called

       from Aligarh to the police station to make a report, which Rakesh
Criminal Appeal No. 1981 of 2014                                  Page 5 of 10
Kumar (PW-1) categorically denied as incorrect. He has denied that

       the complaint against the appellants was false. Secondly, it was

       suggested that Rakesh Kumar (PW-1) was not medically examined.

       Rakesh Kumar (PW-1) denied that there was no medical

       examination and that he had shown fake/self-inflicted injuries.
6.     Dr. Anil Kumar Purwani (PW-5), who had examined Rakesh Kumar

       (PW-1) on 12th August 2003, has deposed that Rakesh Kumar (PW-
1) had as many as six injuries, which included one lacerated wound

       and five contusions. The injuries were simple in nature and could

       have been caused by a hard blunt object. The injuries could have

       been caused in the preceding 12 hours, and thus, might have been

       caused on 11th August 2003 at about 4:30 p.m.
7.     The death of the deceased Chandrapal Singh by a firearm injury is

       not disputed and is proven by the post mortem report (Exhibit Ka-
10), and vide deposition of Dr. Hira Singh (PW-4), who had

       conducted the post mortem on 12th August 2003 at 3:30 p.m. in the

       District Hospital, Aligarh. He has testified, and as per the post

       mortem report (Exhibit ka-10), the death of Chandrapal Singh was

       due to shock and haemorrhage as a result of the ante-mortem

       injuries inflicted by a firearm. Dr. Hira Singh (PW-4) has testified
Criminal Appeal No. 1981 of 2014                                 Page 6 of 10
about the entry and the exit wound on the front and backside of the

       left side chest of Chandrapal Singh.
8.     Learned counsel for the appellants has submitted that empty

       cartridges were not found at the spot and have not been exhibited.

       This is correct. However, Veerpal Singh (PW-6) has deposed that

       on 11th August 2003 he was posted as SSI at Police Station, Atrauli

       and the investigation of the case was handed over to him. On the

       same day, he had visited the place of incident and had prepared

       the site map of the incident, which was marked Exhibit Ka-12. He

       had prepared the seizure report of the blood-stained and plain earth

       bearing his signatures, which was marked Exhibit Ka-9. The place

       of incident was located at a distance of 5-6 kilometres from the

       police station. With reference to the site map (Exhibit Ka-12),

       Veerpal Singh (PW-6) had identified and demarcated the place

       from where the blood-stained earth was collected. It was a rough

       surface of concrete. Blood had also spilled on open soil.
9.     What is clear from the above deposition is that there was a time gap

       between the actual occurrence and the visit of the police to the

       place of incident. By that time, the villagers had collected at the

       spot, a factum which has been deposed to by Rakesh Kumar (PW-
1), wherein he has stated that the villagers saw the police taking
Criminal Appeal No. 1981 of 2014                                   Page 7 of 10
the dead body 2 hours after the incident. This was not controverted

           and challenged in the cross-examination. Disappearance of the

           empty cartridges can be explained, as a number of villagers had

           gathered on the spot and had access to the place of occurrence.

           Further, the place of occurrence cannot be challenged on this

           ground. There is overwhelming evidence to establish that the place

           of incident was outside the residence of the deceased Chandrapal

           Singh and his brother Rakesh Kumar (PW-1).
10.        Ramphal Singh (PW-2) has similarly deposed and stated that the

           police arrived around 7:00-8:00 p.m. and several persons had gone

           along with the dead body. He had also deposed that he was an eye-

           witness who had seen the appellants and was a witness to the

           firing. However, in his cross-examination, he accepted that the Sub-

           Inspector3 had not recorded his statement and he had not informed

           the SI that Bhoop Singh had shot at Chandrapal Singh. Further, he

           had not told the SI that he had reached the spot after hearing a

           noise and had seen the dispute between the appellants, deceased

           Chandrapal Singh and Rakesh Kumar (PW-1). As per Veerpal

           Singh (PW-6), Ramphal Singh (PW-2) was a signatory to the

           panchnama (Exhibit Ka-9), but Veerpal Singh (PW-6) had neither



3   For Short, ‘SI’
Criminal Appeal No. 1981 of 2014                                     Page 8 of 10
recorded the statement of Ramphal Singh (PW-2) nor asked him

       whether he was an eye-witness. Ramphal Singh (PW-2) did not tell

       Veerpal Singh (PW-6) anything with regard to his being an eye-

       witness. It appears that Ramphal Singh’s (PW-2) statement under
Section 161
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, on his being

       an eye-witness, was recorded as late as 2nd September 2003,

       which is nearly 20 days after the occurrence. The spot map/site

       plan (Exhibit Ka-12) does not mention the location of the house of

       Ramphal Singh (PW-2). We would, therefore, discard and not take

       into account the testimony of Ramphal Singh (PW-2) as a purported

       eye-witness. However, for the reasons stated above, we are of the

       view that we can rely upon the testimony of Rakesh Kumar (PW-1)

       to affirm the conviction of the appellants, which has been proved

       and established beyond reasonable doubt.
11.    Recording the aforesaid, the appeal is dismissed. The appellant

       Bhoop Singh, who was released on bail pursuant to the order of this

       Court dated 9th September 2014, as he had already suffered

       incarceration for 11 years, shall surrender within one month from

       the date of pronouncement of this judgment. In case he fails to

       surrender, the authorities shall take steps in accordance with law to

       take him into custody for undergoing the sentence. The other
Criminal Appeal No. 1981 of 2014                                  Page 9 of 10
appellants are incarcerated and would, therefore, undergo their

       sentence. We are not interfering or modifying the order of sentence.
......................................J.
                                                         (SANJIV KHANNA)



                                                ......................................J.
                                                         (BELA M. TRIVEDI)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 29, 2022.
Criminal Appeal No. 1981 of 2014                                       Page 10 of 10