[Cites
15
, Cited by
8
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Etnoori Yadagiri Goud And Ors. on 5 August, 1994
Equivalent citations: 1995ACJ600
Author:
B.S. Raikote
Bench:
B.S. Raikote
JUDGMENT
 

B.S. Raikote, J.
1. This is an appeal preferred by the United India Insurance Co. Ltd., Adilabad, the first respondent in O.P. No. 127 of 1986 on the file of Addl. District Judge, Adilabad (Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, Adilabad) against the judgment and award dated 10.3.1988 passed in O.P. No. 127 of 1986. Though the learned Addl. District Judge disposed of O.P. Nos. 126 and 127 of 1986 by a common judgment, now we are concerned with the judgment and award insofar as it pertains to O.P. No. 127 of 1986.
2. The learned Counsel appealing for the appellant, Mr. S. Hanumaiah, seriously contested the judgment and award insofar as it fixes the liability on the appellant insurance company contending that having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, no liability could have been fixed on the appellant.
3. In order to appreciate the arguments of the learned Counsel for the appellant, a few facts of this case would be necessary. The deceased Vijaya Kumar Goud, having taken the motor cycle bearing No. API 6300 from his brother, was driving the same on 5.12.1985 at about 6.30 p.m. and when he was passing Umdam village, a double bullock-cart came in front of that motor cycle and the bullocks of the said cart were frightened and the said double bullock-cart gave a dash against the motor cycle which the deceased was driving and as a result, the deceased sustained injuries and died on the spot. It appeal's that there was another person on the said vehicle as a pillion rider. He sustained minor injuries.
4. On the basis of these facts, the claimants, who are the legal representatives of the deceased, filed the above claim petition. In support of their case, PWs 1 to 3 have been examined. PW 3 is said to be an eyewitness to the occurrence. PWs 1 and 2 are not the direct witnesses. Relying on the evidence of PW 3, while answering issue No. 1, the lower court held as follows:
There is no evidence adduced by the respondents to show that there was any fault on the part of the deceased. On the other hand, the evidence of PW 3 coupled with Exh. A-3, true copy of F.I.R., Exh. A-4, tine copy of inquest report and Exh. A-5, the photostat copy of post-mortem report clinchingly established that the accident occurred not due to the fault of the deceased.
While answering issue No. 2, the lower court came to the conclusion that the claimants were entitled to a total compensation of Rs. 90,000/- in aggregate. The contest issue, so far as the appellant is concerned, was issue No. 3 decided by the lower court. With reference to this issue, the appellant examined RW 1, the Branch Manager of the appellant and he deposed that Exh. B-1 was the insurance policy issued by their branch office for the vehicle involved in the accident and owned by the 2nd respondent in the O.P. The 2nd respondent in the O.P., i.e., 5th respondent herein, is no other than the brother of the deceased. It is not in dispute that the vehicle belonged to the 2nd respondent in that O.P. On the basis of the evidence, it is clear that the deceased had borrowed the said vehicle from his brother. From the evidence of RW 1, it is clear that the said vehicle was insured with the appellant insurance company so as to cover the third party risk. On the basis of the evidence of RW 1 and Exh. B-l, the insurance company strenuously contended before the Claims Tribunal that it was not liable to pay compensation and having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, it is not a case of any vicarious liability. However, Claims Tribunal gave a finding that under
sections 95 (1)
and
96 (2) (ii)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act'), the insurance company was liable. In this appeal, the learned Counsel for the appellant contested this finding of the Claims Tribunal, in fixing the liability on the insurance company jointly and severally along with the owner of the vehicle, the 2nd respondent in the O.P.
5. On the basis of the evidence of RW 1 and Exh. B-l, the Claims Tribunal has concluded that the insurance policy covered only 'third party' risk. On the basis of the policy, which covers only a third party risk, whether the insurance company could be fastened with the liability having regard to the facts of this case, is a serious question I am considering presently. Since the accident occurred on 5.12.1985, it is the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939
, that would be applicable to the facts of the case.
Section 95 (1)
of the Act reads as under:
95. Requirements of policies and limits of liability.-(1) In order to comply with the requirements of this Chapter, a policy of insurance must be a policy which-
(a) is issued by a person who is an authorised insurer or by a co-operative society allowed under Section 108 to transact the business of an insurer, and
(b) insures the person or classes of persons specified in the policy to the extent specified in Sub-section (2)-
(i) against any liability which may be incurred by him in respect of the death of or bodily injury to any person or damage to any property of a third party caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place;
(ii) against the death of or bodily injury to any passenger of a public service vehicle caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place:
Provided that a policy shall not be required-
(i) to cover liability in respect of the death, arising out of and in the course of his employment, of the employee of a person insured by the policy or in respect of bodily injury sustained by such an employee arising out of and in the course of his employment other than a liability arising under the
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923
, in respect of the death of, or bodily injury to, any such employee-
(a) engaged in driving the vehicle, or
(b) if it is a public service vehicle, engaged as a conductor of the vehicle or in examining tickets on the vehicle, or
(c) if it is a goods vehicle, being carried in the vehicle, or
(ii) except where the vehicle is a vehicle in which passengers are carried for hire or reward or by reason of or in pursuance of a contract of employment, to cover liability in respect of the death of or bodily injury to persons being carried in or upon or entering or mounting or alighting from the vehicle at the time of the occurrence of the event out of which a claim arises; or
(iii) to cover any contractual liability.
6. From the reading of this provision, it is clear that the insurance company would be liable jointly and severally along with the owner of the vehicle under this section on the following counts: i.e., against any liability which may be incurred by him in respect of the death of or bodily injury to any person or damage to any property of a third party caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place; and against the death of or bodily injury to any passenger of a public service vehicle caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place. Under the proviso to the said section, it has been provided that such policy shall not cover the liability in respect of the death arising out of and in the course of his employment, of the employee of a person insured by the policy or in respect of bodily injury sustained by such an employee arising out of and in the course of his employment other than a liability arising under the
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923
, in respect of the death of, or bodily injury to, any such employee engaged in driving the vehicle; or if it is a public service vehicle engaged as a conductor of the vehicle or in examining tickets on the vehicle; or if it is a goods vehicle, being carried in the vehicle.
7. As an exception it is provided under Clause (ii) of the proviso that the insurance company would be liable, where the vehicle in which passengers are carried for hire or reward or by reason of or in pursuance of the contract of employment, to cover liability in respect of the death of or bodily injury to persons being carried in or upon or entering or mounting or alighting from the vehicle at the time of the occurrence of the event out of which a claim arises.
8. Now, the question for me is to consider whether the case on hand falls under main principle vide Clause (b) (i) or at least under Clause (ii) of the proviso. It is not in dispute that the vehicle in question belonged to the brother of the deceased and the deceased was using the vehicle in the public place and while using the vehicle, he sustained bodily injuries. But from the finding given by the Claims Tribunal, it is clear that the deceased himself was not driving the motor cycle negligently and the negligence that was attributed was to the driver of the bullock-cart, who is not made a party to the case as one of the co-respondents nor is there any claim against the owner of the bullock-cart. The principle laid down in
Section 95
of the Act is nothing but the principle of vicarious liability. The principle of vicarious liability, which has been earlier the common law principle, has been codified in
Section 95
of the Act.
Section 95
of the Act is nothing but a replica of
British Act
, viz., Road Traffic Act, 1972. In order to fix the liability on the insurance company, it is, therefore, necessary to make the owner of the vehicle liable primarily for the rash and negligent driving of the driver or some other person authorised by him so as to make such person vicariously liable.
9. In the instant case, no doubt the deceased, being the brother of the owner of the vehicle, himself was driving the vehicle. As per the finding of the Tribunal, he was not driving the vehicle rashly and negligently and it is not the evidence of the claimants also that the deceased was driving the vehicle rashly and negligently. The simple case made out by them is that the deceased was driving the motor cycle in question and it is the driver of the cart who hit the motor cycle, as a result of which the deceased sustained injuries and died on the spot. So, primarily there is no negligence on the part of the deceased as a driver of the vehicle so as to make the owner liable, assuming for the sake of argument that the deceased was driving the vehicle as a driver on behalf of the owner. At any rate, he was not the driver as commonly understood for the owner. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, absolutely there is no relationship of servant and master between the deceased and the owner of the motor cycle, i.e., 2nd respondent in the O.P. This must be established as a basic fact in order to make the insurance company (appellant herein) liable coextensively along with the owner of the vehicle. From the evidence on record, this fact itself is not proved in this case.
10. As stated above, at the cost of repetition, I should say that the insurance company would be only liable when the owner of the vehicle is liable. The insurance company simply takes over the liability of the owner and nothing more. I am fortified by a decision of the Supreme Court for this proposition in
Minu B. Mehta v. Balkrishna Ramchandra Nayan
1977 ACJ 118 (SC). The Supreme Court held as follows:
The liability of the owner of the car to compensate the victim in a car accident due to the negligent driving of his servant is based on the law of Torts. Regarding the negligence of the servant, the owner is made liable on the basis of vicarious liability. Before the master could be made liable, it is necessary to prove that the servant was acting during the course of his employment and that he was negligent. Under
Section 95 (1) (b) (i)
it is required that policy of insurance must be a policy which insures the person against any liability which may be incurred by him in respect of the death of or bodily injury to any person or damage to any property of a third party caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place. The insurance policy is only to cover the liability of a person which he might have incurred in respect of the death or bodily injury. The accident to which the owner or the person insuring is liable is to the extent of his liability in respect of the death of or bodily injury and that liability is covered by the insurance. Therefore, if the owner has not incurred any liability in respect of the death of or bodily injury to any person, there is no liability and it is not intended to be covered by the insurance. The expression 'liability which may be incurred by him' is meant as covering any liability arising out of the use of the vehicle. A person is not liable unless he contravenes any of the duties imposed on him by common law or by the statute. In the case of a motor accident the owner is only liable for negligence and on proof of vicarious liability for the acts of his servant. Proof of negligence is, therefore, necessary before the owner or the insurance company could be held to be liable for the payment of compensation in a motor accident claim case.
11. From the law declared by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the above decision
, it is clear that proof of negligence on the part of the driver is necessary before the owner or insurance company could be held liable for payment of compensation in the motor accidents claims. In the instant case, it cannot be said that the deceased was a driver of the owner of the vehicle. Assuming that he was driving the vehicle as a driver, even then the finding is that he was not driving the vehicle rashly and negligently. Therefore, it is clear that there was no liability on the part of the owner to pay the compensation to the deceased. Therefore, absolutely there cannot be any liability on the insurance company.
12. From the facts of this case, it is clear that the deceased was in the position of the owner himself, in the sense that he was driving the vehicle belonging to his brother and he was not driving for or on behalf of the owner of the vehicle. It is also not a case that there was any contract of employment between the owner of the vehicle and the deceased on the basis of the material on record. As per the finding of the Claims Tribunal, the vehicle was covered with the third party risk. Now, a question arises whether the claimants are entitled to any compensation on the basis of the insurance policy, Exh. B-l, that it covered third party risk and the deceased was the third party for the purpose of compensation. Thus, the question would be who is a 'third parly' who would be entitled to compensation from the insurance company if the vehicle in question is covered by the insurance policy only in regard to the third party risk. This is a question that has to be considered depending on the facts of each case.
13.
The Act
itself has not defined who is a 'third party'. At any rate, it is common knowledge that the driver of the vehicle would not constitute a third party for purpose of
Section 95
of the Act. Considering the similar provision under Section 145 of the Road Traffic Act, 1972, in Cooper v. Motor Insurers' Bureau 1985 QB 575, the Appeal Court in England has held as follows:
A policy covering him 'in respect of third party risks' clearly does not include the actual driver of the vehicle at the time of the use of the vehicle which gives rise to the damage. The scope of phrase 'any person' in Section 145 (3) (a) is limited by Section 143 (1) so as to exclude the driver of the vehicle." (Extracted from Bingham's Motor Claims Cases of Butterworths Publication, 9th Edition, p. 743).
From this position of law, it is clear that the driver cannot constitute a third party for the purpose of
Section 95 (1)
of the Act. Therefore, it is clear that if the deceased is treated as a driver of the vehicle in question, his L.Rs. would not be entitled to claim any compensation.
14. The next question would be whether the claimants would be entitled to any compensation treating the deceased as a passenger on the motor cycle and as such, a passenger. Dealing with the similar contention in
Pushpabai Purshottam Udeshi v. Ranjit Ginning & Pressing Co.
1977 ACJ 343 (SC), the Hon'ble Supreme Court has laid down the law as under:
Sections 95(a)
and
95(b)(i)
of the Motor Vehicles Act adopted the provisions of the English Road Traffic Act, 1960 and excluded the liability of the insurance company regarding the risk to the passengers.
Section 95
provides that a policy of insurance must be a policy which insures the persons against any liability which may be incurred by him in respect of death of or bodily injury to any person or damage to any property of a third party caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place. The plea that the words 'third party' are wide enough to cover all persons except the person and the insurer is negatived as the insurance cover is not available to the passengers is made clear by the proviso to sub-section which provides that a policy shall not be required.
It is further held:
The insurer can always take policies covering risks which are not covered by the requirements of
Section 95
of the Act. In this case, the insurer had insured with the insurance company the risk to the passengers. By an endorsement to the policy the insurance company had insured the liability regarding the accidents to passengers...
15. But in the case on hand, the insurer had not taken any special coverage regarding the passengers by paying extra premium required for that purpose. As per the law declared by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in
the above case
, unless the insurer takes a special coverage even regarding the risk to the passengers, the insurance company would not be liable. In the instant case, passenger is not covered by the insurance policy. From the law as declared by the Supreme Court, it is clear that the passengers cannot be treated as third parties. Therefore, even the contention of the claimants that they are entitled to compensation as the third parly treating the deceased as a passenger is not acceptable.
16. The last contention urged by the learned Counsel for the claimants is that since the motor cycle was insured by its owner, the deceased being the brother of the owner at least can claim the compensation in the capacity of the owner of the vehicle. In fact, a similar question did arise in this Court and the matter was referred to the Division Bench by the learned single Judge opining that the case involves important question of law to be decided by the Division Bench in A.A.O. No. 453 of 1986. Speaking for the Division Bench, Syed Shah Mohammed Quadri, J. vide his judgment dated 13.4.1993, after referring number of decisions in
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Jugal Kishore
1988 ACJ 270 (SC);
M. Akkavva v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd.
1988 ACJ 445 (Karnataka);
Mathew Koshy v. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.
1989 ACJ 21 (Kerala);
Oriental Fire & General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Shakuntala Devi
;
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Chimajirao Kanhojirao Shirke
; Premier Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Siromanamma AIR 1988 AP 396;
Minu B. Mehta v. Balkrishna Ramchandra Nayan
1977
ACJ 118 (SC) and Pushpabai Purshottam Udeshi v. Ranjit Ginning & Pressing Co.
1977 ACJ 343 (SC), held as follows:
The liability of the insurance company is to indemnify the insured against the claim of a third party but not to pay compensation for injury or death of the insured owner of a vehicle who died while driving the vehicle due to accident.
17. From this declaration of law made by the Division Bench of this Court, it is clear that even on this count, the claimants cannot succeed and accordingly, this contention is hereby rejected.
18. From the discussion
referred to above
, it is clear that the judgment and award passed by the Claims Tribunal so far as it pertains to the appellant insurance company making it liable along with the owner of the vehicle is hereby set aside. It is further made clear that absolutely there is no liability on the insurance company, the appellant herein, to pay compensation.
19. In the result, I allow the appeal filed by the insurance company and set aside the judgment and award of the Claims Tribunal insofar as it relates to the liability of the appellant insurance company and the claim petition filed by the claimants insofar as it pertains to the insurance company, the present appellant herein, is hereby dismissed. But having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall not be any order as to costs.
20. This cross-objection coming on for hearing upon an office note dated 20.8.1994 and put upon herein and upon perusing the said office note dated 20.8.1994 and the order of the High Court dated 5.8.1994 and passed in C.M.A. No. 547 of 1988 and upon healing the arguments of Mr. S. Hanumaiah, Advocate for the respondent No. 1 in the cross-objection and the respondent No. 2 in the cross-objection not appearing in person or by advocate, the court on 30.9.1994 made the following order:
The C.M.A. is filed by the United India Insurance Co. Ltd., Adilabad, against the judgment and award dated 10.3.1988 in O.P. No. 127 of 1986 on the file of the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, Adilabad. This appeal was heard by me and allowed on 25.8.1994 so far as it pertains to the appellant insurance company.
Now, the office has put up a note that there is cross-objection filed in this appeal by the claimants and the same was not disposed of.
Since the existence of cross-objection was not brought to my notice when the C.M.A. was disposed of, the cross-objection has remained on the file. Now the office has posted the said cross-objection for orders of the court.
None appears on behalf of cross-objectors. Hence, the cross-objection is dismissed for default.