[Cites
52
, Cited by
9
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Kalla Yadagiri And Others vs Kotha Bal Reddy on 13 November, 1994
Equivalent citations: 1999(1)ALD222, 1999(1)ALT211
Author:
Chief Justice
Bench:
Chief Justice
ORDER
B. Subhashan Reddy, J
1. The question at issue is whether the provisions of the
A.P. Civil Courts Act, 1972
deal with the valuation of suits determining pecuniary jurisdiction overriding the provisions contained in the
A.P. Court Fees & Suits Valuation Act, 1956
. The matter is of practical importance and the reference has been made to the Full Court to resolve the divergence of opinion.
2. We may narrate the events leading to the reference. This CRP 4858 of J994 first came up before the learned single Judge. It is directed against the order passed by the Court of Subordinate Judge, Siddipet in OS No.72 of 1994 on preliminary objection raised by the defendants in the said suit, who are the petitioners herein. The objection was with regard to jurisdiction on the ground that the value of the subject matter of the suit was shown as Rs.68,000/- and the relief of declaration and consequential injunction under
Section 24(b)
of A.P. Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as "the
Court Fees Act
") was mentioned as Rs.34,000/- being half of the value of the properties involved in the said suit. The contention of the petitioners was that, it is not the value of the properties which determines the jurisdiction, but it is the value of the relief which has to be constmcd as the value of the suit determining the jurisdiction. This contention was repelled by the lower Court and it was held that the said Court had jurisdiction construing the value of the properties involved which was at Rs.68,0007 - as the value of the suit determining the jurisdiction, relying upon a judgment of a learned single Judge of this Court in G. Venkataratnam v. G, Kesuva RaO, 1991 (1) APLJ 485. The question there was with regard to jurisdiction of the High Court to maintain the appeal and
Section 17(1)
of A.P. Civil Courts Act (for short "the
Civil Courts Act
") was construed to the effect that the entire value of the property is relevant for the purpose of determining jurisdiction under the above provision and not 3/4th of the value of the subject-matter as in
Section 24
read with
Section 50(1)
of the Court Fees Act. It is pertinent to mention that the value of the property in the said suit was arrived at Rs. 18,000/- and the Court-fees was paid on the amount of Rs. 13,500/- being three-fourth of the said value under
Section 24(a)
of Court Fees Act and Rs.13,500/- was construed as the value of the suit and was tried by the Court of the Subordinate Judge and the Registry had raised objection that the appeal has to be valued tat Rs. 13,500/- and according to the then existing provisions of
Civil Courts Act
, the appeal was maintainable only before the District Court and not the High Court, but the learned single Judge overruled the objections of the Registry holding that for appeal under
Section 17(1)
of Civil Courts Act, it is the entire value of the property of Rs. 18,000/- which is the criterion and not the three-fourth of the same as was construed in the suit. The learned Judge did not rely upon
Section 5(1)
of the Court Fees Act on the ground that
Section 17(1)
of Civil Courts Act made a specific provision and as such, the said provision will prevail. There is an earlier Division Bench judgment of this Court quite contra to the view taken by the learned single Judge. But, the same was not brought to the notice of the learned Judge.
The earlier judgment of the Division Bench was rendered in the case of
Sidramappa v. Sangappa
, . Dealing with the provisions ofthe
Court Fees Act
and particularly, Section 50(1), it was held by the Division Bench that it is the valuation which is mentioned in the suit for the purpose of paying Courf-fees that determines the jurisdiction of the Court and not the value of the property involved.
3. When this CRP came-up for hearing, having regard to the divergent views of the learned single Judge on one hand and of the Division Bench on the other, the learned single Judge was of the prima facie view that the judgment of 1991 may be a good law. But, as there is a Division Bench judgment to the contra, the learned single Judge has referred the matter to the Division Bench and the Division Bench because of the conflict, thought it fit to refer to the Bench of a larger strength for resolving the conflict. May be, both the learned single Judge and the Division Bench were of the view that
Section 16
of Civil Courts Act lays down the criteria for valuation of the suit and that
Section 50(1)
of the Court Fees Act being general and is subject to any specific provision made to the contrary, the market value of the property is the criterion and not the value of the suit made for the payment of the Court-fees.
4. While the learned Counsel for the petitioners relied upon the judgment in Sidramappa's v case (supra) and asked us to set aside the order passed by the learned Subordinate Judge and to transmit the matter to the concerned District Munsif, the learned Counsel for the respondents supported the order of the lower Court.
5. As the matter is of utmost importance, as it occurs daily in all the subordinate Courts of the State of Andhra Pradesh, there should not be any confusion left in the minds of either the litigant public or the advocates appearing for them with regard to the jurisdiction which results in multiplicity of proceedings and long-drawn litigations. While deciding the case of this magnitude, reference to a single provision either in the
Court Fees Act
or in the
Civil Courts Act
will not do and the object, purpose and scope of legislations i.e.,
Civil Courts Act and the Court Fees Act
have to be gone into in detail. What are the aspects of the respective legislations have also to be gone into. It is also to be seen as to whether there is any overlapping of the said aspects or as to whether subject matter of each of the Act is separate and distinct. It is needless to mention that the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code and particularly,
Section 6
, only say that no Court shall try a cause beyond its pecuniary jurisdiction. The limits of pecuniary jurisdiction arc not stated in the said provision. That task is taken up by the
Civil Courts Act, 1972
. Before enacting the above law, Telangana area, a part of the erstwhile State of Hyderabad was being governed by the provisions of Hyderabad Civil Courts Act, while the Andhra area, carved out of erstwhile Madras State and forming separate State of Andhra, was being governed by the provisions of the Madras Civil Courts Act. While in Hyderabad Civil Courts Act, the original suits were tried by the Munsif Court with pecuniary jurisdiction upto Rs.5000/-, the Subordinate Judges were invested to deal the suits with pecuniary jurisdiction over Rs.5000/- but upto Rs.20,000/-. District Court had unlimited jurisdiction over Rs.20,000/-. In Madras Civil Courts Act, while pecuniary jurisdiction was prescribed for Munsif Magistrate upto a limit, the Court of Subordinate Judge was having unlimited jurisdiction. Occasionally, the suits were being withdrawn to the Court of the District Judge. By repealing both the Acts, as also the Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Small Causes Courts Act, 1313
Fasli, the A.P. Civil Courts Act, 1972
(Act No.19 of 1972) was enacted. The said Act originally followed the pattern of Madras Civil Courts Act. But, a later amendment effective from December, 1997 (A.P. Act No.29 of 1997) created a three-tier system for trying the original civil matters with Munsifs (upto Rs.1,00,000/-), Subordinate Judges (above Rs.1,00,000/- and upto Rs.5,00,000/-) and District Judges (unlimited jurisdiction above Rs.5 lakhs).
Section 3
speaks of establishment of a City Civil Court for the District of Hyderabad and appointment of Judges to the said Court like Chief Judge, Additional Chief Judges, Additional Judges of the rank of Subordinate Judge and Assistant Judges of the rank of District Munsif. The jurisdiction of the Judges of the City Civil Court in original suits and other proceedings is earmarked in
Section 5
of the Act.
Section 6
speaks of distribution of work in the City Civil Court.
Section 9
prescribes forum for filing appeals against the orders/decisions rendered by the City Civil Court. Part-Ill comprises of the establishment and constitution of Courts in Districts other than the District of Hyderabad.
Section 10
deals with establishment of District Courts,
Section 1
1
deals with appointment of Additional District Judges,
Section 12
deals with establishment of the Courts of Subordinate Judges and District Munsifs,
Section 13
deals with the appointment of Principal and Additional Sub-ordinate Judges and District Munsifs,
Section 14
deems the existing Courts as the one constituted under the Act.
Section 15
deals with the territorial limits of the District Courts, Subordinate Courts and District Munsifs.
Section 16
deals with the jurisdiction of the above Courts in original suits and other proceedings.
Section 17
deals with appeals against the orders/decisions rendered by the Courts mentioned in
Section 16
.
Section 18
deals with the establishment of Courts for Subordinate Judges for two or more districts.
Section 19
deals with the exercise by Subordinate Judge of jurisdiction of District Judge in certain proceedings.
Section 21
prescribes the places for the sitting of the Courts.
Section 22
prescribes the Court working days,
Section 23
vests the District Judge with control over all Courts in a District,
Section 24
confers power of small causes jurisdiction.
Section 26
deals with the administration of law by Courts in deciding questions regarding succession, inheritance, marriage etc.
Section 28
deals with the temporary discharge of the duties of the District Judge or the Chief Judge, City Civil Court.
Section 29
requires witness or party to suit to make oath or affirmation.
Section 30
envisages duties of ministerial officers of the Court.
Section 31
prescribes the limit of vacation as two months in a year.
Section 32
deals with appointment of a Vacation Civil Judge during vacation.
Section 33
empowers the High Court to receive suits and appeals when no Vacation Civil Judge is appointed.
6. The title of the
Court Fees Act
is "
The Andhra Pradesh Court-Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1956
" and it has to be borne in mind that it deals with the valuation of the suits as also the quantum of Court-fees payable thereon. It is a law relating lo Court-fees and valuation of the suit in the State of Andhra Pradesh. "Court" is defined under
Section 3(ii)
as any Civil, Revenue or Criminal Court and includes a Tribunal or other authority having jurisdiction under any special or local law to decide questions affecting the rights of parties.
Section 4
deals with the levy of fees in Courts and public offices.
Section 5
deals with the collection of proper fees on documents.
Section 6
deals with the multifarious suits,
Section 7
deals with the determination of market value as on the date of the presentation of the plaint,
Section 8
deals with the set-off or counterclaim and levying the fees in the same manner as a plaint.
Section 10
requires the statement of particulars of subject matter of suit and plaintiff's valuation thereof and
Section 11
invests the Courts to decide as to proper fees.
Section 12
deals with the relinquisliment of portion of claim,
Section 13
deals with the fees payable on written statements,
Section 14
deals with fees payable on appeals,
Section 15
deals with fees payable on petitions, applications etc.
Section 16
confers powers on Court-fee Examiners relating to valuation of subject matter and sufficiency of fees,
Section 17
provides for enquiry and Commission for the purpose of deciding whether the subject matter of a suit or civil proceeding has been properly valued and whether the fees paid is sufficient.
Section 18
contemplates notice to the State Government in any enquiry relating to the fees payable on the plaint, written statement, petition, memorandum of appeal or other document relates insofar as such valuation affects the fees payable. Chapter IV deals with computation of fees and
Section 19
says that the fees payable under this Act shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of the said Chapter, as also Chapter V11I and Schedules I and II.
Section 20
deals with suits for money and the fees shall be computed on the amount claimed.
Section 21
deals with suits for immovable property and fees is computed on three-fourths of the market value of the property, subject to other provisions of the Act.
Section 22
deals with suits for maintenance and annuities and in a suit for maintenance, the fees payable is on the amount claimed for one year and insofar as the annuities are concerned, on five times the amount claimed to be payable for one year.
Section 23
deals with suits for movable property and where the subject matter has a market value, on such value or where the subject matter has no market value on the amount at which such relief sought is valued in the plaint or at which such relief is valued by the Court, whichever is higher.
Section 24
deals with suits for declaration coupled with possession or consequential injunction.
Section 25
deals with the adoption suits and the fees is computed on one-half of the market value of the movable and immovable property involved in, or affected by such declaration or on Rs.500/- whichever is higher.
Section 26
deals with injunction suits and under subsection (a) if the plaintiffs title to the property is denied, fees shall be computed on one-half of the market value of the property or on Rs.200/- whichever is higher and under subsection (b), where the relief sought relates to the plaintiffs exclusive right to use, sell, print or exhibit any mark, etc., fees shall be computed on the amount at which the relief sought is valued in the plaint or at which such relief is valued by the Court, whichever is higher and under sub-section (c) whether the subject matter of the suit has the market value or not, fees shall be paid on the amount at which the relief sought is valued in the plaint or at which such relief is valued by the Court, whichever is higher.
Section 27
deals with suits relating to trust property and the fees shall be computed on one-fifth of the market value of the property subject to a maximum fees of Rs.200/- or where the property has no market value, on rupees one thousand.
Section 27 (2)
is significant which says "Where the property has no market value, value for the purpose of determining the jurisdiction of Courts shall be the amount stated in the plaint."
Section 28
deals with suits for possession under the
Specific Relief Act
and the fees shall be computed on one-half of the market value of the property or Rs.200/- whichever is higher.
Section 29
deals with suits for possession not otherwise provided for and the fees shall be computed on three-fourths of the market value of the property or on Rupees 3007- whichever is higher.
Section 30
deals with suits relating to easements, be it dominant or the servient owner, fees shall be paid on the amount at which the relief sought is valued in the plaint or at which such relief is valued by the Court, whichever is higher.
Section 31
deals with suits relating to mortgages and the fees shall be computed on the amount claimed.
Section 32
deals with suits for accounts and the fees shall be paid on the amount estimated in the plaint, of course, if there is excess amount determined over the ascertained amount, then for the difference, the Court-fees has to be paid.
Section 33
deals with suit for dissolution of partnership and the fees shall be computed on the value of the plaintiffs share in the partnership as estimated by the plaintiff. Under subsection (2) of
Section 33
, the plaintiff has to deposit the difference for the purpose of final decree and under sub-section (3), no final decree shall be passed in favour of the defendant until the fees computed on the amount or the value of his share is paid.
Section 34
deals with partition suits and under sub-section (I), the fees shall be computed on the market value of the movable property or three-fourths of the market value of the immovable property included in the plaintiffs share. Under sub-section (2) which deals with the joint possession, fees shall be paid at the following rates:
When the plaint is presented to:
(i) a District Munsif's         Rupees fifty Court
(ii) a Subordinate Judges       Rupees one hundred 
   Court or a District Court    if the value of the
                                plaintiffs share is less
                                thanRs.10,000/-.

                                Rupees two hundred, 
                                if the value is not less
                                thanRs.10,000/-.
Section 35
deals with suit for joint possession and the fees shall be computed on the market value of the movable property or three-fourths of the market value of the immovable property included in the plaintiffs share.
Section 36
deals with the administration suits and the fees is levied on the plaint at the rates specified in Section 47. Section 37 deals with suits for cancellation of decrees. Fees shall be computed on the value of the subject matter of the suit and such value shall be deemed to be (a) if the whole decree or other document is sought to be cancelled, the amount or value of the property for which the decree was passed or other document was executed; (b) if a part of the decree or other document is sought to be cancelled, such part of the amount or value of the property. Section 37(2) says that if the decree or other document is such that the liability under it cannot be split-up and the relief claimed relates only to particular item of property belonging to the plaintiff or to the plaintiff's share in any such property, tecs shall be computed on the value of such property or share or on the amount of (he decree, whichever is less. Section 38 deals with suits to set aside attachment and the fees shall be computed on the amount for which the property was attached or on one-fourth of the market value of the property attached, whichever is less. Section 39 deals with the suit for specific performance. In sub-section (a), fees is computed on the amount of consideration in a contract of sale, under sub-section (b), it is computed on the amount agreed to be secured by the mortgage in a contract of mortgage, under subsection (c), it is computed on the aggregate amount of the penalty or premium and of the average of the annual rent agreed to be paid in a contract of lease and under subsection (d) in the case of a contract of exchange, it is computed on the amount of consideration or as the case may be, on the market value of the movable property or three-fourths of the market value of the immovable property sought to be taken in exchange and under sub-section (e) in other cases, where the consideration for the promise sought to be enforced has a market value, the fees is computed on the market value of the property or three-fourths of the market value of the immovable property or where such consideration has no market value, at the rates specified under Section 47. Section 40 deals with suits between landlords and tenants and the Court-fees is on the amount of rent for the immovable property to which the suit relates payable for the year next before the date of presenting the plaint. The rent includes damages for use and occupation payable by a tenant holding over. Under Section 42, in a suit under
A.P. Survey and Boundaries Act, 1923
, fees shall be computed on one-half of the market value of the property affected by the determination of the boundary or on Rs.300/- whichever is higher. Section 43 deals with suits to alter or cancel entry in a register and the fixed fees payable is Rs.15. The said suit deals with alteration or cancellation of any entry in a register of the names of proprietors of revenue paying estates. Under Section 44, suits relating to public matters, the fees payable shall be Rs.50 and under Section 45 which is an inter-pleader suit, fees shall be payable on the plaint at the rates specified in Section 47. Subsection (3) of Section 45 is important as it states "Value for the purpose of determining the jurisdiction of Courts shall be the amount of the debt, or the sum of money or the market value of the movable property or three-fourths of the market value of the immovable property to which the suit relates." Chapter V comprising of Sections 50 and 51 under caption "Valuation of Suits" will be dealt with later. Chapter VI deals with Probates, Letters of Administration and Certificates of Administration, while Chapter VII deals with refunds and remissions and Chapter VIII contains miscellaneous provisions. The repeal and savings clause is contained under Section 79 and the
Court Fees Act, 1870
(Central enactment) and the
Suits Valuation Act, 1887
(Central Act) were repealed so far as the application of the said statutes in the State of Andhra Pradesh is concerned.
7. As seen from the above, the subject-matter of
Civil Courts Act
is constitution of several civil Courts investing them with jurisdiction to try all suits/matters of civil nature within certain pecuniary and territorial limits and allied matters mentioned above, for the administration of civil Justice. The grading of the Courts in their hierarchy has reference to the pecuniary and territorial limits rather than to Ihe nature and kind of the subject matter which they are empowered to deal with.
The Civil Courts Act
does not make any attempt to define as to what is the value of the suit or the subject matter of the civil proceeding. It does not also attempt to prescribe the manner and mode of valuation of the suits or Court-fees payable thereon. The true aspect of the
Civil Courts Act
is to establish the Courts, appoint the Presiding Officer thereto, spell out the working days and also limit the vacation in a calendar year and provide Ihe territorial and pecuniary limits of each of the hierarchy of Courts with corresponding provisions for appellate jurisdiction. Mode and manner of valuation of the subject matter of civil cause is outside the purview of the civil
Courts Act
and mere compliance of provisions of
Civil Courts Act
will not lead us anywhere, as mode, manner and method of valuation and the Court-Fees to be collected thereon have got to be determined and that is done only by one statute i.e.
The Court Fees Act
, which in fact, is anterior to the Civil Courts Acl, 1972.
If the Civil Courts Act
wanted to explain the provisions of the
Court Fees Act
or to make a departure, the same would have been certainly stated in the
Civil Courts Act
. Bui, the said Legislation did not choose to do so. As such, for the administration of Justice to be carried out, implementation of both the Acts i.e.,
Court Fees Act and the Civil Courts Act
is necessary and in the absence of either of the Acts, the Administration of Justice would be at stand-still, for, the
Court Fees Act
is unworkable in isolation, as it will only determine the value of the suit and the Court-fees payable thereon without prescribing the forum to receive and adjudicate the cause and likewise,
Civil Courts Act
in isolation will be rendered otiose for the reason that no valuation can be done for the purpose of conferring jurisdiction. As such, both the Acts, though, independent in their scope, are inter-dependent for the administration of Justice. The words "amount or value of the subject matter" in conjunction with words "suits and proceedings" under
Section 16(2)
of Civil Courts Act do not connote the entire value of the property involved, be it movable or immovable or right attached to the same. What Section 15 prescribes is the territorial jurisdiction and Section 16 prescribes only the pecuniary jurisdiction and while the territorial jurisdiction is one prescribed by a notification issued for that purpose by the Government after consultation with the High Court, the pecuniary jurisdiction is dependent upon the valuation of the suit to be made only under the
Court Fees Act
and not otherwise. Section 17 deals with filing of the appeal and there also the words "amount or value of the subject-matter of the suit or proceeding" aremenlioned.
8. What decides the jurisdiction with regard to a particular case is the nature of the claim as brought. The plaintiff is bound to assess the relief he claims on the basis of the benefit he seeks to obtain by filing of the suit. For instance, in a suit for redemption of mortgage, the valuation is on the amount due to the mortgagee, which is the value of the relief and the suit is'not valued taking the value of the property. So also, in the case of foreclosure, the relief is valued on the basis of the total amount due and not of the value of the property mortgaged. In a suit for partition of joint family property, the value for the purpose of jurisdiction is the value of the share claimed by the plaintiff and not of the whole estate. In a suit for injunction simplicitor, it is the value of the relief claimed and not on the value of the property involved. In a suit for eviction against the tenant, the value is the annual rental value and not the value of the property involved. In a suit for specific performance of enforcement of agreement, it is the consideration amount stated in the agreement which forms the valuation of the suit and not the value of the property on the date of the presentation of the plainl. We need not multiply the instances and suffice it to say that the proper method is to value for the Court-fees first and take that value for the purpose of jurisdiction, for, value will control the matter for Court-fees and jurisdiction.
It is not the value of the thing affected that settles the value of the thing affected that settles the value of the relief sought, but it is the value of the relief sought, which determines the jurisdiction. "Subject matter" is not the same thing as property. Subject matter is the substance for adjudication and it has reference to the right which the plaintiff seeks to enforce and the valuation of the suit depends upon the value of the subject matter thereof and the same is valued according to the
A.P. Courts Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1956
and not
A.P. Civil Courts Act, 1972
. There arc several judicial precedents supporting our view that the value of the relief for the purpose of Court-fees determines the jurisdiction and we need not state those plethora of precedents and suffice it to mention a judgment of the Supreme Court directly on the point dealing with analogous provision in the
Suits Valuation Act, 1887
, in
S.Rm.Ar.S.Sp. Sathappa Chettiar v. S.Rm.Ar.Rm. Ramanathan Chettiar
, . It is apt to extract the relevant portion of
the said judgment
:
"......There can be little doubt that the effect of the provisions of Section 8 is to make the value for the purpose of jurisdiction dependent upon the value as determinable for computation of Court-fees and that is natural enough. The computation of Court-fees in suits falling under
Section 7(iv)
of the Act depends upon the valuation that the plaintiff makes in respect of his claim. Once the plaintiff exercises his option and values his claim for the purpose of Court-fees, that determines the value for jurisdiction. The value for Court-fees and the value for jurisdiction must no doubt be the same in such cases; but it is the value of the Court-fees stated by the plaintiff that is of primary importance. It is from this value that the value for jurisdiction must be detennincd. The result is that it is the amount at which the plaintiff has valued the relief sought for the purposes of Court-fees that determines the value for jurisdiction in the suit and not vice versa"
9. In view of \vhat is stated supra, we hold that
Section 16
of the A.P. Civil Courts Act, 1972 is not concerned with the mode of valuation of the suits and the valuation of the suits for determining the jurisdiction is outside the purview of the said Act. This is equally applicable to the appeals also, referred to in Section 17 of the above Act. Section 50 with its sub-sections (1) and (2) of the
A.P. Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1956
is the only provision dealing with the value of any suit for the purpose of determining the jurisdiction of the Courts. Likewise, the value of the appeal for the purpose of jurisdiction is governed by only
Section 49
of A.P. Court-fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1956.
In the circumstances, we uphold the view taken by the Division Bench in
Sidramappa v. Sangappa
(supra) and overrule the view taken by the learned single Judge in G. Venkatarattiam v. G. Kesava Rao (supra).
10.    The CRP is allowed. No costs.