[Cites
17
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Mmc Projects India Pvt.Ltd. vs Gujarat State Electricity Corpn. Ltd on 22 March, 2018
Author:
Adarsh Kumar Goel
Bench:
Uday Umesh Lalit
,
Rohinton Fali Nariman
,
Adarsh Kumar Goel
1

                                                                                        REPORTABLE
                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 8984-8985 OF 2017


                          M/S LION ENGINEERING CONSULTANTS                         APPELLANT(S)

                                                                   VERSUS

                          STATE OF M.P. & ORS.                                     RESPONDENT(S)


                                                     O R D E R
1.       We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
2.       The matter arising out of a dispute in execution of

                         a works contract was referred to the Arbitrator by the High

                         Court on 4.09.2008. The Arbitrator made his Award dated

                         10.07.2010 in favour of the appellant. It was challenged

                         under
Section 34
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,

                         1996 (“the Act”) before the Seventh Additional District

                         Judge,    Bhopal     by     the       respondent-State    of   M.P.     The

                         respondent sought to amend its objections after three years

                         which was rejected by the trial Court. On a petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India, the High Court

                         has allowed the said amendment.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SWETA DHYANI
Date: 2018.03.28
3.       Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the
17:06:12 IST
Reason:
amendment    could    not    be       allowed   beyond   the   period   of

                         limitation which affected the vested rights of a party. It
2
was   also     submitted       that       the      objection         having    not    been

raised       under
Section    16(2)
of     the       Act      before   the

Arbitrator, could not be raised under
Section 34
of the

Act.
In support of this submission reliance has been placed

on
MSP    Infrastructure          Ltd.          vs.        Madhya      Pradesh     Road

Development Corporation Ltd.
reported in (2015) 13 SCC 713.
4.          Learned       Advocate    General         for      the    State     of    M.P.

submitted that the amendment sought is formal. Legal plea

arising on undisputed facts is not precluded by
Section

34(2)(b)
of the Act. Even if an objection to jurisdiction

is not raised under
Section 16
of the Act, the same can be

raised        under
Section    34
of   the    Act.       It   is   not    even

necessary to consider the application for amendment as it

is    a legal plea, on admitted facts, which can be raised in

any case. He thus submits the amendment being unnecessary

is not pressed. Learned Advocate General also submitted

that observations in M/s
MSP Infrastructure Ltd.
(supra),

particularly         in    Paragraphs         16   and    17    do     not     laid   down

correct law.
5.          We find merit in the contentions raised on behalf of

the State. We proceed on the footing that the amendment

being       beyond    limitation         is     not      to    be    allowed     as    the

amendment is not pressed.
6.          We do not see any bar to plea of jurisdiction being
3
raised by way of an objection under
Section 34
of the Act

even if no such objection was raised under
Section 16
.
7.      We   may   quote     the   observations      from     M/s
MSP

Infrastructure
(supra):
“16.    It   is   not   possible    to   accept this
     submission. In the first place, there is nothing to
     warrant the inference that all objections to the
     jurisdiction of the Tribunal cannot be raised under
Section 16
and that the Tribunal does not have
     power to rule on its own jurisdiction. Secondly,
     Parliament has employed a different phraseology in
     Clause (b) of
Section 34
. That phraseology is "the
     subject matter of the dispute is not capable of
     settlement by arbitration." This phrase does not
     necessarily refer to an objection to 'jurisdiction'
     as the term is well known. In fact, it refers to a
     situation   where    the    dispute    referred  for
     arbitration, by reason of its subject matter is not
     capable of settlement by arbitration at all.
     Examples of such cases have been referred to by the
     Supreme Court in Booz Allen and Hamilton Inc. V/s.
     SBI Home Finance Limited (2011) 5 SCC 532. This
     Court observed as follows:-
"36. The well-recognised examples of
               non-arbitrable    disputes     are:    (i)
               disputes   relating    to    rights    and
               liabilities which give rise to or
               arise out of criminal offences; (ii)
               matrimonial    disputes     relating    to
               divorce,      judicial        separation,
               restitution of conjugal rights, child
               custody; (iii) guardianship matters;
(iv)    insolvency     and     winding-up
               matters;   (v)   testamentary     matters
               (grants   of    probate,     letters    of
               administration       and       succession
certificate); and (vi) eviction or
               tenancy matters governed by special
               statutes   where   the    tenant    enjoys
               statutory protection against eviction
               and only the specified courts are
               conferred    jurisdiction      to    grant
               eviction or decide the disputes."
The   scheme   of   the   Act   is   thus   clear.   All
4
objections to jurisdiction of whatever nature
must be taken at the stage of the submission
of the statement of defence, and must be dealt
with under
Section 16
of the Arbitration Act,
1996. However, if one of the parties seeks to
contend that the subject matter of the dispute
is   such   as  cannot   be   dealt  with   by
arbitration, it may be dealt under
Section 34
by the Court.
17. It was also contended by Shri Divan, that
the newly added ground that the Tribunal under
the
Arbitration Act, 1996
had no jurisdiction
to decide the dispute in question because the
jurisdiction lay with the Tribunal under the
M.P. Act of 1983, was a question which can be
agitated under sub-clause (ii) of clause (b)
of sub-section (2) of
Section 34
of the
Arbitration Act, 1996. This provision enables
the court to set- aside an award which is in
conflict with the public policy of India.
Therefore, it is contended that the amendment
had been rightly allowed and it cannot be said
that what was raised was only a question which
pertained to jurisdiction and ought to have
been raised exclusively under
Section 16
of
the Arbitration Act, 1996, but in fact was a
question which could also have been raised
under
Section 34
before the Court, as has been
done by the Respondent. This submission must
be rejected. The contention that an award is
in conflict with the public policy of India
cannot be equated with the contention that
Tribunal under the Central Act does not have
jurisdiction and the Tribunal under the State
Act, has jurisdiction to decide upon the
dispute. Furthermore, it was stated that this
contention might have been raised under the
head that the Arbitral Award is in conflict
with the public policy of India. In other
words, it was submitted that it is the public
policy of India that arbitrations should be
held under the appropriate law. It was
contended that unless the arbitration was held
under the State Law i.e. the M.P. Act that it
would be a violation of the public policy of
India. This contention is misconceived since
the intention of providing that the award
should not be in conflict with the public
policy of India is referable to the public
policy of India as a whole i.e. the policy of
the Union of India and not merely the policy
5
of an individual state. Though, it cannot be
          said that the upholding of a state law would
          not be part of the public policy of India,
          much depends on the context. Where the
          question arises out of a conflict between an
          action under a State Law and an action under a
          Central Law, the term public policy of India
          must   necessarily   be  understood  as  being
          referable to the policy of the Union. It is
          well    known,   vide
Article   1
of   the
          Constitution, the name 'India' is the name of
          the Union of States and its territories
          include those of the States.”
8.       Both     stages     are        independent.      Observations        in

Paragraphs 16 and 17 in
MSP Infrastructure
(supra) do not,

in our view, lay           down correct law. We also do not agree

with the observation that the Public policy of India does

not refer to a State law and refers only to an All India

law.
9.       In our considered view, the public policy of India

refers   to     law   in   force       in   India   whether    State   law   or

Central law. Accordingly, we overrule the observations to

the contrary in Paragraphs 16 and 17 of the judgment in
MSP

Infrastructures Ltd.
(supra).
10.      Since    amendment     application         is   not   pressed,      the

appeal is rendered infructuous. The impugned order is set

aside.
11.      The matter may now be taken up by the trial court

for consideration of objections under Section 34 of the

Central Act. It will be open for the respondents to argue
6
that its objection that the Act stands excluded by the

M.P. Madhyastham Adhikaran Adhiniyam, 1983   could be raised

even without a formal pleading, being purely a legal plea.

It will also be open to the appellant to argue to the

contrary. We leave the question to be gone into by the

concerned court.
The appeals are disposed of accordingly.
…...…................J.
                                        (ADARSH KUMAR GOEL)


                                   ...….…................J.
                                    (ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN)


                                   ...….…................J.
                                         (UDAY UMESH LALIT)

NEW DELHI,
MARCH 22, 2018
7
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

          SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 15059 OF 2011


M/S MMC PROJECTS INDIA PVT. LTD.                           PETITIONER(S)

                                         VERSUS

GUJARAT STATE ELECTRICITY CORPORATION
LTD. & ANR.                                                RESPONDENT(S)


                             O R D E R


      It is not disputed that for purposes of decision of

the question arising in the present case the provisions of
Gujarat    Public    Works       Contracts     Disputes      Arbitration

Tribunal Act, 1992
are in pari materia to the provisions of

M.P. Madhyastham Adhikaran Adhiniyam, 1983 which have been

considered   by   this   Court    vide    Order    dated   8.03.2018   in

Civil Appeal No. 974/2012 titled as “Madhya Pradesh Rural

Road Development Authority & Anr.            vs.    M/s L.G. Chaudhary

Engineers and Contractors.”

      In view of above, this petition is dismissed.
…...…................J.
                                                 (ADARSH KUMAR GOEL)


                                             ...….…................J.
                                              (ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN)


                                             ...….…................J.
                                                   (UDAY UMESH LALIT)

NEW DELHI,
MARCH 22, 2018
8
REPORTABLE
                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.3344 OF 2018
              (Arising out of SLP (C) No(s). 18212 OF 2017

THE STATE OF BIHAR & ORS.                                   Appellant(s)

                                       VERSUS

M/S. BRAHMAPUTRA INFRASTRUCTURE LIMITED                     Respondent(s)

                                   WITH

                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.3345 OF 2018
              (Arising out of SLP (C) No(s). 21434 OF 2017)

THE STATE OF BIHAR & ORS.                                   Appellant(s)

                                       VERSUS

M/S. SUPREME BRAHMAPUTRA (JV)                               Respondent(s)

                                O R D E R

(1)   Leave granted.     We have heard learned counsel for the

parties.
(2)   The State is aggrieved by the appointment of arbitrator

under
Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,

1996 (the Central Act) on the ground that the said Act is

excluded   by   the
Bihar   Public    Works   Contracts    Arbitration

Tribunal Act, 2008
(Bihar Act 21 of 2008) (the State Act).

(3)   To appreciate the plea raised, it is necessary to refer

to the scheme of the State Act as reflected in some of the key

provisions.     Sections 8, 9 and 22 of the State Act are as

follows:
“8. Act to be in addition to
Arbitration &
        Conciliation  Act,  1996
. -   Notwithstanding
        anything contained in this Act, and of the
9
provisions   shall  be   in   addition  to  and
supplemental to
Arbitration & Conciliation Act,
1996
and in case any of the provision contained
herein is construed to be in conflict with
Arbitration Act
, then the latter Act shall
prevail to the extent of conflict.
9. Reference to Tribunal and making of award.--
(1) Where any dispute arises between the
parties to the contract, either party shall,
irrespective of whether such contract contains
an arbitration clause or not refer, within one
year from the date on which the dispute has
arisen, such dispute in writing to the Tribunal
for arbitration in such form and accompanied by
such documents or other evidence and by such
fees, as may be prescribed.
(2) On receipt of a reference under sub-
section (10, the Tribunal may, if satisfied
after such inquiry as it may deem fit to make,
that the requirements under this Act in
relation to the reference are complied with,
admit such reference and where the Tribunal is
not so satisfied, it may reject the reference
summarily.
(3) Where the Tribunal admits the reference
under   sub-section  (2),   it   shall,  after
recording evidence if necessary, and after
perusal of the material on record and on
affording and opportunity to the parties to
submit their argument, make an award or an
interim award, giving its reasons therefor.

  (4)   The Tribunal shall use all reasonable
dispatch in entering on and proceeding with the
reference admitted by it and making the award,
and an endeavour shall be made to make an award
within four months from the date on which the
Tribunal had admitted the reference.

  (5) The award including the interim award
made by the Tribunal shall, subject      to an
order, if any made under Section – 12 or 13, be
final and binding on the parties to the
dispute.
(6) An award including an interim award as
confirmed or varied by an order, if any, made
under
Section- 12
or 13 shall be deemed to be
a decree within the meaning of section-2 of the
10
Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 of the principal
            Court of original jurisdiction within the local
            limits whereof the award or the interim award
            has   been   made   and   shall   be   executed
            accordingly.
22.   Overriding    effect     of   this Act.-
            Notwithstanding any thing contained in any
            other Law, Rule, Order, Scheme, or Contract
            Agreement   entered    into  before   or after
            commencement of this Act, any dispute as
            defined in
Section 2(e)
of this Act shall be
            regulated under the provisions of this Act,
            Rules and Regulations framed thereunder, and
            absence of arbitration clause in any contract
            agreement shall not have effect excluding any
            dispute from the purview of this Act.”

(4)    It     is    not    in   dispute      that      the   parties    have   executed

agreement dated 22nd June, 2012, providing for appointment of

an     arbitrator          as   per     provisions           of   the   Central   Act.

Relevant portion of Clause 25 of the said Agreement is as

follows:
“The         arbitration        shall       be    conducted    in
            accordance with provisions of the
Arbitration
            and Conciliation Act, 1996
(26 of 1996) or any
            statutory modification or re-enactment thereof
            and the rules made there under and for the time
            being in force shall apply to the arbitration
            proceeding under the clause.”

(5)    The scheme of Sections 8, 9 and 22 of the State Act shows

that     in        the    absence      of    an        agreement    stipulating    the

applicability of the Central Act, the State Act applies to

works contracts. Since in the present cases, an arbitration

agreement exists and stipulates applicability of the Central

Act, the State Act will not apply.                       We, thus, do not find any

ground to interfere with the impugned order.
11
(6)    The appeals are dismissed. It will, however, be open to

the    appellant-State          to    move       the   High     Court      for     change    of

Arbitrator,      if      a    case    to     this      effect    is    made      out    on   an

objection of neutrality, as submitted by learned counsel for

the State.
(7)    Before      parting          with        this    order,        we      consider       it

appropriate      to    deal        with    the    submission       raised        by    learned

counsel    for     the       respondent(s)        that       Section       4(3)(b)     of    the

State Act is patently unconstitutional.                          The said section is

as follows:
“
Section       4
. Terms and conditions of service of
       the Chairman and other members of Tribunal.-
       (3) (b) The Chairman and any other member shall
       hold the office at the pleasure of the Government,
       provided that; in case of premature termination;
they shall be entitled to three months pay &
       allowances in lieu of compensation.”

(8)    We are of the view that a provision that the tenure of

the Chairman and other members of the Arbitration Tribunal at

the    pleasure       of     the     Government         is    inconsistent         with      the

constitutional           scheme,          particularly
Article       14
of    the

Constitution of India.               Section 4(1) of the State Act provides

for a three year tenure or till the age of 70 years whichever

is    earlier.        Termination          of    the    said    tenure       cannot     be   at

pleasure         within       the     term      stipulated       as     the      arbitration

tribunal     has      quasi         judicial        functions         to     perform.        Any

termination of the service of such member by a party to the

dispute    would      interfere        directly        with     the    impartiality          and

independence expected from such member. The said provision is,
12
thus, manifestly arbitrary and contrary to the Rule of Law.

Accordingly,      we   declare   the    said   provision   to   be

unconstitutional.
..........................J.
                                          (ADARSH KUMAR GOEL)


                                         ..........................J.
                                          (ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN)


                                         ..........................J.
                                          (UDAY UMESH LALIT)
New Delhi,
March 22, 2018.