[Cites
28
, Cited by
91
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs M/S Intercontinental Consultants And ... on 7 March, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3754, 2018 (4) SCC 669, (2018) 4 SCALE 243
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
REPORTABLE

                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2013 OF 2014


                         UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                              .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

                         M/S. INTERCONTINENTAL CONSULTANTS
                         AND TECHNOCRATS PVT. LTD.                        .....RESPONDENT(S)

                                                                   WITH

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 295-299 OF 2014

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2021 OF 2014

                                            CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4340-4341 OF 2014

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6866 OF 2014

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7685 OF 2014

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7688 OF 2014

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8056 OF 2015

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3360 OF 2015

                                 TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NOS. 1043-1045 OF 2017

Signature Not Verified                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6090 OF 2017
Digitally signed by
NIDHI AHUJA

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 10626-10627 OF 2017
Date: 2018.03.08
16:44:49 IST
Reason:




                                 TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NOS. 1932-1934 OF 2017


                         Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                     Page 1 of 44
                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6864 OF 2014

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6865 OF 2014

                   CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4536-4537 OF 2016

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5130 OF 2016

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4975 OF 2016

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5453 OF 2016

                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 10223-10224 OF 2017

                                          AND

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5444 OF 2017




                                JUDGMENT
A.K. SIKRI, J.
In all these appeals, legal issue that needs determination is

       almost identical, though there may be little variation on facts.

       This difference pertains to the nature of services provided by the

       respondents/assessees who are all covered by the service tax.

       The fringe diferences in the nature of services, however, nature of

       differences, however, has no impact on the final outcome.
2)     All the assessees are paying service tax. The services which

       these assessees are rendering broadly fall in the following four
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                           Page 2 of 44
categories:
(a)     Consulting engineering services.
(b)     Share transfer agency services.

       (c)     Custom house agent services covered by the head ‘clearing

       and forwarding agent’.

       (d)     The site formation and clearances, excavation and earth

       moving and demolition services.


3)     While rendering the aforesaid services, the assessees are also
getting reimbursement in respect of certain activities undertaken

       by them which according to them is not includable to arrive at

       ‘gross value’ charged from their clients. As per Rule 5 of the

       Service Tax (Determination of Value) Rules, 2006 (hereinafter

       referred to as the ‘Rules’), the value of the said reimbursable

       activities is also to be included as part of services provided by

       these respondents. Writ petitions were filed by the assessees

       challenging the vires of Rule 5 of the Rules as unconstitutional as

       well as ultra vires the provisions of Sections 66 and 67 of Chapter

       V of the Finance Act, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’).
The High Court of Delhi has, by the judgment dated November

       30, 2012, accepted the said challenge and declared Rule 5 to be

       ultra vires these provisions. Other cases have met similar results

       by riding on the judgment dated November 30, 2012.             This
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                         Page 3 of 44
necessitates examining the the correctness of the judgment of the

       Delhi High Court and outocme thereof would determine the fate of

       all these appeals/transfer petitions.
4)     This judgment was rendered by the High court in the writ petition

       filed by M/s. Intercontinental Consultants and Technocrats Pvt.

       Ltd. out of which Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 arises. Therefore,

       for our purpose, it would suffice to advert to the facts of this

       appeal and take note of the reasons which have prevailed with

       the High Court in arriving at this conclusion.
5)     The assessee M/s. Intercontinental Consultants and Technocrats

       Pvt. Ltd. is a provider of consulting engineering services.          It

       specialises in highways, structures, airports, urban and rural

       infrastructural projects and is engaged in various road projects

       outside and inside India. In the course of the carrying on of its

       business, the petitioner rendered consultancy services in respect

       of highway projects to the National Highway Authority of India

       (NHAI). The petitioner receives payments not only for its service

       but is also reimbursed expenses incurred by it such as air travel,

       hotel stay, etc. It was paying service tax in respect of amounts

       received by it for services rendered to its clients. It was not paying

       any service tax in respect of the expenses incurred by it, which
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                           Page 4 of 44
was      reimbursed         by     the   clients.   On      19.10.2007,    the

       Superintendent (Audit) Group II (Service Tax), New Delhi issued a

       letter to the petitioner on the subject “service tax audit for the

       financial year 2002-03 to 2006-07. In this letter, it was mentioned

       by the appellant that service tax was liable to be charged on the

       gross value including reimbursable and out of pocket expenses

       like travelling, lodging and boarding etc. and the respondent was

       directed to deposit the due service tax along with interest @13%

       under Sections 73 and 75 respectively of the Act. In response,

       the respondent provided month-wise detail of the professional

       income as well as reimbursable out of pocket expenses for the

       period mentioned in the aforesaid letter.                 Thereafter, a show

       cause notice dated March 17, 2008 was issued by the

       Commissioner, Service Tax, Commissionerate vide which the

       respondent was asked to show cause as to why the service tax

       should      not    be    recovered       by   including    the   amounts    of

       reimbursable which were received by the respondent, pointing out

       these were to be included while arriving at the gross value as per

       provisions of Rule 5(1) of the Rules.
6)     Rule 5 was brought into existence w.e.f. June 01, 2007. The

       demand which was made in the show cause notice was covered
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                   Page 5 of 44
by the period from October, 2002 to March, 2007. Against this

       show cause notice, the respondent preferred Writ Petition No.

       6370 of 2008 in the High Court of Delhi challenging the vires

       thereof with three prayers, namely:
(i) for quashing Rule 5 in its entirety of the Service Tax

       (Determination of Value) Rules, 2006 to the extent it includes the

       reimbursement of expenses in the value of taxable service for the

       purpose of charging service tax; and
(ii) for declaring the rule to be unconstitutional and ultra vires

       Sections 66 and 67 of the Finance Act, 1994; and
(iii) for quashing the impugned show-cause notice-cum-demand

       dated 17.03.2008 holding that it is illegal, arbitrary, without

       jurisdiction and unconstitutional.
7)     Rule 5, which provides for ‘inclusion in or exclusion from the value

       of certain expenditure or costs’, is reproduced below in order to

       understand its full implication:
“5. Inclusion in or exclusion from value of certain
                   expenditure or costs.
(1) Where any expenditure or costs are incurred by
                   the service provider in the course of providing taxable
                   service, all such expenditure or costs shall be treated
                   as consideration for the taxable service provided or to
                   be provided and shall be included in the value for the
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                               Page 6 of 44
purpose of charging service tax on the said service.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub rule (1), the
                   expenditure or costs incurred by the service provider
                   as a pure agent of the recipient of service, shall be
                   excluded from the value of the taxable service if all the
                   following conditions are satisfied, namely:
 the service provider acts as a pure agent of the
                        recipient of service when he makes payment to
                        third party for the goods or services procured;
 the recipient of service receives and uses the
                        goods or services so procured by the service
                        provider in his capacity as pure agent of the
                        recipient of service;
 the recipient of service is liable to make
                        payment to the third party;
 the recipient of service authorities the service
                        provider to make payment on his behalf;
 the recipient of service knows that the goods
                        and services for which payment has been made
                        by the service provider shall be provided by the
                        third party;
 the payment made by the service provider on
                        behalf of the recipient of service has been
                        separately indicated in the invoice issued by the
                        service provider to the recipient of service;
 the service provider recovers from the recipient
                        of service only such amount as has been paid
                        by him to the third party; and

                       the goods or services procured by the service
                        provider from the third party as a pure agent of
                        the recipient of service are in addition to the
                        services he provides on his own account.
Explanation 1 : For the purposes of sub rule (2),
                          “pure agent” means a person who –

                       enters into a contractual agreement with the
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                 Page 7 of 44
recipient of service to act as his pure agent to
                          incur expenditure or costs in the course of
                          providing taxable service;
 neither intends to hold nor holds any title to the
                        goods or services so procured or provided as
                        pure agent of the recipient of service;
 does not use such goods or services so
                        procured; and

                       receives only the actual amount incurred to
                        procure such goods or services.
Explanation 2 : For the removal of doubts it is
                          clarified that the value of the taxable service is
                          the total amount of consideration consisting of
                          all components of the taxable service and it is
                          immaterial that the details of individual
                          components of the total consideration is
                          indicated separately in the invoice.
Illustration 1 : X contracts with Y, a real estate
                          agent to sell his house and thereupon Y gives
                          an advertisement in television. Y billed X
                          including charges for Television advertisement
                          and paid service tax on the total consideration
                          billed. In such a case, consideration for the
                          service provided is what X pays to Y. Y does not
                          act as an agent behalf of X when obtaining the
                          television advertisement even if the cost of
                          television     advertisement     is    mentioned
                          separately in the invoice issued by X.
                          Advertising service is an input service for the
                          estate agent in order to enable or facilitate him
                          to perform his services as an estate agent.
Illustration 2 : In the course of providing a
                          taxable service, a service provider incurs costs
                          such as traveling expenses, postage, telephone,
                          etc., and may indicate these items separately on
                          the invoice issued to the recipient of service. In
                          such a case, the service provider is not acting
                          as an agent of the recipient of service but
                          procures such inputs or input service on his own
                          account for providing the taxable service. Such
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                 Page 8 of 44
expenses do not become reimbursable
                          expenditure merely because they are indicated
                          separately in the invoice issued by the service
                          provider to the recipient of service.
Illustration 3 : A contracts with B, an architect for
                          building a house. During the course of providing
                          the taxable service, B incurs expenses such as
                          telephone charges, air travel tickets, hotel
                          accommodation, etc., to enable him to
                          effectively perform the provision of services to A.
                          In such a case, in whatever form B recovers
                          such expenditure from A, whether as a
                          separately itemised expense or as part of an
                          inclusive overall fee, service tax is payable on
                          the total amount charged by B. Value of the
                          taxable service for charging service tax is what
                          A pays to B.

                          Illustration 4 : Company X provides a taxable
                          service of rent cab by providing chauffeur driven
                          cars for overseas visitors. The chauffeur is given
                          a lump sum amount to cover his food and
                          overnight accommodation and any other
                          incidental expenses such as parking fees by the
                          Company X during the tour. At the end of the
                          tour, the chauffeur returns the balance of the
                          amount with a statement of his expenses and
                          the relevant bills. Company X charges these
                          amounts from the recipients of service. The cost
                          incurred by the chauffeur and billed to the
                          recipient of service constitutes part of gross
                          amount charged for the provision of services by
                          the company X.”
8)     The case set up by the respondent in the writ petition was that

       Rule 5(1) of the Rules, which provides that all expenditure or cost

       incurred by the service provider in the course of providing the

       taxable services shall be treated as consideration for the taxable

       services and shall be included in the value for the purpose of
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                    Page 9 of 44
charging service tax, goes beyond the mandate of Section 67. It

       was argued that Section 67 which deals with valuation of taxable

       services for charging service tax does not provide for inclusion of

       the aforesaid expenditure or cost incurred while providing the

       services as they cannot be treated as element/components of

       service. Section 67 was amended by Finance Act, 2006 w.e.f.
May 01, 2006. Since the cases before us involve period prior to

       the aforesaid amendment as well as post amendment period, it

       would apt to take note of both unamended and amended

       provisions. Unamended Section 67 was in the following form:
““67. Valuation of taxable services for charging service
                   tax.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the value of any
                   taxable service shall be the gross amount charged by
                   the service provider for such provided or to be
                   provided by him.
Explanation 1. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
                   declared that the value of a taxable service, as the
                   case may be, includes,
(a) the aggregate of commission or brokerage charges
                   by a broker on the sale or purchase of securities
                   including the commission or brokerage paid by the
                   stock broker to any sub broker.
(b) the adjustments made by the telegraph authority
                   from any deposits made by the subscriber at the time
                   of application for telephone connection or pager or
                   facsimile or telegraph or telex or for leased circuit;
(c)the amount of premium charged by the insurer from
                   the policy holder;
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                               Page 10 of 44
(d) the commission received by the air travel agent
                   from the airline;
(e) the commission, fee or any other sum received by
                   an actuary, or intermediary or insurance intermediary
                   or insurance agent from the insurer;
(f) the reimbursement received by the authorized
                   service station from manufacturer for carrying out any
                   service of nay motor car, light motor vehicle or two
                   wheeled motor vehicle manufactured by such
                   manufacturer; and
(g) the commission or any amount received by the rail
                   travel agent from the Railways or the customer.
But does not include –
(i) initial deposit made by the subscriber at the time of
                   application for telephone connection or pager or
                   facsimile (FAX) or telephone or telex or for leased
                   circuit;
(ii) the cost of unexposed photography film,
                   unrecorded magnetic tape or such other storage
                   devices, if any, sold to the client during the course of
                   providing the service;
(iii) the cost of parts or accessories, or consumable
                   such as lubricants and coolants, if any, sold to the
                   customer during the course of service or repair of
                   motor cars, light motor vehicle or two wheeled motor
                   vehicles;
(iv) the airfare collected by air travel agent in respect
                   of service provided by him;
(v) the rail fare collected by rail travel agent in respect
                   of service provided by him;
(vi) the cost of parts or other material, if any, sold to
                   the customer during the course of providing
                   maintenance or repair service;
(vii) the cost of parts or other material, if any, sold to
                   the customer during the course of providing erection,
                   commissioning or installation service; and
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                  Page 11 of 44
(viii) interest on loan.
Explanation 2 – Where the gross amount charged by a
                   service provider is inclusive of service tax payable, the
                   value of taxable service shall be such amount as with
                   the addition of tax payable, is equal to the gross
                   amount charged.
Explanation 3. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
                   declared that the gross amount charged for the
                   taxable service shall include any amount received
                   towards the taxable service before, during or after
                   provision of such service.”
9)     After its amendment w.e.f. May 01, 2006, a much shorter version

       was introduced which reads as under:
“67. Valuation of taxable services for charging service
                   tax.
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, where
                   service tax is chargeable on any taxable service with
                   reference to its value, then such value shall,
(i) in a case where the provision of service is for a
                   consideration in money, be the gross amount charged
                   by the service provider for such service provided or to
                   be provided by him;
(ii) in a case where the provision of service is for a
                   consideration not wholly or partly consisting of money,
                   be such amount in money as, with the addition of
                   service tax charged, is equivalent to the consideration;
(iii) in a case where the provision of service is for a
                   consideration which is not ascertainable, be the
                   amount as ay be determined in the prescribed
                   manner.
(2) Where the gross amount charged by a service
                   provider, for the service provided or to be provided is
                   inclusive of service tax payable, the value of such
                   taxable service shall be such amount as, with the
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                Page 12 of 44
addition of tax payable, is equal to the gross amount
                   charged.
(3) The gross amount charged for the taxable service
                   shall include any amount received towards the taxable
                   service before, during or after provision of such
                   service.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub sections (1), (2)
                   and (3), the value shall be determined in such manner
                   as may be prescribed.
Explanation: For the purpose of this section,
(a) “consideration” includes any amount that is
                   payable for the taxable services provided or to be
                   provided;
(b) “money” includes any currency, cheque,
                   promissory note, letter of credit, draft, pay order,
                   travelers cheque, money order, postal remittance and
                   other similar instruments but does not include
                   currency that is held for its numismatic value;
(c) “gross amount charged” includes payment by
                   cheque, credit card, deduction from account and any
                   form of payment by issue of credit notes or debit notes
                   and book adjustment, and any amount credited or
                   debited, as the case may be, to any account, whether
                   called “Suspense account” or by any other name, in
                   the books of accounts of a person liable to pay service
                   tax, where the transaction of taxable service is with
                   any associated enterprise.”
10)    The High Court, after taking note of the aforesaid provisions,

       noted that the provisions both amended and unamended Section

       67 authorised the determination of value of taxable services for

       the purpose of charging service tax under Section 66 (which is a

       charging section) as the gross amount charged by the service

       provider for such services provided or to be provided by him, in a
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                              Page 13 of 44
case where the consideration for the service is money.
Emphasising on the words ‘for such service’, the High Court took

       the view that the charge of service tax under Section 66 has to be

       on the value of taxable service i.e. the value of service rendered

       by the assessee to the NHAI, which is that of a consulting

       engineer, that can be brought to charge and nothing more. The

       quantification of the value of the service can, therefore, never

       exceed the gross amount charged by the service provider for the

       service provided by him. On that analogy, the High Court has

       opined that scope of Rule 5 goes beyond the Section which was

       impermissible as the Rules which have been made under Section

       94 of the Act can only be made ‘for carrying out the provisions

       of this Chapter’ (Chapter V of the Act) which provides for levy

       quantification and collection of the service tax. In the process,

       the High Court observed that the expenditure or cost incurred by

       the service provider in the course of providing the taxable service

       can never be considered as the gross amount charged by the

       service provider ‘for such service’ provided by him, and illustration

       3 given below the Rule which included the value of such services

       was a clear example of breaching the boundaries of Section 67.

       The High Court even went on to hold further pointed out that it

       may even result in double taxation inasmuch as expenses on air
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                          Page 14 of 44
travel tickets are already subject to service tax and are included

        in the bill. No doubt, double taxation was permissible in law but it

        could only be done if it was categorically provided for and

        intended; and could not be enforced by implication as held in
Jain Brothers v. Union of India1
.                  The High Court has also

        referred to many judgments of this Court for the proposition that

        Rules cannot be over-ride or over-reach the provisions of the

        main enactment2.
The High Court also referred to the judgment

        of Queens Bench of England in the case of
Commissioner of

        Customs and Excise v. Cure and Deeley Ltd.3
.
11)    Mr. K. Radhakrishnan, learned senior counsel argued for the

        appellant, ably assisted by Ms. Nisha Bagchi, advocate who also

        made significant contribution by arguing some of the nuances of

        the issue involved. Submission of the learned counsel appearing

        for the appellant/Department was that prior to April 19, 2006 i.e. in

        the absence of Rule 5 of the Rules, the value of taxable services

        was covered by Section 67 of the Act. As per this Section, the

        value of taxable services in relation to consulting engineering

        services provided or to be provided by a consulting engineer to

1   (
1970) 77 ITR 107
2   Central Bank of India & Ors. v. Workmen
, etc., (1960) 1 SCR 200;
Babaji Kondaji Garad v.
    Nasik Merchants Co-operative Bank Ltd.
, (1984) 2 SCC 50;
State of U.P. & Ors. v. Babu
    Ram Upadhya
, (1961) 2 SCR 679;
CIT v. S. Chenniappa Mudaliar
, (1969) 74 ITR 41;
Bimal
    Chandra Banerjee v. State of M.P. & Ors.
, (
1971) 81 ITR 105 and CIT, Andhra Pradesh v. Taj
    Mahal Hotel
, (1971) 82 ITR 44
3   (1961) 3 WLR 788 (QB)
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                         Page 15 of 44
the client shall be the gross amount charged for a consideration

       or in money from the client in respect of engineering services.

       The expression ‘gross amount charged’ would clearly include all

       the amounts which were charged by the service provider and

       would not be limited to the remuneration received from the

       customer. The very connotation ‘gross amount charged’ denotes

       the total amount which is received in rendering those services

       and would include the other amounts like transportation, office

       rent, office appliances, furniture and equipments etc.      It was

       submitted that this expenditure or cost would be part of

       consideration for taxable services.    It was, thus, argued that

       essential input cost had to be included in arriving at gross amount

       charged by a service provider.
12)    It was further submitted that Section 67 of the Act was amended

       w.e.f. May 01, 2006 and this also retained the concept of ‘the

       gross amount charged’ for the purpose of arriving at valuation on

       which the service tax is to be paid. The learned counsel pointed

       out that sub-section (4) of amended Section 67 categorically

       provides that the value has to be determined in such a manner as

       may be prescribed and in pursuant thereto, Rule 5 of the Rules

       which came into effect from June 01, 2007, provided for ‘inclusion
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                        Page 16 of 44
in or exclusion from value of certain expenditure or costs’. It was

       submitted that there was no dispute that as per this Rule, all such

       expenditure or costs which are incurred by the service provider in

       the course of providing taxable services are to be treated as

       consideration for the taxable services provided or to be provided

       for arriving at valuation for the purpose of charging service tax,

       except those costs which were specifically excluded under sub-

       rule (2) of Rule 5.            Submission was that since Section 67

       specifically lays down the principle of gross amount charged by a

       service provider for the services provided or to be provided, Rule

       5 did not go contrary to Section 67 as it only mentions what would

       be the meaning of gross amount charged.
13)    In the aid of this submission, the learned counsel sought to take

       help from principle
laid down in
excise law and submitted that it is

       held by this Court in
Union of India & Ors. v. Bengal Shrachi

       Housing Development Limited & Anr.
4 that same principles as

       applicable in excise law are applicable while examining service

       tax matters. Reliance was placed on paragraph 22 of
the said

       judgment
to support this proposition. However, we may point out

       at this stage itself that the context in which the observations were

       made were entirely different.          The issue was as to whether

4      (2018) 1 SCC 311
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                          Page 17 of 44
service tax, which is an indirect tax, can be passed on by the

       service provider to the recepient of the service and, in this hue,

       the matter was discussed, as can be seen from the combined

       reading of paragraphs 21 and 22 which are to the following effect:
“21. It is thus clear that the judgments of this Court which
            referred to service tax being an indirect tax have reference
            only to service tax being an indirect tax in economic theory
            and not constitutional law. The fact that service tax may not,
            in given circumstances, be passed on by the service
            provider to the recipient of the service would not, therefore,
            make such tax any the less a service tax. It is important to
            bear this in mind, as the main prop of Shri Jaideep Gupta's
            argument is that service tax being an indirect tax which
            must be passed on by virtue of the judgments of this Court,
            would make the recipient of the service the person on whom
            the tax is primarily leviable.
22. Let us now examine some of the judgments relating to
            another indirect tax, namely, excise duty. Like service tax,
            excise duty is also in the economic sense, an indirect tax.
The levy is on manufacture of goods; and the taxable
            person is usually the manufacturer of those goods.
            InCentral Provinces and Berar Sales of Motor Spirit and
            Lubricants Taxation Act, 1938, In re, the Federal Court
            decided, through Maurice Gwyer, C.J., that excise duty
            under the
Government of India Act, 1935
is a power to
            impose duty of excise upon the manufacturer of excisable
            articles at the stage of or in connection with manufacture or
            production. In a separate judgment, Jayakar, J. held that all
            duties of excise are levied on manufacture of excisable
            goods and can be levied and collected at any subsequent
            stage up to consumption.”
14)    It was also submitted that while dealing with the valuation of a

       taxable service, the provision which deals with valuation has to be

       taken into consideration and no assistance can be taken from

       charging section, as held in
Union of India & Ors. v. Bombay
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                              Page 18 of 44
Tyre International Limited & Ors.5
:
“8. Mr N.A. Palkhivala, learned counsel for the
                   assessees, has propounded three principles which, he
                   contends, form the essential characteristics of a duty
                   of excise. Firstly, he says, excise is a tax on
                   manufacture or production and not on anything else.
                   Secondly, uniformity of incidence is a basic
                   characteristic of excise. And thirdly, the exclusion of
                   post-manufacturing expenses and post-manufacturing
                   profits is necessarily involved in the first principle and
                   helps to achieve the second. Learned counsel urges
                   that where excise duty is levied on an ad valorem
                   basis the value on which such duty is levied is a
                   “conceptual value”, and that the conceptual nature is
                   borne out by the circumstance that the identity of the
                   manufacturer and the identity of the goods as well as
                   the actual wholesale price charged by the
                   manufacturer are not the determining factors. It is
                   urged that the old
Section 4(a)
clearly indicates that a
                   conceptual value forms the basis of the levy, and that
                   the actual wholesale price charged by the particular
                   assessee cannot be the basis of the excise levy. It is
                   said that the criterion adopted in clause (a) succeeds
                   in producing uniform taxation, whether the assessees
                   are manufacturers who sell their goods in wholesale,
                   semi-wholesale or in retail, whether they have a vast
                   selling and marketing network or have none, whether
                   they sell at depots and branches or sell at the factory
                   gate, and whether they load the ex-factory price with
                   post-manufacturing expenses and profits or do not do
                   so. Because the value of the article rests on a
                   conceptual base, it is urged, the result of the
                   assessment under
Section 4(a)
cannot be different
                   from the result of an assessment under
Section 4(b)
.
                   The contention is that the principle of uniformity of
                   taxation requires the exclusion of post-manufacturing
                   expenses and profits, a factor which would vary from
                   one manufacturer to another. It is pointed out that
                   such exclusion is necessary to create a direct and
                   immediate nexus between the levy and the
                   manufacturing activity, and to bring about a uniformity
                   in the incidence of the levy. Learned counsel contends
                   that the position is the same under the new Section 4
                   which, he says, must need be so because of the
5      (1984) 1 SCC 467
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                 Page 19 of 44
fundamental nature of the principles propounded
                   earlier. Referring to the actual language of the new
Section 4(1)(a)
, it is pointed out that the expression
                   “normal price” therein means “normal for the purposes
                   of excise”, that is to say, that the price must exclude
                   post-manufacturing expenses and post-manufacturing
                   profit and must not be loaded with any extraneous
                   element. It is conceded, however, that under the new
Section 4(1)(a)
there is no attempt to preserve
                   uniformity as regards the amount of duty between one
                   manufacturer and another, but it is urged that the
                   basis on which the value is determined is constituted
                   by the same conceptual criterion, that post-
                   manufacturing expenses and post-manufacturing profit
                   must be excluded. Considerable emphasis has been
                   laid on the submission that as excise duty is a tax on
                   the manufacture or production of goods it must be a
                   tax intimately linked with the manufacture or
                   production of the excisable article and, therefore, it
                   can be imposed only on the assessable value
                   determined with reference to the excisable article at
                   the stage of completed manufacture and to no point
                   beyond. To preserve this intimate link or nexus
                   between the nature of the tax and the assessment of
                   the tax, it is urged that all extraneous elements
                   included in the “value” in the nature of post-
                   manufacturing expenses and post-manufacturing
                   profits have to be off-loaded. It is pointed out that
                   factors such as volume, quantity and weight, which
                   enter into the measure of the tax, are intimately linked
                   with the manufacturing activity, and that the power of
                   Parliament under Entry 84 of List I of the Seventh
                   Schedule to the Constitution to legislate in respect of
                   “value” is restricted by the conceptual need to link the
                   basis for determining the measure of the tax with the
                   very nature of the tax.
xxx          xxx          xxx
10. Besides this fundamental issue, there are other
                   points of dispute, principally in respect of the
                   connotation of the expression “related person” in the
                   new
Section 4
as well as the nature of the deductions
                   which can be claimed by the assessee as post-
                   manufacturing expenses and post-manufacturing profit
                   from the price for the purpose of determining the
                   “value”.
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                               Page 20 of 44
11. The submissions made by learned counsel for the
                   parties in support of their respective contentions cover
                   a wide area, and several questions of a fundamental
                   nature have been raised. We consider it necessary to
                   deal with them because they enter into and determine
                   the conclusions reached by us.
12. We think it appropriate that at the very beginning
                   we should briefly indicate the concept of a duty of
                   excise. Both Entry 45 of
List I of the Seventh Schedule
                   to the Government of India Act, 1935
, under which the
                   original Central Excises and Salt Act was enacted, and
                   Entry 84 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the
                   Constitution under which the Amendment Act of 1973
                   was enacted, refer to “Duties of excise on... goods
                   manufactured or produced in India”. A duty of excise,
                   according to the Federal Court in The Central
                   Provinces and Berar Sales of Motor Spirit and
                   Lubricants Taxation Act, 1938 [AIR 1939 FC 1, 6 :
1939 FCR 18] is a duty ordinarily levied on the
                   manufacturer or producer in respect of the
                   manufacture or production of the commodity taxed. A
                   distinction was drawn between the nature of the tax
                   and the point at which it was collected, and Gwyer,
                   C.J. observed that theoretically “. . .there can be no
                   reason in theory why an excise duty should not be
                   imposed even on the retail sale of an article, if the
                   taxing Act so provides. Subject always to the
                   legislative competence of the taxing authority, a duty
                   on home-produced goods will obviously be imposed at
                   the stage which the authority finds to be the most
                   convenient and the most lucrative, wherever it may be;
                   but that is a matter of the machinery of collection, and
                   does not affect the essential nature of the tax. The
                   ultimate incidence of an excise duty, a typical indirect
                   tax, must always be on the consumer, who pays as he
                   consumes or expends; and it continues to be an
                   excise duty, that is, a duty on home-produced or
                   home-manufactured goods, no matter at what stage it
                   is collected….” (emphasis supplied). The position was
                   explained further in
Province of Madras v. Boddu
                   Paidanna and Sons
[1942 FCR 90, 101 : AIR 1942 FC
                   33] where the Federal Court observed:
“… There is in theory nothing to prevent the
                      Central Legislature from imposing a duty of
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                               Page 21 of 44
excise on a commodity as soon as it comes into
                      existence, no matter what happens to it
                      afterwards, whether it be sold, consumed,
                      destroyed, or given away. A taxing authority will
                      not ordinarily impose such a duty, because it is
                      much more convenient administratively to
                      collect the duty (as in the case of most of the
                      Indian Excise Acts) when the commodity leaves
                      the factory for the first time, and also because
                      the duty is intended to be an indirect duty which
                      the manufacturer or producer is to pass on to
                      the ultimate consumer, which he could not do if
                      the commodity had, for example, been
                      destroyed in the factory itself. It is the fact of
                      manufacture which attracts the duty, even
                      though it may be collected later;….”

                   The observations show that while the nature of an
                   excise is indicated by the fact that it is imposed in
                   respect of the manufacture or production of an article,
                   the point at which it is collected is not determined by
                   the point of time when its manufacture is completed
                   but will rest on considerations of administrative
                   convenience, and that generally it is collected when
                   the article leaves the factory for the first time. In other
                   words, the circumstance that the article becomes the
                   object of assessment when it is sold by the
                   manufacturer does not detract from its true nature,
                   that it is a levy on the fact of manufacture.
In a
                   subsequent                   case,
Governor-General-in-
                   Council v. Province of Madras
[1945 FCR 179 : AIR
                   1945 FC 98] , the Privy Council referred to
                   both Central Provinces and Berar Sales of Motor Spirit
                   and Lubricants Taxation Act, 1938 [AIR 1939 FC 1, 6 :
                   1939
FCR 18] and Province of Madras v. Boddu
                   Paidanna and Sons
[1942 FCR 90, 101 : AIR 1942 FC
                   33] and affirmed that when excise was levied on a
                   manufacturer at the point of the first sale by him “that
                   may be because the taxation authority imposing a duty
                   of excise finds it convenient to impose that duty at the
                   moment when the excisable article leaves the factory
                   or workshop for the first time on the occasion of its
                   sale. But that method of collecting the tax is an
                   accident of administration; it is not of the essence of
                   the duty of excise, which is attracted by the
                   manufacture itself.
This Court had occasion to
                   consider a similar question in
R.C. Jall v. Union of
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                  Page 22 of 44
India
[AIR 1962 SC 1281 : 1962 Supp (3) SCR 436,
                   451] . In that case, the Central Government was
                   authorised by an Ordinance to levy and collect as a
                   cess on coal and coke despatched from collieries in
                   British India a duty of excise at a specified rate. Rule 3
                   made under the Ordinance empowered the
                   Government to impose a duty of excise on coal and
                   coke when such coal and coke was despatched by rail
                   from the collieries of the coke plants, and the duty was
                   to be collected by the Railway Administration by
                   means of a surcharge on freight either from the
                   consignor or consignee. It was contended by the
                   assessee that the excise duty could not legally be
                   levied on the consignee who had nothing to do with
                   the manufacture or production of coal. The Court
                   remarked:
“The argument confuses the incidence of
                      taxation with the machinery provided for the
                      collection thereof,”

                   and reference was made to In re the Central
                   Provinces and Berar Act 14 of 1938[AIR 1939 FC 1,
                   6 : 1939
FCR 18] , Province of Madras v. Boddu
                   Paidanna and Sons
[1942 FCR 90, 101 : AIR 1942 FC
                   33] and Governor-General in Council v. Province of
                   Madras [1945 FCR 179 : AIR 1945 FC 98] . This Court
                   then summarised the law as follows:
“… Excise duty is primarily a duty on the
                      production or manufacture of goods produced or
                      manufactured within the country. It is an indirect
                      duty which the manufacturer or producer passes
                      on to the ultimate consumer, that is, its ultimate
                      incidence will always be on the consumer.
                      Therefore, subject always to the legislative
                      competence of the taxing authority, the said tax
                      can be levied at a convenient stage so long as
                      the character of the impost, that is, it is a duty
                      on the manufacture or production, is not lost.
                      The method of collection does not affect the
                      essence of the duty, but only relates to the
                      machinery of collection for administrative
                      convenience.”

                   Other cases followed where the nature of excise duty
                   was reaffirmed in the terms set out earlier, and
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                 Page 23 of 44
reference may be made to In re Bill to Amend
                   Section 20 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 and
Section 3
of the Central Excises And Salt Act, 1944
                   [AIR 1963 SC 1760 : (1964) 3 SCR 787] ;
Union of
                   India v. Delhi Cloth & General Mills
[AIR 1963 SC
                   791 : 1963 Supp (1) SCR 586] ;
Guruswamy &
                   Co. v. State of Mysore
[AIR 1967 SC 1512 : (
1967) 1
                   SCR 548] and South Bihar Sugar Mills Ltd. v. Union of
                   India
[AIR 1968 SC 922 : (1968) 3 SCR 21] .
xxx           xxx          xxx
17. A contention was raised for some of the
                   assessees, that the measure was to be found by
                   reading
Section 3
with
Section 4
, thus drawing the
                   ingredients of
Section 3
into the exercise. We are
                   unable to agree. We are concerned with
Section 3(1)
,
                   and we find nothing there which clothes the provision
                   with a dual character, a charging provision as well as a
                   provision defining the measure of the charge.
xxx           xxx          xxx
35. We have examined the principles of an excise levy
                   and have considered the statutory construction of the
                   Act, before and after its amendment, in view of the
                   three propositions formulated, on behalf of the
                   assessees, as principles constituting the essential
                   characteristics of a duty of excise. It is apparent that
                   the first proposition, that excise is a tax on the
                   manufacture or production of goods, and not on
                   anything else, is indisputable and is supported by a
                   catena of cases beginning with The Central Provinces
                   and Berar Sales of Motor Spirit and Lubricants
                   Taxation Act, 1938 [AIR 1939 FC 1, 6 : 1939 FCR 18] .
As regards the second proposition. that uniformity of
                   incidence is a basic characteristic of excise, we are
                   inclined to think that the accuracy of the proposition
                   depends on the level at which the statute rests it. We
                   shall discuss that presently. As to the third proposition,
                   that the exclusion of post-manufacturing expenses
                   and post-manufacturing profit is necessarily involved
                   in the first principle does not inevitably follow. The
                   exclusion of post-manufacturing expenses and post-
                   manufacturing profits is a matter pertaining to the
                   ascertainment of the “value” of the excisable article,
                   and not to the nature of the excise duty, and as we
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                 Page 24 of 44
have explained, the standard adopted by the
                   Legislature for determining the “value” may possess a
                   broader base than that on which the charging
                   provision proceeds. The acceptance of the further
                   statement contained in the formulation of the third
                   proposition, that the exclusion of post-manufacturing
                   expenses and post-manufacturing profits helps to
                   achieve uniformity of incidence in the levy of excise
                   duty, depends on what is the point at which such
                   uniformity of incidence is contemplated. It is not
                   necessarily involved at the stage of sale of the article
                   by the manufacturer because we find, for example,
                   that under the amended Section 3(3) of the Central
                   Excises and Salt Act, different tariff values may be
                   fixed not only (a) for different classes or descriptions of
                   the same excisable goods, but also (b) for excisable
                   goods of the same class or description (i) produced or
                   manufactured by different classes of producers or
                   manufacturers, or (ii) sold to different classes of
                   buyers. That the “value” of excisable goods
                   determined under the new
Section 4(1)(a)
may also
                   vary according to certain circumstances is evident
                   from the three clauses of the proviso to that clause.
                   Clause (i) recognises that in the normal practice of
                   wholesale trade the same class of goods may be sold
                   by the assessee at different prices to different classes
                   of buyers; in that event, each such price shall, subject
                   to the other conditions of clause (a), be deemed to be
                   the normal price of such goods in relation to each
                   class of buyers. Clause (ii) provides that where the
                   goods are sold in wholesale at a price fixed under any
                   law or at a price being the maximum, fixed under any
                   such law, then the price or the maximum price, as the
                   case may be, so fixed, shall in relation to the goods be
                   deemed to be the normal price thereof. Under clause
(iii), where the goods are sold in the course of
                   wholesale trade by the assessee to or through a
                   related person, the normal price shall be the price at
                   which the goods are sold by the related person in the
                   course of wholesale trade at the time of removal to
                   dealers (not being related persons) or where such
                   goods are not sold to such dealers, to dealers (being
                   related persons) who sell such goods in retail. The
                   verity of the three principles propounded by learned
                   counsel for the assessees has been, as indeed it had
                   to be, examined in the context of the Act before and
                   after its amendment. For the case of the assessees is
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                  Page 25 of 44
that the amendment has made no material change in
                   the basic scheme of the levy and the provisions for
                   determining the value of the excisable article.”
15)    It was, thus, argued that the High Court had committed serious

       error in relying upon
Section 66
of the Act (which is a charging

       section) while interpreting
Section 67
of the Act, or for that matter,

       while examining the validity of Rule 5 of the Rules. The learned

       counsel also relied upon the dictionary meaning that is given to

       the word ‘gross amount’.           At the end, it was submitted that
Section 67
which uses the term ‘any amount’ would include

       quantum as well as the nature of the amount and, therefore, cost

       for providing services was rightly included in Rule 5, which was

       not ultra vires
Section 67
of the Act.
16)    Mr. J.K. Mittal, Advocate, appeared for M/s. Intercontinental

       Consultants and Technocrats Pvt. Ltd. He argued with emphasis

       that the impugned judgment of the High Court was perfectly in

       tune with legal position and did not call for any interference. At

       the outset, he pointed out that the Parliament has again amended
Section 67
of the Act by the
Finance Act, 2015
w.e.f. May 14,

       2015. By this amendment, explanation has been added which

       now lays down that consideration includes the reimbursement of

       expenditure or cost incurred by the service provider. Taking clue
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                           Page 26 of 44
therefrom, he developed the argument that for the first time, w.e.f.
May 14, 2015, reimbursement of expenditure or cost incurred by

       the service provider gets included under the expression

       ‘consideration’, which legal regime did not prevail prior to May 14,

       2015. Therefore, for the period in question, the ‘consideration’

       was having limited sphere, viz. It was only in respect of taxable

       services provided or to be provided. On that basis, submission

       was that for the period in question that is covered by these

       appeals, there could not be any service tax on reimbursed

       expenses as
Section 67
of the Act did not provide for such an

       inclusion.       Mr.     Mittal    also   referred   to   para     2.4     of

       Circular/Instructions F. No. B-43/5/97-TRU dated June 6, 1997

       wherein it is clarified that ‘...various other reimbursable expenses

       incurred are not to be included for computing the service tax”.
17)    Coming to the main arguments revolving around
Sections 66
and
67
, he submitted that the High Court was right in holding that as

       per
Section 66
which was a charging section, service tax is to be

       charged only on the ‘value of taxable services’. Likewise,
Section

       67
which deals with valuation of taxable service categorically

       mentions that it was only on the gross amount charged for

       providing ‘such’ a taxable service.             Therefore, any amount

       collected which is not for providing such taxable service could not
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                 Page 27 of 44
be brought within the tax net. Further, w.e.f. April 18, 2006, as

       per Explanation (c) to
Section 67
, “gross amount charged”

       includes payment by cheque, credit card, deduction from account

       and any form of payment by issue of credit notes or debit notes

       and book adjustment, and any amount credited or debited, as the

       case may be, to any account, whether called “Suspense account”

       or by any other name, in the books of accounts of a person liable

       to pay service tax, where the transaction of taxable service is with

       any associated enterprise.” Whereas prior to April 18, 2006, as

       per Explanation 3 to
Section 67
, - “For the removal of doubts, it is

       hereby declared that the gross amount charged for the taxable

       service shall include any amount received towards the taxable

       service before, during or after provision of such service.” Thus,

       levy on taxable services were not levied at once, but tax was

       levied at different point of time, tax was levied on difference

       person and also values in many taxable services was

       substantially exempted. He demonstrated it from the following

       table:
Sl. Taxable Services                       Sub-     Date    of Tax
        No.                                        clause   levy       Rate
                                                   of    65
(105)
1       Consulting                Engineer (g)      7-7-1997
                Service
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                            Page 28 of 44
2      Rent-a-Cab services by a        (o)        16-7-1997 *
               person engage in business
               of renting of cabs
        3      Transport of Passenger by       (zzzo)                  **
               Air by an aircraft operator
               (a) International                          1-5-2006
               (b) Domestic                               1-7-2010
        4      Renting      of    immovable    (zzzz)     1-7-2007
               property
        5      Restaurant services             (zzzzy)    1-5-2011     ***
        6      Accommodation        services   (zzzzw)    1-5-2011     ****
               by Hotel
        7      Telephone Services/             (b),       1-7-1994,
               Telecommunication               (zzzx)     1-6-2007
               services     by     Telegraph
               Authority

                   Notes :
* Service Tax was leviable only on 40% of value, 60%
                   value was exempted.
** Service Tax was leviable only on 40% of value, 60%
                   value was exempted, but prior to 01-04-2012, tax was
                   only on 10% of value of tickets.
*** Service Tax was leviable only on 30% of value,
                   70% value was exempted.
**** Service Tax was leviable only on 50% of value,
                   50% value was exempted.
18)    Following judgments were referred to and relied upon by Mr.

       Mittal for placating the aforesaid submissions:
(a)     In the first instance, reference was made to the Constitution

       Bench judgment in the case of
Mathuram Agrawal v. State of

       Madhya Pradesh6
wherein this Court held:
“12. ... The statute should clearly and unambiguously
6      (1999) 8 SCC 667
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                            Page 29 of 44
convey the three components of the tax law i.e. the
                   subject of the tax, the person who is liable to pay the
                   tax and the rate at which the tax is to be paid. If there
                   is any ambiguity regarding any of these ingredients in
                   a taxation statute then there is no tax in law. Then it is
                   for the legislature to do the needful in the matter.”
(b)     The learned counsel also relied upon the following

       observations in case of Govind Saran Ganga Saran v.
Commissioner of Sales Tax & Ors.7:
“6. The components which enter into the concept of a
                   tax are well known. The first is the character of the
                   imposition known by its nature which prescribes the
                   taxable event attracting the levy, the second is a clear
                   indication of the person on whom the levy is imposed
                   and who is obliged to pay the tax, the third is the rate
                   at which the tax is imposed, and the fourth is the
                   measure or value to which the rate will be applied for
                   computing the tax liability. If those components are not
                   clearly and definitely ascertainable, it is difficult to say
                   that the levy exists in point of law. Any uncertainty or
                   vagueness in the legislative scheme defining any of
                   those components of the levy will be fatal to its
                   validity.”
19)    The learned counsel reiterated that such an ambiguity in law is

       now cured by amendment to
Section 67
only w.e.f. May 14, 2015.
20)     We have duly considered the aforesaid submissions made by the

       learned counsel for the Department as well as the counsel for the

       assessees. As can be seen, these submissions are noted in

       respect of Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 where the assessee is

       providing ‘consulting engineering services’.             In other appeals,

7      (1985) Suppl. SCC 205
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                   Page 30 of 44
though the nature of services is somewhat different, it doesn’t

       alter the colour of legal issue, in any manner. In the course of

       providing those services, the assessees had incurred certain

       expenses which were reimbursed by the service recepient.
These expenses were not included for the purpose of valuation,

       while paying the service tax. Thus, the question for determination

       which is posed in Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014, answer to that

       would govern the outcome of the other appeals as well. Still, for

       the sake of completeness, we may give a brief resume of all

       these cases.
“A. “Consulting Engineering Services” – Assessee were providing

       consulting services to M/s. NHAI              for highway projects. They

       were paying Service Tax on remuneration only instead of the

       gross value charged from the client.
Sl. No.   Civil    Appeal     Facts                        Reimbursable claimed
                  details                                          as not includible
        1.        2013/2014           Period:   Oct’2002  –        Transportation, office
                  UOI           v.    March’ 2007 (prior to        rent, office supplies
                  Intercontinental    coming into effect of        and utilities, testing
                  Consultants         impugned Rule 5 on           charges,     document
                                      01.06.2007]                  printing      charges,
                                                                   travelling,    lodging,
                                      Demand:Rs.3,55,80,38/-       boarding etc. (post
                                                                   19.04.2006)
                                      Assessee filed W.P. No.
                                      6370/2008         directly   Transportation, office
                                      against Show Cause           rent, office supplies,
                                      Notice dated 17.03.2008      office furniture and
                                      resulting     in      the    equipment,     reports
                                      impugned        judgment     and         documents
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                      Page 31 of 44
dated 30.11.2012          printing charges etc.
                                                                [Pre      19.04.2006].
                                                                [page 62-64]

        2         6090/2017           Period: 2007-2008 [postTransportation, office
                  CST           v.    coming into effect of  rent, office supplies &
                  Intercontinental    impugned Rule 5 on     utilities,        testing
                  Consultants         01.06.2007]            charges,      document
                                                             printing       charges,
                                      Demand:            Rs. travelling,     lodging,
                                      1,50,62,017/-          boarding etc. [page
                                                             157]
                                      Show Cause Notice
                                      dated 24.10.2008 was
                                      issued on the basis of
                                      the earlier SCN dated
                                      17.03.2008    for  the
                                      subsequent period.

                                      O-I-O dated 02.03.2010
                                      covered   both   SCNs
                                      dated 17.03.2008 &
                                      24.10.2008.



       B. Share Transfer Agency Service:


        Sl.      Civil      Appeal Facts               Reimbursable
        No.      details                               claimed      as    not
                                                       includible
        1        6866/2014      Period:    01.04.2008- Reimbursement       of
                                31.03.2010             Expenses, out of
                 CST v. Through                        pocket      expenses,
                 its Secretary  Demand:Rs.13,83,479    Postage     expenses,
                                                       stationery charges

        2.       3360/2015       Period:    01.05.2006- Reimbursement     of
                                 31.03.2008             Expenses, out of
                 CST v. Pinnacle                        pocket     expenses,
Share Registry Demand: Rs. 13,83,479   Postage expenses
                 Pvt. Ltd.
C.     Custom House Agent covered by head “Clearing and

       Forwarding Agent” prior to 18.04.2006. Procedure of raising two
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                  Page 32 of 44
sets of invoices for reimbursement of various expenses and for

       service/agency charged separately started after introduction of

       Service Tax on CHA’s (wef 15.06.1997) in view of Circular dated

       06.09.1997.
Invoice issued for services/agency charges alone is used

       for payment of Service Tax.
Sl.    Civil       Appeal     Facts                     Reimbursable claimed
        No.    details                                          as not includible
        1.     295-299/2014           Period:     01.10.2003-   Customs Examination
               CST v. Asshita         31.03.2008 ([pre and      Chages,            Misc.
               International          post coming into effect   Expenses,        Sundry
                                      of the impugned Rule 5]   expenses,      strapping
                                                                and         re-strapping
                                      Demand: 4,66,607/-        charges,
                                                                documentation
                                      SCN dated 21.04.2009.     charges.
                                      O-I-A dated 30.11.2010
                                      [pages 238-259] set
                                      aside demand prior to
                                      18.04.2006 in view of
                                      circular         dated
                                      06.06.1997.

        2.     2021/2014     Period: Apr.08 to Aug’08           Customs Examination
               CST v. Sunder [post coming into effect           Charges,         Misc.
               Balan         of impugned rule 5 on              Expenses,      Sundry
                             01.06.2007]                        expenses,    strapping
                                                                and       re-strapping
                                      Demand:Rs.2,26,659/-      charges,
                                                                documentation
                                      SCN dated 24.07.2009.     charges.
3.     4340-4341/2014   Period: 01.04.2004 to Customs Examination
                                31.03.2008               Charges,         Misc.
CST    v.  Suraj                          Expenses,      Sundry
               Forwarders       Demand: Rs. 6,35,071/- expenses,      strapping
                                as confirmed in the O-I- and       re-strapping
                                O.                  The charges,
Commissioner(Appeals) documentation
                                set aside the demand charges.
on the reimbursable
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                    Page 33 of 44
expenses       received
                                      under the category
                                      “Clearing & Forwarding
                                      Agent” Service relation
                                      to           1.04.2004-
                                      17.04.2006          and
                                      confirmed the remaining
                                      demand.

        4.     8056/2015              Not Available

               CST    v.  Suraj
               Forwarders

        5.     T.P.(C)     No. A Transfer Petition for          CFS charges, steamer
               10431045/2017    transferring W.P. Nos.          agent          charges,
                                20832,      14521 and           delivery order charges,
               UOI     v.   Sri 20590 of 2016 pending           Airport/Customs
               Chidambaram & before Hon’ble High                charges [page 25-
               Ors.             Court at Madras.                26/para C]

                                      SCNs raised demands       Airline/steamer
                                      for Rs. 37.13 lacs and    charges, storage and
                                      Rs. 53.30 lacs which      handling      charges,
                                      were dropped by the O-    packing       charges,
                                      I-O.      However on      transport     charges,
                                      appeals the O-I-O was     fumigation    charges,
                                      set aside, hence W.P’s    insurance        survey
                                      were filed.               charges,         original
                                                                certificate     charges
                                                                [pages 62-62]

                                                                Charges     paid     to:
                                                                Steamer          agent,
                                                                Custom          Freight
                                                                Station,        Airport
                                                                Authority of India and
                                                                Transporters      [page
                                                                106-107]

        6.     7688/2014        Period: 01.10.2003 to Customs Examination
                                31.03.2008              Charges,         Misc.
               CST v. Shree                             Expenses,      Sundry
               Gayatri Clearing [pre and post coming expenses,       strapping
               Agency           into effect of impugned and       re-strapping
                                Rule 5 on 01.06.2007]   charges,
                                                        documentation
                                Demand: Rs. 9,65,652/- charges.

                                      SCN      issued      on
                                      21.04.2009. O-I-A dated
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                    Page 34 of 44
31.07.2013 set aside
                                      demand for the period
                                      18.04.2006-31.03.2008
                                      in view of circular dated
                                      06.06.1997.
        7.     7685/2014              Period:2004-05 & 2007- CMC                  charges,
                                      08                           CONCOR,         GSEC,
               Comm.        of                                     Transportation
               Customs       v.       The          Adjudicating charges, Air and sea
               Ramdas    Pragji       Authority held that no freight, Custom Duty,
               Forwarders Pvt.        Service      Tax      was Custom              Cess,
               Ltd.                   payable                 on fumigation       charges,
                                      reimbursable      amount bottom paper, wooden
prior to 18.04.2006. the etc. handling charges,
                                      Circular             dated labour         expenses,
                                      06.06.1997      lost     its sundry charges, airport
                                      validity              after charges,
                                      introduction of Rule 5. documentation
                                      Hence the ST was charges, photocopying
                                      recoverable thereafter.      charges etc. [page
                                                                   181-182]
8.     T.P.(C)   1932- Period: April             2006- Harbour/Airport
               1934/2017       March 2009                      Authority            of
                                                               India/CFS/CCTL and
               CST v.        Green                             delivery order charges,
               Channel       Cargo                             harbour dues, seal
               Care                                            verification,
                                                               warehouse/godown
                                                               charges.
D. Site Formation and clearance, excavation and earth moving

       and demolition services:           Assessees conduct drilling, blasting,

       excavation, loading, transport etc. of overburdened at open cast

       Mines.      Issue is whether value of Goods/material service
u/s.

       65(97a)
, is to be included in ‘Gross Amount’ u/s 67 of
Finance Act
for the purpose of S.T.


       The impugned orders follow the decisions in Bhayana Builder
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                     Page 35 of 44
Intercontinental.
Sl.No. Civil     Appeal Facts                           Reimbursable claimed
             details                                          as not includible
      1.     6864/2014        Period:     01.02.2005-         Value of Diesel and
             CCE & ST v. 31.03.2009                           explosives      supplied
             S.V. Engineering                                 free of cost by service
                              Demand:             Rs.         recipient.
                              74,14,396/- and Rs.
                              12,26,38,376/-



      2.        6865/2014        Period:     01.04.2009- Value of Diesel and
                CCE & ST v. 31.03.2010                   explosives     supplied
                S.V. Engineering                         free of cost by service
                                 Demand:             Rs. recipient.
                                 87,63,595/-




      3.        4356-4537/2016                                Value of diesel oil and
                                                              explosives     supplied
CCE&ST v. S.V.
free of cost by service
                Engineering                                   recipient.


      4.        5130/2016     Demand       of    Rs.          Value of explosives and
                              18,85,88,959/- relating         diesel oil supplied free
                CCE & ST v. to period 01.06.2008 to           of cost by service
                Sushree Infra 31.03.2012                      recipient.

                                     SCN dated 01.10.2012
                                     confirmed    by  O-I-O
                                     dated 04.05.2011
5.        4975/2016   Period: October 2008 to Value of explosives and
                            November 2008           diesel oil supplied free
                CCE & ST v.                         of cost by service
                Gulf Oil    Demand:             Rs. recipient.
50,54,746/-
6.        5453/2016   Period: Mar’08 to Mar’ Value of explosives and
                            2012                   diesel oil supplied free
                CCE & ST v.                        of cost
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                  Page 36 of 44
AMR India            Demand:
Rs.57,74,30,683/-
7.        10223-               Period: Apr’09 to Jan’10 Value of diesel oil
                10224/2017           & February 2010 to supplied free of cost
                                     September 2010
                CCE & ST v.
Mehrotra    Demand:Rs.21,48,835/-
                Buildcon    + Rs. 18,06,655/-

                5444/2017            Not available                Value of diesel oil
      8.                                                          supplied free of cost
                CCE & ST v.
                Mehrotra
                Buildcon




       E.

      Sl.      Civil    Appeal Facts                              Reimbursable claimed
      No.      details                                            as not includible
      1.       10626-          Period:Apr’04 to Mar’06            Hiring     of      venue,
               10627/2017                                         merchandise,       artists,
                               [prior to coming into              travel, courier, food and
                               effect of impugned Rule            beverages,
                               5 on 01.06.2007]                   administrative
                                                                  expenses, [page 76
                                     Demand:Rs.24,70,790/-        @78]

                                     SCN dated 22.10.2008

                                     Non-payment of Service
                                     Tax on the amount
                                     received               as
                                     reimbursement by way
                                     of    debit    notes    in
                                     addition    to    amount
                                     charged           through
                                     invoices for providing
                                     ‘Event      Management
                                     Service’,
Section 65(40)
and
Section 65(90)(zu)
[page 83]




21)    Undoubtedly, Rule 5 of the Rules, 2006 brings within its sweep
the expenses which are incurred while rendering the service and
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                       Page 37 of 44
are reimbursed, that is, for which the service receiver has made

       the payments to the assessees.             As per these Rules, these

       reimbursable expenses also form part of ‘gross amount charged’.

       Therefore, the core issue is as to whether
Section 67
of the Act

       permits the subordinate legislation to be enacted in the said

       manner, as done by Rule 5. As noted above, prior to April 19,

       2006, i.e., in the absence of any such Rule, the valuation was to

       be done as per the provisions of
Section 67
of the Act.
22)
Section 66
of the Act is the charging Section which reads as

       under:
“there shall be levy of tax (hereinafter referred to
                      as the service tax) @ 12% of the value of taxable
                      services referred to in sub-clauses .....of
Section
                      65
and collected in such manner as may be
                      prescribed.”
23)    Obviously, this Section refers to service tax, i.e., in respect of

       those services which are taxable and specifically referred to in

       various sub-clauses of
Section 65
. Further, it also specifically

       mentions that the service tax will be @ 12% of the ‘value of

       taxable services’. Thus, service tax is reference to the value of

       service. As a necessary corollary, it is the value of the services

       which are actually rendered, the value whereof is to be

       ascertained for the purpose of calculating the service tax payable
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                Page 38 of 44
thereupon.
24)    In this hue, the expression ‘such’ occurring in
Section 67
of the

       Act assumes importance. In other words, valuation of taxable

       services for charging service tax, the authorities are to find what

       is the gross amount charged for providing ‘such’ taxable services.

       As a fortiori, any other amount which is calculated not for

       providing such taxable service cannot a part of that valuation as

       that amount is not calculated for providing such ‘taxable service’.

       That according to us is the plain meaning which is to be attached

       to
Section 67
(unamended, i.e., prior to May 01, 2006) or after its

       amendment, with effect from, May 01, 2006.               Once this

       interpretation is to be given to
Section 67
, it hardly needs to be

       emphasised that Rule 5 of the Rules went much beyond the

       mandate of
Section 67
. We, therefore, find that High Court was

       right in interpreting
Sections 66
and
67
to say that in the valuation

       of taxable service, the value of taxable service shall be the gross

       amount charged by the service provider ‘for such service’ and the

       valuation of tax service cannot be anything more or less than the

       consideration paid as quid pro qua for rendering such a service.
25)    This position did not change even in the amended
Section 67
which was inserted on May 01, 2006. Sub-section (4) of Section
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                          Page 39 of 44
67 empowers the rule making authority to lay down the manner in

       which value of taxable service is to be determined. However,
Section 67(4)
is expressly made subject to the provisions of sub-

       section (1). Mandate of sub-section (1) of
Section 67
is manifest,

       as noted above, viz., the service tax is to be paid only on the

       services actually provided by the service provider.
26)    It is trite that rules cannot go beyond the statute.              In Babaji

       Kondaji Garad,             this rule was enunciated in the following

       manner:
“Now if there is any conflict between a statute and
                      the subordinate legislation, it does not require
                      elaborate reasoning to firmly state that the statute
                      prevails over subordinate legislation and the bye-
                      law, if not in conformity with the statute in order to
                      give effect to the statutory provision the Rule or
                      bye-law has to be ignored.             The statutory
                      provision ahs precedence and must be complied
                      with.”
27)    The aforesaid principle is reiterated in Chenniappa Mudaliar

       holding that a rule which comes in conflict with the main

       enactment has to give way to the provisions of the Act.
28)    It is also well established principle that Rules are framed for

       achieving the purpose behind the provisions of the Act, as held in

       Taj Mahal Hotel:
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                 Page 40 of 44
‘the Rules were meant only for the purpose of
                      carrying out the provisions of the Act and they
                      could not take away what was conferred by
                      the Act or whittle down its effect.”
29)    In the present case, the aforesaid view gets strengthened from

       the manner in which the Legislature itself acted. Realising that
Section 67
, dealing with valuation of taxable services, does not

       include reimbursable expenses for providing such service, the

       Legislature amended by
Finance Act, 2015
with effect from May

       14, 2015, whereby Clause (a) which deals with ‘consideration’ is

       suitably amended to include reimbursable expenditure or cost

       incurred by the service provider and charged, in the course of

       providing or agreeing to provide a taxable service. Thus, only with

       effect from May 14, 2015, by virtue of provisions of
Section 67
itself, such reimbursable expenditure or cost would also form part

       of valuation of taxable services for charging service tax. Though,

       it was not argued by the learned counsel for the Department that
Section 67
is a declaratory provision, nor could it be argued so,

       as we find that this is a substantive change brought about with

       the amendment to
Section 67
and, therefore, has to be

       prospective in nature.             On this aspect of the matter, we may

       usefully refer to the Constitution Bench judgment in the case of
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                             Page 41 of 44
Commissioner of Income Tax (Central)-I, New Delhi v. Vatika

       Township Private Limited8
wherein it was observed as under:
“27. A legislation, be it a statutory Act or a statutory rule or a
            statutory notification, may physically consists of words
            printed on papers. However, conceptually it is a great deal
            more than an ordinary prose. There is a special peculiarity in
            the mode of verbal communication by a legislation. A
            legislation is not just a series of statements, such as one
            finds in a work of fiction/non-fiction or even in a judgment of a
            court of law. There is a technique required to draft a
            legislation as well as to understand a legislation. Former
            technique is known as legislative drafting and latter one is to
            be found in the various principles of “interpretation of
            statutes”. Vis-à-vis ordinary prose, a legislation differs in its
            provenance, layout and features as also in the implication as
            to its meaning that arise by presumptions as to the intent of
            the maker thereof.
28. Of the various rules guiding how a legislation has to be
            interpreted, one established rule is that unless a contrary
            intention appears, a legislation is presumed not to be
            intended to have a retrospective operation. The idea behind
            the rule is that a current law should govern current activities.
Law passed today cannot apply to the events of the past. If
            we do something today, we do it keeping in view the law of
            today and in force and not tomorrow's backward adjustment
            of it. Our belief in the nature of the law is founded on the
            bedrock that every human being is entitled to arrange his
            affairs by relying on the existing law and should not find that
            his plans have been retrospectively upset. This principle of
            law is known as lex prospicit non respicit: law looks forward
            not backward. As was observed in Phillips v. Eyre [(1870) LR
            6 QB 1] , a retrospective legislation is contrary to the general
            principle that legislation by which the conduct of mankind is
            to be regulated when introduced for the first time to deal with
            future acts ought not to change the character of past
            transactions carried on upon the faith of the then existing law.
29. The obvious basis of the principle against retrospectivity
            is the principle of “fairness”, which must be the basis of every
            legal rule as was observed in L'Office Cherifien des
            Phosphates v. Yamashita-Shinnihon Steamship Co. Ltd.
            Thus, legislations which modified accrued rights or which
8   (2015) 1 SCC 1
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                Page 42 of 44
impose obligations or impose new duties or attach a new
            disability have to be treated as prospective unless the
            legislative intent is clearly to give the enactment a
            retrospective effect; unless the legislation is for purpose of
            supplying an obvious omission in a former legislation or to
            explain a former legislation. We need not note the
            cornucopia of case law available on the subject because
            aforesaid legal position clearly emerges from the various
            decisions and this legal position was conceded by the
            counsel for the parties. In any case, we shall refer to few
            judgments containing this dicta, a little later.”
30)    As a result, we do not find any merit in any of those appeals

       which are accordingly dismissed.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6865 OF 2014, CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6864 OF
2014, CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4975 OF 2016, CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5130
OF 2016 AND CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4536-4537 OF 2016
31)    In the aforesaid appeals, the issue is as to whether the value of

       free supplies of diesel and explosives in respect of the service of

       ‘Site Formation and Clearance Service’ can be included for the

       purpose of assessment to service tax under
Section 67
of the Act.

       These assessees had not availed the benefit of aforesaid

       Notifications Nos. 15/2004 and 4/2005. Therefore, the issue has

       to be adjudged simply by referring to
Section 67
of the Act. We

       have already held above that the value of such material which is

       supplied free by the service recipient cannot be treated as ‘gross

       amount charged’ and that is not the ‘consideration’ for rendering

       the services.        Therefore, value of free supplies of diesel and
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                             Page 43 of 44
explosives would not warrant inclusion while arriving at the gross

       amount charged on its service tax is to be paid. Therefore, all

       these appeals are also dismissed.
TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NOS. 1043-1045 OF 2017
TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NOS. 1932-1934 OF 2017
32)    These transfer petitions are allowed and the writ petitions

       mentioned in the prayer clause, which are pending before the

       High Court of Madras, are transferred to this Court.
33)    The transferred writs are also disposed of in terms of the

       judgment rendered above in Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 and

       other connected matters.
.............................................J.
                                                                       (A.K. SIKRI)


                                           .............................................J.
                                                         (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
MARCH 07, 2018.
Civil Appeal No. 2013 of 2014 with Ors.                                  Page 44 of 44