[Cites
4
, Cited by
70
]
Supreme Court of India
Syed Maqbool Ali vs State Of U.P. & Anr on 4 April, 2011
Equivalent citations: AIR 2011 SUPREME COURT 2542, 2011 (15) SCC 383, 2011 AIR SCW 3195, 2011 (4) ALL LJ 455, AIR 2011 SC (CIVIL) 1707, (2011) 2 GUJ LH 755, (2011) 3 ALLMR 905 (SC), (2011) 3 CAL LJ 16, (2011) 4 SCALE 766, (2011) 2 LANDLR 308, 2011 (2) KLT SN 127 (SC), 2011 (3) KCCR SN 209 (SC)
Author:
R. V. Raveendran
Bench:
R.V. Raveendran
,
A.K. Patnaik
SYED MAQBOOL ALI

                                                v.

                    STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.

                    (Civil Appeal Nos. 2913-2914 of 2011)

                                     APRIL 04, 2011

                    [R.V. Raveendran and A.K. Patnaik, JJ.]

                                      [2011] 4 SCR 238



    The Order of the Court was delivered by


                                          O R D E R
R. V. RAVEENDRAN J. 1. Leave granted.
2.   Certain   lands   in   village   Sarai   Badli   and   Ibrahimpur,   Danda,   Pargana 

Kora, District Fatehpur, UP, were acquired for construction of a six Kilometre 

road from Jahanabad to Garhi Jafraganj in the year 1982 and compensation 

was paid to the land owners in the year 1983.
3. In the year 1996, the appellant submitted a complaint to the Lokayukta 

alleging that  his plots (bearing No.87/5,  88,  90,  and  232  in Sarai Badli  and 

plot   No.580/5   and   602/1   in   Ibrahimpur   Danda)   were   included   in   the   said 

acquisition; that in 1995 when he got his other lands measured, he found that 

his plots bearing Nos.27, 57, 58, 450, 451 and 452 (new numbers 103, 90, 

93/1, 232/2, 231/2 and 229/5) measuring 0.7068 Hectare had been illegally 

and   unauthorisedly   used   for   constructing   the   road.   On   enquiry   by   the   Lok 

Ayukta,   the   Addl.   District   Magistrate   (Land   Acquisition)   informed   that   there 

was   a   possibility   of   the   acquired   lands   being   left   out   and   the   road   being 

constructed   in   the   adjoining   lands   which   were   not   acquired.   On   the   other 

hand, the concerned Executive Engineer, PWD, informed the Lok Ayukta that 

the Khasra numbers in respect of which the appellant alleged encroachment 

and claimed compensation had never stood in his name and that even for the 

lands acquired in 1982, the compensation was paid to Mohammed Hussain 

alias   Bhola   and   others   and   not   to   the   appellant.   The   said   complaint   was 


however closed on 7.9.1999 as time barred, in view of the delay of 12 years 

in seeking relief. Thereafter, the appellant approached the High Court in the 

year   2000   seeking   a   direction   to   the   respondents   to   pay   compensation   in 

regard to the extra land used and occupied by respondents by diverting the 

road from its original alignment. The said writ petition was dismissed by order 

dated 9.7.2007 on the ground that petitioner can have recourse to
section 18
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (`Act' for short), if he wanted enhancement 

of compensation. The review petition filed by the appellant was dismissed on 

22.2.2008. The said orders are challenged in these appeals by special leave.
4.  The  respondents  deny  any encroachment  or unauthorized   use.  They 

point out on account of the inordinate delay in approaching the High Court, 

and the disputes/questions  relating to  identity  of  land,  boundaries, title  etc., 

the writ petition was not maintainable and liable to be dismissed.
5.   The   limited   question   that   arises   for   our   consideration   is   whether   the 

High Court could have dismissed a writ petition seeking a direction to acquire 

the land and pay compensation (on the ground that his land has been taken 

over without acquisition) by holding that the remedy lies under
Section 18
of 

the Act. An application seeking reference to court under
Section 18
of the Act 

would lie only where the land-holder is aggrieved by the award made by the 

Land Acquisition Collector in regard to land acquired under the provisions of 

the   Act,   either   with   reference   to   quantum   of   compensation,   or   the 

measurements   of   the   land,   or   the   persons   shown   as   being   entitled   to 

compensation. An application under
section 18
of the Act cannot be filed in 

regard to a land which was not acquired at all. The remedy of a land holder 

whose land is taken without acquisition is either to file a civil suit for recovery 

of possession and/or for compensation, or approach the High Court by filing a 

writ   petition   if   the   action   can   be   shown   to   be   arbitrary,   irrational, 

unreasonable,   biased,   malafide   or   without   the   authority   of   law,   and   seek   a 

direction   that   the   land   should   be   acquired   in   a   manner   known   to   law.   The 

appellant has chosen to follow the second course. The High Court was not 


therefore,   justified   in   dismissing   the   writ   petition   on   the   ground   that   the 

remedy was under
section 18
of the Act. The order of the High Court, which is 

virtually   a   non-speaking   order,   apparently   proceeded   on   the   basis   that 

appellant   was   seeking   increase   in   compensation   for   an   acquired   land.   The 

matter therefore requires to be reconsidered by the High Court, on merits.
6. But that does not mean that the delay should be ignored or appellant 

should   be   given   relief.   In   such   matters,   the   person   aggrieved   should 

approach the High Court diligently. If the writ petition is belated, unless there 

is good and satisfactory explanation for the delay, the petition will be rejected 

on the ground of delay and laches. Further the High Court should be satisfied 

that   the   case   warrants   the   exercise   of   the   extra-ordinary   jurisdiction   under
Article 226
of the Constitution of the India, and that the matter is one where 

the alternative remedy of suit is not appropriate. For example, if the person 

aggrieved and the State are owners of adjoining lands and he claims that the 

State has encroached over a part of his land, or if there is a simple boundary 

dispute, the remedy will lie only in a civil suit, as the dispute does not relate to 

any highhanded, arbitrary or unreasonable action of the officers of the State 

and there is a need to examine disputed questions relating to title, extent and 

actual possession.
But where the person aggrieved establishes that the State 

had   highhandedly   taken   over   his   land   without   recourse   to   acquisition   or 

deprived him of his property without authority of law, the landholder may seek 

his   remedy   in   a   writ   petition.   When   a   writ   petitioner   makes   out   a   case   for 

invoking the extra ordinary jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution, 

the   High   Court   would   not   relegate   him   to   the   alternative   remedy   of   a   civil 

court,   merely   because   the   matter   may   involve   an   incidental   examination   of 

disputed  questions  of  facts.   The  question   that  will  ultimately   weigh with  the 

High Court is this : Whether the person is seeking remedy in a matter which is 

primarily a civil dispute to be decided by a civil court, or whether the matter 

relates   to   a   dispute   having   a   public   law   element   or   violation   of   any 

fundamental   right   or   to   any   arbitrary   and   high-handed   action.   (See   the 


decisions   of   this   court   in
ABL   International   Ltd.   v.   Export   Credit   Guarantee  

Corporation   of   India   Ltd
-
2004(3)   SCC   553   and  Kisan   Sahkari   Chini   Mills  

Ltd. v. Vardan Linkers
- 2008(12) SCC 500].
7. High Courts should also be cautious in entertaining writ petitions filed 

decades   after   the   dispossession,   seeking   directions   for   acquisition   and 

payment   of   compensation.   It   is   not   uncommon   for   villagers   to   offer/donate 

some part of their lands voluntarily for a public purpose which would benefit 

them or the community - as for example, construction of an access road to 

the   village   or   their   property,   or   construction   of   a   village   tank   or   a   bund   to 

prevent flooding/erosion. When they offer their land for such public purpose, 

the land would be of little or negligible value. But decades later, when land 

values   increase,   either   on   account   of   passage   of   time   or   on   account   of 

developments   or   improvements   carried   out   by   the   State,   the   land   holders 

come   up   with   belated   claims   alleging   that   their   lands   were   taken   without 

acquisition   and   without   their   consent.   When   such   claims   are   made   after 

several decades, the State would be at a disadvantage to contest the claim, 

as it may not have the records to show in what circumstances the lands were 

given/donated and whether the land was given voluntarily. Therefore, belated 

writ   petitions,   without   proper   explanation   for   the   delay,   are   liable   to   be 

dismissed. Be that as it may.
8. The High Court has not examined any of the relevant questions. The 

High Court has dismissed the writ petition, after a pendency for seven years, 

by   a   short   order   on   a   baseless   assumption   about   the   existence   of   a   non-

existent alternative remedy.
9.   We   therefore   allow   these   appeals,   set   aside   the   orders   of   the   High 

Court   and   remit   the   matter   to   the   High   Court   for   fresh   consideration   and 

disposal   of   the   writ   petition   in   accordance   with   law.   Nothing   stated   above 

shall be construed as expression of any opinion on the merits of the matter. It 

is open to the State to contest the matter on all ground available to it.