[Cites
28
, Cited by
92
]
Supreme Court of India
Prahlad Singh & Ors vs Union Of India & Ors on 29 April, 2011
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2011 SC 424
Bench:
G. S. Singhvi
,
Asok Kumar Ganguly
PRAHLAD SINGH & ORS.

                                                 v.

                               UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

                          (Civil Appeal No. 3779 of 2011)

                                      APRIL 29, 2011

                 [G. S. Singhvi and Asok Kumar Ganguly, JJ.]

                                       [2011] 5 SCR 1002





    The following order of the Court was delivered


                                              O R D E R
Delay condoned.
Leave granted.
Whether   the   acquired   land   can   be   treated   to   have   vested   in   the   State 

Government   under
Section   16
of   the   Land   Acquisition   Act,   1894   (for   short, 

"the Act") on the making of an award by the Collector though the actual and 

physical   possession   continues   with   the   landowner   is   the   question   which 

arises for consideration in this appeal filed against the order of the Division 

Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court whereby the writ petition filed 

by the appellants questioning the acquisition of their land was dismissed.


    In   exercise   of   the   power   vested   in   it   under
Section   4(1)
of   the   Act,   the 

Government   of   Haryana   issued   notification   dated   17.4.2002   for   the 

acquisition of the appellants' land along with other parcels of land of village 

Baloure, Tehsil Bahadurgarh, District Jhajjar for development and utilization 

thereof for residential, commercial and institutional parts of different sectors of 

Bahadurgarh.
The predecessors of the appellant and other landowners filed objections 

under Section 5-A(1) and prayed that their land may not be acquired because 

they had developed  the  same for  agricultural  activities  like dairy,  gardening 

etc. by investing huge money. They claimed that the acquisition proceedings 


were   initiated   without   application   of   mind   and   there   was   no   justification   to 

acquire fertile and irrigated land. They also pointed out that land acquired for 

the  same  purpose   in 1965  was  still   lying  vacant  and  undeveloped.   Another 

objection   taken   by  the  predecessors   of   the   appellant   and  other   landowners 

was that the area proposed to be acquired falls in the National Capital Region 

under the
National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985
(for short, "the 

1985 Act") and in the Regional Plan prepared by the National Capital Region 

Planning Board (for short, "the Board"), land in question has been shown as 

part of Green Belt/Green Wedge and, as such, the same cannot be acquired 

for residential, commercial and institutional purposes. In support of this plea, 

the landowners relied upon an order passed by this Court in C.A. Nos.4384 

and 4385 of 1994.
Although, it is not clear from the record as to how the Collector dealt with 

the objections and submitted recommendations to the State Government, this 

much   is   evident   that   the   State   Government   issued   declaration   dated 

10.4.2003   under
Section   6
of   the   Act   reiterating   its   resolve   to   acquire   the 

entire   area   notified   under
Section   4(1)
on   17.4.2002.   Thereafter,   the   Land 

Acquisition Collector passed award dated 25.6.2004.
Immediately after pronouncement of the award, the predecessors of the 

appellant   and   other   landowners   filed   69   writ   petitions   questioning   the 

acquisition   proceedings   on   various   grounds   including   non-consideration   of 

their objections, non-application of mind by the Collector and the concerned 

authorities   of   the   State   Government   and   violation   of   the   provisions   of   the 

1985 Act and Regional Plan 2001 prepared by the Board. They pleaded that 

being   a   participating   State,   the   State   of   Haryana   is   bound   to   act   in 

consonance with the provisions of the 1985 Act and it cannot acquire land in 

violation of Regional Plan 2001. They relied upon the judgment of this Court 

in
Ghaziabad Development Authority v. Delhi Auto & General Finance (Pvt.) 

Ltd.
(1994) 4 SCC 42 and pleaded that the land which has been identified in 

Regional   Plan   2001   as   Green   Belt/Green   Wedge   cannot   be   used   for   the 


purpose of urbanization.  They also claimed that possession of the acquired 

land was still with them and they were cultivating the same.


    The  Division  Bench  of  the  High  Court  did  not  deal  with  the  grounds  on 

which the appellants questioned the acquisition of their land including the one 

that the impugned acquisition was contrary to the provisions of the 1985 Act 

and   Regional   Plan   2001   and   dismissed   the   writ   petitions   by   observing   that 

once the land has vested in the State Government, the writ petitioners do not 

have the locus to challenge the acquisition proceedings.
The Division Bench 

relied upon the judgments of this Court in
Municipal Corporation of Greater  

Bombay v. Industrial Development and Investment Company (P) Ltd.
(
1996) 

11   SCC   501,  C.   Padma   v.   Deputy   Secretary   to   the   Government   of   Tamil  

Nadu
(
1997) 2 SCC 627, Municipal Council, Ahmednagar v. Shah Hyder Beig
(
2000) 2 SCC 48,  Star Wire (India) Ltd. v. State of Haryana
(1996) 11 SCC 

698, Swaika Properties (P) Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan (
2008) 4 SCC 695 and 

Sawaran Lata v. State of Harayana
(2010) 4 SCC 532 and held as under:
"It   is,   thus,   well   settled   that   no   writ   petition   would   be   competent   after 

    passing of award because possession of land is taken and it is deemed to 

    vest in the State Government free from all encumbrances. The petitioners 

    would of course be entitled to compensation at the market value prevalent 

    at   the   time   of   issuance   of   notification   under
Section   4
of   the   Act   in 

    accordance with the award subject to further remedies of reference etc. 

    The petitioners would also be entitled to compensation for the user of the 

    land from the date of possession to the date of notification issued under
Section 4
. Thus, no ground is made out to accept the contention raised by 

    the petitioners and to quash the acquisition proceedings subject matter of 

    these petitions."
Mrs. Rani Chhabra, learned counsel appearing for the appellants argued 

that   the   impugned   order   is   liable   to   be   set   aside   because   the   premise   on 

which   the   High   Court   dismissed   the   writ   petition,   namely,   vesting   of   the 


acquired   land   in   the   State   Government   is   ex   facie   erroneous.   Learned 

counsel   submitted   that   at   no   point   of   time   possession   of   the   acquired   land 

was taken by the State authorities and, therefore, the same cannot be treated 

to have vested in the State Government. Mrs. Chhabra invited our attention to 

the   assertion   contained   at   page   'Y'   of   the   List   of   Dates   and   documents 

marked Annexures-P5 and P6 to show that physical possession of the land is 

still   with   the   appellants.   Learned   counsel   emphasised   that   the   appellants 

have been in continuous possession of the land and carrying on agricultural 

operations and submitted that the High Court gravely erred by declaring that 

the   acquired   land   will   be   deemed   to   have   vested   in   the   State   Government 

under
Section   16
of   the   Act.   Mrs.   Chhabra   submitted   that   the   High   Court 

should have examined the important issues raised by the appellants including 

the   violation   of   the   provisions   of   the   1985   Act   and   Regional   Plan   2001 

prepared   by   the   Board   in   which   the   acquired   land   is   shown   as   part   of   the 

Green Belt/Green Wedge and decided the writ petition on merits keeping in 

view  the  fact  that  the  same remained  pending  for 10  years  and during  that 

period the landowners had been undertaking agricultural operations.


    Learned counsel appearing for the State could not draw our attention to 

any material to show that actual and physical possession of the acquired land 

had been taken by the State authorities. He, however, argued that by virtue of
Section 16
of the Act the acquired land will be deemed to have vested in the 

State Government because the Land Acquisition Collector has passed award 

on 25.6.2004.
We   have   given   our   serious   thought   to   the   entire   matter   and   carefully 

examined   the   records.
Section   16
lays   down   that   once   the   Collector   has 

made   an   award   under
Section   11
,   he   can   take   possession   of   the   acquired 

land. Simultaneously, the section declares that upon taking possession by the 

Collector, the acquired land shall vest absolutely in the Government free from 

all  encumbrances.  In  terms   of  the  plain  language  of  this  section,   vesting  of 

the acquired land in the Government  takes place as soon as possession is 


taken   by   the   Collector   after   passing   an   award   under
Section   11
.   To   put   it 

differently, the vesting of land under
Section 16
of the Act presupposes actual 

taking   of   possession   and   till   that   is   done,   legal   presumption   of   vesting 

enshrined in
Section 16
cannot be raised in favour of the acquiring authority.
Since   the   Act   does   not   prescribes   the   mode   and   manner   of   taking 

possession   of   the   acquired   land   by   the   Collector,   it   will  be   useful   to   notice 

some of the judgments in which this issue has been considered.
In
Balwant  

Narayan   Bhagde   v.   M.D.   Bhagwat
(1976)   1   SCC   700,   Bhagwati   J.,   (as   he 

then was), speaking for himself and Gupta J. disagreed with Untwalia J., who 

delivered separate judgment and observed:
".........We think it is enough to state that when the Government proceeds 

     to take possession of the land acquired by it under the
Land Acquisition 

     Act, 1894
, it must take actual possession of the land, since all interests in 

     the   land   are   sought   to   be   acquired   by   it.  There   can   be   no   question   of  

     taking   "symbolical"   possession   in   the   sense   understood   by   judicial  

     decisions   under
the   Code   of   Civil   Procedure
.   Nor   would   possession  

     merely on paper be enough.
What the Act
contemplates as a necessary  

     condition of vesting of the land in the Government is the taking of actual  

     possession   of   the   land.  How   such   possession   may   be   taken   would 

     depend   on   the   nature   of   the   land.   Such   possession   would   have   to   be 

     taken as the nature of the land admits of. There can be no hard and fast 

     rule   laying   down   what   act   would   be   sufficient   to   constitute   taking   of 

     possession of land. We should not, therefore, be taken as laying down an 

     absolute and inviolable rule that merely going on the spot and making a 

     declaration by beat of drum or otherwise would be sufficient to constitute 

     taking of possession of land in every case. But here, in our opinion, since  

     the land was lying fallow and there was no crop on it at the material time,  

     the act of the Tehsildar in going on the spot and inspecting the land for  

     the purpose of determining what part was waste and arable and should,  

     therefore,   be   taken   possession   of   and   determining   its   extent,   was  


     sufficient to constitute taking of possession. It appears that the appellant  

     was not present when this was done by the Tehsildar, but the presence  

     of the owner or the occupant of the land is not necessary to effectuate the  

     taking of possession.  It is also not strictly necessary as a matter of legal 

     requirement that notice should be given to the owner or the occupant of 

     the   land   that   possession   would   be   taken   at   a   particular   time,   though   it 

     may be desirable where possible, to give such notice before possession 

     is taken by the authorities, as that would eliminate the possibility of any 

     fraudulent   or   collusive   transaction   of   taking   of   mere   paper   possession, 

     without the occupant or the owner ever coming to know of it."
(emphasis supplied) 


     In
Balmokand Khatri Educational and Industrial Trust v. State of Punjab
(1996)   4   SCC   212,   the   Court   negatived   the   argument   that   even   after 

finalization   of   the   acquisition   proceedings   possession   of   the   land   continued 

with the appellant and observed:
"It   is   seen   that   the   entire   gamut   of   the   acquisition   proceedings   stood 

     completed by 17-4-1976 by which date possession of the land had been 

     taken.   No   doubt,   Shri   Parekh   has   contended   that   the   appellant   still 

     retained   their   possession.   It   is   now   well-settled   legal   position   that   it   is 

     difficult   to   take   physical   possession   of   the   land   under   compulsory 

     acquisition.   The   normal   mode   of   taking   possession   is   drafting   the 

     panchnama in the presence of panchas and taking possession and giving 

     delivery to the beneficiaries is the accepted mode of taking possession of 

     the   land.   Subsequent   thereto,   the   retention   of   possession   would 

     tantamount only to illegal or unlawful possession".
In
P.K.   Kalburqi   v.   State   of   Karnataka
(2005)   12   SCC   489,   the   Court 

referred   to   the   observations   made   by   Bhagwati,   J.   in
Balwant   Narayan  

Bhagde v. M.D. Bhagwat
(supra) that no hard and fast rule can be laid down 

as   to   what   act   would   be   sufficient   to   constitute   taking   of   possession   of   the 


acquired   land   and   observed   that   when  there   is   no   crop   or   structure   on   the 

land only symbolic possession could be taken.
In
NTPC   v.   Mahesh   Dutta
(2009)   8   SCC   339,   the   Court   noted   that 

appellant   NTPC   paid   80   per   cent   of   the   total   compensation   in   terms   of
Section   17(3A)
and   observed   that   it   is   difficult   to   comprehend   that   after 

depositing that much of amount it had obtained possession only on a small 

fraction of land.
In
Sita Ram Bhandar Society v. Govt. of NCT, Delhi
(2009) 10 SCC 501 

and  Omprakash   Verma   v.   State   of   Andhra   Pradesh  (2010)   13   SCC   158,   it 

was held that when possession is to be taken of a large tract of land then it is 

permissible   to   take   possession   by  a   properly  executed   panchnama.
Similar 

view was expressed in the recent judgment in
Brij Pal Bhargava v. State of  

UP
2011(2) SCALE 692.
The   same   issue   was   recently   considered   in
C.A.   No.   3604   of   2011   - 

Banda   Development   Authority,   Banda   v.   Moti   Lal   Agarwal
decided   on 

26.4.2011.
After   making   reference   to   the   judgments   in
Balwant   Narayan  

Bhagde   v.   M.D.   Bhagwat
(
supra),  Balmokand   Khatri   Educational   and  

Industrial Trust v. State of Punjab
(
supra), P.K. Kalburqi v. State of Karnataka
(
supra), NTPC v. Mahesh Dutta
(
supra),  Sita Ram Bhandar Society v. Govt.  

of NCT
,
Delhi
(supra),
Omprakash Verma v. State of Andhra Pradesh
(supra) 

and Nahar Singh v. State of U.P. (1996) 1 SCC 434, this Court laid down the 

following principles:
"(i) No hard and fast rule can be laid down as to what act would constitute 

    taking of possession of the acquired land.
(ii) If the acquired land is vacant, the act of the concerned State authority 

    to go to the spot and prepare a panchnama will ordinarily be treated as 

    sufficient to constitute taking of possession.
(iii)   If   crop   is   standing   on   the   acquired   land   or   building/structure   exists, 

    mere going on the spot by the concerned authority will, by itself, be not 


    sufficient for taking possession. Ordinarily, in such cases, the concerned 

    authority will have to give notice to the occupier of the building/structure 

    or   the   person   who   has   cultivated   the   land   and   take   possession   in   the 

    presence   of   independent   witnesses   and   get   their   signatures   on   the 

    panchnama.   Of   course,   refusal   of   the   owner   of   the   land   or 

    building/structure may not lead to an inference that the possession of the 

    acquired land has not been taken.
(iv) If the acquisition is of a large tract of land, it may not be possible for 

    the   acquiring/designated   authority   to   take   physical   possession   of   each 

    and   every   parcel   of   the   land   and   it   will   be   sufficient   that   symbolic 

    possession is taken by preparing appropriate document in the presence 

    of independent witnesses and getting their signatures on such document.
(v)   If   beneficiary   of   the   acquisition   is   an   agency/instrumentality   of   the 

    State and 80% of the total compensation is deposited in terms of
Section 

    17(3A)
and  substantial  portion  of  the  acquired  land has been  utilised in 

    furtherance   of   the   particular   public   purpose,   then   the   Court   may 

    reasonably   presume   that   possession   of   the   acquired   land   has   been 

    taken."
If the present case is examined in the light of the facts which have been 

brought   on   record   and   the   principles   laid   down   in   the   judgment   in
Banda 

Development   Authority
's   case,   it   is   not   possible   to   sustain   the   finding   and 

conclusion recorded by the High Court that the acquired land had vested in 

the   State   Government   because   the   actual   and   physical   possession   of   the 

acquired land always remained with the appellants and no evidence has been 

produced   by   the   respondents   to   show   that   possession   was   taken   by 

preparing a panchnama in the presence of independent witnesses and their 

signatures were obtained on the panchnama.
A reading of the Khasra Girdawari and Jamabandis, copies of which have 

been   placed   on   record,   shows   that   actual   and   physical   possession   of   the 


acquired land is still with the appellants. Jamabandis relate to the year 2005-

2006.   Copies   of   notice   dated   10/11.2.2011   issued   by   Uttar   Haryana   Bijli 

Vitran Nigam Ltd. relates to appellant No.1 - Prahlad Singh and this, prima 

facie, supports the appellants' assertion that physical possession of the land 

is   still   with   them.   Respondent   Nos.   3   to   6   have   not   placed   any   document 

before   this   Court   to   show   that   actual   possession   of   the   acquired   land   was 

taken   on   the   particular   date.   Therefore,   the   High   Court   was   not   right   in 

recording a finding that the acquired land will be deemed to have vested in 

the State Government.
The judgments, which have been referred to in the impugned order really 

do not have any bearing on the case in hand because in all those cases, the 

Court had found that possession of the acquired land had been taken.
In
Municipal   Corporation   of   Greater   Bombay   v.   Industrial   Development  

and Investment Company (P) Ltd.
(supra), this Court declined to interfere with 

the   acquisition   proceedings   on   the   ground   of   delay.   The   facts   of   that   case 

were that after preparation of the draft development plan for 'G' Ward of the 

Bombay Municipal Corporation, notification dated 6.7.1972 was issued under
Section 126(2)
of the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966 for 

the   acquisition   of   land   needed   for   implementing   the   development   plan. 

Respondent   Nos.1   and   2,   who   were   in   possession   of   the   land   as   tenants, 

filed claim for compensation. They were heard by the competent authority in 

1979.   In   the   meanwhile,   the
Bombay   Metropolitan   Region   Development 

Authority   Act,   1974
was   enacted   by   the   State   Legislature   and   notifications 

were   issued   under   that   Act.   In   1979,   City   Survey   No.503   was   de-reserved 

from the earlier public purpose of locating the extension of Dharavi Sewage 

Purification   Plant   and   the   entire   land   was   to   be   utilized   for   residential, 

commercial, para-commercial and social facilities by the local residents of the 

area. After the award was made by the Collector, possession of the acquired 

land was taken. The respondents filed writ petition after lapse of four years 

from the date of taking possession. The learned Single Judge dismissed the 


writ petition but the Division Bench allowed the appeal. This Court held that 

once   the   award   was   passed   and   possession   was   taken,   the   High   Court 

should not have exercised its power to quash the award.
In
C.   Padma   v.   Deputy   Secretary   to   the   Government   of   Tamil   Nadu
(supra),   the   Court   held   that   once   the   acquired   land   vested   in   the   State 

Government   and   compensation   was   paid   after   taking   possession,   the 

appellant was not entitled to question the acquisition proceedings.
In
Municipal Council, Ahmednagar v. Shah Hyder Beig
(supra), this Court 

reversed the judgment of the Bombay High Court on the ground that they had 

moved the Court after 21 years of the issue of notifications under
Section 6
and
16
years from the date of making an award and taking of possession.
The  same  view was reiterated  in
Swaika Properties  (P) Ltd.  v.  State  of  

Rajasthan
(supra).   In that   case,  the  writ petition   was  filed  in  1989  after  the 

award was passed and possession of the acquired land was taken.
In  Sawaran   Lata   v.   State   of   Harayana  (supra),   the   landowners   were 

denied  relief  because they had approached the High Court after 8 years  of 

the notification issued under
Section 4(1)
and about 5 years of the passing of 

award and taking of possession.
In the result, the appeal is allowed. The impugned order is set aside and 

the matter is remitted to the High Court for disposal of the writ petition on 

merits. The parties are left to bear their own costs.