[Cites
12
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Suraz India Trust vs Union Of India & Anr on 4 April, 2011
Equivalent citations: 2011 AIR SCW 2680, 2012 (13) SCC 497, AIR 2011 SC (SUPP) 191, (2011) 86 ALL LR 886, (2011) 6 MAD LJ 72, (2011) 4 SCALE 252, (2011) 102 ALLINDCAS 83 (SC), (2012) 1 SCT 796.2
Bench:
B.S. Chauhan
,
Deepak Verma
Reportable


             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF  INDIA

               CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 204 OF 2010




Suraz India Trust                                              ..... Petitioner  


                                       Versus


Union of India & Anr.                                            ..... Respondent(s)
O R D  E R
1.         This   writ   petition   has   been   filed   under
Article   32
of   the 


Constitution   by   the   present   petitioner   claiming   itself   to   be   the 


registered Trust under the provisions of
Rajasthan Public Trust Act, 


1959
.  It has been established in the legal arena for the larger public 


interest.   The Trust's motto is to challenge those provisions of law 


which are ultra vires and unconstitutional.    Basically  the petitioner 


has sought the review of the judgment by nine Judges' Bench of this 


Court   in  Advocate   on
Record   Association   v.   Union   of   India   & 


Ors.
, (1993) 4 SCC 441; so also in the case of  Special Reference 


No.1 of 1998  (reported in   (1998) 7 SCC 739), whereby this Court 


declared the primacy of the collegium in the matter of appointment 


of the Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts.
2)      As Mr. Rajiv Daiya, Chairman of the Trust appeared in person 


and   was   not   able   to   render   any   assistance   to   the   Court,   thus,   we 


requested   Mr   A.K.   Ganguli,   learned   Senior   counsel   alongwith   Mr. 


Bharat   Sangal   to   assist   the   Court   as   amicus   curiae.   The   petition 


raises   large   number   of   complicated   issues.     Meanwhile,   we   also 


sought assistance of the learned Attorney General for India.
3)          Shri A.K. Ganguly, learned senior Advocate, has submitted:
That the method of appointment of a Supreme Court Judge is 


mentioned   in
Article   124(2)
of   the   Constitution   of   India   which 


states:
"Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by 

          the   President   by   warrant   under   his   hand   and   seal   after 

          consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme Court 

          and   of   the   High   Courts   in   the   States   as   the   President   may 

          deem necessary for the purpose and shall hold office until he 

          attains the age of sixty five  years.
Provided that in the case of appointment of a Judge other 

          than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of India shall always 

          be consulted."
It may be noted that there is no mention:
(i)         for any Collegium in
Article 124(2).
(ii)        The   word   used   in
Article   124(2)
is   `consultation',   and   not 

              `concurrence'.


  (iii)       The   President   of   India   while   appointing   a   Supreme   Court
Judge can consult any Judge of the Supreme Court or even 

              High Court as he deems necessary for the purpose, and is not
2
bound   to   consult   only   the   five   seniormost   Judges   of   the 

        Supreme Court.
4.     That by the judicial verdicts in the aforesaid two cases,
Article 


124(2)
has been practically amended, although amendment to the 


Constitution   can   only   be   done   by   Parliament   in   accordance   with 


the procedure
laid down in
Article 368
of the Constitution of India.
5.       That under
Article 124(2)
while appointing a Supreme Court 


Judge,   the   President   of   India   has   to   consult   the   Chief   Justice   of 


India, but he may also consult any other Supreme Court Judge and 


not merely the four seniormost Judges.  Also, the President of India 


can   even   consult   a   High   Court   Judge,   whereas,   according   to   the 


aforesaid  two decisions  the President of India cannot consult any 


Supreme Court Judge other than the four seniormost Judges of the 


Supreme Court, and he cannot consult any High Court Judge at all.
6.           Shri   Ganguli   submits   that   the   matter   is   required   to   be 


considered   by   a   larger   Bench   as   the   petition   raises   the   following 


issues of Constitutional importance:
(1)     Whether the aforesaid two verdicts, viz. the 7-Judge Bench 

        and 9-Judge Bench decisions of this Court
referred to above
really   amount   to   amending
Article   124(2)
of   the 

        Constitution?
(2)     Whether   there   is   any   `Collegium'   system   for   appointing 

        Supreme Court or High Court Judges in the Constitution?
3
(3)     Whether   the   Constitution   can   be   amended   by   a   judicial 

        verdict   or   it   can   only   be   amended   by   Parliament   in 

        accordance with
Article 368?
(4)     Whether   the   Constitutional   scheme   was   that   the   Supreme 

        Court   and   High   Court   Judges   can   be   appointed   by   mutual 

        discussions and mutual consensus between the judiciary and 

        the     executive;   or   whether   the   judiciary   can   alone   appoint 

        Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts?


(5)     Whether   the   word   `consultation'   in
Article   224
means 

        `concurrence'?
(6)     Whether by judicial interpretation words in the Constitution 

        can be made redundant, as appears to have been done in the 

        aforesaid two decisions which have made consultation with 

        High   Court   Judges   redundant   while   appointing   a   Supreme 

        Court Judge despite the fact that it is permissible on the clear 

        language of
Article 124(2)?
(7)     Whether the clear language of
Article 124(2)
can be altered 

        by judicial verdicts and instead of allowing the President of 

        India   to   consult   such   Judges   of   the   Supreme   Court   as   he 

        deems   necessary   (including   even   junior   Judges)   only   the 

        Chief   Justice   of   India   and   four   seniormost   Judges   of   the 

        Supreme   Court   can   alone   be   consulted   while   appointing   a 

        Supreme Court Judge?
(8)     Whether   there   was   any   convention   that   the   President   is 

        bound   by   the   advice   of   the   Chief   Justice   of   India,   and 

        whether any such convention (assuming there was one) can 

        prevail over the clear language of
Article 124(2)?
(9)     Whether   the   opinion   of   the   Chief   Justice   of   India   has   any 

        primacy in the aforesaid appointments? 


(10)    Whether the aforesaid two decisions should be overruled by 

        a larger Bench?
4
7.        Mr.   G.E.   Vahanvati,   learned   Attorney   General   for   India, 


supports   the   petitioner   contending   that   the   aforesaid   judgments 


require reconsideration.  However, he also submits:
(a) A writ petition under
Article 32
is not maintainable at the behest 


of   a   Trust   as   the   Trust   cannot   claim   violation   of   any   of   its 


fundamental rights;
(b) Petitioner has no locus standi to seek review of the judgments of 


this   Court.   In   fact,   a   petition   under   Article   32   of   the   Constitution 


does not lie to challenge the correctness of a judicial order; and
(c)   A   bench   of   two   Judges   cannot   examine   the   correctness   of   the 


judgment of nine Judges Bench.
(d)   A   Bench   of   two   Judges   cannot   refer   the   matter   to   the   larger 


bench of nine Judges or more directly.
8.
In
Coir Board Ernakulam & Anr. v. Indira Devai P.S. & 


Ors.
,   (2000)   1   SCC   224,   this   Court   while   dealing   with   a   similar 


reference   by   a   Bench   of   two   Judges   doubting   the   correctness   of 


seven   Judges'   Bench   judgment   in
Bangalore   Water   Supply   & 


Sewerage Board v. A Rajappa
, (1978) 2 SCC 213, held as under:-
"The   judgment   delivered   by   the   seven   learned  

             Judges   of   the   Court   in
Bangalore   Water   Supply
case,   does     not,   in   our   opinion,   require   any  

             reconsideration   on   a   reference   being   made   by   a  

             two Judge Bench of the Court, which is bound by  

             the   judgment   of   the   larger   Bench.     The   appeals
5
shall,   therefore,   be   listed   before   the   appropriate  

                 Bench for further proceedings."
9.            The   Constitution   Bench   of   this   Court   in
Pradip   Chandra 


Parija & Ors. v. Pramod Chandra Patnaik & Ors.
, AIR 2002 SC 


296, while dealing with a similar situation held that judgment of a 


co-ordinate Bench or larger Bench is binding.  However, if a Bench 


of two Judges concludes that an earlier judgment of three Judges is 


so   very   incorrect   that   in   no   circumstances   it   can   be   followed,   the 


proper course  for it to adopt is to refer the matter to a Bench of three 


Judges setting out, the reasons why it could not agree with the earlier 


judgment.     If,   then,   the   Bench   of   three   Judges   also   comes   to   the 


conclusion   that   the   earlier   judgment  of  a   Bench   of  three   Judges   is 


incorrect, reference to a Bench of five Judges is justified.
10.
In
Union   of   India   &   Anr.   v.   Hansoli   Devi
,   (2002)   7   SCC 


273,   this   Court   reiterated   the   same   view   placing   reliance   upon   its 


earlier judgment in
Pradip Chandra Parija
(supra).
11.      However, Mr. Ganguli dealing with the issue of locus standi 


of the Trust has submitted that the petition may not be maintainable 


but   it   should   be   entertained   because   it   raises   a   large   number   of 


substantial   questions   of   law.
In   order   to   fortify   his   submission   he 


places   reliance   upon   a   recent   Constitution   Bench   judgment   of   this
6
Court in
B.P. Singhal v. Union of India & Anr.
, (2010) 6 SCC 331 


wherein while dealing with the issue of removal of Governors, this 


Court held as under:
"The   petitioner   has   no   locus   to   maintain   the  
             petition in regard to the prayers claiming relief for  
             the   benefit   of   the   individual   Governors.   At   all  
             events, such prayers no longer survive on account  
             of   passage   of   time.   However,   with   regard   to  the  
             general question of public importance referred to  
             the Constitution Bench, touching upon the scope of
Article   156(1)
and   the   limitations   upon   the  
             doctrine   of   pleasure,  the   petitioner   has   the  
             necessary locus."
(Emphasis added)


        Thus, Mr. Ganguli  submits that considering the gravity of the 


issues involved herein, the matter should be entertained.
12.      While dealing with the issue of reference to the larger Bench, 


Mr. Ganguli has placed a very heavy reliance of the recent order of 


this Court dated 30.3.2011 in Civil Appeal Nos.4056-4064 of 1999 


(Mineral Area Development Authority v. M/s. Steel Authority of 


India & Ors.) wherein considering the issue of interpretation of the 


Constitutional provisions and validity of the Act involved therein, a 


three Judges Bench presided over by Hon'ble the Chief Justice has 


referred the matter to nine Judges' Bench.
13.     At this juncture, Mr. Ganguli as well as Mr. Vahanvati have 


submitted that even at the stage of preliminary hearing for admission
7
of the petition, the matter requires to be heard by a larger Bench as 


this matter has earlier been dealt with by a three Judges Bench and 


involves very complicated legal issues.
14.       In view of the above, we place the matter before the Hon'ble 


Chief Justice for appropriate directions.
..............................J.

                                           (DEEPAK VERMA)




                                           ..............................J.

                                           (DR. B.S. CHAUHAN)


New Delhi,

April 4, 2011
8