[Cites
9
, Cited by
35
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of U.P. & Ors vs M/S. Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd on 20 April, 2011
Equivalent citations: 2011 AIR SCW 6414, 2011 (13) SCC 77, 2012 (1) ALL LJ 444, AIR 2012 SC (CIVIL) 108, (2011) 5 SCALE 188, (2011) 3 JCR 137 (SC), 2011 (86) ALR SOC 37 (SC)
Bench:
Mukundakam Sharma
,
Anil R. Dave
REPORTABLE


                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                   CIVIL APPEAL No. 3405 OF 2011

              

                                          IN 


      SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 2190 OF 2008





STATE OF U.P. & ORS.                                        Appellant (s)


                                   VERSUS




M/S. MAHINDRA & MAHINDRA LTD.                Respondent(s)

 





                                  O R D E R
1.    Leave granted.
2.    We  have heard  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the  parties 


in   this   appeal,   which   is   filed   challenging   the   legality   of   the 


judgment   and   order   passed   by   the   Allahabad   High   Court   in   a 


writ petition filed by the respondent, praying for issuance of a 


writ   of   mandamus   to   read   in   the   exemption   notification,   the 


words   "Tractor   Engine   specifying     Cubic   Capacity   (CC)   of   the 


Tractor   Engine   not   exceeding   1800   CC.     The   Government   of 


India   had   issued   notification   on     16th  April,   1985,   making   an 


amendment  in the notification  of the Government of India in 


respect   of   the   table   annexed   to   the   notification,   inserting   by 


way   of   substitution   the   words   "Tractors   of   Draw-Bar   Horse 


Power   not   exceeding   25".              Another   notification   was 


subsequently  issued by the Government of India on 17th  July, 


1985,   substituting   the   words   "Draw-Bar"   with   the   words 


"Power   Take-off   Horse".     Be   it   stated   here   that   all   such 


notifications relate to the payment of excise duty.
3.    The   Government   of   Uttar   Pradesh,   however,   for   the 


purpose of levy of sales tax issued a notification on          12th 


September, 1986, in which it was stated that under Section 4 


of the Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax Act, 1948,  Tractors with  Power 


Take-off Horse Power not exceeding 25 would stand exempted 


from payment of tax under the
Sales Tax Act
, subject, however, 


to   the   condition   that   the   said   tractors   are   exempted   from 


payment of Central Excise Duty.
4.    A   show   cause   notice   was   issued   to   the   respondent   from 


the Office of the Assistant Commissioner (Assessment)-I  Sales 


Tax, Lucknow, stating therein that at the time of survey made, 


and as per the literature made available it was found that the,
Page 2 of 10
horse   power   of   the   tractors   of   the   respondent   had   been 


disclosed   as   30   Horse   Power.     In   the   aforesaid   show   cause 


notice it was stated that in view of the facts mentioned in the 


said notice, the respondent may submit a reply as to why the 


return   filed   by   the   respondent   would   not   be   rejected   and   a 


provisional   assessment   order   for   the   period   in   question   may 


not be completed under Rule 41(5) of the Rules.
5.     Pursuant   to   the   aforesaid   show   cause   notice   issued,   a 


detailed   reply   was   filed   by   the   respondent.     The   Assessment 


Officer   considered   the   entire   records   and,   thereafter,   by   his 


order   dated  21st  March,   1992,   passed  an assessment   order  on 


the   basis   of  the   contents   of  the   notification   dated                12th 


September,   1986,   denying   exemption   from   payment   of   sales 


tax to the tractors of the respondent.
6.     After   the   aforesaid   assessment   order   was   passed,   the 


respondent   filed   a   writ   petition   before   the   Allahabad   High 


Court with the following reliefs:
"1.    A Writ of certiorari or any other suitable Writ, Order 

       of   direction   be   issued   to   modify   or   amend,   the 

       notification so as to bring in conformity with the Central 

       Government   and   conformity   in   respect   of   measuring 

       strength   or   engine   by   all   manufacturer   as   contained   in 

       Annexure-1 to this Writ Petition.
Page 3 of 10
2.    A   Writ   of   mandamus   directing   the   Opposite   Party 

      No.2 to clearly state in the said notification the basis of 

      exemption being cubic capacity of the Tractor Engine not 

      exceeding  1800  CC   for   exemption   for   Sales  Tax   in  place 

      of 25 P.T.O.H.P., and directing the Opposite Party No.2 to 

      exempt   the   petitioners,   tractor   engine   and   specify   the 

      C.C. (Cubic Capacity) of the Tractor engine not exceeding 

      1800 C.C. And bring it at Par with Circular No.89/87/CE 

      dated 01.03.1987 issued by Central Government to clear 

      the   anomaly   and   ambiguity   in   both   the   circulars,   which 

      creates   discrimination   among   manufacturer   of   Fuel 

      Efficient engines and rest ones, and refrain the Opposite 

      Party No.2 to desist from recovering disputed Sales Tax of 

      Rs.2,34,00,965.400   from   April'   91   to   Feb.   92   created   by 

      Annexure   II   dated   21.03.1991,   and   stay   operation 

      thereof."
7.    Interestingly,   in   the   said   writ   petition   there   was   no 


challenge to the assessment order passed.   Be that as it may, 


the   Division   Bench   of   the   Allahabad   High   Court   proceeded   to 


hear the aforesaid writ petition and by a detailed order passed 


held   that   since   the   Central   Government   has   by   notification 


dated 28th February, 1987, replaced the word 25 PTOHP by the 


word   1800   CC   and   thereby   exempted   the   tractor   having 


capacity   not   exceeding   1800   from   Excise   Duty,     the   same 


wordings,   namely,   Tractors   with   Power   Take-off   Horse   Power 


not exceeding 25 should also be read as Tractors not exceeding 


1800 CC, which would stand exempted from levy of Sales Tax.
The   aforesaid   findings   recorded   by   the   High   Court   are   under 


challenge in this appeal.
Page 4 of 10
8.    The   first   contention   of   the   counsel   appearing   for   the 


appellant is that there is no power vested on the High Court to 


issue   such   a   direction   to   the   Executive   to   re-frame   the 


subordinate   legislation,   and   that   therefore   the   High   Court 


exceeded   its   jurisdiction   by   issuing   such   directions   in   a   field 


where the High Court cannot and should not tread.
In support 


of   the   said   contention,   the   counsel   has   relied   upon   the 


decision   of   this   Court   in  Supreme   Court
Employees'   Welfare 


Association   v.   Union   of   India   and   another
(
1989)   4   SCC   187, 


Bal Ram Bali and another v. Union of India
(
2007) 6 SCC 805 


and  Municipal   Committee,   Patiala   v.   Model   Town   Residents 


Association and others
(2007) 8 SCC 669 as also the decision 


in  M/s.
Narinder   Chand   Hem   Raj   and   others   v.   Lt.   Governor, 


Administrator,   Union   Territory,   Himachal   Pradesh   and   others
(1971) 2 SCC 747.  Wherein this Hon'ble court held as follows:
"The   power   to   impose   tax   is   undoubtedly   a   legislative 

      power.   That   power   can   be   exercised   by   the   legislature 

      directly   or   subject   to   certain   conditions,   the   legislature 

      may delegate that power to some other authority. But the 

      exercise of that power whether by the legislature or by its 

      delegate   is   an   exercise   of   a   legislative   power.   The   fact 

      that   the   power   was   delegated   to   the   executive   does   not 

      convert   that   power   into   an   executive   or   administrative 

      power.   No   court   can   issue   a   mandate   to   a   legislature   to 

      enact   a   particular   law.   Similarly   no   court   can   direct   a 

      subordinate legislative body to enact or not to enact a law 

      which   it   may   be   competent   to   enact.   [945   F-G]
Article
Page 5 of 10
265
of   the   Constitution   lays   down   that   no   tax   can   be 

       levied and collected except by authority of law. Hence the 

       levy of a tax can only be done by the authority of law and 

       not   by   any   executive   order.   Unless   the   executive   is 

       specifically   empowered   by   law   to   give   any   exemption,   it 

       cannot   say   that   it   will   not   enforce   the   law   as   against   a 

       particular   person.   No   Court   can   give   a   direction   to   a 

       Government to refrain from enforcing a provision of law".
9.     In  Supreme   Court   Employees'   Welfare   Association   v.
Union of India and another
(supra), in paragraph 51, this Court 


stated as follows:
"51. There   can   be   no   doubt   that   no   court   can   direct   a 

       legislature to enact a particular law.   Similarly, when an 

       executive   authority   exercises   a   legislative   power   by   way 

       of   subordinate   legislation   pursuant   to   the   delegated 

       authority   of   a   legislature,   such   executive   authority 

       cannot   be   asked   to   enact   a   law   which   he   has   been 

       empowered   to   do   under   the   delegated   legislative 

       authority.
10.    Within our Constitution, we have specifically demarcated 


the ambit of power and the boundaries  of the three organs of 


the   Society   by   laying   down   the   principles   of   separation   of 


powers, which is being adhered to for carrying  out democratic 


functioning   of   the   country.     So   far   as   the   legislation   is 


concerned,   the   exclusive   domain   is   with   the   legislature.
Subordinate   legislations   are   framed   by   the   executive   by 


exercising the delegated power conferred by the Statue, which
Page 6 of 10
is rule making power.   The judiciary has been vested with the 


power to interpret the aforesaid legislations and to give effect 


to   them   since   the   parameters   of   the   jurisdiction   of   both   the 


organs are  earmarked.   Therefore,  it  is  always  appropriate for 


each   of   the   organs   to   function   within   its   domain.     It   is 


inappropriate for the courts to issue a mandate to legislate an 


Act and also to make a subordinate legislation in a particular 


manner.    In   this   particular   case,  the   High   Court  has   directed 


the   subordinate   legislation   to   substitute   wordings   in   a 


particular   manner,   thereby   assuming   to   itself   the   role   of   a 


supervisory   authority,   which   according   to   us,   not   a   power 


vested in the High Court.  It is also by now settled law that so 


far   exemption   clauses   are   concerned,   there   should   be   strict 


interpretation   of   the   same   as   has   been   held   by   this   Court 


repeatedly.   Suffice will be to refer to very recent decisions of 


this   Court   in
Bhai   Jaspal   Singh   and   another   v.   Assistant 


Commissioner   of   Commercial   Taxes   and   others
(
2011)   1   SCC 


39   and  Commissioner   of   Central   Excise,   New   Delhi   v.   Hari 


Chand Shri Gopal and others
(2011) 1 SCC 236.
We would also 


extract   a   passage   from   the   decision   of   the   Supreme   Court   in
Novopan     India     Ltd.     Hyderabad     Vs.   Collector   of   Central 


Excise and Customs, Hyderabad
, reported at 1994 Supp (3) SCC
Page 7 of 10
at page 606, wherein this Court has held that:
"16. .........such a notification has to be interpreted in the 

       light   of   the   words   employed   by   it   and   not   on   any   other 

       basis.   This   was   so   held   in   the   context   of   the   principle 

       that   in   a   taxing   statute,   there   is   no   room   for   any 

       intendment,   that   regard   must   be   had   to   the   clear 

       meaning   of   the   words   and   that   the   matter   should   be 

       governed wholly by the language of the notification i.e. by 

       the plain terms of the exemption."
11.    During   the  course  of  the  arguments,   it   was   also   brought 


to   our   notice   that   subsequent   to   the   order   of   assessment,   an 


appeal   was   filed,   which   came   to   be   dismissed,   subsequent   to 


which   a   second   appeal   was   filed   before   the   Tribunal,   which 


allowed   the   appeal   giving   effect   to   the   orders   of   the   High 


Court.     Since,   in   our   considered   opinion,   the   High   Court 


exceeded its jurisdiction in passing the aforesaid orders and in 


issuing   the   directions   for   inserting   certain   additional   words 


into   notification   of   exemption   issued   by   the   Uttar   Pradesh 


Government,   we   set   aside   the   impugned   judgment   and   order 


passed   by   the   High   Court   and   also   the   order   passed   by   the 


Tribunal.   As the Tribunal had given effect to the order of the 


High Court, the order of the Tribunal is hereby set aside.  Even 


otherwise   Courts   can   always   take   notice   of   the   subsequent 


events   and  developments   that   had  taken   place   subsequent   to 


the   filing   of   the   writ   petition   or   filing   of   the   special   leave
Page 8 of 10
petition  and  it  is  also  within  the  jurisdiction  of this  Court   to 


pass   consequential   orders   to   give   effect   to   the   remedies 


available   to   the   parties.   Considering   these   facts   and 


circumstances from the aforesaid angle, we after setting aside 


the order passed by the High Court and also by the Tribunal as 


also by the First Appellate Court, remit back the matter to the 


First   Appellate   Court   to   consider   the   matter  de   novo  taking 


into   consideration   the   notification   as   existing   and   which   was 


issued   on   12th  September,   1986,   and   decided   the   matter 


without making any addition/alternation thereto.
12.    However,   counsel   appearing   for   the   respondent   has 


submitted   before   us   that   it   would   be   possible   for   the 


respondent   to   prove   and   establish   that   the   tractor 


manufactured by the respondent is below 25 PTOHP.  If certain 


exemption is available on the factual aspect, such benefit must 


be provided to an assessee but that is possible only when the 


respondent   is   able   to   prove   and   establish   with   cogent   and 


reliable   materials   that   he   is   entitled   to   the   benefit   of   the 


exemption notification.  Therefore, we allow the parties to lead 


additional evidence before the appellate authority, which shall 


be   allowed   to   be   filed   within   four   weeks   from   their   date   of 


appearance   and,   thereafter,   the   appellate   authority   shall
Page 9 of 10
proceed   to   decide   the   matter  de   novo  in   the   light   of   the 


records   available   and   also   in   the   light   of   the   exemption 


notification.
13.    This   appeal   stands   allowed   to   the   aforesaid   extent   as 


indicated   and   leave   the   parties   to   bear   their   own   costs.     The 


parties shall appear before the appellate authority on 2nd  May, 


2011,   for   obtaining   further   dates   in   the   appeal.     We   also 


request   the   appellate   authority   to   take   up   the   matter   and 


dispose   of   the   same   as   expeditiously   as   possible,   preferably 


within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the 


additional evidence, if produced by the parties.
...........................................
J.   

                                           (DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)





                                         ..............................................J.

                                                    (ANIL R. DAVE)


New Delhi;
April 20, 2011.
Page 10 of 10