[Cites
27
, Cited by
73
]
Supreme Court of India
Tejumal Bhojwani And Ors vs State Of U.P on 26 August, 2003
Equivalent citations: AIR 2003 SUPREME COURT 3791, 2003 (10) SCC 525, 2003 AIR SCW 4335, 2003 ALL. L. J. 2288, (2003) 6 ANDH LT 17, 2003 (5) SLT 138, (2003) 11 ALLINDCAS 747 (SC), 2003 (9) SRJ 457, (2003) 3 UPLBEC 2775, (2004) 1 ANDHWR 91, (2004) 1 RAJ LW 28, (2004) 1 MAD LJ 11, (2004) 1 MAD LW 87, (2003) 4 RECCIVR 551, (2003) 10 INDLD 282, (2003) 4 ALL WC 3392, (2003) 4 CURCC 31, (2003) 7 SCALE 38, (2004) 1 UC 46, (2003) 2 LACC 608, (2003) 3 LANDLR 717, (2003) 53 ALL LR 426, (2003) 6 SUPREME 538
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
S.B. Sinha
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  6365-6382 of 1999

PETITIONER:
Tejumal Bhojwani and Ors.	    


RESPONDENT:
Vs.

State of U.P.				      


DATE OF JUDGMENT: 26/08/2003@

CJI &  S.B. Sinha.

&

ORDER
With C.A. Nos. 6383-6398 of 1999



	The appellants herein (in C.A. Nos. 6365-6382 of 

1999) were the owners of large tract of land situate in 

village Chhauni Gora Barik and/or Chhauni Qadim, 

Pargana Khairabad, Tehsil and District Sitapur in the 

State of Uttar Pradesh.  The respondent herein (in C.A. 

Nos. 6365-6382 of 1999) is the State of U.P., through the 

Collector, [Land Acquisition Officer, Avas Evam Vikas 

Parishad (hereinafter referred to as 'the Parishad')], 

established and constituted under the provisions of U.P. 

Avas Evam Vikas Parishad Adhiniyam, 1965 (for short 

'the Adhiniyam').  Under the Adhiniyam, the Parishad is 

entrusted with certain functions and duties for preparing 

and executing housing schemes.  For the aforesaid 

purpose in mind, the Parishad issued a notification dated 

1st of November, 1974 under Section 28 of the 

Adhiniyam, which is equivalent to
Section 4
of the Land 

Acquisition Act, 1894.  By the aforesaid Notification a 

large tract of land was sought to be acquired pursuant to 

a Housing Scheme for construction of houses for the 

public.  The said notification was followed by a 

Notification dated 11th November, 1978, under
Section 32
of the Adhiniyam, which is equivalent to
Section 6
of the 

Notification.
The Land Acquisition Officer gave three different 

Awards on three different dates.  In the case of appellants 

herein, the Land Acquisition Officer offered compensation 

for the acquired land @ Rs. 2/- per square feet in first 

two Awards and Rs.3/- per square feet in the last Award.  

It is pertinent to mention here that the Land Acquisition 

Officer offered separate compensation for the structure 

standing on the land as well as to the existing Tube Well.  

The claimants were not satisfied by the compensation 

and, therefore, they sought compensation before the Civil 

Court.  The Civil Court enhanced the compensation to 

Rs.7.75, Rs. 12/- and Rs.15/- per square feet 

respectively and also enhanced the compensation 

awarded for the Tube Well as well as the structure 

standing on the land.  Aggrieved, the parties preferred 

appeals and cross appeals before the High Court.

	The High Court after considering the matters, 

modified the judgment of the Reference Court awarding 

compensation @ Rs.10/- per square feet.  However, it 

declined to award separate compensation for the Tube 

Well and the structure standing on the Land.  The High 

Court, however, held that there would be further 

deduction @ 10% towards the development of the land.  

The claimants, (appellants in C.A. Nos. 6365-6382 of 

1999 and the U.P. Avas Evam Vikas Parishad and 

appellants in C.A. Nos. 6383-6398 of 1999) not satisfied, 

preferred separate appeals by way of special leave 

petition.
This Court, while entertaining the special leave 

petitions, restricted the notice on the following three 

questions:
(1)	Whether solaltium and interest should have been 

awarded as per the Land Acquisition 

(Amendment) Act, 1984 as laid down by this 

Court in
U.P. Avas Evam Vikas Parishad Vs. 

Jainul Islam and Anr.
(1998 (2) S.C.C. 467);

(2)	Whether appropriate compensation should have 

been awarded for structures and tube wells 

situated on the land concerned; and 

(3)	Whether the offer regarding payment of 

compensation for trees given by the Land 

Acquisition Officer could be withdrawn in
Section 

18
proceedings.
So far Civil Appeal Nos. 6365-6382 of 1999 are 

concerned, the grounds challenged were limited as 

indicated above.
Mr. S. Ganesh, learned senior counsel appearing for 

the appellants, urged that in view of the latest decision of 

this Court in the case of
Savitri Cairae Vs. U.P. Avas 

Evam Vikas Parishad and Anr.
, reported in 2003 (6) SCC 

255, the claimants whose land were acquired by the 

Parishad and whose proceedings are pending in the year 

1984, are entitled to solatium as provided under the 

Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984.  We find merit 

in the submission.
In view of the decision in
Savitri 

Cairae
's case (supra), it must be held that each of the 

appellants are entitled to solatium @ 30%, interest and 

additional compensation.
Next submission of learned senior counsel is that 

the claimants were entitled to separate compensation for 

the Tube Well as well as for the structure standing on the 

land and the High Court committed error while denying 

compensation for the above items, although the Land 

Acquisition Officer has granted compensation for those 

items.  We find substance in the argument.  However, 

learned counsel appearing for the Parishad argued that 

the claimants were not entitled to compensation for value 

of land and building separately and for that purpose cited 

a decision of this Court in
Ratan Kumar Tandon and Ors. 

Vs. State of U.P.
, reported in 1997 (2) SCC 161.  We find 

that
the said decision
is distinguishable.  In that case we 

find that there was capitalisation of the value of land and 

structure and, therefore, the claimants were not given 

separate compensation for land and building.  Here we 

find that there was no capitalisation of value of land and 

structure by the Land Acquisition Officer in his award.  

On the other hand, Land Acquisition Officer has given 

compensation separately for the land, building and Tube 

Well.  In that view of the matter claimants are entitled to 

separate compensation for land, Tube Well and structure.



Learned counsel appearing in C.A. Nos.
6383-6398 

of 1999 urged that the High Court, while deducting the 

development charges @ 10% from compensation, acted 

erroneously, and in fact the deduction ought to have 

been between 30 to 40% and for that purpose he relied 

on the decision in
Shimla Development Authority and 

Ors. Vs. Smt. Santosh Sharma and Anr.
, reported in AIR 

1997 SC 1791.  It is true that the deduction for 

development charges ought to be adequately provided for, 

but it varies from place to place, area to area and amount 

of developments which are required to be carried out and 

thus there cannot be any fixed amount of deduction 

towards development charges.  In the present case, we 

find that the total land acquired was about 27 acres.  We 

are, therefore, of the view that it would be appropriate if 

the development charges @ 25% is deducted from the 

compensation awarded to the claimants.
For the aforesaid reasons, the orders and judgment 

under challenge are modified and the appeals are 

disposed of in the aforesaid terms.  No costs.	





















+

5 659 2003

!
Punit Rai							

Vs.

Dinesh Chaudhary						

@

August
19, 2003.
BENCH:
S.B. Sinha


JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T



S.B. SINHA, J :
Matter relating to castes, races and tribes of a person is 

governed by
Articles 341
and
342
of the Constitution of India.
Article 

341
reads thus:
"341 SCHEDULED CASTES.
(1) The President may with respect to any State 

or Union territory, and where it is a State 

after consultation with the Governor thereof, 

by public notification, specify the castes, 

races or tribes or parts of or groups within 

castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups 

within castes, races or tribes which shall for 

the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to 

be Scheduled Castes in relation to that State 

or Union territory, as the case may be.
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude 

from the list of Scheduled Castes specified in 

a notification issued under clause (1) any 

caste, race or tribe or part of or group within 

any caste, race or tribe, but save as aforesaid 

a notification issued under the said clause 

shall not be varied by any subsequent 

notification."
The object of Clause (1) of
Article 341
is to provide 

preferential right by way of protection to the members of the Scheduled 

Caste having regard to the economic and educational backwardness from 

which they suffer.  It is in relation thereto the President has been 

authorised to limit the notification to parts or groups within the 

castes.  The notification issued in terms of the said provision is 

exhaustive.
How the caste or tribe of the person is to be determined depends 

upon several factors including the customary laws.



 	The President of India in exercise of his power conferred under
Article 341(1)
of the Constitution of India notified Constitution 

(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.  The tribe 'Pasi' admittedly finds 

place in the said notification whereas 'Kurmi' does not.  By reason of
Articles 341
of the Constitution, a legal fiction is created which is 

to be given its full effect.
Caste has been defined in Collins English Dictionary as  "any of 

the four major hereditary classes, namely, the Brahman, Kshatriya, 

Vaisya and Sudra into which Hindu society is divided".



	The caste system in India is engrained in Indian mind.  A person, 

in the absence of any statutory law, would inherit his caste from his 

father and not his mother even in a case of inter-caste marriage.  



	In 'the caste system in India - Myth and Reality' by Dr. Rajendra 

Pandey, the different attributes of the caste as unit mentioned by 

various writers has been stated thus :
"1.	Basic (pivotal) attributes: Endogamy.
2.	Sufficiently relevant attributes :
(i)	Membership by birth
(ii)	Common occupation
(iii)	Caste Council.
3.	Peripheral attributes :
(i)  Name
(ii)	Diacritical signs.
Following the same pattern of attribute-

hierarchy, the attributes that characterize 

caste as system have been drawn up and set in 

as follows :
1.	Basic attribute: Plurality of interacting 

endogamous groups.
2.	Sufficiently relevant attribute:
Hierarchy.
3.	Peripheral attribute : Traditional 

division of labour.
Besides these, Ghurye among others, has 

also mentioned segmental division of society, 

hierarchy, restriction on feeding and social 

intercourse, and civil and religious 

disabilities and privileges of the different 

sections as characteristics of the caste.  

Above them all, Nagendra has made mention of 

the principle of individual freedom as one of 

the attributes of the caste, which seems to 

have been omitted by most of the authors.
In summary, then, hierarchy, restricted 

commensality and connubium, hereditary 

occupation and a clear-cut differentiation of 

functions, ritual observance, and the principle 

of individual freedom are characteristics of 

the caste system till today."
In 'Caste in Modern India and other Essays' by M.N. Srinivas at 

page 3, it is stated :
"A sociologist would define caste as a 

hereditary, endogamous, usually localized 

group, having a traditional association with an 

occupation, and a particular position in the 

local hierarchy of castes.  Relations between 

castes are governed, among other things by the 

concepts of pollution and purity, and 

generally, maximum commensality occurs within 

the caste."
In 'Caste and the Law in India' by Justice S.B. Wad at page 30 

under the heading 'Sociological Implications', it is stated :
"Traditionally, a person belongs to a caste in 

which he is born.  The caste of the parents 

determines his caste but in case of re-

conversion a person has the liberty to renounce 

his casteless status and voluntarily accept his 

original caste.  His caste status at birth is 

not immutable.  Change of religion does not 

necessarily mean loss of caste.  If the 

original caste does not positively disapprove, 

the acceptance of the caste can be presumed.  

Such acceptance can also be presumed if he is 

elected by a majority to a reserved seat.  

Although it appears that some dent is made on 

the classical concept of caste, it may be 

noticed that the principle that caste is 

created by birth is not dethroned.  There is 

also a judicial recognition of caste autonomy 

including right to outcaste a person."
If he is considered to be a member of Scheduled Caste, he has to 

be accepted by the community.   (See
C.M. Arumugam Vs. V.S. Rajgopal 

and Others
(
1976) 1 SCR 82 and Principal, Guntur Medical College v. V. 

Y. Mohan Rao
– (1976) 3 SCR 1046).
A Christian by birth when converted to Hinduism and married a 

member of Scheduled Caste was held to be belonging to her husband's 

caste on the evidence that she had not only been accepted but also 

welcomed by the important members, including the President and Vice-

President of the community. [See
Kailash Sonkar vs. Smt. Maya Devi
[AIR 

1984 SC 600].
In the instant caste there is nothing on record to show that the 

Respondent has ever been treated to be a member of Scheduled Caste.  In 

fact evidence suggests that he has not been so treated.   He as well as 

his brothers and other members of his family are married to persons 

belonging to his own caste i.e. 'Kurmi'.
There was no attempt on the part of the respondent herein to 

bring on records any material to the effect that he was treated as a 

member of 'Pasi' community.  Furthermore, no evidence has been brought 

on record to show that the family of the respondent had adopted and had 

been practising the customary traits and tenets of 'Pasi' community.        



 	The question as to whether a person belongs to a particular caste 

or not has to be determined by the statutory authorities specified 

therefor.
In
B.Basavalingappa Vs. D.Munichinnappa
[(1965) 1 SCR 316], a 

Constitution Bench of this Court considered the scope of
Article 341(1)
and
(2) (which is in pari materia with Article 342
(1) and
(2)
), and 

held that it is not open to any person to lead evidence to establish 

that the caste to which he belongs to is the same as and/ or part of 

another caste, which is included in the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) 

order, it was observed:
"It may be accepted that it is not open to make 

any modification in the Order by producing 

evidence to show (for example) that though 

caste A alone is mentioned in the Order, caste 

B is also a part of caste A and therefore must 

be deemed to be included in caste A. It may 

also be accepted that wherever one caste has 

another name it has been mentioned in brackets 

after it in the Order [see Aray (Mala) Dakkal 

(Dokkalwar) etc.]. Therefore, generally 

speaking it would not be open to any person to 

lead evidence to establish that caste B (in the 

example quoted above) is part of caste A 

notified in the Order.
(See also
Parsram Vs. Shivchand
AIR 1969 SC 597 paras 38 & 39)



 	In
Kumari Madhuri Patil Vs. Addl
. Commissioner, Tribal 

Development and Other [(1994) 6 SCC 241], this court denounced the 

practice of persons claiming benefits conferred on STs by producing 

fake, false and fraudulent certificates observing:
"The admission wrongly gained or appointment 

wrongly obtained on the basis of false social 

status certificate necessarily has the effect 

of depriving the genuine Scheduled Castes or 

Scheduled Tribes or OBC candidates as enjoined 

in the Constitution of the benefits conferred 

on them by the Constitution. The genuine 

candidates are also denied admission to 

educational institutions or appointments to 

office or posts under a State for want of 

social status certificate. The ineligible or 

spurious persons who falsely gained entry 

resort to dilatory tactics and create hurdles 

in completion of the inquiries by the Scrutiny 

Committee. It is true that the applications for 

admission to educational institutions are 

generally made by a parent, since on that date 

many a time the student may be a minor. It is 

the parent or the guardian who may play fraud 

claiming false status certificate."
Similar observations have also been made in
Director of Tribal 

Welfare Vs. Laveti Giri
[(1995) 4 SCC 32].



 	A person in fact not belonging to Scheduled Caste, if claims 

himself to be a member thereof by procuring a bogus caste certificate, 

would be committing fraud on Constitution.  No court of law can 

encourage commission of such fraud.
This Court in
Kumari Madhuri Patil and Another Vs. Addl
. 

Commissioner Tribal Development, Thane and Others (Second) [(1997) 5 

SCC 437] laid down the law thus:
"3. As regards prayer (b) read with direction 

No. (iv) of the Order of this Court, we too 

appreciate the inconvenience caused due to vast 

area of the State. Therefore, instead of one 

committee of three officers, there will be 

three Scheduled Tribe/Caste Scrutiny Committees 

comprising of five members with quorum of three 

members, as suggested in para 4 of the 

directions, to take a decision. At Pune, Nasik 

and Nagpur, six Caste Scrutiny Committees for 

SCs, Denotified Tribes, Nomadic Tribes, Other 

Backward Classes and the Special Backward 

Category in existence at Mumbai, Pune, Nasik, 

Aurangabad, Amaravati and Nagpur would continue 

to scrutinise the certificates issued by the 

respective officers and take a decision in that 

behalf. In this regard, it is also suggested by 

Shri Dholakia, learned Senior Counsel for the 

applicant, that in case any certificate has 

been wrongfully refused by the certificate 

issuing authority, the aforestated Committees 

also would go into the question and decide in 

that behalf, whether refusal was wrongful and 

in case it finds that the refusal was wrongful, 

they are at liberty to direct the authority to 

grant the certificate.
5. With regard to prayer (d), along with the 

Vigilance Cell, one Research Officer/Tribal 

Development or Social Welfare Officer would be 

associated in finding the social status of 

eligibility of the officers."
Determination of caste of a person is governed by the customary 

laws. A person under the customary Hindu Law would be inheriting his 

caste from his father.  In this case, it is not denied or disputed that 

the respondent's father belonged to a 'Kurmi' caste.  He was, 

therefore, not a member of Scheduled Caste.  The caste of the father, 

therefore, will be the determinative factor in absence of any law.  

Reliance, however, has been placed upon a circular dated 3.3.1978 said 

to have been issued by the State of Bihar which is in the following 

terms:
"Subject: Determination of caste of a child 

born from Non-Schedule Caste Hindu father and 

Schedule Caste mother.
Sir,

 	In the aforesaid subject as per 

instruction I have to state for the 

determination of a child born from Non-Schedule 

Caste father and schedule caste mother, upon 

deliberation it has been decided that child 

born from such parents will be counted in the 

category of schedule caste.
2. 	In such cases before the issue of caste 

certificate there will be a illegible enquiry 

by the block development officer/ circle 

officer/ block welfare officer."
The said circular letter has not been issued by the State in 

exercise of its power under
Article 162
of the Constitution of India.  

It is not stated therein that the decision has been taken by the 

Cabinet or any authority authorized in this behalf in terms of
Article 

166(3)
of the Constitution of India.  It is trite that a circular 

letter being an administrative instruction is not a law within the 

meaning of
Article 13
of the Constitution of India.  (See
Dwarka Nath 

Tewari and Others Vs. State of Bihar and Others
AIR 1959 SC 249)



 	A person can take the benefit of a reserved category candidate if 

he satisfies the test
laid down by
the
Constitution of India, the 

Representation of the People Act, 1950
and the guidelines issued by the 

Election Commission, if any.
In our opinion, the State has no jurisdiction to reserve a 

Constituency for a person who does not belong to the reserved category 

for whose benefit it was constituted except by way of a legislation.



 	If a customary law is to be given a go-bye for any purpose 

whatsoever and particularly for the purpose of enlarging the scope of a 

notification issued by the President of India under Clause (1) of
Article 341
of Constitution of India, the same must be done in terms of 

a statute and not otherwise.
The High Court itself noticed that the caste certificate of the 

Respondent was found to be forged by the Returning Officer and a 

criminal case is pending.  It was held:
"Definitely, if a person is born of a Kurmi 

father or in a Kurmi family then the 

presumption goes that the child is Kurmi by 

caste.  But here the respondent could make out 

a special case that, although, he has been born 

of a Kurmi father but mother being a Pasi, he 

is a Scheduled Caste and as such, a competent 

person to contest from the Reserved 

Constituency."
The High Court, therefore, erred in so far as it failed to 

consider that for the purpose of determination of caste, the Respondent 

could not have relied upon the circular letter dated 3.3.1978 in 

absence of any law.  In any event, it has not been shown by the 

Respondent as to what enquiry was made for determination of his caste.  

If he had taken part in some enquiry, he had special knowledge in 

respect thereof within the meaning of
Section 106
of the Evidence Act.  

He, therefore, was bound to prove the same by bringing on records 

relevant evidence which was in his power or possession.



 	 If a special case is to be made out, the same has to be done in 

accordance with law.  It must meet the legal requirement.  

Unfortunately, this aspect of the matter has not been considered by the 

High Court.  The impugned judgment, therefore, cannot be sustained.



 	Subject to aforementioned, I respectfully agree with the opinion 

of my learned brother.