[Cites
24
, Cited by
41
]
Supreme Court of India
State (Union Of India) vs Ram Saran on 4 December, 2003
Equivalent citations: AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 481, 2003 (12) SCC 578, 2003 AIR SCW 6585, (2003) 9 JT 578 (SC), 2003 (9) JT 578, (2004) 14 ALLINDCAS 460 (SC), 2003 (10) SCALE 454, (2004) 2 JCR 220 (SC), 2004 (14) ALLINDCAS 460, 2003 (10) SRJ 563, 2003 (7) SLT 675, (2004) 1 MADLW(CRI) 351, (2004) 1 EFR 382, (2004) 1 FAC 160, (2004) 1 RECCRIR 770, 2004 FAJ 1 96, (2003) 10 SCALE 454, (2004) 1 EASTCRIC 219, (2004) 104 FJR 7, (2004) 101 FACLR 447, (2004) 1 RECCRIR 100, (2003) 4 CURCRIR 500, (2003) 8 SUPREME 954, (2004) 1 ALLCRIR 819, (2004) 13 INDLD 359, (2004) 48 ALLCRIC 890, (2004) 1 CHANDCRIC 10, (2004) 1 ALLCRILR 899, (2004) 1 CRIMES 232
Author:
Arijit Pasayat
Bench:
Doraiswamy Raju
,
Arijit Pasayat
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  410 of 1997

PETITIONER:
State (Union of India)					

RESPONDENT:
Ram Saran						

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 04/12/2003

BENCH:
DORAISWAMY RAJU & ARIJIT PASAYAT.
@
J U D G M E N T
ARIJIT PASAYAT,J


	Questioning conviction made by the Assistant Commandant of Central 
Reserve Police Force (in short the 'CRPF') made under
Section 10(m)
of 
the Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949 (in short the 'Act') and 
consequential sentences imposed, the respondent filed an appeal before 
the Sessions Judge, Solan and Sirmaur. The Sessions Judge held that the 
Assistant Commandant had no jurisdiction to record conviction and impose 
sentence. The said judgment was questioned before the High Court of 
Himachal Pradesh by a revision petition filed by the Union of India. The 
revision was also dismissed. Both the Sessions Judge and the High Court 
held that the Assistant Commandant, III Battalion, ITBP, Nahan could not 
have exercised powers of Judicial Magistrate Ist Class and, therefore, 
the trial and conviction of the accused-respondent were illegal. The 
High Court held that combined reading of
Sections 11
,
12
and
13
of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short the 'Code') clearly rule out 
the appointment of any person exercising powers of Judicial Magistrate, 
Ist Class in the absence of conferment of powers by the High Court. 
This, according to the Sessions Judge and the High Court stemmed from 
the fact that there was separation of judiciary from the Executive in 
1973 and thereafter the powers of appointment and conferment for 
functioning as Judicial Magistrate either of First Class or Second Class 
could only be done by the High Court and the Central Government or the 
State Government had no power to invest any person with powers of 
Judicial Magistrate of any class. Reference was also made to
Section 5
of the Code and observed that the expression "in the absence of a 
specific provision to the contrary" used therein did not render
Section 
16(2)
of the Act redundant.
At this juncture, it would be necessary to take note of the 
factual position.
The respondent while functioning as a Constable (Sweeper) in the 
III Battalion, ITBP, Nahan did not join duty after expiry of the leave 
granted to him. Though he was granted leave for the period from 9.4.1987 
to 24.5.1987, he did not join after expiry of the period. There was no 
intimation to the competent authority or request for extension of leave. 
The respondent accepted that he had stayed beyond the period of leave, 
but indicated several reasons as to why the same was necessitated. 
Complaint was lodged by the concerned authorities and the Assistant 
Commandant exercising powers of Judicial Magistrate, Ist Class in terms 
of
Section 10 (m)
of the Act, issued notice in terms of Section 251 of 
the Code and after trial found him guilty and sentenced him to undergo 
imprisonment for three months. The said order as noted above was 
questioned before the Sessions Judge by the respondent and in view of 
the relief granted to him by the Sessions Judge, the matter was carried 
in revision by the Union of India. But the same having been rejected, 
this appeal has been filed.
In support of the appeal, learned senior counsel for the appellant 
submitted that the Sessions Judge and the High Court clearly lost sight 
of
Section 16(2)
of the Act and Rule 36 (a), (b), (e) and (f) of the 
Central Reserve Police Force Rules, 1955 (in short the 'Rules') as well 
as
Sections 4
and
5
of the Code.
Section 16(2)
of the Act clearly 
indicates that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, the 
provisions of the Act could be applied.
Section 4(2)
of the Code permits 
action under any law other than the
Indian Penal Code
, 1860 (for short 
the '
IPC
').
Section 5
refers to absence of a specific provision to the 
contrary in any special or local law.
The Act
was a special law which 
operated in a specified field. These aspects were not considered in 
their proper perspective by the Sessions Judge and the High Court.
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the 
Sessions Judge and the High Court were justified in interfering with the 
order passed by the Assistant Commandant as he had no jurisdiction to 
function and his appointment by a Notification issued by the Central 
Government could not have conferred on him any power to act as a 
Judicial Magistrate when the sole repository of the power to so notify 
is the High Court after the Code was enacted in 1973. The position may 
have been different under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1898 (in short 
the 'Old Code'), but the present position is entirely different and the 
Ministry of Home Affairs' Notification dated 25.1.1978 was really of no 
consequence.
The Courts below have overlooked certain essential and vital 
aspects necessary to appreciate the relevant issues arising in their 
proper perspective. Under
Section 3(1)
of the Act, CRPF is constituted 
to be an 'armed force' maintained by the Central Government, and 
consequently it would be 'any other armed forces of the union' as 
envisaged in Entry 2 of List I of the VII Schedule to the Constitution 
of India. Entry 93 of List I enables Parliament also to provide for 
offences against laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in 
List I.
Sections 9
and
10
create by enumerating what are stated to be 
'more heinous offences' and 'less heinous offences' respectively and 
many of such specially created offences for the purposes of this Act 
cannot constitute or amount to be offences under the ordinary criminal 
law of the land.  To that extent they are new class of offences created 
with punishments therefor, which are unknown to ordinary criminal law in 
force.
Section 16
provides for empowering Competent Authorities in the 
hierarchy of the force itself with powers or duties conferred or imposed 
on a police officer of any class or grade by any law for the time being 
in force and by further enacting a provision with a specific "non 
obstante" clause stipulates that notwithstanding anything contained in 
the Code, the Central Government may invest the Commandant or Assistant 
Commandant with the powers of a Magistrate of any class for the purpose 
of inquiring into or trying any offence committed by a member of the 
force and punishable "under this Act" or any offence committed by a 
member of the force against the person or property of another member.  
Consequently, what is purported to be done by these provisions are 
merely to refer to the nature and extent of powers possessed by such 
authorities under the other laws being made available to the authorities 
designated under this Act, for discharging their duties under this Act, 
without exhaustively enumerating the details of all such powers or 
without re-enacting all such provisions in detail as part and parcel of 
this law  the Act, and not to constitute them to be or empower them as 
Magistrates as such for all or any of the purposes for which Courts of 
ordinary criminal justice have been constituted under the Code.
Section 
5
of the Code sufficiently protects the authorities empowered to 
function and exercise powers under the Act, from any such challenge as 
are directed against them, in this case.  The fallacy in the reasoning 
of the Courts below lies in their superficial and cursory nature of 
consideration undertaken therein, without reference to the competence 
and powers of the Parliament to specifically and specially provide for 
trial and punishment of offences separately created under a special 
enactment of Parliament, in a manner distinct and separate from the 
method of trying other ordinary criminal offences under the general 
criminal law of the country.
At the outset, it must be noted that certain infractions which are 
relatable to service broadly fall within the spectrum of disciplinary 
proceedings.
Section 10(m)
is an infraction which though normally would 
have attracted departmental proceedings, keeping in view the 
essentiality of force and imminent and ever alert situation in which 
with high sense of morale and duty consciousness the member of this 
service is expected to be demonstrate at all times, a serious view of 
the same is being taken. But the CRPF, the Army, the Navy and the Air 
Force are disciplined forces and even any infraction which otherwise 
would not be an offence is deemed to be an offence under certain 
provisions like
Section 10(m)
of the Act. Unauthorised absence of an 
employee staying beyond the sanctioned period of leave is not an offence 
in the normal course under the ordinary criminal law of the land. But as 
noted above, disciplined forces with the intention of enforcing 
discipline have made them punishable considering them as offences and 
have prescribed various sentences. For such particular purposes the 
designated officials have been conferred with magisterial powers. The 
Assistant Commandant who passed the order undisputedly acted as a 
Judicial Magistrate in view of the powers conferred on him under the 
Act. The conferment of such power has not been distinctly questioned and 
could not have been questioned in a proceeding, appeal or a revision 
under the Code. As long as the specific provision in Act exists enabling 
the competent Authority to pass the order under challenge, the same will 
have full force and efficacy. It is well settled that creature of any 
statute cannot consider the vires of a particular provision in that 
statute or any other statute as well. Exclusive power for such purposes 
are vested under the Constitution of India, 1950 (in short 'the 
Constitution') only on Courts exercising powers of judicial Review under 
Articles 32/226 of the Constitution alone. While exercising appellate or 
revisional jurisdiction under the Code it is impermissible for any Court 
to decide on the vires of the provision. That is precisely what the 
Sessions Judge and the High Court have done in the present case. The 
vires of a provision can only be questioned in a writ proceeding before 
the Constitutional Court. That being the position, neither the Sessions 
Judge nor the High Court could have found fault with the exercise of 
jurisdiction by the Assistant Commandant in exercising magisterial 
powers. It will also be relevant to note that in List I of Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution in Union List, Entry 2 makes the position 
clear that members of CRPF are part of the armed forces of the Union 
Government. The punishments to be imposed under the Act for various 
offences are defined by
Sections 9
and
10
, which have been created by 
statute. As noted earlier, they are deemed offences and in the scheme of 
enforcing discipline they have been treated as infractions unbecoming of 
members belonging to disciplined forces like the CRPF That being the 
position, the Sessions Judge and the High Court were not justified in 
holding that the Assistant Commandant had no jurisdiction to deal with 
the respondent in the concerned trial.
It would also be necessary to take note of
Sections 10(m)
,
16(2)
of the Act and
Sections 4
and
5
of the Code:
Act
"
Section 10 (m)
- Every member of the Force who 
absents himself without leave, or without sufficient 
cause overstays leave granted to him shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to 
three months' pay, or with both".
Section 16(2)
- Notwithstanding anything contained in 
the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1898 (5 of 1898) the 
Central Government may invest the Commandant or an 
Assistant Commandant with the powers of a Magistrate 
of any class for the purpose of inquiring into or 
trying any offence committed by member of the Force 
and punishable under this Act, or any offence 
committed by a member of the Force against the person 
or property of another member:
Provided that-
(i) when the offender is on leave or absent 
from duty, or
(ii)	when the offence is not connected with 
the offender's duties as a member of the Force, or
(iii)when it is a petty offence, even if 
connected with the offender's duties as a member of 
the Force,

the offence may, if the prescribed authority within 
the limits of whose jurisdiction the offence has been 
committed, so directs, be inquired into or tried by 
an ordinary criminal court having jurisdiction in the 
matter".
Code
Section 4
:	Trial of offences under the
Indian Penal 
Code
and other laws- (1) All offences under the
Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860) shall be investigated, 
inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with 
according to the provisions hereinafter contained.
(2)	All offences under any other law shall be 
investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise 
dealt with according to the same provisions, but 
subject to any enactment for the time being in force 
regulating the manner or place of investigating, 
inquiring into, trying or otherwise dealing with such 
offences.
Section 5
:Saving- Nothing contained in this Code 
shall, in the absence of a specific provision to the 
contrary, affect any special or local law for the 
time being in force, or any special jurisdiction or 
power conferred, or any special form of procedure 
prescribed, by any other law for the time being in 
force".
Provisions of the Code would be applicable to the investigations, 
inquiries into and trials of cases by criminal Courts of various 
descriptions, being the parent statute, in the absence of any contrary 
provision in any special statute or special provision excluding 
jurisdiction or applicability of the Code. Sub-section (1) of
Section 4
deals with offences under the
IPC
. Second limb of sub-section (2) deals 
with the exclusion, reading ".........but subject to any enactment for 
the time being in force regulating the manner or place of investigating, 
inquiring into, trying or otherwise dealing with such offences". (See 
Directorate of Enforcement v. Deepak Mahajan and Anr.  (1994 (3) SCC
440). In a case involving
Bombay Prevention of Gambling Act, 1887
it was 
held that the Act was a special law providing special procedures for the 
manner or place of investigating or inquiring into the offences under 
it, and therefore the provisions thereof must prevail and no provisions 
of the Code can apply. (See
Nilratan Sircar v. Lakshmi Narayan Ram Niwas
(AIR 1965 SC 1).
Section 5
consists of three components, and as observed in Maru 
Ram etc.etc. v. Union of India and Ors. (1981 (1) SCC 107), they are as 
follows:
"(1)	The Code covers matters covered by it;
(2)	If a special or local law exists covering 
the same area, the said law is saved and will 
prevail;
(3)	If there is a special provision to the 
contrary, that will override the special or local 
law. A "special law", as observed in
Kaushalya Rani 
v. Gopal Singh
(AIR 1964 SC 260), means a law enacted 
for special cases, in special circumstances, as 
distinguished from the general rules of law laid down 
as being applicable to all cases dealt with by the 
general law.
The Act
fits the description.
Additionally,
Section 16(2)
of the Act begins with a 
non obstante clause relating to the Code."
There are parallel provisions to
Section 10(m)
of the Act in the 
Army Act, 1950 (hereinafter referred to as the '
Army Act
'). In fact
Section 39
of the Army Act deals with 'absence without leave'. The 
maximum period of imprisonment may extend to three years or with such 
less punishment as is mentioned in the said Act itself.
The inevitable conclusion is that the Assistant Commandant was 
clothed with necessary jurisdiction for trial of the matter.
Residual question is what would be an appropriate sentence. It is 
not disputed and rather fairly conceded that for a person in a 
disciplined service like the CRPF, any act of indiscipline deserves 
adequate and stringent punishment under the Act. In terms of
Section 
10(m)
an employee who absents himself without leave or without 
sufficient cause overstays leave granted to him can be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which 
may extend to three months pay or with both. The offence has been 
treated as one of "less heinous offences". More heinous offences are 
provided in
Section 9
. The Assistant Commandant has found the 
explanation given by the respondent to be not acceptable. Therefore, he 
has been rightly held to have committed a less heinous offence. Taking 
note of the relevant aspects, we feel the fine of two months pay which 
respondent was drawing at the time when the proceedings were initiated 
would meet the ends of justice. By altering the punishment we are not 
belittling the gravity of offence but, in our view deterrent punishment 
must be resorted to when such absence is resorted to avoid and evade 
undertaking a testing or trying venture or deployment  essential at any 
given point of time, and not as a routine in the normal course. The 
appeal is allowed to the extent indicated above.
+
5 4617 1996  
!
M/s. Sun Beverages (P) Ltd.
Vs.
The State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
@
November 28, 2003.
#
P. Venkatarama Reddi & Dr. AR. Lakshmanan.
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T


Dr. AR. Lakshmanan, J.
The present appeal was filed against the judgment dated 19.05.1995 
pronounced by the Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad by 
which the writ petition of the appellant bearing No. 1607 of 1988 was dismissed.  The 
writ petition was filed by the appellant to issue a writ prohibiting the respondents from 
recovering Rs. 18,72,821.92 constituting cash subsidy plus interest thereon from the 
appellant-Company as arrears of land revenue after quashing notice dated 15.09.1987 
(Annexure 8 to the petition) and recovery certificate dated 31.10.1987 (Annexure 11 to 
the petition).
The sequence of facts and events leading to the filing of this civil appeal are as 
follows:-
By an order dated 30.09.1982, the Government of Uttar Pradesh formulated a 
scheme known as 'Capital Grant Scheme' (hereinafter referred to as 'Scheme') for the 
grant of subsidies to various industrial units for giving an impetus to the industrialisation 
of the backward areas i.e. zero industrial areas of the State.
In the said Scheme, 'Pioneer Unit' has been defined as : 
"Such industrial units to be set up during the period from 01.10.1982 to 
31.03.1985 firstly in any part of the Tehsil or at Tehsil level where no heavy 
industry is established prior to 01.10.1982 and that those capital investment is 
more than Rs. one crore shall be treated as a Pioneer Unit."
In view of the aforesaid incentive Scheme, Shri Rajan Sethi (since deceased) 
and his wife decided to incorporate a Company for bottling of aerated waters in the 
backward area of the District Agra.  The Company was incorporated under the
Companies Act
on 01.10.1983 and it had entered into a franchise agreement with M/s 
Campa Beverages Private Limited on 06.05.1983 for bottling various brands of aerated 
waters.  For the purpose of becoming entitled to the cash subsidy under the aforesaid 
Scheme, the appellant purchased land and building and made an investment of Rs. 
17,11,845.95.  The Company made further investment on installing plant and machinery 
in the unit.  The total investment made by the appellant in establishing this unit 
amounted to Rs.1,07,78,368.34 with the location of the industrial unit in a zero industrial 
area.  According to the appellant, because of the total investments made, the appellant 
became entitled to cash subsidy under the aforesaid Scheme as a pioneer unit.
The aforesaid Scheme prescribed the following two conditions for grant of cash 
subsidy to industrial units -
(i) That it will be a 'Pioneer Unit' within the terms of the Scheme.
(ii) That it is registered with the Director General of Technical Development.
Under the Notification issued by the Government of India, in the year 1983, a 
Small Scale Industry has been defined under the Industries Development Regulation 
Act, 1948  as one which had made an investment of up to Rs. 20 lacs in plant and 
machinery alone apart from other assets.  As a Small Scale Industry, the appellant was 
liable to be registered with the Government and as a Medium Scale Industry, the 
appellant was entitled to be registered with the Director General of Technical 
Development (in short 'the DGTD'), Government of India.  The investment of the 
appellant in the plant and machinery exceeded Rs. 20 lacs.  The DGTD was obliged to 
register the appellant industry as a Medium Scale Industry since the investment in the 
plant and machinery exceeded Rs. 20 lacs.  The appellant accordingly applied to the 
Director General of Industries for registration and the appellant was registered on 
28.11.1984 with the DGTD as a Medium Scale Industry for the manufacture of 43.2 
million bottles of soft drinks per annum.  The appellant applied for cash subsidy to the 
Government of U.P. as it fulfilled both the above stated conditions under the Scheme.  
The Government of U.P., on 31.03.1986, sanctioned a subsidy of Rs. 15 lacs to the 
appellant and this subsidy was paid to the appellant in two instalments.  An agreement 
was entered into between the appellant and the respondents under which the mode and 
method of the payment of subsidy of Rs. 15 lacs was prescribed.  It was covenanted :
"1(b). 	That the grantee will comply with and faithfully observe all the 
provisions of the said Scheme as also any other conditions imposed by the 
order sanctioning the said subsidy.
(c)	That for a period of five years from the date of receiving the subsidy or 
any part thereof or from the date of production starts, whichever of these 
dates are earlier, the grantee will allow the officers subordinate to the Director 
or any other person or persons authorised by the Director or by the State 
Level Committee constituted under the said Scheme to inspect the work for 
which the Special State Capital Subsidy has been given and also the machine 
plant, appliances, tools, equipment for the procuring of which the grant has 
been made.
(f)	That within a period of five years from the date of going into 
production or of the date of receipt of the Subsidy or any part thereof 
whichever of these dates are later.  The Grantee will not change the place or 
location of the said Industrial Unit entirely or partly, nor enter into partnership 
with anyone nor change its constitution nor will the grantee effect substantial 
contractive disposal of substantial part of its total fixed capital investment 
without the written prior permission of the Director.
2.	It is hereby agreed and declared by and between the parties hereto 
that in any of the following cases the Director shall have the right to stop 
further payment of the State Capital Subsidy and to require the Grantee to 
refund the amount of subsidy already paid and the Grantee shall refund the 
same forthwith together with interest at the Bank lending rate then prevailing 
and in the case of Grantee's failure to do so, the Director may recover the 
same as arrears of land revenue.
(a)	Where Grantee has obtained the said Subsidy by misrepresentation 
as to an essential fact or by furnishing of false information/or where his 
industrial unit does not go into production;
(b)	Where the Grantee's said industrial unit goes out of production within 
five years from the date of commencement of production except in cases 
where the unit remains out of production for short periods extending to six 
months due to reason beyond its control such as shortage of raw material, 
power, etc. or
(c)	Where the Grantee fails to furnish the prescribed statement and/or 
information which it is called upon to furnish, or
(d)	If the Grantee commits a breach of any one of the covenants herein 
contained or of the Provisions of the said Scheme."
Subsequent to the registration of the appellant as Medium Scale Industry, the 
Government of India, by Notification dated 18.03.1985 altered the definitions of 'Small 
Scale Industry' and 'Medium Scale Industry'.  By this notification, it was provided that if 
the investment of an industrial unit in plant and machinery alone (excluding other 
investments) was up to Rs. 35 lacs, it was entitled to be registered as a Small Scale 
Industry, but if it exceeded Rs. 35 lacs, it was entitled to be registered as Medium Scale 
Industry.  In other words, the limit of investment in plant and machinery for Small Scale 
Industry was increased from Rs. 20 lacs to Rs. 35 lacs.  The existing registered medium 
scale industries were given option to get themselves registered as small scale 
industries if they so chose within six months.  The appellant was advised to apply to the 
DGTD for de-registration on the ground that its investment in plant and machinery was 
less than Rs. 35 lacs in view of the revised definition of the Small Scale Industry and 
the Medium Scale Industry made by the Government of India by its Notification issued 
on 18.03.1985.  The appellant was advised to apply to the DGTD for de-registration 
more than a year after the cash subsidy had been sanctioned and granted to the 
appellant under the Scheme and much after the expiry of the option period.  By letter 
dated 04.08.1987, the DGTD cancelled the registration of the appellant as a Medium 
Scale Industry and directed the appellant to approach the Director of Industries, U.P. for 
registration as a Small Scale Industry.  According to the appellant, the registration could 
not be cancelled as the option period of six months had already expired.  The appellant 
thereupon applied for registration with the General Manager, District Industries, Agra, 
for being registered as a Small Scale Industry.
On 24.09.1987, the appellant received a communication dated 15.09.1987 from 
respondent No.2 calling upon the appellant to refund the cash subsidy together with 
interest amounting to more than Rs.18,40,767.12 on the only ground that the unit of the 
appellant was required to continue to remain a Medium Scale Industry for five years 
from the date of the agreement and on account of the cancellation of its registration by 
the DGTD, the appellant had caused a violation of the scheme.  It is also stated that the 
power to seek refund of the subsidy is also circumscribed by clause 2 of the Agreement 
dated 31.03.1986 executed between the parties.  Clause 2 of the said Agreement has 
already been extracted above.
While so the respondent without waiting for a reply from the appellant or 
affording any opportunity of hearing straight away issued a recovery certificate on 
31.10.1987 to the third respondent calling upon him to recover the sum of Rs. 18 lacs 
and odd as arrears of Land revenue from the appellant.  The appellant thereupon made 
a representation to the Government of U.P. that the said demand and subsequent 
recovery order were illegal and contrary to the factual position.  As no response was 
received to the aforesaid representation and as the respondents were taking recourse 
to coercive processes, the appellant filed a writ petition before the High Court.
It was contended before the High Court on behalf of the respondents that the 
appellant has not faithfully observed all the provisions of the Scheme as also other 
conditions imposed by the order sanctioning the scheme and that a perusal of the terms 
of the scheme under which the subsidy was allowed only show that a Pioneer Unit 
holding DGTD registration was eligible for subsidy under the Scheme and a combined 
reading of the Scheme and the Agreement shows that the loanee that is the petitioner 
(appellant) had to retain its character as a Pioneer Unit holding DGTD registration for a 
period of five years to be computed from the year in which the disbursement of the 
subsidy was made.  It was further submitted that after raising of the limit from Rs. 20 
lacs to Rs. 35 lacs in the meanwhile, the appellant lost its DGTD registration which was 
cancelled on its own application vide order dated 04.08.1987 as a result of which the 
appellant was relegated to the character of a Small Scale Unit.  It was further argued by 
the respondents that the inevitable consequence of the loss of the DGTD registration by 
the appellant as aforesaid was that the appellant ceased to be eligible for special 
subsidy paid to it under the Scheme and this indeed constituted violation of condition 
No.1(b) of the Agreement.  Under such circumstances, the subsidy of Rs. 15 lacs paid 
to the appellant under the Scheme as a Pioneer Unit holding DGTD registration 
became recoverable by the respondents as provided in clause 2 and clause 2(d) of the 
Agreement along with interest at current bank lending rate calculated from the date of 
payment of subsidy till the date of recovery of the amount.
The Division Bench of the High Court held that the writ petition filed by the 
appellant was bereft of merits and that the respondents are entitled to recover the 
subsidy with interest as demanded.  The High Court proceeded on the basis that there 
was breach of the terms granting subsidy by reason of the appellant being de-
recognised by DGTD

Aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court, the above appeal has been filed.
We have perused the pleadings, the judgment under appeal, the anneuxres and 
other relevant documents and, in particular, the Scheme, notice for recovery of subsidy, 
certificate for recovery issued by the Commissioner and Director of Industries, U.P., 
correspondence between the appellant and the respondents, Sanction letter dated 
31.03.1986, Agreement dated 31.03.1986, cancellation order of DGTD registration 
dated 04.08.1987 and the proceedings issued by the Government of India in regard to 
the procedure for registration of units on transfer from DGTD etc., consequent upon 
revision in the definition of Small Scale Industries dated 17.01.1981 and the Notification 
dated 18.03.1985.
We heard the arguments of Mr. Kailash Vasdev, learned senior counsel for the 
appellant and Mr. R.K. Singh, learned counsel for the respondents.  The counsel for the 
respective parties reiterated their submissions advanced before the High Court.
On the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the case, the following questions 
may arise for consideration :
(1)	If an industrial unit of a Company is granted subsidy in terms of the 
Scheme framed by the State Government when it fulfils all the terms and 
conditions of the Scheme, is it open to the State Government to call for 
refund of the subsidy at a later stage when the 'pioneer unit' chooses to 
get itself registered as a Small Scale Industry with the State Government 
instead of remaining registered as a Medium Scale Industry with the 
Director General of Technical Development, Government of India in 
accordance with the change effected in the definition of a Small Scale 
Industry and a Medium Scale Industry by the Government of India, 
although it continues to remain 'pioneer unit' and there is absolutely no 
change in the control of the State Government over the unit in the 
obligations, investments and assets of the pioneer unit?
(2)	Whether there is any provision in the Scheme or Agreement that a 
'Pioneer Unit' which had been granted subsidy must continue to remain 
registered with the Director General of Technical Development for a 
period of five years and if it does not remain registered, are respondents 
1 & 2 entitled to seek refund of the subsidy?
In the instant case, the following facts are not in dispute :-
(1)	That both the parties to this action have entered into an Agreement; 
(2)	That the Government of U.P. formulated a scheme known as 'Capital 
Grant Scheme' for the grant of subsidies to various industrial units for 
giving an impetus to the industrialisation of the backward areas of the 
State;
(3)	That the Scheme provides for payment of subsidies to the industries 
sector in the zero industrial area;
(4)	That the petitioner, in fact, had set up his industrial unit in the zero 
industrial area;
(5)	That the industrial unit had been set up during the period from 
01.10.1982 to 31.03.1985 in a backward area where no heavy industry is 
established prior to 01.10.1982;
(6)	That the appellant's unit was treated as a Pioneer Unit within the terms of 
the scheme and that it was registered with DGTD;
(7)	That the appellant had made a total investment of Rs.1,07,78,368/- on 
building, land and machinery etc. and became entitled to cash subsidy 
under the Scheme;
(8)	That the appellant's unit was registered with DGTD as a Medium Scale 
Industry and that the appellant had fulfilled the conditions of the scheme;
(9)	That the sanction of subsidy of Rs.15 lacs to the appellant and payment 
of the same in two instalments;
(10)	That the Government of India has issued fresh guidelines on 18.03.1985 
which provided that an industry, investment of which did not exceed Rs. 
35 lacs in plant and machinery alone shall be entitled to be treated as a 
Small Scale Industry;
(11)	That the DGTD cancelled the registration of the appellant as a Medium 
Scale Industry on 04.08.1987 and directed the appellant to approach 
Director of Industries, U.P. for registration as a Small Scale Industry and 
as a consequence of de-registration as a Medium Scale Industry by the 
DGTD, the Government of U.P. issued notice for recovery of Rs. 15 lacs 
and again called upon the appellant to refund Rs. 15 lacs as DGTD had 
cancelled the registration contending that the appellant had violated 
condition 1(b) of the Agreement.
A resume of the aforesaid undisputed facts clearly show that there has been 
absolutely no violation of any provision of the Scheme on the part of the appellant and 
that the demand for the refund was wholly illegal and arbitrary.
In this background, we have also to see as to whether the grantee/appellant 
complied with and observed all the provisions of the Scheme and of the covenants of 
the Agreement or violated any terms of the Agreement.
We have already noticed as a result of change in the definition of Small Scale 
Industry by the Development Commissioner, Government of India the industrial units 
which had invested upto Rs. 35 lacs in plant and machinery was liable to be treated as 
small scale industries and that it was on this ground alone, the appellant's industrial unit 
been de-registered as a Small Scale Industry but it continued to be a pioneer unit in 
terms of the scheme to which the subsidy had been granted to the appellant.  In the 
circumstances, the appellant stated that the question of seeking refund of the amount 
from them did not arise as the appellant had not violated any terms of the Scheme or of 
the Agreement.  In our view, the High Court has overlooked the aforesaid facts and 
documents in this regard.
It is also pertinent to notice that subsequent to the registration of the appellant 
as Medium Scale Industry, the Government of India, by Notification dated 18.03.1985 
altered the definitions of Small Scale Industry and Medium Scale Industry.  By this 
Notification, it was provided that if the investment of an industrial unit in plant and 
machinery alone was up to Rs.35 lacs.  It was entitled to be registered as a Small Scale 
Industry, but if it exceeded Rs.35 lacs, it was entitled to be registered as a Medium 
Scale Industry.  In fact, the respondents could not point out that there was any change 
in the investment, assets, production, land, building, plant and machinery of the 
appellant and that there had been any change in the control exercised by the 
respondent Nos. 1 and 2 over the appellant and its units.  There has been no change in 
the obligations of the appellant.  The appellant had applied for re-registration with 
DGTD as a Small Scale Industry more than a year after grant of subsidy on the advise 
that in view of the revised Notification issued by the Government of India, the appellant 
was liable to be registered as a Small Scale Industry.  In our opinion, the registration of 
a unit as a Small Scale and Medium Scale Industry is done in pursuance of notifications 
issued under the
Industries Development and Regulation Act, 1951
by the Government 
of India and that the subsequent cancellation of registration by DGTD on account of 
change of criteria has no bearing on the status of an industrial unit as a Pioneer Unit 
under the scheme framed by the State of U.P.
The appellant was registered as a DGTD Unit on 21.10.1983 and the said 
registration continued.  Thereafter, in the year 1985, there have been some changes in 
the definition of the Small Scale Industries by the Development Commissioner, 
Government of India by which the definition of a Small Scale Industries Unit has been 
amended  and  the  limit  of investment in the plant and machineries has been extended 
from Rs. 20 lacs to Rs. 35 lacs.  It has also been made clear that while computing the 
value of the machineries, only the value of those machineries will be considered which 
are directly involved in the production, while the other accessories and other 
machineries which are used in the manufacturing process but are not directly involved 
in the process of manufacture were not to be included for considering the unit as Small 
Scale Industry unit.  In this view of the matter, even though the investment of the 
appellant in the machineries was more than Rs.35 lacs, but the machineries which are 
utilised for manufacturing was less than Rs.35 lacs i.e. Rs.32,15,861/-, hence the 
appellant was compelled to get it registered as Small Scale Industry unit, instead of a 
DGTD Unit.  Thereafter, the appellant applied for registration as Small Scale Industry 
Unit and the requisite registration certificate was granted to the appellant by the 
General Manager, District Industries Centre, Agra, registering the appellant as a Small 
Scale Industry Unit.
It is also pertinent to notice that the respondents without issuing any show cause 
notice to the appellant as to why the said recovery be not made against the appellant 
and without affording any opportunity to show cause, a call notice dated 15.09.1987 has 
been issued to the appellant for recovering that amount and again followed by a 
recovery certificate from the office of the Commissioner and Director of Industries for 
recovering the sum of Rs.18,72,821.92 as the arrears of land revenue.  In our opinion, 
the entire recovery proceedings initiated against the appellant by the respondents as 
arrears of land revenue is absolutely illegal and in gross violation of the principles of 
natural justice.
In this context, we may reproduce clause 13 of the Scheme which reads as 
follows :
"13. Recovery of Special State Capital Grant: The Director of Industry, 
Uttar Pradesh shall have power to get the Special State Grant recovered 
as is the recovery of land revenue is done consequent to following 
circumstances:
a)	If the Industrial Unit has obtained the State Capital Grant by 
giving false facts or by submitting necessary facts in fraudulent manner.
b)	If the Unit has stopped the production work within five years of 
the commencement of the production.  However, this condition of 
restriction shall not be applicable to such units where the production 
work has remained suspended for a short period of 6 months due to 
reasons beyond its control such as sick and shortage of power etc.
c)	If industrial Unit fails to provide prescribed details and information 
sought for.  If Director of Industries of Uttar Pradesh could not get the 
Special State Capital Grant recovered from the Unit under the normal 
procedure, then he can get the amount of loan recovered as the arrear 
of land revenue recovery done under the Government of Uttar Pradesh 
rules.
d)	If the Director of any Unit who has partly or fully received the 
grant has to change the place of his unit or dispose of any part of 
immoveable property/assets within five years from the date of start of 
production.
Clause 2 of the Agreement has been extracted in paragraphs supra.
The above two clauses mentioned the circumstances under which the cash 
subsidy may be recovered as arrears of land revenue.  None of the said clauses is 
applicable or attracted in the instant case.  Therefore, we are of the opinion that the 
entire recovery proceedings are absolutely illegal and without jurisdiction.  It is not the 
case of the respondents that the appellant has practised any fraud or guilty of making of 
any mis-representations in obtaining the sanction/eligibility.  The only provision which 
refers for recovery of cash subsidy as arrears of land revenue is mentioned in the 
above two clauses and inasmuch as none of the conditions enumerated therein is 
attracted, the entire recovery of the cash subsidy as arrears of land revenue is illegal.  
Even otherwise, the allegations made in the call notice for recovery of the cash subsidy 
as arrears of land revenue is uncalled for.
We have carefully perused the entire Scheme which goes to show that the cash 
subsidy would be granted to the unit which is a Pioneer Unit i.e. having an investment 
of more than Rs. 1 crore and which has been established after 01.10.1982 and at the 
time of grant of cash subsidy, the said Unit should be registered as DGTD Unit.  
Nowhere it provides that the said industry should remain as a DGTD Unit for a period of 
five years as mentioned in clause 4 of the call notice.  A perusal of the scheme further 
goes to show that it has been provided in the scheme that the production should not be 
stopped for a period of five years but it nowhere provides that the unit should remain as 
a DGTD Unit for a period of five years.  In fact, the appellant had been compelled to get 
the registration under the Small Scale Industries Unit on account of the change in the 
definition of the Small Scale Industries Unit by the Central Government and not on 
account of any inaction of the appellant.  Hence, if on account of the change in the 
definition of the Small Scale Industries Unit, the appellant was de-recognised as DGTD 
Unit then the appellant could not be denied the benefit of cash subsidy.
We have already seen that clause 13 of the Scheme and clause 2 of the 
Agreement has been invoked by the respondents for the recovery of the subsidy.  A 
close scrutiny of the above two clauses goes to show that in the event of violation of 
any conditions, the recovery will be made as arrears of land revenue and so prior to 
initiating action for breach of the terms of clause 13 of the Scheme and clause 2 of the 
Agreement, the opportunity ought to have been provided by the respondent No.2 to the 
appellant to demonstrate whether the provisions of the Scheme and the Agreement are 
violated or not and that having not done so the entire recovery proceedings initiated 
against the appellant is bad for violation of principles of natural justice.
As already observed, a perusal of the pleadings would reveal that there is no 
allegation regarding playing of fraud or mis-representation in obtaining the 
sanction/eligibility.  The argument of the learned counsel for the respondents that the 
appellant on his own freewill applied for de-registration vide letter dated 12.06.1987 and 
that the appellants were no more entitled to be registered under DGTD and since the 
constitution of the Company had undergone change and under the changed conditions 
the respondents were entitled to recover the subsidy given to the appellant cannot at all 
be countenanced.
Having taken note of the aforesaid factual situation, we have no hesitation to 
hold that the respondents have acted arbitrarily and contrary to the terms of the 
Scheme and the Agreement and on the basis of unwarranted assumptions in seeking to 
recover the amounts given as subsidy to the appellant.
In the facts and circumstances of the aforesaid, we set aside the judgment of the 
High Court impugned in this appeal and allow this appeal.  However, there will be no 
order as to costs.