[Cites
15
, Cited by
173
]
Supreme Court of India
Sohan Lal @ Sohan Singh & Ors vs State Of Punjab on 14 October, 2003
Equivalent citations: AIR 2003 SUPREME COURT 4466, 2003 (11) SCC 534, 2003 AIR SCW 5235, 2004 (1) SRJ 196, 2004 SCC(CRI) 226, (2004) 13 ALLINDCAS 144 (SC), 2003 (6) SLT 476, 2003 (8) SCALE 568, 2003 (4) LRI 321, 2003 ALL MR(CRI) 2670, 2003 CRIAPPR(SC) 618, (2003) 4 KHCACJ 471 (SC), (2003) 4 CURCRIR 230, (2003) 7 SUPREME 386, (2004) 1 ALLCRIR 582, (2003) 8 SCALE 568, (2004) 1 CURLJ(CCR) 569, 2004 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 121, (2003) 2 DMC 645, (2003) 4 ALLCRILR 931, (2004) 1 MADLW(CRI) 1, (2003) 12 INDLD 379, (2004) 48 ALLCRIC 132, (2003) 3 CHANDCRIC 122, 2004 (1) ALD(CRL) 1
Bench:
K. G. Balakrishnan
,
B. N. Srikrishna
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  280 of 2003

PETITIONER:
Sohan Lal @ Sohan Singh & Ors.		         		 

RESPONDENT:
State of Punjab							

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 14/10/2003

BENCH:
K. G. Balakrishnan & B. N. Srikrishna.
@
JUDGMENT
SRIKRISHNA, J.
This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment of the 
Punjab & Haryana High Court dismissing the appeals of the present 
appellants against convictions, under Section 302 read with
Section 109
IPC 
in respect of appellant No. 1, and under
Section 302
IPC in respect of 
appellant Nos. 2 and 3.
On 1.4.1996 an F.I.R. was lodged at the Sadar Police Station on the 
basis of information given by one Bansi Ram (Taya i.e. Uncle) at 10.40 p.m. 
on that night with regard to the unnatural death, in suspicious circumstances, 
of one Kamlesh Rani. The gist of the F.I.R. was that Kamlesh Rani was 
being harassed by her husband-Sohan Lal @ Sohan Singh (first appellant), 
mother-in-law Harbans Kaur (second appellant) and sister-in-law  Kanchan 
(third appellant), who  ill treated her to extract dowry from her parents. The 
said Kamlesh Rani was also thrown out of the house of her in-laws and it 
was only after intervention of interested parties that she returned to the 
house of the in-laws on 31.3.1996.  On 1.4.1996, Bansi Ram received 
information that Kamlesh Rani had been admitted in G.N.D. Hospital, New 
Emergency, Amritsar with extensive burn injuries. He lodged a complaint 
that Kamlesh Rani had been set on fire by her husband, Sohan Lal, mother-
in-law, Harbans Kaur, father-in-law, Sarwan Singh, and sister-in-law, 
Kanchan after pouring kerosene oil on her, after conniving with one another.
The police started investigation in the matter, seized certain 
incriminating materials and also recorded statements of witnesses.  As a 
result of the investigation, the police filed a Charge Sheet against the three 
appellants and Sarwan Singh. It was alleged against Harbans Kaur and 
Kanchan that at about 4.00 p.m. on 1.4.1996 they murdered Kamlesh Rani 
and committed an offence punishable under
Section 302
of the IPC.  In 
the alternative, since Kamlesh Rani had died on account of burn injuries 
otherwise than under normal circumstances, within seven years of her 
marriage with Sohan Lal @ Sohan Singh, Sohan Lal (husband),  Sarwan 
Singh (father-in-law), Harbans Kaur (mother-in-law) and Kanchan (sister-in-
law) of Kamlesh Rani were charged with subjecting Kamlesh Rani to cruelty 
and harassment on account of demand of dowry and causing her dowry 
death, an offence punishable under
Section 304B
of the IPC. The accused 
denied the charges and claimed to be tried. The prosecution examined Dr. 
Gurmanjit Rai, Lecturer, Forensic Medicines, Medical College, Amritsar 
(PW 1),  Bansi Ram (PW 2), Usha Rani (PW 3), Gopi Ram (PW 4), Rishi 
Ram (PW 5),  Lakhbir Singh, Naib Tehsildar, Ratala (PW 6), Jit Singh (PW
7), Surinder Singh HC (PW 8), A.S.I. Joginder Singh, P.S. Civil Lines, 
Amritsar (PW 9), Dr. Sat Pal, Surgical Specialist, C.S.C. Saroya, Distt. 
Nawan Shehar (PW 10) and A.S.I. Satnam Singh (PW 11) and produced 
certain material objects and documents to prove the charges against the 
accused.  The trial court held that Kamlesh Rani had died as she was 
murdered by second appellant  Harbans Kaur and third appellant  Kanchan 
abetted by first appellant Sohan Lal @ Sohan Singh.  The trial court also 
recorded a finding that, as far as dowry death was concerned, there was no 
definite statement of any witness that any of the accused had ever demanded 
dowry at the time of the marriage or even thereafter.  Upon appreciation of 
the evidence on record, the trial court held that the prosecution had failed to 
prove its case against accused Sarwan Singh beyond a shadow of doubt.  
Sarwan Singh was, therefore, acquitted of all charges against him, but 
Harbans Kaur and Kanchan were held guilty of burning Kamlesh Rani to 
death and Sohan Lal @ Sohan Singh was held guilty of abetting the same.  
Harbans Kaur and Kanchan were thus held guilty of an offence punishable 
under
Section 302
of the IPC, while  Sohan Lal @ Sohan Singh was held 
guilty of an offence punishable under
section 302
read with
Section 109
IPC.  
All three accused were sentenced to imprisonment for life and fine of Rs. 
1,000/- each and, in default, a further imprisonment of two months.  Being 
aggrieved by the convictions, the three appellants,  Sohan Lal @ Sohan 
Singh, Harbans Kaur and Kanchan are in appeal.
The case of the prosecution rests mostly on two declarations made by 
Kamlesh Rani, one on 2.4.1996 to the Naib Tehsildar-cum-Executive 
Magistrate, Lakhbir Singh (PW 6) at 3.15 p.m. and the second statement 
made under
Section 161
of the Cr. P.C., recorded by Satnam Singh, A.S.I. 
(PW 11) at 7.10 p.m. on 7.4.1996.  It also rests on the oral testimony of the 
witnesses for corroboration of the statements made in the said declarations.
Appellant No. 1, accused Sohan Lal husband of Kamlesh Rani, 
according to the Charge Sheet, had been charged only with the offence of 
dowry death, punishable under
Section 304B
of the IPC. There was no 
charge under
Section 302
or for abetment of murder under
Section 109
of 
the IPC.  Counsel for the appellants contended that
Section 109
of the IPC, 
which deals with abetment of a substantive offence, is itself a substantive 
offence for which punishment is prescribed under the section.  Learned 
counsel contended that unless an accused has been charged for an offence 
under
Section 109
IPC and tried, it was not open to the trial court to sustain 
the charge under
Section 302
with the help of
Section 109
IPC for which the 
accused was never tried.  Learned counsel relied on the judgments of this 
Court in
Joseph Kurian Philip Jose  v.  State of Kerala
(1994) 6 SCC 535 
and Wakil Yadav and Anr.  v.  State of Bihar (2000) 10 SCC 500 to 
buttress his contention.
Joseph Kurian
(supra) holds thus:
"
Section 109
IPC is by itself an offence though punishable in 
the context of other offences.  A-4 suffered a trial for substantive 
offences under the Indian Penal Code and Abkari Act.  When his 
direct involvement in these crimes could not be established, it is 
difficult to uphold the view of the High Court that he could lopsidedly 
be taken to have answered the charge of abetment and convicted on 
that basis.  There would, as is plain, be serious miscarriage of justice 
to the accused in causing great prejudice to his defence.  The roles of 
the perpetrator and abettor of the crime are distinct, standing apart 
from each other."
This view was reiterated in the subsequent judgment in Wakil Yadav 
(supra).  In Wakil Yadav (supra)  the appellant was originally charged with 
several other accused under
Section 302
with the aid of
Section 109
IPC.  
The Court of Sessions convicted all the 7 accused for the offences charged. 
The High Court in appeal acquitted 5 persons, convicting one Guru Charan 
Yadav substantively for the offence under
Section 302
IPC and the 
appellant, Wakil Yadav, for the offence under
Section 302
read with
Section 
109
IPC.  There was no dispute that no charge had been framed against the 
appellant, Wakil Yadav, under
Section 109
IPC.
This Court reiterated the 
law laid down in
Joseph Kurian
(supra) and held that it was not open to the 
High Court to convict the accused, Wakil Yadav, for an offence under
Section 302
with the aid of
Section 109
IPC, as no charge had been  framed 
against him under
Section 109
IPC, which is itself  a substantive offence.
Section 211
of the Code of Criminal Procedure requires that the 
charge against the accused be precisely stated. Sub-section(4) of
Section 211
of the Code of Criminal Procedure specifically requires that the law and 
section of the law against which the offence is said to have been committed 
shall be mentioned in the charge.  The learned counsel for the respondent 
State, relying on
Section 464
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, urged that 
failure to specify
Section 109
in Charge Sheet against Sohan Lal was a mere 
irregularity which would not vitiate the trial without proof of prejudice to the 
accused.   We cannot agree. The learned counsel for the accused is fully 
justified in his submission that failure to frame a charge with regard to the 
substantive offence of
Section 109
IPC has certainly prejudiced the accused 
in the trial court. The accused Sohan Lal @ Sohan Singh was called upon to 
face trial only for the charge under
Section 304B
IPC.  Neither a charge 
under
Section 302
IPC nor under
Section 109
IPC, was levelled against him 
in the Charge Sheet.  In the absence of a charge being framed against the 
accused Sohan Lal under
Section 302
or 109
IPC
,  it would certainly cause 
prejudice to him, if he is convicted under either for these offences at the end 
of  the trial.  In our view, it was not permissible for the trial court to convict 
the first accused Sohan Lal for the offence under
Section 302
read with
Section 109
IPC.  His conviction under
Section 302
read with
Section 109
IPC is, therefore, illegal and is liable to be set aside. The High Court erred in 
upholding the conviction of Sohan Lal @ Sohan Singh under
Section 302
read with
Section 109
of the IPC and dismissing his appeal.
The learned counsel for the appellants then strongly assailed the 
convictions of Harbans Kaur (mother-in-law) and Kanchan (sister-in-law) 
under
Section 302
IPC.  He contended that the version given in the First 
Information Report (FIR) lodged at the instance of Bansi Ram (PW 2) and 
the version given by Bansi Ram in his evidence before the trial court are 
irreconcilable and suggest that Bansi Ram could never have had the 
information with which he rushed to the Police.  In the FIR, Bansi Ram says:
"After making my niece Kamlesh to understand the things, we sent her with 
her parent's in-law on 31.3.1996.  Today on 1.4.1996, we received 
information that Kamlesh was admitted to G.N.D. Hospital, New 
Emergency, Amritsar in burnt condition. I accompanied by Usha Rani W/o 
Hira Lal (brother's daughter-in-law) reached G.N.D. Hospital, New 
Emergency, Amritsar.  My niece Kamlesh told us that on that day at about 
4.00 p.m. she was present  in her house and that her husband Sohan Lal, 
Banso, mother-in-law, Sarwan Singh, father-in-law and Kanchan her sister-
in-law after conniving with one another had set her on fire, after pouring 
kerosene oil on her."  In his testimony before the court, Bansi Ram stated 
that on 1.4.1996, Gurbux Singh, another son of Sarwan Singh, came to their 
house at 8.00 p.m. in the night and told that Kamlesh was admitted in 
G.N.D. Hospital, Amritsar in burnt condition.  He then said, " I accompanied 
by Usha Rani and another person went to the said hospital.  Kamlesh was in 
excessively burnt condition.  She told us that her husband's sister Kanchan 
had tied her legs and Sohan Singh accused had set her on fire after pouring 
kerosene oil on her body."  A number of improvements, variations and 
inconsistencies between the FIR statement  made by Bansi Ram     (PW 2) 
and his evidence before the court were highlighted by the learned counsel 
for the accused.  He also contended that it was impossible for Kamlesh Rani 
to have spoken to Bansi Ram and given him information as to what 
transpired at the time of the incident.  Strong reliance was placed by the 
learned counsel on the bed-head ticket (Ex. PQ) which showed that on 
1.4.1996 Kamlesh Rani was admitted to the hospital at 6.30 p.m. with 
alleged history of burns, that she was prescribed several medicines which 
included a strong sedative and pain killer like Calmpose and Pathidine 
injections.  There is an endorsement at 8.40 p.m. in the bed-head ticket (Ex. 
PQ): "seriousness of the Pt. explained to the relatives." There is also an 
endorsement at 9.10 p.m.:  "Pt. declared unfit for statement due to sedation."
The learned counsel urged that according to the evidence of Bansi 
Ram, he received information about the burn injuries and admission in the 
hospital of Kamlesh Rani at about 8.00 p.m.; he immediately went to Usha 
Rani and accompanied by her and others came to the hospital.  By that time, 
injections Calmpose, Furtulin and Pathidine had already been administered 
at 7.20 p.m., as seen from the I.O. Chart dated 1.4.1996.  It would be 
improbable that the patient would be in a position to talk to anyone, if  these 
strong sedatives had been administered at 7.20 p.m..  There appears to be 
substance in this contention. At 9.10 p.m. the doctor had declared the patient 
unfit for statement due to sedation. The exact time at which Bansi Ram 
reached the hospital is not available from the evidence on the record. The 
evidence of Usha Rani (PW 3) suggests that she had received information 
about Kamlesh Rani receiving burn injuries and her admission to the 
hospital at  8.30 p.m. on 1.4.1996.  According to    PW 3, she found that, 
"she was in a serious condition, she was speechless and was not able to 
speak." It is true that Usha Rani was declared as a hostile witness and cross-
examined.  Nonetheless, it is open to the accused to rely on the testimony of 
Usha Rani for the purpose of improbabilising the evidence of Bansi Ram, in 
so far as his talk with Kamlesh Rani on the night of 1.4.1996 is concerned.  
In our view, the contention of the learned counsel for the accused is justified 
and needs to be upheld.  A cumulative assessment of the evidence of Bansi 
Ram (PW 2), Usha Rani (PW 3) and the medical chart (Ex. PQ) 
improbabilises that Bansi Ram could have had a talk with Kamlesh Rani in 
the evening of 1.4.1996, before he went to the Police Station and had the 
FIR recorded.
The learned counsel thereafter contended that if Bansi Ram's 
testimony is not believable, then the whole of the FIR becomes doubtful and 
the case against the accused necessarily collapses. We cannot accept this. It 
may be probable that Bansi Ram might have given information to the police 
which was exaggerated and added things which, probably, he did not learn 
from Kamlesh Rani on 1.4.1996.  It is possible that seeing Kamlesh Rani in 
the hospital, after suffering extensive burns to the extent of 80 per cent, 
Bansi Ram might have suspected the in-laws of Kamlesh Rani as having 
murdered her.  The First Information Report is only a report about the 
information as to the commission of an offence; it is not substantive 
evidence, as the police has yet to investigate the offence.  If Bansi Ram's 
was the only testimony in support of the prosecution, then perhaps the 
counsel's was right. We find, however, that the prosecution strongly relied 
on two declarations, one made to Naib Tehsildar, Lakhbir Singh (PW 6) on 
2.4.1996 as well as the statement made by Kamlesh Rani under
Section 161
of the Cr. P.C.  recorded on 7.4.1986 by  Satnam Singh, A.S.I., both of 
which can be treated as dying declarations.
The learned counsel for the accused strongly assailed the two dying 
declarations and contended that the two dying declarations are mutually 
contradictory and the evidence of the other witnesses do not probabilise their 
truth.  It was contended that the overall circumstances make it unsafe to 
convict the accused merely on the said dying declarations.  We need to 
consider these arguments in detail and assess their merit.
The first dying declaration (Ex. PN) was recorded on 2.4.1996, on the 
basis of a complaint (Ex. PL) made by Bansi Ram to the Deputy 
Commissioner, Amritsar alleging that the police were not cooperating in 
recording the statement by Kamlesh Rani, who had been admitted in the 
Emergency Ward. A request was made that some officer may be deputed for 
recording her statement and legal action be taken.  Lakhbir Singh, Naik 
Tehsildar-cum-Executive Magistrate addressed a letter dated 2.4.1996 to the 
Doctor on duty in the hospital requesting the doctor to issue a certificate as 
to whether Smt. Kamlesh Rani was fit to give a dying declaration. 
According to the evidence of Lakhbir Singh (PW 6), Bansi Ram made an 
application addressed to the District Magistrate, Amritsar, on which the 
District Magistrate made an endorsement at 2.05 p.m. on 2.4.1996 directing 
the Tehsildar to record her statement as an emergency.  The document and 
the endorsement have been proved by PW 6.  PW 6, thereafter, went to the 
hospital and addressed the letter (Ex. PM) to the Doctor on duty requesting 
him to certify as to whether Smt. Kamlesh Rani was fit to give dying 
declaration.  The Doctor on duty (Dr. Vikram Dua, Junior Resident, Surgical 
Unit-4, GND Hospital, Amritsar) made an endorsement on the application 
(Ex. PM) to the effect: "Pt. is fit for statement."  His endorsement (Ex. 
PM/1) was made at 3.00 p.m.. Thereafter, PW 6 went to Kamlesh Rani, 
disclosed his identity to her, asked the attendants to go out and, after 
ascertaining that she was fit to make the statement voluntarily, recorded her 
statement.  The dying declaration (Ex. PN) was recorded without any 
omission or addition and as narrated by Kamlesh Rani at 3.15 p.m.. An 
endorsement on Exhibit PN 1 was made by PW 6 stating, "The above given 
dying declaration of Smt. Kamlesh Rani wife of Sh. Sohan Lal, was 
recorded by the undersigned on 2.4.1996 at 3.15 p.m. in the Emergency 
Ward of Guru Nanak Dev Hospital, Amritsar." He, thereafter, sent the 
original dying declaration to the District Magistrate, who with his 
endorsement upon Exhibit PN/1 directed that the same to be sent to the 
S.S.P., Taran Taran under sealed cover. This dying declaration (Ex. PN) 
translated in English reads as under:
"I,  Kamlesh Rani wife of Sohan Lal resident of 1-a, Jajj 
Nagar near V.V. Modern School, Amritsar.  I was burnt on 
pouring kerosene oil by my mother-in-law Harbans Kaur and I 
am conscious although my body was completely burnt but I 
understand all the things.  Before I burnt I took tea mixed 
something in it.  After that my mother-in-law put kerosene oil 
on me and my sister-in-law named Kanchan lit the fire.  My 
husband harasses me and demanded for bringing money from 
her parents if  she  resides with him.  Heard and admitting the 
correct.
RTI of
					    Sd/- Kamlesh Rani
					       W/o Sohan Lal
					              2.4.96"
The learned counsel for the accused criticised the dying declaration 
(Ex. PN) as not legally sustainable on several grounds.  First, it is contended 
that the certificate of fitness is not endorsed on the dying declaration itself 
but on a separate paper i.e. on Exhibit PM/1.  Secondly, it is contended that 
the certificate of fitness alleged to have been given by Dr. Vikram Dua,  
Junior Resident, Surgical Unit-4, G.N.D. Hospital, Amritsar  was not proved 
as the said Dr. Dua was not examined at all.  He also criticised the evidence 
of Dr. Sat Pal, Surgical Specialist, C.H.C. Saroya (PW 10), who produced 
the bed-head ticket and identified the writing and signature of Dr. Vikram 
Dua with his endorsement on the application.  Though this witness was not 
even cross examined, the learned counsel contended that the certificate of 
Dr. Dua was not proved in accordance with law.  He also criticised the 
evidence of PW 6 by contending that no material was produced by PW 6 to 
show that he was really appointed as Naik Tehsildar-cum-Executive 
Magistrate.  PW 6 also denied having made a statement to the Police during 
investigation and that he had not brought the Gazette Notification whereby 
he had empowered to discharge the function of an Executive Magistrate.
Having read the evidence of PW 6,  in the light of the law
laid down 
by
a Constitution Bench of this Court in
Laxman  v. State of Maharashtra
(2002) 6 SCC 710, and on assessment of the dying declaration, Exhibit PN, 
we are afraid that none of  the contentions can prevail.
The Constitution 
Bench in
Laxman
(supra),  while resolving the conflict of opinion as to the 
manner of testing the credibility of a 'dying declaration', overruled the view 
taken in
Paparambaka Rosamma  v.  State of A.P.
(1999) 7 SCC 695 and 
approved the correctness of the view taken in
Koli Chunilal Savji and Anr.   
v.   State of Gujarat
(1999) 9 SCC 562. According to the Constitution 
Bench:
"The juristic theory regarding acceptability of a dying 
declaration is that such declaration is made in extremity, when 
the party is at the point of death and when every hope of this 
world is gone, when every motive to falsehood is silenced, and 
the man is induced by the most powerful consideration to speak 
only the truth.  Notwithstanding the same, great caution must be 
exercised in considering the weight to be given to this species 
of evidence on account of the existence of many circumstances 
which may affect their truth.  The situation in which a man is on 
the deathbed is so solemn and serene, is the reason in law to 
accept the veracity of his statement.  It is for this reason the 
requirements of oath and cross-examination are dispensed with.  
Since the accused has no power of cross-examination, the 
courts insist that the dying declaration should be of such a 
nature as to inspire full confidence of the court in its 
truthfulness and correctness.  The court, however, has always to 
be on guard to see that the statement of the deceased was not as 
a result of either tutoring or prompting or a product of 
imagination.  The court also must further decide that the 
deceased was in a fit state of mind and had the opportunity to 
observe and identify the assailant.  Normally, therefore,  the 
court in order to satisfy whether the deceased was in a fit 
mental condition to make the dying declaration looks up to the 
medical opinion.  But where the eyewitnesses state that the 
deceased was in a fit and conscious state to make the 
declaration, the medical opinion will not prevail, nor can it be 
said that since there is no certification of the doctor as to the 
fitness of the mind of the declarant, the dying declaration is not 
acceptable.  A dying declaration can be oral or in writing and 
any adequate method of communication whether by words or 
by signs or otherwise will suffice provided the indication is 
positive and definite.  In most cases, however, such statements 
are made orally before death ensues and is reduced to writing 
by someone like a Magistrate or a doctor or a police officer.  
When it is recorded, no oath is necessary nor is the presence of 
a Magistrate absolutely necessary, although to assure 
authenticity it is usual to call a Magistrate, if available for 
recording the statement of a man about to die.  There is no 
requirement of law that a dying declaration must necessarily be 
made to a Magistrate and when such statement is recorded by a 
Magistrate there is no specified statutory form for such 
recording.  Consequently, what evidential value or weight has 
to be attached to such statement necessarily depends on the 
facts and circumstances of each particular case.  What is 
essentially required is that the person who records a dying 
declaration must be satisfied that the deceased was in a fit state 
of mind.  Where it is proved by the testimony of the Magistrate 
that the declarant was fit to make the statement even without 
examination by the doctor the declaration can be acted upon 
provided the court ultimately holds the same to be voluntary 
and truthful.  A certification by the doctor is essentially a rule of 
caution and therefore the voluntary and truthful nature of the 
declaration can be established otherwise."
The view taken in
Paparambaka Rosamma
(supra) that in the absence of  
a medical certification as to the fitness of  state of mind, it would be risky to 
accept a dying declaration on the subjective satisfaction of the Magistrate 
was overruled as having been too broadly stated and not being the correct 
enunciation of law. The Constitution Bench said :
"…It is indeed a hypertechnical view that the certification of 
the doctor was to the effect that the patient is conscious and 
there was no certification that the patient was in a fit state of 
mind especially when the Magistrate categorically stated in his 
evidence indicating the questions he had put to the patient and 
from the answers elicited was satisfied that the patient was in a 
fit state of mind whereafter he recorded the dying declaration.  
Therefore, the judgment of this Court in
Paparambaka 
Rosamma  v.  State of A.P.
must be held to be not correctly 
decided and we affirm the law
laid down by
this Court in
Koli 
Chunilal Savji  v.  State of Gujarat
."
In
Koli Chunilal Savji
(supra) a Bench of three learned Judges 
rejected the contention that in the absence of a doctor while recording the 
dying declaration, the declaration loses its value and cannot be accepted. 
The Court observed that,  "… the aforesaid requirements are a mere rule of 
prudence and the ultimate test is whether the dying declaration can be held 
to be  a truthful one and voluntarily given."
Ravi Chander and Ors.  v.  State of Punjab
(1998) 9 SCC 303,  
was approved, in which  this Court held that for not examining the doctor, 
the dying declaration recorded by the Executive Magistrate and the dying 
declaration orally made need not be doubted.  The Court observed that the 
Executive Magistrate is a disinterested witness and is a responsible officer 
as long as there was no material on record to suspect that he had any animus 
against the accused or was in any way interested in fabricating the dying 
declaration, no question arises to checking the genuineness of the dying 
declaration recorded by the Executive Magistrate.
In the face of this clear enunciation of law, we are afraid that none of 
the above arguments urged by the learned counsel can be accepted.  Upon 
careful assessment of the evidence tendered by PW 6, Lakhbir Singh, Naik 
Tehsildar, we find no circumstance brought on record to suspect his 
bonafides; nothing has been elicited to show that he was interested in 
fabricating a case against the accused or that he had any motive to make out 
a false case against the accused.  Hence, we are unable to accept the 
contention of the learned counsel for the accused that it is unsafe to convict 
the accused on the dying declarations.
It was strenuously urged by the learned counsel for the accused that 
the testimony of the Naib Tehsildar Lakhbir Singh (PW 6) is unbelievable 
because the District Magistrate appears to have acted with great haste in 
deputing Lakhbir Singh to record the dying declaration as soon as he was 
approached by Bansi Ram (PW 2).  It was also urged that the entries in the 
bed-head ticket suggest that the witness was constantly under administration 
of heavy sedatives which improbabilises the recording of her dying 
declaration by Lakhbir Singh (PW 6). In our view, these are arguments of 
desperation. As to how much time the District Magistrate should take in 
responding to a request for recording  a dying declaration, is not a matter of 
law  or rigidity, but one of convenience depending on the circumstances and 
the urgency with which he views it.
The bed-head ticket shows that the last injection of Pathidine and 
other sedative drugs were given at 7.20 p.m. on 1.4.1996.  On 2.4.1996, no 
Pathidine injection was given in the morning.  On the contrary, there is an 
endorsement in the treatment sheet stating, "Sedation dose of evening 
withheld.  Pt. declared fit for statement and the same given in the presence 
of the Magistrate." It is contended that this entry has not been proved by any 
witness.  In our view, this argument is without substance.  If the accused 
wanted to rely on this entry, to impeach the credit worthiness of Exhibit PN, 
they were free to examine any witness.  Whether this entry is held proved or 
not, it does not detract from the credit worthiness of the evidence of Lakhbir 
Singh (PW 6).  We, therefore, think that there is no substance in this 
contention.
We are satisfied that the dying declaration (Ex. PN) was made by the 
deceased Kamlesh Rani and that there is no need to discard the evidence of  
PW 6; that when she made the dying declaration she was in a fit mental 
condition to do so and was fully conscious of what she was saying. 
Irrespective of whether the endorsement of  Dr. Dua upon Exhibit PM/1 has 
been proved in accordance with law or not, we find no reason to discard the 
dying declaration (Ex. PN).
The learned counsel asserted that this is a peculiar case in which there 
are five statements which can be characterised as dying declarations and 
each one is inconsistent with the others.  He, therefore, urged that we should 
disbelieve all of them, give the benefit of doubt to the accused, and acquit 
them.
According to the learned counsel for the accused, the circumstances 
under which the deceased Kamlesh Rani died have been narrated differently 
on five different occasions. First,  there is the version in the FIR lodged by 
Bansi Ram (PW 2);  second,  is the version given in the deposition of Bansi 
Ram (PW 2); third, is the dying declaration recorded by Naib Tehsildar 
Lakhbir Singh (PW 6) (Ex. PN); fourth, is the version in the statement of 
Kamlesh Rani recorded under
Section 161
of  the Cr. P.C. and fifthly, the 
version given in the deposition of Jit Singh (PW 7) under cross-examination.  
Learned counsel contended that each one of the versions is inconsistent with 
the others and, therefore, taking an overall view, as each one the versions 
conflicts with the dying declaration (Ex. PN),  it would be unsafe to rely on 
the dying declarations to uphold the conviction of the appellants.  Although, 
at the first blush, the contention of the learned counsel for the appellants 
seems attractive, upon a careful appraisal it has no substance.  We have 
already analysed the deposition of Bansi Ram (PW 2) in the light of the 
deposition of  Usha Rani (PW 3).  A cumulative reading of the two, together 
with the medical endorsements made on the bed-head ticket of G.N.D. 
Hospital, clearly ruled out Bansi Ram as having received any information 
from deceased Kamlesh Rani.  It is true that both in the FIR as well as in the 
deposition of  Bansi Ram (PW 2)  an exaggerated version had been given. 
Merely, because Bansi Ram takes it upon himself to give an exaggerated 
and coloured version of the circumstances under which Kamlesh Rani died, 
we do not think that it would be proper to reject the dying declaration       
(Ex.  PN) which we have tested on the anvil of the law
laid down by
the 
Constitution Bench of this Court in
Laxman
(supra) and found it to have 
passed.
We are, therefore, not inclined to accept the contention that the 
dying declaration (Ex. PN) needs to be rejected because of the FIR of Bansi 
Ram and the deposition of Bansi Ram do not tally with it.
Next, we turn to the evidence of  Jit Singh (PW 7) on the basis of 
which the dying declaration (Ex. PN) is impeached. PW 7 was  examined 
only to prove the recovery of certain material objects. He was a Pancha, who 
had signed the Panchanama which showed the recovery of certain 
incriminating articles.   His examination-in-chief merely consists of the fact 
that certain articles were recovered in his presence and that he had attested 
the Panchanama, and that his statement had been recorded by the police.  
Surprisingly, in his cross-examination, this witness came out with a new 
story that he was present at the seen of the occurrence, that Kamlesh Rani 
was lying in the hands of her husband Sohan Lal @ Sohan Singh and she 
had told all of them including Jit Singh that she had committed suicide, and 
that she had committed a blunder, before she was moved to the hospital.  
Rightly, this witness was declared as hostile and suggestions were made to 
him that the facts deposed by him  had not been narrated in his statement to 
the police, that they had been so narrated at the instance of the accused and 
that he had deposed falsely under the cross-examination. We have no 
hesitation in rejecting that part of the testimony of PW 7 which appears to 
have found its way on the record so convenient  for the accused. If at all 
there was any truth in his statement that he was present at the time of 
occurrence and that the deceased Kamlesh Rani had made any statement 
before him, it was the obligation of Jit Singh (PW 7) to have disclosed this 
to the police. Had he done so, he would have been treated as a material 
witness and examined by the police with regard to the so called statement 
made before him. The fact that no such disclosure was ever made by him to 
the police, and his attempt to come out with crucial material facts pertaining 
to the occurrence, although he was being examined only as a witness to the 
Panchanama, do not lend credence to his testimony. It appears to us that    
Jit Singh (PW 7) must have been won over by the accused and made bold to 
give convenient evidence under cross-examination.  We are not inclined to 
accept this very convenient testimony of Jit Singh (PW 7) as detracting from 
the veracity and weight to be attached to the dying declaration (Ex.  PN).
That leaves us with the other statement made by Kamlesh Rani to the 
police under
Section 161
of the Cr. P.C.  The High Court in its judgment has 
quoted the statement of Kamlesh Rani under
Section 161
of the Cr. P.C. 
(Ex.  PV),  which is as under:
"Statement of Kamlesh Rani wife of Sohan Lal resident 
of Gali No. 1A, Judge Nagar, Amritsar
u/s 161
Cr. P.C.

It is stated that I am resident of above said address on 
1.4.96. I was burnt by my mother-in-law Harbans Kaur by 
pouring kerosene oil. Due to that my body was burnt. At this 
time I am conscious.  Before burnt, I took a tea after mixing 
some poison in the tea. Then my mother-in-law put a kerosene 
oil on me.  My sister-in-law named Kanchan lit the fire by 
match box.  Before the present occurrence my father-in-law 
Sarwan Singh, Sohan Lal, husband, Harbans Kaur mother-in-
law and Kanchan sister-in-law stressing me for bringing dowry 
from my parents.  On 1.4.1996 at the time of occurrence my 
father-in-law Sarwan Singh and Sohan Lal my husband both 
were present in the house.  My husband usually asked me that I 
did not like her and he further told me that if she remain with 
him bring more dowry from his parents house.  I have heard my 
statement which is correct."
A comparison of the dying declaration (Ex. PN) recorded by PW 6, 
Naib Tehsildar Lakhbir Singh, and the statement of Kamlesh Rani recorded 
under
Section 161
of the Cr. P.C. (Ex. PV) shows that they tally in material 
particulars.  There is no conflict or inconsistency between these two 
statements.  The contention of the learned counsel as to the inconsistency 
must, therefore, fail.
Upon careful consideration of the facts and circumstances of the case, 
we are satisfied that we can safely accept the veracity of the dying 
declaration (Ex. PN) made by Kamlesh Rani deceased which is also fully 
corroborated by the other circumstances and not contradicted by her 
statement recorded under
Section 161
of the Cr. P.C.. No material has been 
placed before us to show that the dying declarations were the result of any 
tutoring or coaching.  Hence, we are not satisfied that there exist any 
circumstances which compel us to suspect the trustworthiness of the dying 
declaration.
Once we come to the conclusion that the dying declaration is credit 
worthy, there is no doubt that the accusations against the appellants accused 
Harbans Kaur and accused Kanchan are fully proved. In the circumstances, 
we are of the view that both the courts below were justified in relying upon 
the dying declaration and convicting the two accused, Harbans Kaur and 
Kanchan. We see no reason to take a different view in the matter.
In the result, we make the following order :
First appellant Sohan Lal @ Sohan Singh is acquitted of all the 
charges.  He shall be released forthwith, if his custody is not required in any 
other case.
The convictions of second appellant Harbans Kaur and third appellant 
Kanchan are hereby upheld.  The appeal is dismissed as far as these accused 
are concerned.
+
5 1444-1445 1999
5 1446-1452 1999
5  8507  2003
!
The Government of Tamilnadu & Ors.
Vs. 
M. Ananchu Asari & Ors.
@
October 29, 2003
#
S. RAJENDRA BABU & P. VENKATARAMA REDDI

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT 
With 
(arising out S.L.P.(Civil) No. 870 of 2002)

P. Venkatarama Reddi, J.
Leave granted in S.L.P.(Civil) No. 870/2002.
1.		Civil Appeal Nos. 1444-1445 of 1999 are preferred 
against the common judgment of the Division Bench of the 
Madras High Court in W.A. Nos. 522 of 1992 and 962 of 
1993 dismissing the writ appeals filed by the State of Tamil 
Nadu.  The Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P.(Civil) No.870 of 
2002 is against the order of the division bench of the High 
Court in Writ Petition No. 11985 of 1992 which was allowed 
following the judgment in Writ Appeal Nos. 522 of 1992 and 
962 of 1993 referred to supra. Civil Appeal Nos. 1446-1452 
of 1999 are those filed by the State of Tamil Nadu against 
the common order passed in a batch of writ petitions 
disposing of the writ petitions filed by the Transport 
Corporation employees in terms of the judgment in Writ 
Appeal Nos. 522 of 1992 and 962 of 1993. The State has 
directly approached this Court against the said order of the 
learned single Judge. Thus, the lead judgment is the one 
rendered by the High Court in Writ Appeal Nos. 522 of 1992 
and 962 of 1993.
2.		Broadly, the issue in these appeals is whether the 
cutoff date fixed by the Government for the purpose of 
entitlement to pension of the erstwhile Transport 
Department employees who were later on absorbed in 
Transport Corporations, is constitutionally valid? The High 
Court answered that issue in the negative and directed the 
fixation of cutoff date afresh in the light of the observations 
made.
3.		The two writ petitioners in W.P. No. 6969 of 1990 
with reference to which Writ Appeal No. 522 of 1992 was 
filed by the State Government, were the employees of 
Nessmony Transport Corporation  which was carved out of 
Kattabomman Transport Corporation Limited. The latter 
Corporation came into existence from 1.1.1974. The writ 
petitioner in W.P. No. 7012 of 1988 out of which writ appeal 
No. 962 of 1993 arose is the workers union of Pallavan 
Transport Corporation Limited which was formed with effect 
from 1.1.1973. The said writ petitioners including the 
concerned members of the workers union were originally 
employed in the State Transport Department. Pursuant to 
the decision taken by the Government to form separate 
transport corporations to take over the operation and 
management of public transport in the districts concerned, 
the two Corporations aforementioned came into existence in 
1973 and 1974. The assets and liabilities were transferred 
on certain terms to the newly formed Government 
Companies which in effect have the status of Public Sector 
Undertakings. The writ petitioners and other similarly 
situated employees were deputed to work in the said 
transport Corporations. For instance, in G.O.MS. No. 651 
(Transport) dated 18.7.1973, it was stipulated that all 
employees of the Tamilnadu State Transport Department 
serving in the Kanyakumari District for the purpose of 
running, maintenance and upkeep of the transport system in 
the District will be considered to be employees on 
deputation with the Kattabomman Corporation with effect 
from 1.1.1974. It was further enjoined that "they will 
continue to receive the same emoluments and enjoy the 
same conditions of service and privileges till such time the 
Corporation frames its own rules and takes those employees 
in its pay rolls". The G.O. further provided that the new 
Corporation shall be responsible for meeting all the 
establishment charges and making pension and leave salary 
contributions to Government in respect of such of those 
deputed employees of the Transport Department who were 
in pensionable services.
4.		It is the stand of the State Government as seen 
from the only counter-affidavit filed in W.P. No. 6969 of 
1990 that all the employees absorbed in Kattabomman 
Transport Corporation Limited were on deputation upto 
30.4.1975 and from 1.5.1975 onwards, the Corporation had 
framed its own rules and absorbed all of them as 
Corporation employees duly accepting the options exercised 
by them. It is to be mentioned at this juncture that options 
were called for finally only in the year 1982.
5.		The writ petitioners and other similarly situated 
employees who moved the High Court under
Article 226
for 
appropriate reliefs were not eligible to pension while in 
Government service in view of non-fulfillment of the criterion 
of ten years of qualifying service. It is not in dispute that the 
service in the Corporation is non-pensionable.
6.		In order to extend the benefit of pension to the 
Government servants permanently absorbed in the Public 
Sector Undertakings on the basis of options, the State 
Government issued certain orders from time to time. In 
order to appreciate the controversy in proper perspective, a 
brief reference to these G.Os. is necessary. The first one is 
G.O.MS.No. 378 (FR II) dated 18.4.1975. The said G.O. 
made the following provision for pension and gratuity.
"In addition to pay in the public undertaking an 
optee will be entitled to pension/gratuity earned 
by him in Government service prior to such 
absorption. If the qualifying service under 
Government is less than ten years, gratuity and 
Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity alone will be 
payable.  They are permitted to draw their 
pension/gratuity immediately on absorption in the 
Corporation."
This G.O. was kept in abeyance till further orders were 
issued in regard to the terminal benefits to be given to the 
Government servants who opted for service in Public Sector 
Undertakings. This was done in G.O.MS.No. 1197 dated 
22.8.1978. Then, came G.O.MS.No. 284, Finance (CFC) 
Department, dated 31.3.1980 in supersession of the earlier 
orders issued on the subject including G.O.MS.No. 378. 
According to para 2(iii) of the said G.O.—
 "Pension, in respect of industrial and non 
industrial workers who get themselves absorbed in 
State owned Corporations/Boards will be 
calculated at the time of transfer; it is payable by 
the State Government only on retirement of the 
employee from the public sector corporation…
 ***  ***   ***
The pension if any will be paid by the Government 
direct to the absorbed employee after his 
retirement from the Corporation/Board."
Para 3 of the G.O.  is the crucial provision. It says—
"3. The crucial date for calculating the terminal 
benefits in respect of all the State Public Sector 
Corporations except the Transport Corporations, 
will be the date from which the employee is 
continuously working in Corporation or the date of 
incorporation of the Corporation, whichever is 
later. In respect of Transport Corporations, the 
crucial date will be 1st May, 1975 or the date from 
which the employee is continuously working in the 
Corporation, whichever is later." (Emphasis 
supplied)
7.		Thus, as far as the Transport Corporations are 
concerned, the relevant date for the purpose of judging the 
entitlement of the employees who were earlier in 
Government service was fixed as 1st May, 1975. The same 
G.O. also stipulated that fresh options will be obtained from 
Government servants working in various Corporations/ 
Boards "on the basis of this G.O.". The Corporations/Boards 
were requested to decide absorption of Government 
servants on the basis of the terminal benefits indicated in 
the G.O. Pursuant to this G.O. a letter was addressed by the 
Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Transport 
Department on 5.1.1982 to all State Transport Undertakings 
to get fresh options from the employees of the erstwhile 
Tamilnadu State Transport Department employees absorbed 
in the Corporation. The pro-forma of option form was 
enclosed therewith. The last date for exercise of options was 
fixed as 28.2.1982. As a consequence thereof, the Transport 
Corporations called for options to be submitted by 
28.2.1982. It appears that G.O.MS.No. 284, dated 
31.3.1980 was quashed by the High Court by its judgment 
dated 18.1.1983 insofar as it took away  the benefits 
conferred by G.O.No. 378 dated 18.4.1975. Subsequently, 
G.O.MS.No. 1028 came to be issued on 23.9.1985. It is this 
G.O. read with the earlier G.O. 284 that has given rise to the 
grievance of the writ petitioners—respondents. The relevant 
portion of the G.O. is extracted hereunder:
"…Eventhough the erstwhile Tamilnadu State 
Transport Department employees have exercised 
option for their permanent absorption in the 
Transport Corporations on different dates and 
were working continuously in the various 
Transport Corporations with effect from different 
dates from 1.1.72, the crucial date for their 
permanent absorption in the Transport 
Corporations was fixed as 1.5.75 or the date from 
which the employees were continuously working in 
the Corporation whichever was later as per orders 
issued in the Government order second read 
above. The crucial date already fixed in the G.O. 
second read above holds good without any change 
in this regard."
("The G.O. 2nd read" is G.O. 284 dated 31.3.1980)
8.		It was further laid down that the terminal benefits 
of all the erstwhile Tamilnadu State Transport Department 
employees working in the various Transport Corporations 
should be settled as per the orders issued in G.O.No.378 
dated 18.4.1975 subject to certain procedural modifications 
set out in the G.O. The pension/gratuity earned by an 
employee while in Government service prior to such 
absorption was protected as was done by G.O.No.378.
9.		If the cutoff date stipulated in G.O.1028 dated 
23.9.1985 is applied to the case of the writ petitioners, they 
will not be eligible to get pensionary benefits. This led to the 
filing of the writ petitions in the High Court.
10.		It may be mentioned that during the pendency of 
the writ appeals, the Government issued G.O.MS.No. 250 
(Transport Department) Dated 18.11.1996 further modifying 
the cutoff date in order to benefit the erstwhile State 
Transport Department employees. The Government while 
fixing the crucial date as 15.9.1975 for the permanent 
absorption in the respective Transport Corporations, directed 
that pensionary benefits should be granted to those who 
have completed ten years of qualifying Government service 
as on 15.9.1975 subject to the condition that no arrears of 
pension shall be given to the employees benefited by the 
revised date for the period prior to 1.1.1986. It does not 
appear that any of the respondents will be eligible to get 
pension even if the revised date is taken into account.
11.		In writ petition No. 6969 of 1990, the learned 
single Judge held that the cutoff date fixed by the 
Government in G.O.MS.No. 1028 was illegal and left it to the 
Government to fix a fresh cutoff date taking into 
consideration the services of the writ petitioners. In the 
second writ petition also another learned single Judge of the 
High Court  declared the fixation of cutoff date as 1.5.1975 / 
14.9.1975 as illegal and arbitrary and directed the 
Government to fix the cutoff date afresh within the 
stipulated time. At the same time it was indicated in the 
judgment that the date on which the options were finally 
called for i.e., 20.6.1982 would be the appropriate date for 
determining the eligibility to pension. On appeal, the 
Division Bench of the High Court while affirming the 
judgments in the two writ petitions, concurred with the view 
expressed by the learned Judge in the latter case as regards 
the fixation of cutoff date with reference to the exercise of 
options in the year 1982. The Division Bench observed thus:
"…we are of the view that the cut-off date fixed as 
1.5.1975 for the purpose of computing the 
terminal benefits of the erstwhile Government 
servants, who came to be subsequently 
permanently absorbed in the various Government 
Undertakings, particularly State Transport 
Undertakings, proceeded on an artificial basis. ...
***   ***   ***
…It is only subsequently, in the year 1982, that 
such employees were asked to finally exercise 
their option, either way, and various employees 
exercised their option also. For instance, in 
respect of Pallavan Transport Corporation, the said 
date within which such options have to be 
exercised appears to have been fixed finally by a 
letter dated 20.6.1982 and in respect of other 
Corporations, it would depend upon the option 
called for before they were finally absorbed as 
employees of the Corporations, which have come 
into existence. Till the respective employees have 
exercised their options on their volition, they must 
be considered to continue in service as 
Government employees only, in view of the fact 
that the actual exercise of option by different 
employees may be on different dates and to have 
a uniformity among group or category of workers 
pertaining to a particular Corporation, the date on 
which the options were called for finally, or the 
last date within which the options were to be 
exercised, once and for all finally, may be taken 
up as the relevant criteria in fixing the cut-off or 
crucial date for determination of the terminal 
benefits. …"
12.		The learned senior counsel for the appellants has 
urged that for all practical purposes, the process of 
absorption of deputed employees was completed by 
1.5.1975 by which date even the State Transport 
Department got disbanded. Our attention was drawn to the 
fact that pursuant to the promulgation of the rules known as 
'The Pallavan Transport Corporation Longevity Pay Scheme 
and Conditions of Service Rules' which came into force on 1st 
May, 1975, options were called for from the employees on 
deputation from Government Departments. The option form 
enclosed to the Memorandum dated 29.5.1975 issued by the 
Managing Director of PTC Ltd. required the employees to 
declare that they voluntarily opted to serve in the PTC Ltd. 
and accordingly relinquished all their rights vis-a-vis 
Tamilnadu State Transport Department and that they were 
willing to get absorbed permanently in the said Corporation 
subject to the service put in the State Transport Department 
being carried over to PTC Ltd. with pay scales, accumulated 
rights for gratuity, provident fund, pension etc. Accordingly, 
the respondents exercised their options in 1975 itself and 
the process of absorption had thus completed during that 
year. Having regard to this background, there is nothing 
arbitrary in the policy decision fixing the cutoff date for 
eligibility to pension as 1.5.1975. The learned senior counsel 
then contended that the relevance and the rationality of 
fixation of the crucial date as 1.5.1975 cannot be faulted 
merely because one more opportunity was given to exercise 
options in the year 1982. The premise on which the 
impugned judgment proceeded, namely, that the 
respondents continued to be Government employees till final 
options were exercised in February, 1982, according to the 
learned counsel for the appellants is based on incorrect 
appreciation of facts. The financial repercussions have also 
been stressed by the learned senior counsel.
13.		We find it difficult to accept the contentions 
advanced by the appellants' counsel. The learned counsel 
has not disputed the proposition that the cutoff date fixed by 
the Government for the purpose of conferring the 
pensionary benefits cannot be arbitrary or whimsical. Even 
according to the appellants, the date of permanent 
absorption in the service of the Corporation is a material 
date and it is in the light of that factor that the cutoff date 
was fixed as 1.5.1975. The stand taken in the counter 
affidavit filed on behalf of the Government of Tamilnadu in 
writ petition No. 6969 of 1990 is that the writ petitioners 
were absorbed in the Kattabomman Transport Corporation 
with effect from 1.5.1975 on the basis of the options 
exercised by them and that their deputation ended on 
30.4.1975. That is how the choice of the date 1.5.1975 is 
sought to be justified. In other words, the fixation of cutoff 
date is sought to be linked up with the completion of the 
process of absorption. A perusal of G.Os. 1028 and 250 
would also make it clear that the Government wanted to fix 
the date for pensionary entitlement to coincide with the date 
of permanent absorption. The criterion cannot be said to be 
irrational or irrelevant. But, the question is whether this 
factual premise that the process of absorption took place in 
the year 1975 is correct. Viewed in the light of G.O.MS.No. 
284 dated 30.1.1980 and the subsequent actions taken by 
the Management of the State Transport Undertakings, it 
cannot be said with certitude that the process of absorption 
was completed even in the year 1975. If in fact the process 
was completed by April, 1975, the pertinent question would 
be why fresh options were directed to be called for in the 
year 1980 and actually called for in January, 1982 and 
thereafter? G.O.MS.No. 284 dated 30.1.1980 clearly 
stipulates that fresh options shall be obtained from the 
Government servants working in various Corporations/ 
Boards. The Corporations/Boards were requested to decide 
the question of absorption of Government servants "on the 
basis of the terminal benefits indicated in the G.O." The 
sanction of pension and other terminal benefits was made 
dependent upon the acceptance of options. Specific 
reference has been made in the G.O. to the Transport 
Department employees. This G.O. gives an unequivocal 
indication that the Government itself regarded that the 
process of absorption was not complete and that a final 
exercise of calling for and accepting the offers should be 
gone through, may be, in view of the change of criteria in 
regard to the terminal benefits.  As already noticed, G.O.No. 
378 was issued on 18.4.1975, it was kept in abeyance on 
22.8.1978 and thereafter G.O.No. 284 was issued on 
31.3.1980. Thus, the terms and conditions of absorption did 
not take final shape till then. Moreover, even if the 
respondents had submitted the option forms in the year 
1975 for the purpose of availing the Longevity Pay Scheme 
or otherwise, there is nothing on record to show that the 
said options were treated as final for all purposes. No 
material has been placed either before the High Court or 
before this Court to establish that the respondents' 
deputation came to an end by 1.5.1975 and that they were 
absorbed into Corporations' service from that date. Above 
all, the more important point is that nothing has been said in 
the counter-affidavit filed by the State Government before 
the High Court as to why fresh options were provided for by 
G.O. No. 284 and called for by the Corporation in the year 
1982, if the entire process was concluded in the year 1975 
itself. The counter-affidavit merely contains an assertion 
that State Transport Department employees were absorbed 
into the Transport Corporation with effect from 1.5.1975 by 
accepting the options. In the counter, not even a reference 
has been made to G.O.No. 284 and the options exercised 
pursuant thereto. The reason for calling for fresh options has 
not been spelt out even in the S.L.P. The factual assertion in 
the counter-affidavit therefore remains unsubstantiated.
14.		Having regard to these facts and circumstances, 
we cannot accept the plea of the appellants that the 
absorption did in fact take place in the year 1975. In this 
situation, the justification sought to be made out for fixing 
the cutoff date as 1.5.1975 loses its ground in which case 
the finding of the High Court that the date was arbitrarily 
fixed cannot be assailed.
15.		There is one more point which needs to be 
considered. In order to explain away the effect and efficacy 
of the options called for in the year 1982, a contention has 
been raised that G.O. No. 284 pursuant to which the options 
were called for was struck down by the High Court in a writ 
petition disposed of in the year 1983 and therefore such 
options must be regarded as non est in the eye of law. We 
find no merit in this contention. It is true that G.O No. 284 
was struck down at the instance of some of the employees 
who were benefited by the earlier G.O. which it superseded. 
But, that is besides the point. What is material is the factual 
inference that is to be drawn from the fact that fresh options 
were called for by virtue of and pursuant to G.O.No. 284. 
The inference should be that the process of absorption was 
not regarded as complete by the Government as well as the 
Corporation. The invalidation of that G.O. by the High Court 
does not in any way displace this factual inference. In fact 
the validity of cutoff date was apparently not adjudicated in 
the said writ petition. The options exercised pursuant to 
G.O.No. 284 have for all practical purposes regained their 
efficacy with the reiteration of the same cutoff date by the 
subsequent G.O. dated 23.9.1985.
16.		For the reasons aforesaid we find no merit in 
these appeals. The judgment of the High Court is upheld. 
However, the High Court while indicating that the last date 
for submitting the options finally should have been taken as 
the basis for fixation of date, gave a direction to the 
Government to fix the relevant date in the light of the 
observations made in the judgment. The High Court 
proceeded on the basis that it was only on 20.6.1982 and 
thereafter that the options were called for. We are of the 
view that in view of the long lapse of time and in order to 
avoid further delay and the scope for possible controversies, 
instead of leaving it to the Government to fix a fresh cutoff 
date as per the directions of the High Court, in exercise of 
our powers under
Article 142
of the Constitution, we direct 
that the date 1.4.1982 shall be adopted as cutoff date in 
modification of what was prescribed in G.O.No. 1028 dated 
23.9.1985 and G.O. No. 250 dated 18.11.1996. The reason 
for selecting the said date is that the Commissioner and 
Secretary to Government, Transport Department by his 
letter dated 5.1.1982 addressed to the Managing Directors 
of all State Transport Undertakings requested them to obtain 
fresh options by 28.2.1982. The memo issued by the 
Managing Director of KTC Ltd. dated 11.1.1982 makes it 
clear that the last date for exercise of options was fixed as 
28.2.1982 in conformity with the Government's directive. 
The respective Corporations were supposed to finalise the 
options sometime thereafter. It is reasonable to presume 
that PTC Ltd. and other Corporations would have also 
adhered to the same date. The High Court has referred to 
the Note dated 20.6.1982 issued by the Managing Director 
of PTC (Metro) Ltd. But, it does not fix the last date for 
submitting the options. It purports to give certain 
instructions as to the follow up action to be taken with 
reference to the options received. Hence, the fixation of 
cutoff date as 1.4.1982 would, in our view, be appropriate.    
Taking into account the aforementioned date for the purpose 
of assessing the requisite length of service, we direct the 
appellants to take steps to extend the pensionary benefits to 
the eligible employees.  Having regard to the conduct of the 
respondents in seeking the remedy long after the options 
were exercised, we consider it just and proper to direct that 
the respondent-employees whoever have retired should get 
the arrears of pension only from 1.1.1988 which date is 
fixed with reference to the year of filing the first writ petition 
namely W.P. No. 7012 of 1988.  The fixation of pension and 
payment of arrears should be done accordingly within a 
period of four months from today. The appellants are 
entitled to adjust the monetary benefits which the 
employees would not have received if they were to receive 
the pension.
17.		The civil appeals are disposed of accordingly 
without costs.