[Cites
11
, Cited by
104
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Karnataka vs Puttaraja on 27 November, 2003
Equivalent citations: AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 433, 2004 (1) SCC 475, 2003 AIR SCW 6429, 2004 AIR - KANT. H. C. R. 15, (2004) 13 ALLINDCAS 767 (SC), 2004 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 12, 2004 (1) UJ (SC) 222, 2004 (13) ALLINDCAS 767, 2004 SCC(CRI) 300, (2004) 1 JCJR 152 (SC), 2004 CRILR(SC&MP) 12, 2004 (1) JCJR 152, 2004 ALL MR(CRI) 820, 2004 CALCRILR 143, 2003 (10) SCALE 325, 2003 (7) SLT 329, (2003) 9 JT 603 (SC), 2004 UJ(SC) 1 222, 2004 (1) SRJ 111, (2003) 8 SUPREME 364, (2004) 1 ALLCRIR 831, (2004) SC CR R 867, 2004 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 285, (2003) 3 CHANDCRIC 302, (2004) 1 RECCRIR 113, (2003) 4 CURCRIR 461, (2003) 10 SCALE 325, (2004) 13 INDLD 1041, (2004) 48 ALLCRIC 234, (2004) 3 ANDH LT 6, (2004) 1 ALLCRILR 308, (2003) 4 CRIMES 548
Author:
Arijit Pasayat
Bench:
Doraiswamy Raju
,
Arijit Pasayat
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  506 of 1997

PETITIONER:
State of Karnataka						

RESPONDENT:
Puttaraja							

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 27/11/2003

BENCH:
DORAISWAMY RAJU & ARIJIT PASAYAT.

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

ARIJIT PASAYAT,J

A rapist not only causes physical injuries but more indelibly 
leaves a scar on the most cherished possession of a woman i.e. her 
dignity, chastity, honour and reputation. The depravation of such 
animals in human form reach the rock bottom of morality when they 
sexually assault children, minors and like the case at hand, a woman in 
the advance stage of pregnancy.
We do not propose to mention name of the victim.
Section 228-A
of 
the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short the '
IPC
') makes disclosure of 
identity of victim of certain offences punishable. Printing or 
publishing name of any matter which may make known the identity of any 
person against whom an offence under
Sections 376
,
376-A
,
376-B
,
376-C
or 376-D is alleged or found to have been committed can be punished. 
True it is, the restriction does not relate to printing or publication 
of judgment by High Court or Supreme Court. But keeping in view the 
social object of preventing social victimization or ostracism of the 
victim of a sexual offence for which
Section 228-A
has been enacted, it 
would be appropriate that in the judgments, be it of this Court, High 
Court or lower Court, the name of the victim should not be indicated. We 
have chosen to describe her as 'victim' in the judgment. 
21st August, 1985 is a day on which the victim suffered 
unfathomable physical agony and traumatic ignominy that one can conceive 
of at the hands of the accused-respondent.  The libidinousness and the 
lustful design of the accused crossed all borders of indecency and he 
raped the victim in the presence of her husband, unmindful of the 
shattering mental trauma the latter (PW-1) suffered.  Law was set into 
motion and the accused was charged for commission of offence punishable 
under
Section 376
of the IPC. He was found guilty by the trial Court 
which imposed sentence of 5 years imprisonment, (though the minimum 
sentence prescribed is 7 years) and fine of Rs.2000/-.  What seems to 
have weighed with the trial Court for inflicting a lesser sentence was 
age of accused's parents his dependent sisters, wife and two young 
children. Accused questioned correctness of the conviction and sentence 
before the Karnataka High Court.  While the conviction was maintained, 
the sentence was reduced by a learned Single Judge to period of custody 
already undergone i.e. 46 days.
The State of Karnataka questions the propriety of the sentence 
imposed.  According to learned counsel for the appellant, if such 
minuscule sentence is awarded for such a grave offence, it would be 
giving premium to one most obnoxious acts punishable under the
IPC
.  It 
is submitted that the sentence should be commensurate with the nature of 
the offence.  In this case the High Court has not even indicated any 
reason for reducing the sentence below the prescribed minimum which 
under the proviso to
Section 376(1)
IPC can be done for "adequate and 
special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment".
Learned counsel appearing for the respondents submitted that the 
evidence on record does not establish commission of the offence of rape 
and at the most the offence for which accused could be convicted is 
under
Section 354
IPC, dealing with the assault or criminal force to a 
woman with intent to outrage her modesty. Additionally, it is submitted 
that the High Court has given adequate reasons as to why it considered 
the custodial sentence undergone to be adequate.
The law regulates social interests, arbitrates conflicting claims 
and demands.  Security of persons and property of the people is an 
essential function of the State.  It could be achieved through 
instrumentality of criminal law. Undoubtedly, there is a cross cultural 
conflict where living law must find answer to the new challenges and the 
courts are required to mould the sentencing system to meet the 
challenges. The contagion of lawlessness would undermine social order 
and lay it in ruins.  Protection of society and stamping out criminal 
proclivity must be the object of law which must be achieved by imposing 
appropriate sentence. Therefore, law as a corner stone of the edifice of 
"order" should meet the challenges confronting the society. Friedman 
in his "Law in Changing Society" stated that, "State of criminal law 
continues to be  as it should be  a decisive reflection of social 
consciousness of society".  Therefore, in operating the sentencing 
system, law should adopt the corrective machinery or the deterrence 
ideology based on factual matrix.  By deft modulation  sentencing 
process be stern where it should be, and tempered with mercy where it 
warrants to be. The facts and given circumstances in each case, the 
nature of the crime, the manner in which it was planned and committed, 
the motive for commission of the crime, the conduct of the accused, the 
nature of weapons used the indelible impact on the victim and his family 
and all other attending circumstances are relevant facts which would 
enter into the area of consideration.
Undue sympathy to impose inadequate sentence would do more harm to 
the justice system to undermine the public confidence in the efficacy of 
law and society could not long endure under such serious threats.  It 
is, therefore, the duty of every court to award proper sentence having 
regard to the nature of the offence and the manner in which it was 
executed or committed etc. This position was illuminatingly stated by 
this Court in Sevaka Perumal etc. v. State of Tamil Naidu (AIR 1991 SC 
1463).
The criminal law adheres in general to the principle of 
proportionality in prescribing liability according to the culpability of 
each kind of criminal conduct. It ordinarily allows some significant 
discretion to the Judge in arriving at a sentence in each case, 
presumably to permit sentences that reflect more subtle considerations 
of culpability that are raised by the special facts of each case.  
Judges in essence affirm that punishment ought always to fit the crime; 
yet in practice sentences are determined largely by other 
considerations. Sometimes it is the correctional needs of the 
perpetrator that are offered to justify a sentence. Sometimes the 
desirability of keeping him out of circulation, and sometimes even the 
tragic results of his crime. Inevitably these considerations cause a 
departure from just desert as the basis of punishment and create cases 
of apparent injustice that are serious and widespread.
Proportion between crime and punishment is a goal respected in 
principle, and in spite of errant notions, it remains a strong influence 
in the determination of sentences. The practice of punishing all serious 
crimes with equal severity is now unknown in civilized societies, but 
such a radical departure from the principle of proportionality has 
disappeared from the law only in recent times on account of misplaced 
sympathies to the perpetrator of crime leaving the victim or his family 
into oblivion. Even now for a single grave infraction drastic sentences 
are imposed. Anything less than a penalty of greatest severity for any 
serious crime is thought then to be a measure of toleration that is 
unwarranted and unwise. But in fact, quite apart from those 
considerations that make punishment unjustifiable when it is out of 
proportion to the gravity of the crime, uniformly disproportionate 
punishment has some very undesirable practical consequences.
After giving due consideration to the facts and circumstances of 
each case, for deciding just and appropriate sentence to be awarded for 
an offence, the aggravating and mitigating factors and circumstances in 
which a crime has been committed are to be delicately balanced on the 
basis of really relevant circumstances in a dispassionate manner by the 
Court.  Such act of balancing is indeed a difficult task.  It has been 
very aptly indicated in Dennis Councle MCGDautha v. State of 
Callifornia: 402 US 183: 28 L.D. 2d 711 that no formula of a foolproof 
nature is possible that would provide a reasonable criterion in 
determining a just and appropriate punishment in the infinite variety of 
circumstances that may affect the gravity of the crime.  In the absence 
of any foolproof formula which may provide any basis for reasonable 
criteria to correctly assess various circumstances germane to the 
consideration of gravity of crime, the discretionary judgment in the 
facts of each case, is the only way in which such judgment may be 
equitably distinguished.
The object should be to protect the society and to deter the 
criminal in achieving the avowed object of law by imposing appropriate 
sentence. It is expected that the Courts would operate the sentencing 
system so as to impose such sentence which reflects the conscience of 
the society and the sentencing process has to be stern where it should 
be.
Imposition of sentence without considering its effect on the 
social order in many cases may be in reality a futile exercise. The 
social impact of the crime, e.g. where it relates to offences against 
women like the case at hand, dacoity, kidnapping, misappropriation of 
public money, treason and other offences involving moral turpitude or 
moral delinquency which have great impact and serious repercussions on 
social order, and public interest, cannot be lost sight of and per se 
require exemplary treatment. Any liberal attitude by imposing meagre 
sentences or taking too sympathetic view merely on account of lapse of 
time or considerations personal to the accused only in respect of such 
offences will be result-wise counter productive in the long run and 
against societal interest which needs to be cared for and strengthened 
by the required string of deterrence inbuilt in the sentencing system.
In
Dhananjoy Chatterjee v. State of W.B.
(1994 (2) SCC 220), this 
Court has observed that shockingly large number of criminals go 
unpunished thereby increasingly, encouraging the criminals and in the 
ultimate making justice suffer by weakening the system's creditability. 
The imposition of appropriate punishment is the manner in which the 
Court responds to the society's cry for justice against the criminal. 
Justice demands that Courts should impose punishment befitting the crime 
so that the Courts reflect public abhorrence of the crime.  The Court 
must not only keep in view the rights of the criminal but also the 
rights of the victim of the crime and the society at large while 
considering the imposition of appropriate punishment.
Similar view has also been expressed in
Ravji v. State of 
Rajasthan
, (1996 (2) SCC 175). It has been held in the said case that it 
is the nature and gravity of the crime but not the criminal, which are 
germane for consideration of appropriate punishment in a criminal trial.  
The Court will be failing in its duty if appropriate punishment is not 
awarded for a crime which has been committed not only against the 
individual victim but also against the society to which the criminal and 
victim belong.  The punishment to be awarded for a crime must not be 
irrelevant but it should conform to and be consistent with the atrocity 
and brutality with which the crime has been perpetrated, the enormity of 
the crime warranting public abhorrence and it should "respond to the 
society's cry for justice against the criminal".
These aspects have 
been highlighted in
State of M.P. v. Ghanshyam Singh
(2003 (8) SCC 13). 
Rape is violation with violence of the private person of the victim, an 
abominable outrage by all canons.
In the background what has been stated in
Ghanshyam Singh
's case 
(supra) the inevitable conclusion is that the High Court was not 
justified in restricting the sentence to the period already undergone, 
which is 46 days.  Leniency in matters involving sexual offences is not 
only undesirable but also against public interest.  Such types of 
offences are to be dealt with severity and with iron hands.  Showing 
leniency in such matters would be really a case of misplaced sympathy.  
The acts which led to the conviction of the accused are not only 
shocking but outrageous in their contours.  The only reason indicated by 
the High Court for awarding sentence lesser then prescribed minimum is 
quoted below:
"I have heard at length the submission of Mr. 
Bhagavan, learned counsel for the accused, on the 
question of sentence.  He submitted that the accused 
is a cooli and agriculturists, young man aged 22 
years old and requires sympathy. It is also relevant 
to point out that the occurrence took place in the 
year 1985 and a long time has lapsed.  The trial and 
the appeal have kept the appellant busy in court.  
Taking all these factors into account I feel that the 
appellant need not be sentenced to imprisonment since 
he was already in custody for a period of 46 days."
If the above can be described as "adequate and special reasons"
then it would be insulting to ratiocination.  
According to us this is a case where there was no scope for 
awarding sentence lesser than prescribed minimum and it should have been 
highest prescribed. But the trial Court awarded sentence of 5 years for 
reasons, which may not be strictly meeting the requirements of law.  
Since the State had not questioned the sufficiency of sentence before 
the High Court, we restore the sentence awarded by the trial Court along 
with the fine imposed.
The appeal is allowed.