[Cites
11
, Cited by
204
]
Supreme Court of India
High Court Of Gujarat & Anr vs Gujarat Kishan Mazdoor Panchayat & Ors on 10 March, 2003
Equivalent citations: AIR 2003 SUPREME COURT 1201, 2003 (4) SCC 712, 2003 AIR SCW 1578, 2003 LAB. I. C. 1521, 2003 (2) UJ (SC) 919, 2003 (2) LRI 206, 2003 (3) SCALE 66, 2003 (5) SRJ 41, 2003 (3) ACE 510, (2003) 8 ALLINDCAS 734 (SC), (2003) 2 SCR 799 (SC), (2003) 4 ALLMR 389 (SC), (2003) 2 LAB LN 328, 2003 (3) SLT 103, 2003 (8) ALLINDCAS 734, (2003) 3 JT 50 (SC), 2003 SCC (L&S) 565, (2003) 1 CURLR 970, (2003) 2 SUPREME 672, (2003) 3 GCD 1857 (SC), (2003) 3 GUJ LR 2129, (2003) 2 GUJ LH 96, (2003) 97 FACLR 422, (2003) 2 SCT 370, (2003) 2 SERVLR 729, (2003) 3 SCALE 66, (2003) 4 INDLD 570
Author:
Ar. Lakshmanan
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
Ar. Lakshmanan
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  8574-8577 of 2001

PETITIONER:
High Court of Gujarat & Anr.

RESPONDENT:
Gujarat Kishan Mazdoor Panchayat & Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 10/03/2003

BENCH:
CJI. & AR. Lakshmanan

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT


AR. LAKSHMANAN, J.
By these four appeals, we are called upon to consider the legality,
correctness and validity of the impugned Notification dated 7.12.2000 appointing
Shri N.A. Acharya as the President of the Industrial Court at Ahmedabad.  A
Notification dated 7.12.2000, in this regard, was issued by the order of Governor
by the Labour and Employment Department of the Government of Gujarat in the
Gujarat Government Gazette whereby Shri N. A. Acharya had been appointed as
the President of the Industrial Court which was under challenge before the High
Court of Gujarat in Special Civil Application Nos. 12665/2000, 79/2001, 80/2001
and 93/2001 filed by Gujarat Kishan Mazdoor Panchayat, Gujarat Industrial Court
Judges' Association, Labour Laws Practitioners' Association and Surat Textile
Labour Union.  As per the directions of the Chief Justice, the applications were
placed before the Full Bench of the Gujarat High Court. The Full Bench, by its
judgment dated 4.5.2001, allowed the applications and quashed the said
Notification dated 7.12.2000.  The Full Bench further directed the respondents to
proceed to make the appointment afresh on the post of the President of the
Industrial Court, Gujarat in the light of what has been held in the said order and in
accordance with law.  Aggrieved by the order passed by the Full Bench of the
High Court, the High Court of Gujarat through its Registrar preferred Special
Leave Petition (c) Nos. 11795-11798/2001 on the grounds raised in the special
leave petitions.  By order dated 14.12.2001, this Court granted leave and made
the interim order absolute.
All these appeals involve common question of law based on same set of
facts, therefore, we propose to decide these appeals by a common judgment.  A
Special Civil Application was filed by the Gujarat Kishan Mazdoor Panchayat, a
Registered Trade Union to direct the respondents therein not to make any
appointments on the post of President of the Industrial Court save and except by
appointing any Member of the Industrial Court as President and other allied
reliefs.  A prayer to issue a writ of quo warranto was also asked for to direct Shri
N.A. Acharya - respondent No.3 in the application to state the basis of his right to
be appointed as President of the Industrial Court and to set aside and quash the
appointment order dated 7.12.2000 purporting to appoint Shri N.A.  Acharya as
President of the Industrial Court.
The brief facts leading to the filing of the applications are briefly stated as
under:
The Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946
(hereinafter referred to as "the
B.I.R. Act
") governs the relationship between the employers and workmen in
several industries operating in Gujarat and more particularly, the Industry of
Textile, the Industry of Power in the late Bombay State area of Gujarat, the Surat
Industry, the Banking Industry run by Banking Companies having no branches
outside the State of Gujarat.
Sections 9
and
10
of the B.I.R. Act thereof provide
for setting up of Labour Courts and Industrial Court.
Section 10
of the B.I.R. Act,
which pertains to the setting up of a Court of Industrial Arbitration to be known as
Industrial Court, is provided to consist of three or more Members, one of whom
shall be its President.
Section 10(4)
of the B.I.R. Act provides that every Member
of the Industrial Court shall be a person who is or has been a Judge of High Court
or is eligible for being appointed  a Judge of such Court provided, inter alia, that a
person who has been a Judge not lower in rank than that of Assistant Judge, for
not less than three years; or a person who has been the Presiding Officer of a
Labour Court for not less than five years shall also be eligible for appointment as a
Member of the Industrial Court.	 According to the respondents, there are twelve
Members of the Industrial Court functioning in Gujarat State and so far as the
Labour Courts are concerned, there are 38 Judges functioning in Gujarat, four of
them are Judges who have completed more than ten years' service as Labour
Judges and several more Labour Judges are those who have completed more
than five years' service as Labour Judges and are, therefore, eligible for being
appointed as Members of the Industrial Court.	When the post of President of the
Industrial Court was vacant since the retirement of Shri D.V. Joshi, Shri Y.P.
Bhatt, the senior-most Member of the Industrial Court expressed his unwillingness
to be appointed as President of the Industrial Court, the post was, therefore,
required to be filled up by a regular appointment.  According to the respondents, a
person for being appointed as  President should be a Member of the Industrial
Court and no one except a Member can be appointed as a President of the
Industrial Court.  It was, therefore, submitted before the High Court that anyone
from the Members of the Industrial Court  can be considered to be eligible for
being appointed as President.  It was further submitted that in view of the scheme
of
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act, no one who is not a Member of the Industrial
Court can be directly appointed as President of the Industrial Court.  It was further
argued before the High court that for Members of the Industrial Court, there is no
other avenue of promotion except one by way of appointment as President of the
Industrial Court and now, if the post of President is to be filled up by bringing
someone from Judicial Service,	it will cause a great frustration among Members
of the Industrial Court as their hopes of promotion at an appropriate time will be
dashed to the ground.  Opposing the applications, it was submitted by the
respondents, appellants herein, that no illegality was committed by recommending
the name of Shri N.A.  Acharya for appointment as the President of the Industrial
Court and that under Rules 2 and 3 of the Draft Recruitment Rules, it has become
necessary for the High Court, on its administrative side, to recommend the
appointment of an appropriate person by nomination on the said post under Rule
2(b) and that Shri N.A. Acharya, whose name was recommended, is fulfilling the
criteria prescribed by the Government as per the old Rules as well.  It was
submitted that considering the totality of the facts, the High Court of Gujarat had
not only acted within its rights but the same had been done in due discharge of
the Constitutional duty.  The petitioners, respondents herein, filed their rejoinder to
the reply affidavit on behalf of the High Court of Gujarat reiterating the contentions
raised in the applications.  In the rejoinder affidavit, it was submitted that neither
the appointment order nor the reply affidavit filed on behalf of the High Court
shows that the appointment was made by the Governor of the State and that there
is nothing to show that the Full Court was consulted by the appointing authority
before making the appointment.	It was further stated that assuming that the
appointment by nomination can be made on the post of a President of the
Industrial Court either under the old Rules pertaining to the post of President or
under the new Rules which are at the draft stage only, the candidate concerned
should have atleast for ten years either held a judicial post in India or should have
been an advocate for High Court or should have expert knowledge of Industrial
matters.  According to the petitioners, respondents herein, the appointee, under
the impugned appointment, had not hold a judicial post for ten years and in fact he
was holding the post of Joint District Judge only and he had not even completed
three years on the post of Additional District Judge to which post he was directly
recruited.  It was, therefore, submitted that the appointment had been made
without coming to the conclusion that the appointee was fulfilling the criteria for
appointment as required by the Rules.  An affidavit in reply was filed before the
High Court by the Law Officer of the High Court of Gujarat giving all details as to
how the matter was considered by the Standing Committee of the High Court and
as to how the decision was taken to appoint Shri N.A. Acharya as the President of
the Industrial Court.
The Full Bench of the High Court, by its judgment, held that a reading of
Section 10
of the B.I.R. Act  would show that it  provides for the constitution of the
Industrial Court with three or more Members, one of whom as its President and it
also provides the eligibility for appointment as Member of the Industrial Court.
While the eligibility has been prescribed under
Section	 10(3)
and (4) of the
B.I.R.
Act
for being a Member of the Industrial Court, for the purpose of President of the
Industrial Court all that has been said in sub-section (2) of
Section 10
of the B.I.R.
Act  is that one of the Members shall be its President.	 Therefore, being a Member
of the Industrial Court is a pre-requisite and condition precedent for being the
President of the Industrial Court and no person can be appointed as the President
of the Industrial Court unless he is a Member of the Industrial Court.	The Full
Bench further held that the absence of any Rules with regard to the appointment
on the post of President of the Industrial Court except the existing Draft Rules
framed by the High Court and the Rules as had been framed under proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution vide Gujarat Government Gazette dated 25.2.1965
being only for recruitment for the post of Member, Industrial Court and the Rules
for appointment of President, Industrial Court as contained in the Hand Book
(1992) that too not in consultation with the High Court, the only relevant provision
which can be traced is
Section 10
of the B.I.R. Act and according to
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act, one of the Members of the Industrial Court has to be the
President.  The Full Bench further held that there was no lawful justification for
excluding the candidates, who were holding the post of Member, Industrial Court
and whereas they have been kept out of consideration on the basis of the
proposed Draft Rules, the consideration for making the appointment to the post in
question stands vitiated.  Elaborating further, the Full Bench held :
"In the first instance, there is no question of appointment by
nomination on the basis of the proposed Draft Rules by holding that
existing Members were not eligible because they have not completed
five years as Member.  In a given case when the only mode of
appointment is promotion and it is found that no one is eligible for
appointment by promotion, it may be open to make appointment by
direct recruitment, which would mean inviting application from all
eligible candidates and then making the selection.  No such
procedure has been followed and the consideration was kept
confined to the Members of the Judicial Services, who had conveyed
their willingness for appointment as President of the Industrial Court.
We find that the procedure, which has been adopted and which has
led to the impugned appointment, is not in conformity either with the
general right of equality under
Article 14
of the Constitution of India
and with the right of equality in matters relating to employment as
contemplated by
Article 16
of the Constitution of India and, therefore,
this appointment cannot be sustained in the eye of law.
..
.
It is also not in dispute that the respondent No.3 had never
been appointed as Member of the Industrial Court and in terms of
Section 10(2)
of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, without being a
Member of the Industrial Court, there is no question of his
appointment as the President of the Industrial Court either by
promotion or by direct recruitment.  Being a Member of the Industrial
Court is a sine qua non for consideration for the post of President of
the Industrial Court and no person who is not a Member of Industrial
Court could be considered for appointment as such without committing
violence to the recruitment of
Section 10(2)
.
.
..In the instant case, we find that the mode of direct
recruitment is not contemplated and even if any direct recruitment is
held for the post of President of Industrial Court when no Member is
eligible, such direct recruitment is required to be held after affording
equal opportunity to all those, who are eligible.  The proposed Draft
Rules 2(a) seeks to render the Members of the Industrial Court to be
ineligible by putting the condition of the completion of 5 years service
on the post of Member.
When the Act
has not put any such fetter and
the Act contemplates that one of the Members of the Industrial Court
shall be the President and it is not stated that he must complete
certain years of service as Member, through executive instructions
such a requirement could not be pressed so as to defeat the right of
consideration of the Members of the Industrial Court for consideration
of the post of the President.  Under
Section 10(2)
every Member of the
Industrial Court is eligible to be considered for the post of President
notwithstanding the number of years of service put in by him as a
Member.
In our considered opinion,
Section 10
of the Bombay Industrial
Relations Act, 1946 is the only relevant provision to be taken note of
for the purpose of appointment of the President and the only mode of
appointment is by way of promotion from amongst the Members of the
Industrial Court and in this regard, if any Rules are to be framed in
exercise of the powers under Chapter VI of Part VI of the Constitution
of India, the same cannot be inconsistent with the requirements of the
Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946
"
The High Court, for the reasons stated above, quashed the Notification
which is impugned in the applications and further directed the respondents therein
to proceed to make the appointment afresh on the post of the President of the
Industrial Court, Gujarat in the light of what has been held in the said order and in
accordance with law.
Aggrieved by the impugned judgment, the above four appeals, by way of
special leave petitions, were preferred by the High Court of Gujarat.  We heard
Shri Mahendra Anand, learned senior counsel, for the appellants and Shri R.
Venkataramani, learned senior counsel, for the contesting respondents.
Learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants submitted that the
provisions of
Section 10
of the B.I.R. Act clearly spells out that apart from the
mode of selecting the President, by promotion from amongst the Members, the
President can also directly be appointed from the sitting or retired High Court
Judges. He further submitted that the High Court failed to appreciate that
Section
10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act does not envisage the mode of appointment and that the
High Court failed to appreciate that the words of
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act
are not that the President shall be appointed from one of the current Members of
the Industrial Court and, therefore, the High Court has erroneously read these
words in
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act.  He further submitted that the High Court
failed to appreciate that
Section 10(4)
of the B.I.R. Act   provides for eligibility
criteria and Shri N.A.	Acharya fulfills the eligibility criteria.  He further submitted
that the High Court proceeded on an erroneous footing that the
B.I.R. Act
does
not contemplate the appointment by direct recruitment and only the Members of
the Industrial Court from the zone of consideration for appointment to the post of
President, Industrial Court.
Per contra, Shri R. Venkataramani, learned senior counsel, appearing for
the respondents, apart from reiterating the contentions in the applications,
submitted that
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act clearly indicates that only Member of
Industrial Court is eligible for becoming the President of the Industrial Court and
that becoming Member of the Industrial Court is sine qua non for being considered
for the post of President of the Industrial Court.  According to him, Shri N.A.
Acharya does not fulfil any of the three eligibility conditions mentioned in
Section
10(4)
of the B.I.R. Act and that mandatory consultation with the Gujarat Public
Service Commission was not followed.  He further urged that  the plain and
natural meaning of
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act is capable of only one
construction and that is only Members of the Industrial Court could become its
President.  He further submitted that unless one is or has been the Judge of the
High Court, the post of the President of the Industrial Court could be filled up only
and only by way of promotion, because there exist only one post for the whole
State of Gujarat.   He further contended that the impugned appointment was void
and stillborn since the same was not made by His Excellency, the Governor of
Gujarat, but the same was purported to have been made in the name of the
Governor of Gujarat.  It was further contended that the appointment on a judicial
post can be made only by His Excellency, the Governor, under
Article 234
of the
Constitution of India and the State Government cannot issue Notification
appointing Judicial Officer under the business rules by and in the name of His
Excellency, the Governor of the State.	 He further submitted that even assuming
the appointment to the post of President can be made through nomination or
direct recruitment, all the Members of the Industrial Court were qualified for being
appointed as President of the Industrial Court by nomination in accordance with
the Draft Rules that were relied upon by the Government supporting the
appointment of Shri N.A. Acharya and that the Members of the Industrial Court
were eligible for appointment by nomination according to the Draft Rules also and
that  Rule 2(ii) of the Draft Rules provides, inter alia, that appointment to the post
of President shall be made either (a) by promotion from amongst the Members of
the Industrial Court on the basis of seniority-cum-merit subject to the provision
that for being considered as eligible for such promotion, the Member concerned
should have completed five years' service as a Member of the Industrial Court ;
(b) by nomination.  Draft Rule 3, inter alia, provides that to be eligible for
appointment by nomination, a candidate must have atleast ten years either held a
judicial post in India or been a Advocate of High Court or have expert knowledge
of industrial matters.	It was further contended that the appointment of Shri N.A.
Acharya straightaway by nomination without taking into consideration the cases of
nomination of existing Members of the Industrial Court who had completed ten
years' functioning as a Judicial Officer has been rightly held by the High Court as
violative of
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution of India and that, therefore, no
public appointment can be made in disregard of consideration of the cases of
those who were qualified for the post.
Arguing further, learned senior counsel for the respondents, submitted that
the appointment of a Junior Judicial Officer as President of the Industrial Court
without considering the cases of existing Members of the Industrial Court who are
senior on the basis of longer experience on equivalent post will also not be
conducive to the judicial service which, according to him, will result in a Junior
Judicial Officer presiding over Industrial Court who have Members far senior to the
President and that Junior Judicial Officer will thus exercise administrative powers
of control over undisputedly Senior Judicial Officers.	It was further submitted that
assuming that a District Judge can be directly appointed to the post of President,
Industrial Court carrying a higher pay scale than that of the District Judges in
Gujarat, and assuming that even if somebody is already a Member of the
Judiciary, he can be nominated or directly appointed and that he did not pass
through the channel of promotion or selection meant for those who are already in
service in view of
Article 234
of the Constitution, even in that case, there was no
justification for the High Court on the administrative side to pick up Shri N.A.
Acharya who was 9th in the list of seniority at the relevant time.  He submitted that
the appointment of Shri N.A.  Acharya was also vitiated on account of the fact that
if nomination or direct recruitment was a permissible course in the matter of
appointment of the President of the Industrial Court, then a large number of
Labour Court Judges, Advocates apart from the Members of the Industrial Court
who had completed ten years of practice or seven years of judicial work were also
qualified for that appointment and, therefore, they could not be excluded from
consideration.	 Concluding his arguments, he submitted that the High Court's
conclusion that
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act does not provide for nomination or
direct recruitment and someone has to be appointed from amongst the Members
of the Industrial Court only is correct and that there is no other provision in the
entire
B.I.R. Act
to provide for the mode of appointment of the President of the
Industrial Court.  In that view, it is quite reasonable to read
Section 10(2)
of the
B.I.R. Act as providing that President can be appointed only from amongst the
Members.
We have given our thoughtful consideration on the rival submissions made
by the respective counsel appearing on either side.  Before proceeding to
consider the rival submissions, it is useful to reproduce the relevant provisions
governing the controversy which run as follows:
"
Section 10
.  Industrial Court.-  (1) The State Government shall
constitute a Court of Industrial Arbitration.
(2) The Industrial Court shall consist of three or more members,
one of whom shall be its President.
(3) Every member of the Industrial Court shall be a person who is
not connected with the industrial dispute referred to such court or
with any industry directly affected by such dispute:
Provided that no person shall be deemed to be connected with
the industrial dispute or with the industry by reason only of the fact
that he is a shareholder of an incorporated company which is
connected with, or likely to be affected by such industrial dispute;
but in such a case, he shall disclose to the State Government the
nature and extent of the shares held by him in such company.
(4) Every member of the Industrial Court shall be a person who is
or has been a judge of High Court or is eligible for being appointed
a judge of such Court:
Provided that-
(a)	a person who has been a Judge not lower in rank than that of
Assistant Judge, for not less than three years; or
(b)	a person who has been the presiding officer of a Labour Court
constituted under any law for the time being in force, for not
less than five years; or
(c)	a person who holds a degree in law of a University established
by law in any part of India and is holding or has held an office
not lower in rank than that of Assistant Commissioner of
Labour under the Sate Government, for not less than ten
years,

shall also be eligible for appointment as a member of the Industrial
Court.
Provided further that, one member of the Industrial Court may
be a person not so eligible, if in the opinion of the State
Government he possesses expert knowledge of industrial matters.
DRAFT RULES
1.	These rules may	 be called the Recruitment Rules for the post
of President, Industrial Court, Gujarat, 1998.
2.	The appointment of President, Industrial Court, Gujarat, shall
be made by the Governor of Gujarat, in consultation with the
Public Service Commission and the High Court, either-
(a)	by promotion from amongst the Members, Industrial
Court on the basis of seniority-cum-merits provided
that a person shall not be eligible to be promoted to the
post of President, Industrial Court, unless he has
completed five years' service on the post of Member,
Industrial Court, or
(b)	by  nomination.
3.	To be eligible for appointment by nomination, mentioned in
rule 2(b), a candidate	must not be connected with any industry
as defined in the
Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946
and
must
(i)	not be less than 45 years of age, and
(ii)	have for at least 10 years either held a judicial post in
India or been an Advocate for High Court or have
expert knowledge of Industrial matters.
4.	A person appointed by direct recruitment shall normally be on
probation for a period of one year and shall have to pass an
Examination in Hindi and/or Gujarati, according to the Rules
prescribed by the Government.
Existing Rules

	The Recruitment Rules for the post of President, Industrial
Court ,is as under:
Unless the post is filled up by appointment of a serving or
retired Judge of High Court, appointment shall be made either (a)
by nomination or (b) by promotion from among the Members of the
Industrial Court.
To be eligible for appointment by nomination, the candidate
must not be connected with any industry as defined in the
Bombay
Industrial Relations Act, 1946
and must-
(i)	not  be less than 45 years of age;
(ii)	have for atleast 10 years either held a judicial post in India or
been an Advocate for High Court or have expert knowledge of
Industrial matters."
In the background of the facts and circumstances and the provisions of law
extracted above, the following points arise for consideration by this Court :-
(a)	What is the true scope and interpretation of
Section 10(2)
read with
Section 10(4)
of the B.I.R. Act ?
(b)	Whether
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act can be read to mean
that the President of the Industrial Court must be appointed
from  among the existing Members of the Industrial Court
when the provision  in fact is not in such terms?
(c)	Whether the reading of the provisions of
Section 10
of the
B.I.R. Act clearly spells out that apart from the mode of
selecting the President, by promotion from amongst the
Members, the President can also directly be appointed from
the sitting or retired High Court Judges or from the Judges of
the City Civil Court, Ahmedabad and District Judges, who
fulfills the eligibility requirement for appointment as Member
of the Industrial Court?
(d)	Whether the High Court has failed to appreciate that
Section
10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act does not envisage the mode of
appointment?
Our attention was drawn to the relevant pleadings filed before the High
Court and also in this Court.
As already noticed, the appointment of Shri N.A. Acharya as the President
of the Industrial Court vide Notification dated 7.12.2000 issued by the Labour and
Employment Department, Government of Gujarat, is under challenge by way of
these appeals.	The circumstances and the process, which had culminated in the
appointment of Shri N.A. Acharya as the President of the Industrial Court, had
been fully narrated in the affidavit in reply filed on behalf of respondent No.2 in the
High Court.  Since Shri	 D.V. Joshi, who was working as the President of the
Industrial Court, was to retire on 31.1.2000 and, therefore, the Labour and
Employment Department, Government of Gujarat, sent a communication dated
7.1.2000 to the High Court of Gujarat, inter alia, stating therein that, due to the
retirement of Shri D.V. Joshi, the post will fall vacant and the question of preparing
recruitment Rules for the post of President of the Industrial Court is under
consideration by the High Court and till the Rules are not finalized, Government
cannot take a decision in respect of the appointment on the said post.	Under
these circumstances, it was decided to place the matter for consideration of the
Standing Committee of the High Court of Gujarat, as to by which mode the post of
the President, Industrial Court is to be filled up.  Accordingly, the said matter was
considered by the Standing Committee of the High Court of Gujarat and it was
decided on 8.2.2000 that the post of President, Industrial Court, Ahmedabad, be
filled up by nomination under clause (b) of Rule 2 of the proposed Rules, as none
of the present Members of the Industrial Court is eligible to be appointed to the
said post by promotion, having not completed five years' service on the post of
Member, Industrial Court.  The claim of all the incumbents of the post of Member
of the Industrial Court was examined in light of the criteria prescribed by the High
Court of Gujarat for appointment on the post of President of the Industrial Court.  It
was decided by the Standing Committee to fill up the post of President of the
Industrial Court by nomination as stated above.	 In the light of the decision of the
Standing Committee to fill up the post of the President of the Industrial Court by
way of nomination, it was further decided to ask for the willingness of the Judicial
Officers working in the cadres of City Civil Court Judges and District Judges, who
are not less than 45 years of age and have put in ten years of service in judiciary
including the period of practice at the Bar for being considered for appointment in
question.  Pursuant to the said decision, the willingness was called for and in all,
nine judicial officers had expressed willingness for being considered for the post in
question, the details of which have been furnished at page 92 of the paper book.
Thereafter, the said matter was placed for consideration of the Standing
Committee of the High Court of Gujarat and in the meeting of the Standing
Committee held on 30.3.2000, it was decided to direct the office to resubmit the
matter along with the recruitment Rules prescribing eligibility criteria for
appointment to the post of President, Industrial Court.	 Pursuant to the said
decision, the matter was again considered in the light of the existing Rule
provision by the office.   As per the directions of the Standing Committee, the
matter was again placed before the Standing Committee for further consideration
along with the Rule stated above.  In the meeting of the Standing Committee of
the High Court held on 1.5.2000, the consideration of the subject was deferred,
however, in the meantime, the office was directed to resubmit the matter, pointing
out the provisions of law in the matter, particularly mentioning the provisions
regarding eligibility, experience and age of superannuation etc. prescribed for the
post in question.  Pursuant to the said direction of the Standing Committee, a
detailed note was submitted for consideration of the Standing Committee and after
considering all aspects, in the meeting held on 29.6.2000, the Standing
Committee had taken decision to the effect that the name of Shri N.A.  Acharya,
Joint District Judge, Vadodara may be recommended to the Labour and
Employment Department, Government of Gujarat, for appointment as President of
the Industrial Court, Ahmedabad by nomination provided under the Recruitment
Rules for the post in question.	 Accordingly, the office had sent a communication
to the Government on 5.7.2000 recommending the name of Shri N.A. Acharya for
appointment on the post of President, Industrial Court, Ahmedabad.   Soon after
the recommendation was made by the High Court to the Government as
aforesaid, a representation was received by the High Court from Shri B.I. Kazi, the
President, Gujarat Industrial Judges' Association,  Ahmedabad in connection with
the filling up of the post of President, Industrial Court, Ahmedabad.  In this
connection, Shri Kazi was called for personal hearing on 11.8.2000 and he was
heard by the Chief Justice on the issue.  Again, Shri Y.P. Bhatt, President (In-
charge) of the Industrial Court vide his letter dated 4.11.2000 expressed his
unwillingness to be promoted as the President of the Industrial Court.
On the basis of what is stated	above, it is clear that the decision to fill up
the post of the President of the Industrial Court by way of nomination as provided
under the Rules, was arrived at, after considering all aspects, not only that the
process of selecting the person to be recommended to the Government was also
undertaken transparently and before taking the decision, the matter was
considered from time and again by the Standing Committee of the High Court of
Gujarat and after due consideration and deliberations, the decision was taken to
recommend the name of Shri N.A.	 Acharya.  Considering the totality of the facts,
it is clear to us that there is neither illegality nor arbitrariness in taking the decision
of recommending the name of Shri N.A.  Acharya for appointment on the post of
President, Industrial Court, Ahmedabad.
It is seen from the records that at the request of the Government, the
eligibility criteria for appointment on the post of President, Industrial Court has
been determined by the High Court and the same has been incorporated in the
Draft Recruitment Rules.  We have already extracted Rules 2 & 3 of the Draft
Recruitment Rules.  Shri N.A.  Acharya is eligible for the post of the President,
Industrial Court, Ahmedabad as he has completed ten years' service in judiciary
including the period of practice at the Bar.  The period of practice/service of Shri
N.A. Acharya is given below:-
"Period of Practice/Service or Mr. N.A. Acharya:-
1.8.1978 to 30.11.1983		:-	   Worked as Civil Judge(JD)

Resigned on			  :-	  30.11.1983

	Period of Practice		    :-	       Enrolment No.G/296/1974 on
					  30.10.74
  Practice : 30.10.1974 to 31.7.1978
							     1.12.1983 to 19.2.1992
					  From 20.2.1992 to 22.12.1999
-Addl. Public Prosecutor, City Civil
				  Court, Ahmedabad



					  From 23.12.1999 to 21.12.2000
- Worked in the cadre of District Judge
					   at Vadodara.
From 22.12.2000
-	As President, Industrial Court."
-
In our opinion, in the case of appointment of President of the
Industrial Court by nomination, it is not necessary that he must be appointed
as Member at the first instance.
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act deals with
the composition of Industrial Court, which does not lay down the mode of
appointment.  The words of
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act are not that the
President shall be appointed from one of the current Members of the
Industrial Court.  In our view, the High Court has erroneously read these
words in
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act.  It is also seen that the proposed
Recruitment Rules were framed by the High Court at the request of the
Government and pending approval of the Government.  We are, therefore,
of the opinion that the appointment of Shri N.A.  Acharya as President of the
Industrial Court is not in breach of
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act and also
not violative of
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution of India.   To be eligible
for appointment by nomination, the candidate must not be connected with
any Industry as defined in the
B.I.R. Act
and must (1) not be less than 45
years of age, and (2) have for atleast ten years either held a judicial post in
India or been an advocate for High Court or have expert knowledge of
Industrial matters.  Based on the recommendation of the High Court, on its
administrative side, the Government of Gujarat issued the Notification on
7.12.2000 whereby Shri N.A. Acharya had been appointed as the President
of the Industrial Court.  Considering the totality of the facts, it is clear that by
recommending the appointment in question, the High Court of Gujarat had
not only acted within its rights but the same had been done in due discharge
of the constitutional duty.
In our view,
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act cannot be read to mean
that the President of the Industrial Court must be appointed from amongst
the existing Members of the Industrial Court when the provision in fact is
not in such terms.  The High Court has confused the concept of the
President of the Industrial Court being from among the Members of the
said Court with the erroneous concept that the said President must be from
amongst the existing members of that Court.  A reading of the provisions of
Section 10
of the B.I.R. Act clearly spells out that, apart from the mode of
selecting the President by promotion amongst the Members, the President
can also directly be appointed from the sitting or retired High Court Judges
or from the Judges of City Civil Court, Ahmedabad and District Judges,
who fulfills the eligibility requirement for appointment as Member of the
Industrial Court.  The High Court, in our view, has failed to appreciate that
the words of
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act are not  "that the President
shall be appointed from one of the current Members of the Industrial
Court".	   The narrow interpretation of
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act and
the reasoning of the High Court, in our view, completely rules out the
appointment of President, Industrial Court through the mode of nomination.
In other words, the High Court failed to appreciate that once a person is
appointed as the President of the Industrial Court, he automatically
becomes a Member.
Section 10(2)
of the B.I.R. Act only envisages that
the President is the senior Member of the Industrial Court and that   the
appointment of President of the Industrial Court is inherent in his
appointment as Member of the Industrial Court.
This Court,  in the case of
State of Maharashtra vs. Labour Law
Practitioners' Association & Ors.
, (1998) 2 SCC 688, held that the
Labour Court Judges and the Judges of the Industrial Court belong to
Judicial service and recruitment is to be made in accordance with
Article
234
of the Constitution of India.  The existing Recruitment Rules did not
comply with the provision of
Article 234
of the Constitution of India.	 The
State Government, therefore, referred to the High Court for consultation
and approval of the Rules.  The administrative side of the High Court
framed the Draft Rules and the appointment offered to Shri N.A.	 Acharya
was in accordance with the Draft Rules.	 This apart, the eligibility criteria for
appointment on the post of the President of the Industrial Court has been
determined by the High court and the same has been incorporated in the
Draft Recruitment Rules at the request of the Government.
For the foregoing reasons, we are of the opinion that no illegality is
committed by recommending the name of Shri N.A. Acharya as the
President of the Industrial Court, for appointment by nomination.
The appeals are allowed.  However, in the facts and circumstances
of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.