[Cites
9
, Cited by
194
]
Supreme Court of India
D.S. Lakshmaiah & Anr vs L. Balasubramanyam & Anr on 27 August, 2003
Equivalent citations: AIR 2003 SUPREME COURT 3800, 2003 AIR SCW 4347, 2003 AIR - KANT. H. C. R. 2429, (2003) 7 JT 493 (SC), 2003 (9) SRJ 363, (2003) 95 REVDEC 622, 2003 (5) SLT 116, (2004) 1 JCR 19 (SC), 2003 (10) SCC 310, 2003 (7) SCALE 1, 2003 (7) ACE 746, 2003 (3) BLJR 2405, (2003) 10 ALLINDCAS 95 (SC), (2004) 1 UC 82, (2003) 4 CURCC 34, (2003) 2 HINDULR 497, (2004) 1 LANDLR 172, (2004) 3 MAD LW 49, (2003) 4 PAT LJR 188, (2004) 1 PUN LR 658, (2004) 1 RAJ LW 31, (2003) 6 SUPREME 540, (2003) 4 RECCIVR 547, (2003) 4 ICC 586, (2003) 7 SCALE 1, (2003) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 570, (2003) 4 JLJR 208, (2003) 10 INDLD 724, (2003) 53 ALL LR 158, (2003) 3 BLJ 598, (2003) 2 CAL LJ 604, (2004) 2 CIVLJ 675
Author:
B. N. Agrawal
Bench:
B. N. Agrawal
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2089 of 2000

PETITIONER:
D.S. Lakshmaiah & Anr.					


RESPONDENT:
Vs.

L. Balasubramanyam & Anr.				


DATE OF JUDGMENT: 27/08/2003

BENCH:
Y.K. Sabharwal & B. N. Agrawal.


JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T





Y.K. Sabharwal, J.
Appellant No.1 and respondent No.2 are husband and wife 

respectively.  Respondent No.1 is their son.  The second appellant 

purchased the property in question from the first appellant.

	The respondents in this appeal are original plaintiffs.  They filed a 

suit for declaration of their 2/3rd share, partition and possession thereof in 

respect of two properties described as Item No.1 and Item No.2.  

According to them, Schedule Item No.2 property came to appellant No.1 

(original defendant No.1 in the suit) in partition between him and his 

brothers and it is an ancestral property.  The Item No.1 property, according 

to the averments in the plaint, was acquired by plaintiffs and the first 

defendant out of joint Hindu family funds and the first defendant was trying 

to alienate the suit property for his self benefit and not for the benefit of the 

members of the family.  When, during the pendency of the suit, it came to 

notice of the plaintiffs that Item No.1 property had been sold by the first 

appellant, on their application, appellant No.2 was impleded as defendant 

No.2 in the suit.
The trial court decreed the suit holding that the respondents are 

entitled to 2/3rd share in the properties as also possession thereof and also 

granting other consequential reliefs.
The first appellate court, however, allowed two separate appeals 

that had been filed by each of the appellant and the suit was ordered to be 

dismissed.  It was held that the respondents have failed to prove that Item 

No.1 property was joint Hindu family property.  The said property was held 

to be the self acquired property of the first appellant.  It further held that 

respondent No.1 has failed to prove that any amount of income was 

available in the hands of the first appellant to purchase Item No.1 property 

noticing that except 15 guntas of land (Item No.2 property), there was no 

ancestral property with the first appellant and that the trial court was not 

correct in observing that it was for the first appellant to show that no 

nucleus of ancestral property was available with him to purchase Item No.1 

property.
The judgment and decree of the first appellate court was challenged 

by the respondents before the High Court in a second appeal (Regular 

Second Appeal No.213/91).  That appeal was filed by son and mother.  On 

a memo filed by respondent No.1 who was first appellant before the High 

Court, his second appeal was dismissed and only the claim of his mother 

who prosecuted the second appeal was examined by the High Court.  The 

High Court by the impugned judgment restored the judgment and decree 

of the trial court, setting aside that of the first appellate court.  

	The High Court has held that Item No.2 property has been proved to 

be joint Hindu family property and the respondents have share in it.  The 

finding in respect of Item No.2 property has not been challenged before us.  

Even otherwise, there is no ground to upset the said finding of fact.  The 

only controversy that has been raised before us is in respect of Item No.1 

property.  The said property was purchased by the first appellant in the 

year 1970-71.  It was sold by him in favour of the second appellant in the 

year 1987 after filing of the suit.  The only question to be examined is 

whether Item No.1 property was self-acquired property of the first appellant 

or it was joint Hindu family property in which the respondents/plaintiffs had 

2/3rd share.  Answering this question in favour of the respondents, the High 

Court has held that the second appellant could only be entitled to purchase 

1/3rd share from the first appellant who had no right to sell the remaining 

2/3rd share in Item No.1 property

	The question to be determined in the present case is as to who  is 

required to prove the nature of property whether it is joint Hindu family 

property or self-acquired property of the first appellant.  

	There was evidence and it has been established that Item No.2 

measuring 15 guntas of land was joint Hindu family property but, 

admittedly, no evidence has been led that the said joint Hindu family 

property was yielding any income or that any nucleus was available with 

the aid whereof Item No.1 property could be purchased by the first 

appellant.  Admittedly, no evidence has been led on behalf of the 

respondents/plaintiffs to show income from Item No.2 property or value of 

the property.  At the same time no evidence has also been led by the first 

appellant to prove that he had any separate income so as to acquire Item 

No.1 property.  In absence of evidence either way which party would 

succeed and which fail, is the question.  The legal position is well settled 

as we will presently notice.
In
Appalaswami v. Suryanarayanamurti & Ors.
[AIR 1947 PC 

189], in a partition suit filed against their father by minor sons from the first 

marriage, the father claimed the properties in question were his self-

acquired properties and denied that the plaintiffs had any right to seek 

partition.  The High Court, reversing the judgment of the trial court, held 

that the view expressed by the trial court that only joint family property was 

that which the father took under partition Exhibit A was not correct and 

further held that whole of the property set out in Schedule to the written 

statement of the appellant/father, which had been acquired after partition 

Exhibit A was joint family property.  The contention accepted by the High 

Court was that the share which the father took under Exhibit A formed the 

nucleus from which all his further acquisitions sprang.  The plea of the 

father that was accepted by the Privy Council was that the whole of the 

property that came to him under Exhibit A was intact and unencumbered 

except a small portion sold which amount had been debited against 

household expenditure.  The Privy Council held that the Hindu law upon 

this aspect of the case is well settled.  Proof of the existence of a joint 

family does not lead to the presumption that property held by any member 

of the family is joint, and the burden rests upon anyone asserting that any 

item of property is joint to establish the fact.  But where it is established 

that the family possessed some joint property which from its nature and 

relative value may have formed the nucleus from which the property in 

question may have been acquired, the burden shifts to the party alleging 

self-acquisition to establish affirmatively that the property was acquired 

without the aid of the joint family property.  In the case before the Privy 

Council, on facts, it was held that the burden had shifted to the father to 

prove self-acquisition of properties as it was established that the family 

possessed joint property which from its nature and relative value, may 

have formed the nucleus to acquire the property in question.  Those 

properties were large in number and have been noticed in Privy Council 

decision.  However, on further facts found, it was held that the father had 

discharged that burden.  The properties were held to be self-acquired 

properties of the appellant.
In
Srinivas Krishnarao Kango v. Narayan Devji Kango & Ors.
[AIR 1954 SC 379], the contention that was urged on behalf of the 

appellant was that the burden was wrongly cast on the plaintiff of proving 

that the acquisition of the properties were made with the aid of joint family 

funds, the argument being that as the family admittedly possessed the 

ancestral Watan lands of the extent of 56 acres, it must be presumed that 

the acquisitions were made with the aid of joint family funds and, therefore, 

the burden lay on the defendants who claimed that they were self-acquired 

acquisitions to establish that they were made without the aid of joint family 

funds and that the evidence adduced by them fell far short of it and that the 

presumption in favour of the plaintiff stood unrebutted.  It was noticed by 

this Court that on the question of the nucleus, the only properties which 

were proved to belong to the joint family were the Watan lands of the 

extent of about 56 acres bearing an annual assessment of Rs.49/-.  There 

was no satisfactory evidence about the income which these lands were 

yielding at the material time.  Under these circumstances, noticing with 

approval the aforesaid Privy Council decision, it was held that whether the 

evidence adduced by the plaintiff was sufficient to shift the burden which 

initially rested on him to establish that there was adequate nucleus out of 

which the acquisition could have made is one of fact depending on the 

nature and extent of the nucleus.  The important thing to consider is the 

income which the nucleus yields.  A building in the occupation of the 

members of a family and yielding no income could not be a nucleus out of 

which acquisitions could be made, even though it might be of considerable 

value.  On the other hand, a running business in which the capital invested 

is comparatively small might conceivably produce substantial income 

which may well form the foundation of the subsequent acquisitions.
In
Mudi Gowda Gowdappa Sankh v. Ram Chandra Ravagowda 

Sankh
[(1969) 1 SCC 386], noticing the observations of Sir John 

Beaumont in
Appalaswami
's case (supra), it was reiterated that the 

burden of proving that any particular property is joint family property in the 

first instance is upon the person who claims it to be so.  But if the 

possession of a nucleus of the joint family property is either admitted or 

proved, any acquisition made by a member of the joint family is presumed 

to be joint family property.  This is, however, subject to the limitation that 

the joint family property must be such as with its aid the property in 

question could have been acquired.  It is only after the possession of an 

adequate nucleus is shown, that the onus shifts on to the person who 

claims the property as self-acquisition to affirmatively make out that the 

property was acquired without any aid from the family estate.
We are 

unable to accept the contention of learned counsel for the respondents that 

the aforesaid later observations have been made without reasons or that 

the Privy Council's decision does not hold so.  The observation that only 

after possession of adequate nucleus is shown that the onus shifts also get 

support from
Srinivas Krishnarao Kango
's case (supra) where, while 

considering the question of shifting of burden, it has been held that the 

important thing to consider is the income which the nucleus yields.
In
Baikuntha Nath Paramanik (dead) by His L.Rs. & Heirs v. 

Sashi Bhusan Pramanik
(dead) by his L.Rs. & Ors. [(1973) 2 SCC 334], 

this Court again held that when a joint family is found to be in possession 

of nucleus sufficient to make the impugned acquisitions then a 

presumption arises that the acquisitions standing in the names of the 

person who were in the management of the family properties are family 

acquisitions.
In
Surendra Kumar v. Phoolchand
(dead) through LRs & Anr. 

[(1996) 2 SCC 491], this Court held that where it is established or admitted 

that the family which possessed joint property which from its nature and 

relative value may have formed sufficient nucleus from which the property 

in question may have been acquired, the presumption arises that it was the 

joint property and the burden shifts to the party alleging self-acquisition to 

establish affirmatively that the property was acquired without the aid of the 

joint family funds.
We may now refer to three decisions whereupon reliance has been 

placed by learned counsel for the respondents.
In
Mallesappa Bandeppa 

Desai & Anr. V. Desai Mallappa
alias Mallesappa & Anr. [AIR 1961 SC 

1268], this Court held that where a manager claims that any immovable 

property has been acquired by him with his own separate funds and not 

with the help of the joint family funds of which he was in possession and 

charge, it is for him to prove by clear and satisfactory evidence his plea 

that the purchase money proceeded from his separate fund.  The onus of 

proof in such a case has to be placed on the manager and not on his 

coparceners.  It is difficult to comprehend how this decision lends any 

support to the contention of the respondents that in absence of leading any 

evidence, the claim of appellant No.1 of the property being self-acquired 

has to fail.  In the cited decision, the manager was found to be in 

possession and in charge of joint family funds and, therefore, it was for him 

to prove that despite it he purchased the property from his separate funds.  

In the present case, admittedly, no evidence has been led by the 

respondents that the first appellant was in possession of any such joint 

family funds or as to value or income, if any, of Item No.2 property.
In
Achuthan Nair v. Chinnammu Amma & Ors.
[AIR 1966 SC 

411], it was noticed that there were number of properties owned by joint 

family which were received at the time of separation under a decree 

passed in a partition suit.  The claim of the defendants in the written 

statement was that the property in question had been purchased from the 

private funds of defendant No.1 and her son defendant No.4.  In this 

decision too, it was reiterated that when it is proved or admitted that a 

family possessed sufficient nucleus with the aid of which the member 

might have made the acquisition, the law raises a presumption that it is a 

joint family property and the onus is shifted to the individual member to 

establish that the property was acquired by him without the aid of the said 

nucleus.  After noticing this settled propositions, it was observed that if a 

property is acquired in the name of a karanvan, there is a strong 

presumption that it is a tarwad (joint Hindu family) property and the 

presumption must hold good unless and until it is rebutted by acceptable 

evidence.  This Court did not hold that if a property is acquired in the name 

of karta, the law as to presumption or shifting of onus would be different.  

The question of presumption would depend upon the facts established in 

each case.  In the present case, no evidence of nucleus having been led, 

onus remained on the respondents and, therefore, there could be no 

question of presumption about the property being joint family property.
The last decision relied upon is Malappa Girimallappa Betgeri & 

Ors. v. R. Yellappagouda Patil & Ors. [AIR 1959 SC 906].
It cites with 

approval the earlier decision in the case of
Srinivas Krishnarao Kango
(supra).  On facts, it was noticed that the courts below had held that the 

property provided a sufficient nucleus of joint family property out of which 

the properties in question might have been acquired and the sufficiency of 

nucleus is again a question of fact.  In view of those circumstances, there 

was presumption of the properties being properties of joint family and the 

said presumption had not been displaced.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, the respondents having failed to 

discharge the initial burden of establishing that there was any nucleus in 

the form of any income whatsoever from Item No.2 property and no other 

nucleus was claimed, the burden remained on the respondents to establish 

that Item No.1 property was joint family property.  In this view, the fact that 

the first appellant has not led any evidence to establish his separate 

income is of no consequence insofar as the claim of the respondents is 

concerned.  Under these circumstances, for failure to lead evidence, the 

respondents' claim of Item No.1 to be joint family property would fail as 

rightly held by the first appellate court.
The legal principle, therefore, is that there is no presumption of a 

property being joint family property only on account of existence of a joint 

Hindu family.  The one who asserts has to prove that the property is a joint 

family property.  If, however, the person so asserting proves that there was 

nucleus with which the joint family property could be acquired, there would 

be presumption of the property being joint and the onus would shift on the 

person who claims it to be self-acquired property to prove that he 

purchased the property with his own funds and not out of joint family 

nucleus that was available.
Another contention urged for the respondents was that assuming 

Item No.1 property to be self-acquired property of appellant No.1, he 

blended the said property with the joint family property and, therefore, it 

has become the joint family property.  Assuming the respondents can be 

permitted to raise such a plea without evidence in support thereof, the law 

on the aspect of blending is well settled that property separate or self-

acquired of a member of joint Hindu family may be impressed with the 

character of joint family property if it is voluntarily thrown by the owner into 

the common stock with the intention of abandoning his separate claim 

therein but to establish such abandonment a clear intention to waive 

separate rights must be established.  From the mere fact that other 

members of the family were allowed to use the property jointly with himself, 

or that the income of the separate property was utilized out of generosity to 

support persons whom the holder was not bound to support, or from the 

failure to maintain separate accounts, abandonment cannot be inferred, for 

an act of generosity or kindness will not ordinarily be regarded as an 

admission of a legal obligation {see
Lakkireddi Chinna Venkata Reddy v. 

Lakkireddi Lakshamama
[1964 (
2) SCR 172] and K.V. Narayanan v. 

K.V. Ranganadhan & Ors.
[(1977) 1 SCC 244]}.
In the present case, respondents have not led any evidence on the 

aforesaid aspects and, therefore, it cannot be held that the first appellant 

blended Item No.1 property into the joint family account.

	In view of aforesaid discussion, Item No.1 property cannot be held to 

be joint family property.  The impugned judgment of the High Court is, 

therefore, set aside and the appeal allowed and the judgment and decree 

of the first appellate court is restored.  In the circumstances of the case, 

parties are left to bear their own costs.