[Cites
29
, Cited by
86
]
Supreme Court of India
M. Narayandas vs State Of Karnataka And Ors on 19 September, 2003
Equivalent citations: AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 555, 2003 (11) SCC 251, 2003 AIR SCW 6030, 2003 (10) SRJ 314, 2004 (1) UJ (SC) 512, (2003) 12 ALLINDCAS 521 (SC), 2004 UJ(SC) 1 512, 2004 ALL MR(CRI) 217, 2004 SCC(CRI) 118, 2003 (8) ACE 624, 2003 (12) ALLINDCAS 521, 2003 CRI(AP)PR(SC) 589, 2003 (8) SCALE 1, 2003 (7) SLT 51, (2004) ILR (KANT) (2) 1367, (2003) 3 EASTCRIC 168, (2004) SC CR R 238, (2003) 11 INDLD 461, (2004) 2 MADLW(CRI) 485, (2003) 26 OCR 501, (2004) 2 RAJ CRI C 524, (2003) 4 CURCRIR 351, (2003) 6 SUPREME 863, (2005) 2 ALLCRIR 1955, (2003) 8 SCALE 1, (2003) 3 CHANDCRIC 59, (2004) 1 ALLCRILR 354, (2003) 4 CRIMES 159
Author:
S.N. Variava
Bench:
S.N. Variava
,
H.K. Sema
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  1197 of 2003

PETITIONER:
M. NARAYANDAS

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF KARNATAKA AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 19/09/2003

BENCH:
S.N. VARIAVA & H.K. SEMA

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

2003 Supp(3) SCR 973

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by S.N. VARIAVA, J. : Leave
granted. Heard parties.
This Appeal is against an Order dated 26th August, 2002 whereby an FIR has
been quashed.
Briefly stated the facts are as follows :
The appellant is the owner of survey No. 66 in Sarakki village. He appears
to have entered into an agreement to sell dated 18th February, 1988 with
his sister one Nirmala. This agreement was for 25,188 sq. ft. in survey No.
66. Respondent No. 2 is the son of the said Nirmala. Respondent No. 4 is
the daughter of the said Nirmala. Respondent No. 3 is a daughter-in-law,
through a deceased son of Nirmala. It is the case of the Appellant that he
had permitted his sister Nirmala to reside in the plot agreed to be sold to
her as his licensee. On 7th September, 2000 Respondents 2 to 4 filed a suit
for partition. Appellant claims that in this suit, partition was also
claimed of the 25,188 sq ft. Respondents 2 to 4 deny that the claim in
partition suit includes this piece of land. We are not concerned with this
controversy, save and except to note that admittedly the documents set out
hereunder were not produced or relied upon in this suit. The Appellant
claims that he learnt that Respondents 2 to 4 were trying to get this piece
of land transferred to their names on the basis of some partition deed. The
Appellant thus filed as suit against Respondent 2 to 4 for a permanent
injunction restraining change of name in the records. Respondents 2 to 4
filed a written statement wherein they relied upon three documents all
dated 21st October, 1989. The documents are (a) a general power of attorney
(b) a sale cum possession receipts (c) and affidavits purported to have
been sworn by the Appellant. The Appellant claims that these documents were
never executed by him. The Appellant claims that he also found some
manipulations in the agreement to sell dated 18th February, 1988. The
Appellant thus filed, on 27th May, 2002, a complaint with the police
station at Ulsoor complaining that these documents were forged and
fabricated. An FIR under
Sections 468
,
470
,
471
and
120B
Indian Penal Code
came to be registered. Respondents 2 and 3 filed a Petition under
Section
482
of the Criminal Procedure Code to quash the FIR. This has been allowed
by the High Court. Hence this Appeal.
Before dealing with the High Court judgment, which has been impugned, it is
first necessary to set out well settled law. The law has been very
succinctly set out in the case of
State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal
, reported
in [1992] Supp. 1 SCC 335. In this case the High Court had quashed an FIR.
While setting aside the High Court judgment this Court held as follows :
"31. At the stage of registration of a crime or a case on the basis of the
information disclosing a cognizable offence in compliance with the mandate
of
Section 154(1)
of the Code, the concerned police officer can not embark
upon an enquiry as to whether the information, laid by the informant is
reliable and genuine or otherwise and refuse to register a case on the
ground that the information is not reliable or credible. On the other hand,
the officer in charge of a police station is statutorily obliged to
register a case and then to proceed with the investigation if he has reason
to suspect the commission of an offence which he is empowered under
Section
156
of the Code to investigate, subject to the proviso to
section 157
. (As
we have proposed to make a detailed discussion about the power of a police
officer in the field of investigation of a cognizable offence within the
ambit of
Sections 156
and
157
of the Code in the ensuing part of this
judgment, we do not propose to deal with those sections in extenso in the
present context.) In case, an officer in charge of a police station refuses
to exercise the jurisdiction vested in him and to register a case on the
information of a cognizable offence reported and thereby violates the
statutory duty cast upon him, the person aggrieved by such refusal can send
the substance of the information in writing and by post to the
Superintendent of Police concerned who if satisfied that the information
forwarded to him discloses a cognizable offence, should either investigate
the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by any police
officer subordinate to him in the manner provided by sub-section (3) of
Section 154
of the Code.
32. Be it noted that in
Section 154 (1)
of the Code, the legislature in its
collective wisdom has carefully and cautiously used the expression
"information" without qualifying the same as in
Section 41(l)(a)
or (g) of
the Code wherein the expressions, "reasonable complaint" and "credible
information" are used. Evidently, the non-qualification of the word
"information" in
Section 154 (1)
unlike in
Section 4
l(l)(a) and (g) of the
Code may be for the reason that the police officer should not refuse to
record an information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence
and to register a case thereon the ground that he is not satisfied with the
reasonableness or credibility of the information. In other words,
'reasonableness' or 'credibility' of the said information is not a
condition precedent for registration of a case. A comparison of the present
Section 154
with those of the earlier Codes will indicate that the
legislature had purposely thought it fit to employ only the word
"information" without qualifying the said word.
Section 139
of the Code of
Criminal Procedure of 1861 (Act 25 of 1861) passed by the Legislative
Council of India read that 'every complaint or information' preferred to an
officer in charge of a police station should be reduced into writing which
provision was subsequently modified by
Section 112
of the Code of 1872 (Act
10 of 1872) which thereafter read that 'every complaint' preferred to an
officer in charge of a police station shall be reduced in writing. The word
'complaint' which occurred in previous two Codes of 1861 and 1872 was
deleted and in that place the word 'information' was used in the Codes of
1882 and 1898 which word is now used in
Sections 154
,
155
,
157
and
190(c)
of the present Code of 1973 (Act 2 of 1974). An overall reading of all the
Codes makes it clear that the condition which is sine qua non for recording
a first information report is that there must be an information and that
information must disclose a cognizable offence.
33.  It is, therefore, manifestly clear that if any information disclosing
a cognizable offence is laid before an officer in charge of a police
station satisfying the requirements of
Section 154(1)
of the Code, the said
police officer has no other option except to enter the substance thereof in
the prescribed form, that is to say, to register a case on the basis of
such information.
(emphasis supplied)

xxx                   xxx                   xxx
40. The core of the above sections namely 156, 157 and 159 of the Code is
that if a police officer has reason to suspect the commission of a
cognizable offence, he must either proceed with the investigation or cause
an investigation to be proceeded with by his subordinate, that in a case
where the police officer sees no sufficient ground for investigation, he
can dispense with the investigation altogether; that the field of
investigation of any cognizable offence is exclusively within the domain of
the investigating agencies over which the court cannot have control and
have no power to stifle or impinge upon the proceedings in the
investigation so long as the investigation proceeds in compliance with the
provisions relating to investigation and that it is only in a case wherein
a police officer decides not to investigate an offence, the concerned
Magistrate can intervene and either direct an investigation or in the
alternative, if he thinks fit, he himself can, at once proceed or depute
any Magistrate subordinate to him to proceed to hold a preliminary inquiry
into or otherwise to dispose of the case in the manner provided in the
Code.
(emphasis supplied)

xxx                   xxx                   xxx
102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant
provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law
enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions relating to the exercise
of the extraordinary power under
Article 226
or the inherent powers under
Section 482
of the Code which we have extracted and reproduced above, we
give the following categories of cases by way of illustration wherein such
power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be
possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently
channelised and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulate and to give an
exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be
exercised.
(1)  Where the allegations made in the first information report or the
complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their
entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case
against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other
materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable
offence, justifying a investigation by police officers under
Section 156(1)
of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of
Section 155(2)
of the Code.
(3)    Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint
and the evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the
commission of any offence and make out a case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable
offence but constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no inves-tigation is
permitted by a police officer without an order of a Magistrate as
contemplated under
Section 155(2)
of the Code.
(5)  Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and
inherently improbable on the basis of which    no prudent person can ever
reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding
against the accused.
(6)  Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions
of the Code of the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is
instituted) to the institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or
where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide
and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior
motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him
due to private and personal grudge.
103. We also give a note of caution to the effect that the power of
quashing a criminal proceeding should be exercised very sparingly and with
circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases; that the count
will not be justified in embarking upon an enquiry as to the reliability or
genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made in the FIR or the
complaint and that the extraordinary or inherent powers do not confer an
arbitrary jurisdiction on the court to act according to its whim or
caprice."
It must also be mentioned that it is settled law that the power to quash
must be exercised very sparingly and with circumspection. It must be
exercised in the rarest of rare cases. It is also settled law that the
Court would not be justified in embarking upon an Inquiry as to the
reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made in the FIR.
The Court also cannot inquire whether the allegations in the complaint are
likely to be established or not.
Keeping the above-mentioned principles in mind let us now see what the High
Court has done in the impugned judgment. In the impugned judgment the High
Court proceeds to consider the case of the Appellant in the complaint and
the case made out by the Respondents. The High Court examines the
documents, compare the signatures thereon and then proceeds to arrive at
the conclusion that the documents are not false or fabricated. The High
Court takes into consideration certain photographs and other material
produced by the Respondents, and concludes that the complaint was
vexatious, frivolous and false. On this basis the High Court proceeds to
quash the complaint and impose cost of Rs. 10,000 on the appellant. The
High Court does not conclude, as it could not have, that the allegations
made in the complaint, if taken at their face value and accepted in their
entirety, do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case
against the accused. The High Court does not conclude, as it could not
have, that the allegations in the complaint do not disclose a cognizable
offence justifying an investigation by the police officer. The conclusion
of the High Court that the complaint was false, vexatious and frivolous is
based on material produced by the Respondents. One fails to understand how
without evidence the High Court could have relied on this material. It is
clear that the impugned order is totally unsustainable. To the credit of
Counsel, appearing for the Respondents, it must be stated that the impugned
order was not sought to be supported for the reasons given by the High
Court in quashing the complaint. It was fairly admitted that the reasons
given by the High Court, in quashing the complaint, were unsustainable.
On behalf of the Respondents it was submitted that this was a case which
fell under
Section 195
of the Criminal Procedure Code. It was submitted
that therefore the provisions of Chapter XXVI of the Criminal procedure
Code would apply. It was submitted that once the provisions of Chapter XXVI
applied, impliedly, the provisions of Chapter XII get excluded. It was
submitted that in such a case the only procedure which could be followed
was to make an application to the Court. It was submitted that by not
following the procedure laid down under Chapter XXVI the right of the
Respondents under
Article 21
of the Constitution of India had been
affected. It was submitted that if an application had been made to the
Court and the Court had taken a decision then under
Section 341
of the
Criminal Procedure Code an appeal could have been filed. It was submitted
that by making a complaint to the police, who would then make a report to a
Court and the Court would take cognizance the Respondents were deprived of
the right of appeal as provided under
Section 341
of the Criminal procedure
Code.
We are unable to accept the submissions made on behalf of the Respondents.
Firstly it is to be seen that the High Court does not quash the complaint
on the ground that
Section 195
applied and that the procedure under Chapter
XXVI had not been followed. Thus such a ground could not be used to sustain
the impugned judgment. Even otherwise there is no substance in the
submission. The question whether
Sections 195
and
340
of the Criminal
Procedure Code affect the power of the police to investigate into a
cognizable offence has already been considered by this Court in the case of
State of Punjab v. Raj Singh
, reported in [1998] 2 SCC 391. In this case it
has been that as follows :
"2. We are unable to sustain the impugned order of the High Court quashing
the FIR lodged against the respondents alleging commission of offences
under
Sections 419
,
420
,
467
, and
468
IPC by them in course of the
proceeding of a civil suit, on the ground that
Section 195(l)(b)(ii)
CrPC
prohibited entertainment of and investigation into the same by the police.
From a plain reading of
Section 195
CrPC it is manifest that it comes into
operation at the stage when the court intends to take cognizance of an
offence under
Section 190(1)
Cr. PC; and it has nothing to do with the
statutory power of the police to investigate into an FIR which discloses a
cognizable offence, in accordance with Chapter XII of the Code even if the
offence is alleged to have been committed in, or in relation to, any
proceedings in court.
In other words, the statutory power of the police to
investigate under the Code is not in any way controlled or circumscribed by
Section 195
Cr.PC. It is of course true that upon the charge-sheet
(challan), if any, filed on completion of the investigation into such an
offence the court would not be competent to take cognizance thereof in view
of the embargo of
Section 195(1)(b)
CrPC, but nothing therein deters the
court from filing a complaint for the offence on the basis of the FIR
(filed by the aggrieved private party) and the materials collected during
investigation, provided it forms the requisite opinion and follows the
procedure
laid down in
Section 340
CrPC.
The judgment of this Court in
Gopalkrishna Menon v. Raja Reddy
, [1983] 4 SCC 240 : [1983] SCC (Cri) 822 :
AIR (1983) SC 1053 on which the High Court relied, has no manners of
application to the facts of the instant case for there cognizance was taken
on a private complaint even though the office of forgery was committed in
respect of a money receipt produced in the civil court and hence it was
held that the court could not take cognizance on such a complaint in view
of
Section 195
Cr.PC."
Not only are we bound by this judgment but we are also in complete
agreement with the same.
Sections 195
and
340
do not control or
circumscribe the power of the police to investigate under the Criminal
procedure Code. Once investigation is completed then the embargo in
Section
195
would come into play and the Court would not be competent to take
cognizance. However, that Court could then file a complaint for the offence
on the basis of the FIR and the material collected during investigation
provided that procedure
laid down in
Section 340
Criminal Procedure Code is
followed. Thus no right of the Respondents, much less the right to file an
appeal under
Section 341
, is affected.
It was next submitted that on the material placed before it the High Court
was right in concluding that the complaint was false, frivolous and
vexatious. It was to be noted that the High Court arrived at this
conclusion on the basis of unsubstantiated allegations made by the
Respondents. How Courts should deal with such allegations is set out in
para 108 of
Bhajan Lai
's case (supra). Para 108 read as follows :
"108. No doubt, there was no love lost between Shri Bhajan Lal and Dharam
Pal. Based on this strained relationship, it has been then emphatically
urged by Mr. K. Parasaran that the entire allegations made in the complaint
due to political vendetta are not only scurrilous and scandalous but also
tainted with mala fides, vitiating the entire proceedings. As it has been
repeatedly pointed out earlier the entire matter is only at a premature
stage and the investigation is not yet proceeded with except some
preliminary effort taken on the date of the registration of the case, that
is on November 21, 1987. The evidence has to be gathered after a thorough
investigation and placed before the court on the basis of which alone the
court can come to a conclusion one way or the other on the plea of mala
fides. If the allegations are bereft of truth and made maliciously, we are
sure, the investigation will say so. At this stage, when there are only
allegations and recriminations but on evidence, this court cannot
anticipate the result of the investigation and render a finding on the
question of mala fides on the materials at present available. Therefore, we
are unable to see any force in the contention that the complaint should be
thrown overboard on the mere unsubstantiated plea of mala fides. Even
assuming that Dharam Pal has laid the complaint only on account of his
personal animosity, that by itself, will not be a ground to discard the
complaint containing serious allegations which have to be tested and
weighed after the evidence is collected. In this connection, the following
view expressed by Bhagwati, C.J.in Sheonandan Paswan v. State of Bihar,
[1987] 1 SCC 288, 318 : [1987] SCC (Cri) 82 may be referred to : (SCC p.
318, para 16)"
"It is a well established proposition of law that a criminal prosecution,
if otherwise justifiable and based upon adequate evidence does not become
vitiated on account of mala fides or political vendetta of the first
informant or the complaintant."
For this reason the submission cannot be accepted. If as claimed there is
no substance in the complaint the investigation will say so. At this stage
there were only allegations and recriminations. The High Court could not
have anticipated the result of the investigation or rendered a finding on
question of malafides. Even if the Appellant had made the complaint on
account of personal vendetta that by itself was not a ground to discard the
complaint which had to be tested and weighed after the evidence was
collected.
It was lastly submitted that the question whether
Section 195
Criminal
Procedure Code applied or not had not been considered by the High Court and
therefore the case should be sent back to the High Court for consideration
thereof. It was submitted that in the petition it has been squarely urged
that
Section 195
applied. It was submitted that the High Court should have
considered this aspect. It was pointed out that the question whether
Section 195
applies to documents forged prior to the proceedings in which
they are tendered has, due to conflict of decisions, been referred to a 5
Judge bench. We see no substance in this submission. The law on the point
is clear. At the stage of investigation
Section 195
has' no application. We
are therefore not concerned with the question whether
Section 195
applies
to documents forged/fabricated prior to their being produced in Court. That
question only arises after the Court takes cognizance. At this stage the
only question is whether the investigation should be permitted to proceed
or not. As stated above there is no ground or reason on which the
complaint/FIR can be quashed.
For the above reasons the impugned order needs to be and is accordingly
set-aside. The petition for quashing will stand dismissed. The Appeal is
allowed accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.