[Cites
7
, Cited by
63
]
Supreme Court of India
Bharat Heavy Electrical Ltd vs State Of U.P. And Ors on 21 July, 2003
Equivalent citations: AIR 2003 SUPREME COURT 3024, 2003 AIR SCW 3469, 2003 LAB. I. C. 2630, 2003 ALL. L. J. 1897, 2004 (1) SERVLJ 431 SC, 2003 (4) SLT 549, 2003 (8) SRJ 343, (2003) 6 JT 14 (SC), (2003) 2 BLJ 641, 2003 (6) ACE 206, 2003 (6) SCC 528, (2004) 1 SERVLJ 431, (2003) 98 FACLR 826, (2003) 4 SERVLR 679, (2003) 103 FJR 443, (2003) 4 ALL WC 2685, (2003) 8 INDLD 344, (2003) 5 SCALE 321, (2004) 4 ESC 593, (2003) 4 SCT 333, (2003) 5 SUPREME 45, 2003 LABLR 817, (2003) 2 UPLBEC 1830, (2003) 3 CURLR 188, (2003) 3 LABLJ 215, (2003) 3 LAB LN 892, (2003) 3 BLJ 606, (2003) 4 PAT LJR 79, (2003) 4 JLJR 48
Author:
Shivaraj V. Patil
Bench:
Shivaraj V. Patil
,
D.M. Dharmadhikari
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2459-2461 of 1999

PETITIONER:
BHARAT HEAVY ELECTRICAL LTD.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P. AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 21/07/2003

BENCH:
SHIVARAJ V. PATIL & D.M. DHARMADHIKARI

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

2003 Supp(1) SCR 625

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

SHIVARAJ V. PATIL, J. Respondent nos. 6-19 (in writ petition before the
High Court) were engaged as Garndeners (Malis) to sweep, clean and maintain
and look after the lawns and parks inside the factory premises and the
campus of the residential colony of the appellant through the agency of
respondent nos. 3-5. Their services were terminated on 1.12.1988. They
raised industrial disputes before the Labour Court. The appellant took up a
plea that they were never employed by it and it was not liable to pay any
amount of compensation or to reinstate them in service. The Labour Court on
consideration of respective contentions and the evidence placed before it,
passed the award dated 5.7.1996 directing to re-employ them and for payment
of compensation of Rs. 15,000 each for non-compliance of the provisions of
Section 6-N
of Uttar Pradesh Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short 'the
Act') besides ordering Rs. 500 as costs to each one of them. Aggrieved by
the award, the appellant filed Civil Misc. Writ Petition No. 2109 of 1997
before the High Court. On 30.11.1998, Deputy Labour Commissioner issued a
certificate to the Collector for recovery of Rs. 2,17,000. Challenging the
said certificate, Civil Misc. Writ Petition No. 41787 of 1998 was filed by
the appellant. In the 3rd Writ Petition No. 1654 of 1999, the appellant
questioned the validity and correctness of the order dated 2.1.1999 under
which the appellant was asked to show-cause why prosecution should not be
launched under
Section 14-A
of the Act.
The High Court by the impugned common order dismissed Writ Petition Nos.
2109 of 1997 and 41787 of 1998 concurring with the findings recorded by the
Labour Court. Writ Petition No. 1654 of 1999 was disposed of directing no
further action for initiating criminal proceedings under
Section 14 A
of
the Act if the appellant deposited a sum of Rs. 2,17,000 within a period of
one month and in the event of failure of depositing the amount, there would
be no impediment in launching criminal proceedings against the appellant.
Aggrieved by and no satisfied with this common impugned order these appeals
are brought before this Court.
On behalf of the appellant, the following contentions were urged:-
(1)    That the findings recorded by the Labour Court as affirmed by the
High Court are perverse being contrary to the evidence placed on record.
(2)    That the High Court committed a serious error in applying test of
control in relation to the work of the respondents-workmen having regard to
the definition of 'employer' contained in
Section 2(i)(iv)
of the Act as
the work of the respondents-workmen was not part of the industry.
(3)    That the respondents-workmen had not worked for 240 days to complain
violation of Section 6-N.

Submissions were made on behalf of the respondent-workmen supporting the
impugned order.
The Labour Court on the basis of the evidence concluded that the appellant
was the principal employer. In the award, the Labour Court in this regard
has state thus:-
"From the statements of Ram Swarup who is Head Mali under Employer No. 1.
It appears that though the concerned workers were employed at work by the
contractor but he himself used to take work from them in the capacity of
Head Gardener and he also used to look after their work. The contractor
used to pay salary only and their attendance were used to be marked in a
separate Register by another Head Gardener Sadhu Ram and the Register was
got torn by Manager Shri Varshney so that no proof may remain and after
tearing of register workers were removed. From these, it appears that
employer no.l had control over the plaintiff workers and they cannot be
said to be the workers only of the contractor. It appears that with the
object to keep them out of the ambit of U.P. Industrial Dispute Act, this
method was adopted that work was taken from them by the employee of the
employer and payment should be shown to have been made by the contractor.
From the statements of Shri K.P.S. Chauhan contractor it appears that he
still has work contract in BHEL (Laying of Sewer Pipe Line). From the
complaints made by workers in this regard this fact is confirmed. As per
the statements of worker Vinond Kumar, before tearing of the Attendance
Register, worker had got photocopies of these done by taking these
registers from Head Mali which copies have been filed by the worker party
in the Court. Not filing the records concerning the attendance of workers
by both employer no. 1 and 2 and destroying the same and filing of
photocopies of the same by the worker party prove that employer no. I can
also not escape from the liability of illegal termination of services of
these workers. Hence, it is decided that the Respondent No 1 is also the
employer of plaintiff-workers, though principle employer "
The High Court took note of the fact that the respondents-workmen were
engaged for working as gardeners in the factory premises, campus and
residential colony of the appellant; Ram Swarup, Head Mali was admittedly
employed by the appellant; he used to supervise the work of the
respondents-workmen; another employee of the appellant, namely, Sadhu Ram
used to maintain the record of attendance of the respondents-workmen; when
dispute arose consequent upon disengagement of the workman, he destroyed
the attendance register by tearing it off at the instance of one Mr.
Varshney who was working as Manager with the appellant. Further, in the
impugned order, the High Court observed that if the respondents-workmen
were in fact engaged by independent contractors, the record of their
attendance should have been maintained by them and to show their control
and supervision of the work performed by the workmen. Thus, considering the
evidence, the facts 'and circumstances of the case and findings of fact
recorded by the Labour Court, the High Court held that the workmen were
under the direct employment, supervision and control of the appellant
observing that sometimes, the employers, with a view to get over stringent
provision of the labour law resort to engage the workmen through some
intermediary and such an arrangement has to be termined as artificial.
Further after referring to the case of
Hussainbhai Calicut v. The Alath
Factory Thizolali Union Kozhikode and Ors.
, [1978] 4 SCC 257, the High
Court in the impugned order has stated thus:-
"The findings of facts recorded by the Labour Court cannot be scrutinized
or sifted in this Writ Petition. The tone and tenor of the employment of
the Respondent-workmen makes it amply clear that they were, for all
practical purposes, were the employees of Petitioner. The Petitioner had
retained directed control over the work and the duties of the Respondent-
workmen. The attendance of the workmen was also recorded by an employee of
the Petitioner. The involvement of the alleged direct contractors was
merely a figurative. The engagement of the contractor was sham and not
genuine.  Therefore, if the fictitious agency, which was brought into
existence as a device to camouflage the status of the Respondent-workmen,
is ignored, they would be treated to be in the direct employment of the
Petitioner."
High Court did not find any illegality or irregularity in the award passed
by the Labour Court so as to interfere with it exercising writ
jurisdiction. We have no good reason or valid ground to upset the
concurrent finding of fact recorded by the Labour Court as affirmed by the
High Court in this regard.
It appears to us that the argument based on the definition of employer
under
Section 2(i)(iv)
of the Act was not urged before the High Court. It
was urged on behalf of the appellant that aforesaid
Hussainbhai Calicut
case was distinguishable and it has no application to the facts of the
present case stating that the work done by the workmen
in that case
was an
integral part of the industry concerned and in the present case, the
workmen were engaged as Gardeners and their work was not an integral part
of the industry. There is nothing in
the said judgment
to say that the
workmen engaged for the work in the premises of the industry though their
work was not an integral part of the industry, cannot be employees of the
industry. The two tests stated in the said case are available in paragraphs
5 and 6 which read:-
"5. The true test may, with brevity, be indicated once again. Where a
worker or group of workers laborers, to produce goods or services and these
goods or services are for the business of another, that other is, in fact,
the employer. He has economic control over the workers' subsistence, skill,
and continued employment. If he, for any reason, chokes off, the worker is,
virtually, laid off. The presence of intermediate contractors with whom
alone the workers have immediate or direct relationship ex contracts is of
no consequence when, on lifting the veil or looking at the conspectus of
factors governing employment, we discern the naked truth though drapped in
different perfect paper arrangement, that the real employer is the
Management, not the immediate contractor, Myriad devices, half-hidden in
fold after fold of legal form depending on the degree of concealment needed
the type of industry, the local conditions and the like may be resorted to
when labour legislation casts welfare obligations on the real employer
based on
Articles 38
, 39
, 42,43 and 43-A of the Constitution. The court
must be astute to avoid the mischief and achieve the purpose of the law an
not be misled by the maya of legal appearances.
6. If the livelihood of the workmen substantially depends on labour
rendered to produce goods and services for the benefit and satisfaction of
an enterprise, the absence of direct relationship or the presence of
dubious intermediaries or the make-believe, trappings of detachment from
the Management cannot snap the real life-bond. The story may vary but the
inference defies ingenuity. The liability cannot be shaken off."
Looking to what is stated in paras extracted above, it is clear that where
workman-labour is engaged to produce goods or services and these goods or
services are for the business of another, the other is employer. The work
of the respondents-workmen is not totally disassociated in fact between
them and the appellant to say that they were not employees of the appellant
judged by what is stated in para 7 of the same judgment in the following
words:-
"7. Of course, if there is total dissociation in fact between the disowning
Management and the aggrieved workmen, the employment is, in substance and
in real-life terms, by another. The Management's adventitious connections
cannot ripen into real employment

The definition of 'employer' given in
Section 2(i)(iv)
of the Act is an
inclusive definition. If the respondents-workmen as a matter of fact were
employed with the appellant to work in their premises and which fact is
found established after removing the mask or facade of make-believe
employment under the contractor, the appellant cannot escape its liability.
The learned counsel for the appellant wanted to take support from the
Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in
Steel Authority of India Ltd
and Ors. v. National Union Waterfront Workers and Ors.
, [2001] 7 SCC I. For
that purpose he took us through paras 107 to 116. In
the said judgment
, the
provisions of
The Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act
, l970 l
came up for consideration and interpretation. After detailed analysis of
the provisions and consideration of various decisions, in para 107 contract
labour were classified in three categories. In para 108-116, the issue
whether on a contractor engaging contractor, labour in connection with the
work entrusted to him by a principal employer, the relationship of master
and servant between him (the principal employee) and the contract labour
emerges. An extreme stand was taken by learned Senior Counsel
in that case
that the engagement of contract labour by the contractor in any work of or
in connection with the work of an establishment, the relationship of master
and servant is created between the principal employer and the contract
labour.
In dealing with the said contention, various earlier cases decided
by this Court were referred to including the case of
Hussainbhai Calicut
(supra). The extreme contention was rejected From the preusal of paragraphs
107-116, it is clear whether a workman is an employee of principal employer
or not depends on the facts and circumstances of a given case.
The case of
Hussainbahi Calicut
(supra) is neither dissented nor diluted. On the other
hand, it is held that the said case is covered by class (ii) of para 107
which reads:-
"107.......................................................................
....................................................
(ii) where the contract was found to be a sham and nominal, rather a
camouflage, in which case the contract labour working in the establishment
of the principal employer were held, in fact and in reality, the employees
of the principal employer himself. Indeed, such cases do not relate to
abolition of contract labour but present instances wherein the Court
pierced the veil and declared the correct position as fact at the stage
after employment of contract labour stood prohibited............."
This apart, the finding that the respondents-workmen were the employees of
the appellant, does not rest merely on the test of control. The other
evidence and facts and circumstance of the case were also kept in mind in
recording such a finding including a vital fact that the appellant did not
produce the records alleging that they were not available which led to
drawing adverse inference against them. It is not possible for us to hold
that such concurrent findings recorded by the Labour Court and the High
Court that the workmen were to be treated as the employees of the appellant
are either perverse or based on no evidence or untenable at all.
From the impugned order, it also does not appear that any contention was
urged before the High Court that the respondents-workmen did not net-work
for more than 240 days in 12 calendar months. Be that as it may, in view of
the finding of fact recorded by the Labour Court as affirmed by the High
Court that the respondents-workmen worked for more than 240 days in 12
calendar months, we do not find any good reason to take a different view.
Thus, we find no merit in any of the submissions made on behalf of the
appellant. Consequently, these appeals are liable to be dismissed.
Accordingly, they stand dismissed with no order as to costs.