[Cites
26
, Cited by
120
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India (Uoi) vs Chajju Ram (Dead) By Lrs. And Ors on 16 April, 2003
Equivalent citations: AIR 2003 SUPREME COURT 2339, 2003 (5) SCC 568, 2003 AIR SCW 2322, (2003) 4 JT 161 (SC), (2003) 7 ALLINDCAS 440 (SC), 2003 (4) JT 161, 2003 (3) SLT 262, 2003 (7) SRJ 71, 2003 (2) UPLBEC 1797, (2003) 3 ALLMR 766 (SC), 2003 (3) LRI 96, 2003 (3) ALL MR 766, 2003 (4) SCALE 155, 2003 (4) ACE 643, (2003) 4 MAD LW 6, (2003) 2 PUN LR 740, (2003) 1 LACC 595, (2003) 2 RECCIVR 682, (2003) 3 ICC 537, (2003) 5 INDLD 742, (2003) 3 BLJ 380, (2003) 2 UPLBEC 1797, (2003) 3 SUPREME 661, (2003) 4 SCALE 155, (2004) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 121, (2003) 51 ALL LR 534, (2003) 3 ALL WC 2333, (2003) 3 CIVLJ 247
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
V.N.Khare
,
R.C.Lahoti
,
B.N.Agrawal
,
S.B.Sinha
,
A.R.Lakshmanan
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  967-70 of 1990

PETITIONER:
Union of India (UOI)

RESPONDENT:
Chajju Ram (Dead) by Lrs. and Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 16/04/2003

BENCH:
V.N.Khare CJI & R.C.Lahoti & B.N.Agrawal & S.B.Sinha & A.R.Lakshmanan

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT


DELIVERED BY
S.B. SINHA, J.
S.B. Sinha, J.
1. The core question, involved in this batch of appeals which arise from
the judgment and order dated 13.09.1982 passed by the High Court of Punjab
and Haryana, relates to the constitutional validity of the
Defence of India
Act, 1971
(The Act
) on the premise that absence of any provision for
payment of solatium and interest for acquisition of land is hit by
Article
14
of the Constitution of India.
2. The respondents were owners of several tracts of lands situated in or
around the town of Bhatinda in the State Punjab. For the purpose of
establishing a military cantonment, the said lands were requisitioned by
the District Magistrate, Bhatinda in terms of the provisions of the Act in
the year 1971.
3. On or about 15.1.1975, proceedings were initiated for compulsory
acquisition of the said lands in terms of
Section 30
of the Act. The
competent authority determined the amount of compensation payable for such
acquisition on 28.7.1975. However, the respondents being dissatisfied with
the amount of compensation offered to them asked the competent authority to
refer the matter to an arbitrator in terms of
Section 31
of the said Act.
Allegedly, such reference was not made.
4. Questioning the validity of the Act on the ground that their claim of
interest at the rate of 6% and solatium at the rate of 15% had not been
granted, writ petitions came to be filed. The High Court by reason of the
impugned judgment held that
Section 31
of the Act is ultra vires
Article 14
of the Constitution of India, as a result whereof the respondents became
entitled to claim and recover from the Central Government solatium at the
rate of 15% on the amount of compensation as also the interest thereupon at
the rate of 6% per annum. Several matters came up before this Court wherein
acquisitions have been made under the provisions of various Improvement
Trust Acts and other Acts. A question arose as to whether the provisions of
the
Land Acquisition Act
as regards solatium and interest are to be read
into the other Acquisitions Acts or not. A question also arose in some
appeals as to whether the provisions of
Section 28A
of the Land Acquisition
Act are to be read into the Act. A further question arose as to whether in
the event, it be held that the provisions of
Land Acquisition Act
regarding
payment of solatium and interest cannot be read into the said Act, the same
would be declared ultra vires
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.
5. A Constitution Bench of this Court by an order dated 12.12.2001 while
referring back the matters to 3-Judge Bench as regards the first group and
the second group of cases thought it expedient to direct that these matters
wherein the question as to whether the said Act violates
Article 14
of the
Constitution of India for the reason that it makes no provisions for
solatium and interest should remain before it awaiting decisions on the
first and second group of cases.
6. The first group of cases wherein the question as to whether the
provisions regarding solatium and interest contained in the
Land
Acquisition Act
are to be read into the provisions of various Improvement
Acts arose for consideration has since been answered in the affirmative by
a 3-Judge Bench of this Court in Nagpur Improvement Trust etc. v. Vasantrao
and Ors. etc. (Second Nagpur Improvement Trust).
7. The second group of cases relating to the question as to whether the
provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act
are to be read into the
Defence of
India Act
were considered in
Dayal Singh and Ors. v. Union of India and
Ors.
[(2003) 2 SCC 593] wherein this Court held that the provisions of
Section 28A
of the Land Acquisition Act cannot be read into the said Act.
8. The question as regards the constitutionality of the Act on the
touchstone of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India is required to be
considered by us in the aforementioned backdrop.
9. Mr. Soli J. Sorabjee, the learned Attorney General appearing on behalf
of the appellant submitted that the question is squarely covered by two
decisions of this Court in
Union of India v. Hari Krishan Khosla (Dead) by
L.Rs.
and
Union of India and Ors. v. Dhanwanti Devi and Ors. The
learned
Attorney General would contend that the respective schemes for acquisition
of the said
Act and the Land Acquisition Act
are absolutely distinct and
different. Mr. Sorabjee would urge that the provision for grant of solatium
and interest in the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
was inserted as great delay
used to be caused in payment of the amount of compensation determined on
the basis of valuation of India from an anterior date, namely the date of
publication of notification under
Section 4
thereof.
10. Mr. O.P. Sharma, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondents, on the other hand, would submit that the classification so far
as acquisition of land under the
Land Acquisition Act
vis-a-vis the Act
cannot be said to be rational so far as the matter relating to payment of
compensation is concerned, inasmuch as the owner of the land is not at all
concerned as regard the purpose of acquisition. He would, therefore, submit
that non-payment of solatium and interest where acquisition is made under
the Act would clearly be discriminatory and, thus, violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India. The learned counsel would contend that even
for the purpose of computing the amount of compensation, when acquisition
is made under the said Act, the criteria therefore would also be as per the
provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act
. Strong reliance in this behalf has
been placed by the learned counsel on
Haji Mohammad Ekramul Haq v. The
State of West Bengal
and Nagpur Improvement Trust and Anr. v. Vithal Rao
and Ors. (First Nagpur Improvement Trust).
11. Mr. Sharma urged that having regard to the decision of this Court in
the second Nagpur Improvement Trust case (supra), there is absolutely no
reason as to why the provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act
for the purpose
of payment of compensation should not be read into the Act.
12. Mr. Sharma would also submit that the decisions of this Court in
Hari
Krishan Khosla
(supra) and
Dhanwanti Devi
(supra) do not lay down the law
correctly and, thus, are required to be overruled.
13. Mr. Rajiv Garg and other counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents
in connected appeals, inter alia, would submit that even if the
constitutionality of the said Act is upheld by this Court; equity demands
that the amounts paid to the respondents by way of solatium and interest
about twenty years back should not direct to be refunded.
14. The said Act was enacted to provide for special measure to ensure the
public safety and interest, the defence of India and civil defence and the
trial of certain offences and for matters connected therewith. Chapter V of
the said Act provides for requisitioning and acquisition of immovable
property.
Section 23
of the Act which begins with a non obstante clause
enables the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be,
to requisition any immovable property and make such further orders, if in
their opinion it is expedient so to do, inter alia, for securing the
defence of India and other purposes engrafted therein.
Section 24
of the
said Act entitles the owner of the property to receive compensation on
requisitioning of the property; the determination whereof is required to be
made upon taking into consideration the factors enumerated therein. In the
event any person interested in the lands is aggrieved by the amount of
compensation so determined, he may make an application within the
prescribed time to the Central Government or the State Government, as the
case may be, for referring the matter to an arbitrator who is empowered to
determine the same.
Section 29
provides for release from requisition.
Section 30
of the said Act provides for acquisition of requisitioned
property which reads thus:
"30. Acquisition of requisitioned property. (1) Any immovable
	property which has been requisitioned under
Section 23
may, in the
	manner hereinafter provided, be acquired in the circumstances and
	by the Government specified below, namely:-
(a) where any works have, during the period of requisition, been
	construed on, in or over the property wholly or partly at the
	expense of any Government, the property may be acquired by that
	Government if it decides that the value of or the right to use,
	such works shall, by means of the acquisition of the property, be
	preserved or secured for the purposes of any Government, or
(b) where the cost to any Government of restoring the property to
	its condition at the time of its requisition as aforesaid would, in
	the determination of that Government, be excessive having regard to
	the value of the property at that time, the property may be
	acquired by that Government.
(2) When any Government as aforesaid decides to acquire any
	immovable property, it shall serve on the owner thereof or where
	the owner is not readily traceable or the ownership is in dispute,
	by publishing in the Official Gazette, a notice stating that the
	Government has decided to acquire it in pursuance of this section.
(3) Where a notice of acquisition is served on the owner of the
	property or is published in the Official Gazette, under Sub-section
	(2), then, at the beginning of the day on which the notice is so
	served or published, the property shall vest in the Government free
	from any mortgage, pledge, lien or other similar encumbrances and
	the period of requisition thereof shall come to an end.
(4) Any decision or determination of a Government under Sub-section
 	(1) shall be final, and shall not be called in question in any
 	court.
(5) For the purposes of this section, "works' includes every
	description of buildings, structures and improvements of the
	property."
15.
Section 31
provides for compensation for acquisition of requisitioned
property. The compensation payable for the acquisition of any property
under
Section 30
shall be the price which the requisitioned property would
have fetched in the open market if it had remained in the same condition as
it was at the time of requisitioning and been sold on the date of
acquisition.
16. The said Act is a self-contained code. It lays down the procedure as
well as machinery for determining the amount of compensation. It is not in
dispute that the provisions for payment of compensation under the
Land
Acquisition Act
would not ipso facto apply to the acquisition made under
the said Act. The provisions of the two Acts do not also provide for the
same scheme for acquisition.
17.
In
Hari Krishan Khosla
(supra), a Bench of 3-Judges of this Court while
considering the provisions of the
Requisitioning and Acquisition of
Immovable Property Act, 1952
clearly held that the provisions for grant of
solatium and interest under the
Land Acquisition Act
cannot be read into
the provisions of the said Act. Having regard to the provision of
Section
8(3)
of the 1952 Act, this Court opined that that the provisions thereof
should be aimed at for giving the owner just compensation on the
acquisition of his land whereas under the
Land Acquisition Act
, lands can
be acquired in terms of the doctrine of Eminent Domain so long there exists
an underlaying purpose therefore and in that view of the matter the factors
for determination of compensation thereunder need not be similar.
18.
In
Dhanwanti Devi
's case (supra), a Bench of this Court agreeing with
Hari Krishnan Khosla
(supra), stated the law thus:
"The question, therefore, emerges whether it is necessary for the
	State legislature to expressly specify that interest or solatium
	shall not be payable for the lands or property acquired under
Section 7(1)
of the Act. Sub silentio is eloquent. It would further
	be seen that Section 8 of the Central Act equally does not provide
	for payment of solatium and interest.
The Act
was passed in the
	year 1968 while the Central Act was passed in 1952. It would,
	therefore, be reasonable to conclude that the State legislature was
	cognizant of the express provisions for payment of interest and
	solatium available in the Acquisition Act.
The Act
omitted similar
	provisions for payment of interest and solatium as part or
	omponent of compensation, obviously to fall in line with the
	Central Act."
19. In First Nagpur Improvement Trust (supra) the question which arose
therein was as to whether the State Government being the acquiring
authority for the acquisition of lands, be it under the Improvement Trust
Act or the Kanpur Urban Development Act, or the
Land Acquisition Act
, any
discrimination can be made as regards formulation of different principles
of compensation and such classification would be violative of
Article 14
of
the Constitution of India. It was held:
"It is equally immaterial whether it is one Acquisition Act or
	another Acquisition Act under which the land is acquired. If the
	existence of two Acts could enable the State to give one owner
	different treatment from another equally situated the owner who is
	discriminated against, can claim the protection of
Article 14."
(Emphasis Supplied)
20. Sikri, C.J., speaking for the Bench, however, observed that the State
can make a reasonable classification for the purpose of legislation. The
learned Chief Justice held that that the classification in order to be
reasonable must satisfy two tests : (i) the classification must be founded
on intelligible differentia and (ii) the differentia must have a rational
relation with the object sought to be achieved by the legislation in
question. However, he hastened to add that the object therefore itself must
be lawful and cannot be discriminatory.
21. This Court in the second Nagpur Improvement Trust (supra) came to the
conclusion that all the statutes providing for acquisition of land lay down
a common scheme and pattern as the state legislation relate to the town
planning and development and in terms of which the provisions of the
Land
Acquisition Act
were made applicable with certain modifications, the
provisions relating to solatium and interest contained therein shall be
read into the State Acts.
22. In the second Nagpur Trust's case (supra), having regard to the scheme
of acquisition sought to be achieved, it was held:
"It may be noticed that in
U.P. Avas Evam Vikas Prashad v. Jainul
	Islam
, this Court highlighted the fact that though under the
Land
	Acquisition Act
as amended in its application to the State of U.P.
	there was no provision for grant of solatium, by the U.P. Act such
	solatium was provided for. The intention of the legislature was
	apparent that it wanted to confer the benefit of solatium by
	modifying
Section 23(2)
, which benefit was not available under the
	provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act
as it was applicable in the
	State of U.P. at the time of enactment of the U.P. Act. So far as
	the Punjab Act and the Nagpur Act are concerned, the schedules do
	not modify the provisions of
Section 23(2)
of the Land Acquisition
	Actwhich provides for payment of solatium. However, a proviso was
	added to the effect that Sub-section (2) shall not apply to any
	land acquired under the State Acts in question. The added proviso
	is identical in both the State Acts. This clearly implies that
	where acquisition was made under the provisions of the
Land
	Acquisition Act
, as modified, the legislature did not intend to
	deprive the claimants of solatium as provided under the
Land
	Acquisition Act
. But solatium was not payable in cases of
	cquisition under the State Acts. There are provisions in both the
	State Acts which permit the State to acquire lands for the purposes
	of the scheme without resorting to the provisions of the
Land
	Acquisition Act
such as acquisition by purchase, lease, exchange,
	or otherwise, or acquisitions contemplated under deferred street
	scheme, development scheme and expansion scheme. In respect of such
	acquisitions solatium is not payable.
Such cases are similar to the
	acquisitions under
Section 53
of the Bombay Town Planning Act which
	was considered by this Court in
Prakash Amichand Shah v. State of
	Gujarat
. In these circumstances with a view to save the law from
	the vice of the arbitrary and hostile discrimination, the
	provisions must be construed to mean, in the absence of anything to
	the contrary, that the provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act
as
	amended by the 194 Act relating to determination and payment of
	compensation would apply to acquisition of land for the purposes of
	he State Acts. It must, therefore, be held that while incorporating
	the provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act
in the tate Acts, the
	intention of the legislature was that amendments in the
Land
	Acquisition Act
relating to determination and payment of
	ompensation would be applicable to acquisition of lands for the
	purposes of the State Acts. Consequently, the claimants are
	entitled to the benefits conferred by
Section 23
(1-A), if
	applicable, and
Sections 23(2)
and
28
of the Land Acquisition Act
	as amended by the 1984 Act for acquisition of land for the purpose
	of the State Acts under Section 59 of both the Nagpur and Punjab
	Acts."
(Emphasis Supplied)
23. It is now well-settled that a decision is an authority for what it
decides and not what can logically be deduced therefrom. It is equally
well-settled that a little difference in facts or additional facts may lead
to a different conclusion.
24. The question, therefore, which arises would be, as to whether the
owners of the lands sought to be acquired under the Act vis-a-vis
Land
Acquisition Act
are similarly situated?
25. Here it is not a case where existence of the Acquisition Act enables
the State to give one owner different treatment from another equally
situated owner on which ground
Article 14
was sought to be invoked in the
first Nagpur Improvement Trust's case (supra). The purposes for which the
provisions of the said Act can be invoked are absolutely different and
distinct from which the provision of
Land Acquisition Act
can be invoked
for acquisition of land. In terms of the provisions of the said Act, the
requisition of the land was made. During the period of requisition the
owner of the land is to be compensated therefore.
Section 30
of the said
Act, as referred to hereinbefore, clearly postulates the circumstances
which would be attracted for acquisitioning of the requisitioned land.
26. The purposes for which the requisitioning and consequent acquisition of
land under the said Act can be made, are limited. Such acquisitions, inter
alia, can be made only when works have been constructed during the period
of requisition or where the costs to any Government of resorting the
property to its condition at the time of its requisition would be excessive
having regard to the value of the property at the relevant time.
27. One of the principles for determination of the amount of compensation
for acquisition of land would be the willingness of an informed buyer to
offer the price therefore. In terms of the provisions of the said Act
acquisition of the property would be in relation to the property which has
been under requisition during which period the owner of the land would
remain out of possession. The Government during the period of requisition
would be in possession and full enjoyment of the property.
28. It is beyond any cavil that the price of the land which a willing and
informed buyer would offer would be different in the cases where the owner
is in possession and enjoyment of the property and in the cases where he is
not. The formulation of the criteria for payment of compensation in terms
of
Section 31
of the Act was clearly made having regard to the said factor,
which cannot be said to be arbitrary or unreasonable. The Parliament while
making the provisions for payment of compensation must have also taken into
consideration the fact that the owner of the property would have received
compensation for remaining out of possession during the period when the
property was under acquisition.
29. The learned Attorney General appears to be correct in his submission
that the provision for grant of solatium was inserted in the
Land
Acquisition Act
by the Parliament having regard to the fact that the amount
of compensation awarded to the owner of the land is to be determined on the
basis of the value thereof as on the date of issuance of the notification
under
Section 4
of the Act. It has been noticed that the process takes a
long time. Taking into consideration the deficiencies in the
Act, the Land
Acquisition Act
was further amended in the year 1984. In terms of Sub-
section (2) of
Section 23
of the Land Acquisition Act, therefore, solatium
is paid in addition to the amount of market value of the land.
30. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the classification sought to be
made for determination of the amount of compensation for acquisition of the
land under the said Act vis-a-vis the
Land Acquisition Act
is a reasonable
and valid one. The said classification is founded on intelligible
differentia and has a rational relation with the object sought to be
achieved by the legislation in question.
31. It may be true that in
Haji Mohammad Ekramul Haq
's case (supra), this
Court observed while considering the provisions of the
Defence of India
Act, 1939
, that the principles on which the compensation was to be
ascertained under
Section 19
of the Defence of India Act were the same as
those provided in
Section 23(1)
of the Land Acquisition Act. Even the
principles of ascertaining the amount of compensation, as it then stood,
did not provide for any payment of solatium. The said decision, however,
having regard to the provisions contained in
Section 31
of the Act which
lays down the criteria for determination of the amount of compensation
cannot be said to have any application whatsoever in the instant case.
32.
In
Dayal Singh
's case (supra) is court held:
"The right to get the amount of compensation re-determined must
	expressly be provided by the statute. Such a right being a
	substantive one cannot be sought to be found out by implication nor
	can the same be read therewith. The appellants, thus, cannot invoke
	a right by reading the same into a statute although admittedly
	there exists none."
33. We do not agree with the submission of Mr. Sharma that
Hari Krishan
Khosla
(supra) and
Dhanwanti Devi
(supra) have wrongly been decided.
34. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the impugned judgment cannot be
sustained and are, therefore, liable to be set aside.
35. The question, however, which remains for consideration is as to whether
the amount of solatium and interest which the appellants has paid to the
respondents should be directed to be refunded. We think not. Even in
Hari
Krishan Khosla
(supra) this Court noticed:
"This is the case in which for 16 years no arbitrator was
	appointed. We think it is just and proper to apply the principle
laid down in
Harbans Singh Shanni Devi v. Union of India [C.A. Nos.
	470 and 471 of 1985 disposed of by this Court on February 11,
	1985]. The Court held as under:- "Having regard to the peculiar
	facts and circumstances of the present case and particularly in
	view of the fact that the appointment of the arbitrator was not
	made by the Union of India for a period of 16 years, we think this
	is a fit case in which solatium at the rate of 30 per cent of the
	amount of compensation and interest at the rate of 9 per cent per
	annum should be awarded to the appellants. We are making this order
	having regard to the fact that the law has in the meanwhile been
	amended with a view to providing solatium at the rate of 30 per
	cent and interest at the rate of 9 per cent per annum.""
36. In these cases, also, it is said that the arbitrators have not yet been
appointed despite the demand made in this behalf by the respondents. The
amount of solatium at the rate of 5% per annum and the interest thereupon
had been paid in early eighties when the Punjab and Haryana High Court
declared the said Act ultra vires
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.
37. In the peculiar fact situation obtaining in these cases and inasmuch as
the amounts sought to be recovered are small which were paid to the
respondents decades back, we are of the opinion that interest of justice
shall be met if the appellants are directed not to recover the amount of
compensation from the respondents pursuant to or in furtherance of this
judgment. However, we hasten to add that this direction shall be not
treated as a precedent.
38. These appeals are allowed with the aforementioned observations and
directions. No costs.