[Cites
36
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Saranpal Kaur Anand vs Praduman Singh Chandhok on 28 March, 2022
Author:
Sanjiv Khanna
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
,
Sanjiv Khanna
REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO.                  OF 2022
                           (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 27794 OF 2016)


                         SARANPAL KAUR ANAND                                  ...       APPELLANT

                                                        VERSUS

                         PRADUMAN SINGH CHANDHOK AND OTHERS ...                     RESPONDENTS




                                                         JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
Leave granted.
2.     The appellant before us, Saranpal Kaur Anand, is the plaintiff who

                                has filed a Civil Suit, C.S. (O.S.) No. 873 of 2012, seeking: a decree

                                of declaration that the suit property bearing No. 4-C/7, New Rohtak

                                Road, New Delhi, is a joint undivided family property of the plaintiff

                                and defendant Nos. 3 to 9 being the successors of late Harnam
Signature Not Verified          Singh Anand and late Harbans Kaur; a decree of declaration that
Digitally signed by
Charanjeet kaur
Date: 2022.03.30
the purported sale deed dated 23rd August 1969 executed by late
14:08:46 IST
Reason:
Harbans Kaur through her alleged attorney in favour of late Tej Kaur
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                     Page 1 of 32
is a fictitious, sham, incompetent, bad, illegal, null and void; a

       decree of declaration that the purported sale deed dated 12th

       October 1995 executed by late Tej Kaur in favour of Pervinder

       Singh Chandhok (defendant No. 2) is fictitious, sham, incompetent,

       bad, illegal, nullity and void ab initio in law; and a decree for

       permanent injunction restraining Praduman Singh Chandhok and

       Pervinder Singh Chandhok (defendant Nos.1 and 2), their agents,

       nominees,        successors,        assigns,   representatives   etc.,   from

       raising/constructing/adding/ altering or entering into any agreement

       to sell or creating any third party interest, claims, or parting with

       possession thereof, in respect of any portion of the suit property

       besides seeking determination of the amount of damages and

       mesne profits.
3.     Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 filed their respective written statements

       contesting the suit. They also filed an application for rejection of the

       plaint on the ground of limitation.
4.     By the order dated 7th February 2014, the Single Judge of the High

       Court settled the preliminary issue of limitation as under:
“Whether the suit as framed is liable to be rejected
                  under Order VII Rule 11(d)
of the CPC
on the ground of
                  limitation?”
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                           Page 2 of 32
5.        Subsequently the plaintiff filed two applications for amendment of

          the plaint to incorporate prayer for possession and amending the

          cause of action clause, which were taken up for hearing along with

          hearing on the preliminary issue.
6.        By the order dated 6th April 2015 the Single Judge decided the

          preliminary issue holding that the suit being barred by time, the

          plaint was liable to be rejected. The applications for amendment

          filed by the plaintiff were dismissed as mala fide and not

          maintainable.
7.        The impugned order dated 25th April 2016 passed by the Division

          Bench of the High Court dismissed the appeal preferred by the

          plaintiff upholding the order rejecting the plaint on the ground that it

          was filed beyond the period of limitation. The applications filed for

          amendment of the plaint being unnecessary were, therefore, rightly

          rejected by the Single Judge.
8.        A decision under clause (d) of Rule 11 to
Order VII1 of the Code of

          Civil Procedure
, 1908 (for short, ‘the Code’) normally proceeds on

          ‘demurrer’. This means that the party objecting to the legal action

          assumes the truth of the matter alleged by the opposite party and


1   “Order 7, Rule 11- Rejection of plaint - The plaint shall be rejected in the following cases:—
(d) where the suit appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred by any law;”
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                                            Page 3 of 32
sets up that it is insufficient in law to sustain the claim or there is

        some other defect on the face of the pleadings constituting a legal

        reason why the proceedings should not be allowed to proceed

        further.2 This is also the underlying principle behind clause (d) of

        Order VII Rule 11 of the Code which applies when it appears from

        a statement in the plaint that the suit is barred by any law. The law

        would include the
Limitation Act,1963
.
Section 3
of the Limitation

        Act mandates that every suit, appeal or application instituted,

        preferred or filed after the prescribed period, and subject to

        provisions of
Sections 4
to
24
, shall be dismissed although

        limitation has not been set up as a defence. Sub-rule (2) to Rule 2

        of Order XIV3 of the Code lays down that where issues of both law

        and fact arise in the same suit, and the court is of the opinion that

        the case or any part thereof can be disposed of on an issue of law

        only, it may try that issue first if the issue (a) relates to the

        jurisdiction of the court, or (b) bar to the suit is created by any law

        for the time being in force. Therefore, when decision on issues of

        law depend upon decision on issues of fact, the issue of law should



2 See paragraph 14 in
Ramesh B. Desai v. Bipin Vadilal Mehta & Ors.
(2006) 5 SCC 638.
3 Order XIV Rule 2(2) Court to pronounce judgment on all issues.— (2) Where issues both of law
and of fact arise in the same suit, and the Court is of opinion that the case or any part thereof may be
disposed of on an issue of law only, it may try that issue first if the issue relates to—
(a) the jurisdiction of the Court, or
(b) a bar to the suit created by any law for the time being in force,
and for that purpose may, if it thinks fit, postpone the settlement of the other issues until after that issue
has been determined, and may deal with the suit in accordance with the decision on that issue.
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                                                 Page 4 of 32
not be decided as a preliminary issue4. However, when the issue of

          law can be adjudicated on ‘admitted facts’, the court can decide the

          issue of law as a preliminary issue under Order XIV Rule 2 of the

          Code. The position of law has been succinctly stated in
Nusli

          Neville Wadia v. Ivory Properties and Others5
in the following

          words:
“51...As per Order 14 Rule 1, issues arise when a
                    material proposition of fact or law is affirmed by the one
                    party and denied by the other. The issues are framed
                    on the material proposition, denied by another party.
                    There are issues of facts and issues of law. In case
                    specific facts are admitted, and if the question of
                    law arises which is dependent upon the outcome of
                    admitted facts, it is open to the court to pronounce
                    the judgment based on admitted facts and the
                    preliminary question of law under the provisions of
                    Order 14 Rule 2. In Order 14 Rule 2(1), the court may
                    decide the case on a preliminary issue. It has to
                    pronounce the judgment on all issues. Order 14 Rule
                    2(2) makes a departure and the court may decide the
                    question of law as to jurisdiction of the court or a bar
                    created to the suit by any law for the time being in force,
                    such as under the
Limitation Act
.”
                                                            (Emphasis added)
9.        At the outset itself, it must be stated that unless the plaintiff

          succeeds in grant of declaration whereby the validity of the sale

          deed dated 23rd August 1969 executed and transferring the suit

          property in favour of late Tej Kaur has been challenged, all other

          reliefs would fail and cannot be granted. Thus, the question to be
4   See paragraph 13 and 15 in
Ramesh B. Desai
(supra).
5   (2020) 6 SCC 557
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                              Page 5 of 32
answered is whether the prayer for grant of declaration that the sale

        deed dated 23rd August 1969 is null and void being fictitious, sham,

        incompetent, bad and illegal is barred by limitation, can be decided

        as a legal issue without evidence being led?
10.     As per Article 586 of the
Schedule of the Limitation Act
, in a suit for

        declaration where Articles 567 and 578 do not apply, the plaint

        should be filed within a period of three years when the right to sue

        first accrues. On applying
Article 58
to the prayer for declaration,

        that the sale deed dated 23rd August 1969 is invalid, the suit filed

        after 42 years on 27th March 2012 is clearly barred by limitation.

        However, though not adverted to in the impugned order of the

        Division Bench and the order of the Single Judge of the High Court,

        it is apparent that the plaint, for the purpose of decree of declaration

        that the sale deed dated 23rd August 1969 is invalid, relies on
Section 17
of the Limitation Act, which deals with the effect of fraud

        and mistake, and reads:
“17. Effect of fraud or mistake.—(1) Where, in the
                    case of any suit or application for which a period of
                    Limitation is prescribed by this Act,—
(a) the suit or application is based upon the fraud of the
                    defendant or respondent or his agent; or



6 To obtain any other declaration
7 To declare the forgery of an instrument issued or registered.
8 To obtain a declaration that an alleged adoption is invalid, or never, in fact, took place.
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                                                  Page 6 of 32
(b) the knowledge of the right or title on which a suit or
                    application is founded is concealed by the fraud of any
                    such person as aforesaid; or
(c) the suit or application is for relief from the
                    consequences of a mistake; or
(d) where any document necessary to establish the right
                    of the plaintiff or applicant has been fraudulently
                    concealed from him,

                    the period of Limitation shall not begin to run until the
                    plaintiff or applicant has discovered the fraud or the
                    mistake or could, with reasonable diligence, have
                    discovered it; or in the case of a concealed document,
                    until the plaintiff or the applicant first had the means of
                    producing the concealed document or compelling its
                    production…..”

                  The general principle, which also manifests itself in
Section

          17
of the Limitation Act, is that every person is presumed to know

          his own legal right and title in the property, and if he does not take

          care of his own right and title to the property, the time for filing of

          the suit based on such a right or title to the property is not prevented

          from running against him. The provisions of
Section 17(1)
embody

          fundamental principles of justice and equity, viz. that a party should

          not be penalised for failing to adopt legal proceedings when the

          facts or the documents have been wilfully concealed from him and

          also that a party who had acted fraudulently should not be given the

          benefit of limitation running in its favour by virtue of such frauds.9



9
Pallav Sheth v. Custodian and Others
, (2001) 7 SCC 549
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                              Page 7 of 32
However it is important to remember that
Section 17
does not defer

           the starting point of limitation merely because the defendant has

           committed a fraud.
Section 17
does not encompass all kinds of

           frauds, but specific situations covered by clauses (a) to (d) to
Section 17(1)
of the Limitation Act.
Section 17(1)(b)
and (d)

           encompass         only    those     fraudulent      documents         or    acts    of

           concealment of documents which have the effect of suppressing

           knowledge entitling the party to pursue his legal remedy. Once a

           party becomes aware of antecedent facts necessary to pursue legal

           proceedings, the period of limitation commences.10
11.        Therefore in the event the plaintiff makes out a case that falls within

           any or more of the four clauses to sub-section (1) to
Section 17
of

           the Limitation Act, the period of limitation for filing of the suit shall

           not begin to run until the plaintiff or applicant has discovered the

           fraud/ mistake or could with reasonable diligence have discovered

           it or if the document is concealed till the plaintiff has the means of

           producing the concealed document or compelling its production a

           fortiori.
10
P. Radha Bai and Others v. P. Ashok Kumar and Another
, (2019) 13 SCC 445
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                                       Page 8 of 32
12.       ‘Diligence’ as a word of common parlance means attention,

          carefulness, and persistence in efforts of doing something.11 This

          Court in Chander Kanta Bansal v. Rajinder Singh Anand,12 in

          reference to proviso to Order VI Rule 17 of the Code, defined

          ‘diligence’ as:
“16...According to Oxford Dictionary (Edn. 2006),
                     the word “diligence” means careful and persistent
                     application or effort. “Diligent” means careful and
                     steady in application to one's work and duties,
                     showing care and effort. As per Black's Law
                     Dictionary (18th Edn.), “diligence” means a
                     continual effort to accomplish something, care;
                     caution; the attention and care required from a
                     person in a given situation...”

                  The word ‘diligence’ read with the word ‘reasonable’ in the

          context of
Section 17(1)
of the Limitation Act is subjective and

          relative, and would depend upon circumstances of which the actor

          called upon to act reasonably, knows or ought to know. Vague clues

          or hints may not matter. Whether the plaintiff/applicant had the

          means to know the fraud is a relevant consideration. It is manifest

          that
Section 17(1)
of the Limitation Act does not protect a party at

          fault for failure to exercise reasonable diligence when the

          circumstances demand such exercise and on exercise of which the

          plaintiff/applicant could have discovered the fraud. When the time



11   P. Ramanatha Aiyar, The Major Law Lexicon (4th Edition, Lexis Nexis Publication)
12   (2008) 5 SCC 117.
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                                          Page 9 of 32
starts ticking subsequent events will not stop the limitation. The time

        starts running from the date of knowledge of the fraud/mistake; or

        the plaintiff/applicant when required to exercise reasonable

        diligence could have first known or discovered the fraud or mistake.

        In case of a concealed document, the period of limitation will begin

        to run when the plaintiff/applicant had the means of producing the

        concealed document or compelling its production.
13.     Thus when the plaintiff relies on
Section 17(1) (b)
of the Limitation

        Act asserting fraud or mistake, he has to state the date on which he

        has discovered the fraud or mistake, and also state that he could

        not have discovered the fraud or mistake with reasonable diligence

        on a date earlier than on which he has based his cause of action.
14.     Rules of pleadings relating to fraud and exemption from law of

        limitation are set out in Order VI Rule 413 and Order VII Rule 614 of

        the Code. Order VI Rule 4 lays down that in all cases where a party

        pleading relies upon fraud, particulars with respect to the date and



13 “Order VI Rule 4. Particulars to be given where necessary.—In all cases in which the party
pleading relies on any misrepresentation, fraud, breach of trust, wilful default, or undue influence, and
in all other cases in which particulars may be necessary beyond such as are exemplified in the forms
aforesaid, particulars (with dates and items if necessary) shall be stated in the pleading.”
14 “Order VII Rule 6. Grounds of exemption from limitation law.—where the suit is instituted after

the expiration of the period prescribed by the law of limitation, the plaint shall show the ground upon
which exemption from such law is claimed:
Provided that the Court may permit the plaintiff to claim exemption from the law of limitation on any
ground not set out in the plaint, if such ground is not inconsistent with the grounds set out in the plaint.”
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                                               Page 10 of 32
item, if necessary, shall be stated in the pleadings. The fraud as

       alleged in the plaint must state those facts which together taken as

       a whole, if proved, would show and establish fraud. Pleading of

       fraud should be conspicuous and palpable, and should not be

       predicated on mere suspicion and conjecture. Of course, the court,

       at the initial stage when deciding an application under clause (d) to

       Order VII Rule 11 has to proceed under demurrer, and therefore,

       should accept the facts as alleged in the plaint, but can in a given

       case draw irrefutable inferences from the facts stated. Order VII

       Rule 6 of the Code requires the plaintiff to show the grounds upon

       which exemption(s) from the law of limitation is claimed, and the

       plaint should set out the ground(s) for claiming such exemptions,

       which means that the plaintiff must state the causes or reasons or

       attributes or basis on which, according to the plaintiff, a period

       should be excluded and not be counted. The recitals in the plaint

       should be specific and comply with the terms of Order VI Rule 4 of

       the Code. Order VI Rule 6 is liberal and flexible as while mandating

       that a suit instituted post expiry of the period of limitation must state

       the grounds upon which exemption is claimed, permits the plaintiff

       to rely on a ‘ground’ not inconsistent with the ground set out in the

       plaint. The proviso does not nullify the requirement that in the first

       place the plaint must set out the ground seeking exemption from
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                      Page 11 of 32
limitation. When and to the extent Order VII Rule 6 and Order VI

        Rule 4 apply, these provisions being specific will prevail over the

        general rule found in Order VI Rule 2 of the Code. Nevertheless,

        the requirement of the Rules is to plead specific facts with dates,

        but not the factual evidence on the basis of which the plaintiff would

        ultimately seek to establish and justify his claim for exemption of

        limitation. When the minimum threshold required in terms of Order

        VI Rule 4 and Order VII Rule 6 is satisfied and met, cannot be put

        in a straitjacket or rigid formula, as it would depend upon the facts

        and circumstances including antecedent facts, and in particular the

        relationship between the parties or their predecessors and the

        period bygone without challenge. While examining these aspects,

        especially at the initial stage under clause (d) of Rule 11 to Order

        VII or Order XIV Rule 2 of the Code, the court cannot proceed on

        the basis of the assumption as to the evidence that would be led so

        as to record a finding on the evidence. At the same time, an artifice

        or clever drafting should not prevent the court from stopping plainly

        time-barred proceedings, an aspect we would again advert to

        subsequently. The court can take benefit of Order XII Rule 615 of



15“Order XII Rule 6. Judgment on admissions.—
(1) Where admissions of fact have been made either in the pleading or otherwise, whether orally or in
writing, the Court may at any stage of the suit, either on the application of any party or of its own motion
and without waiting for the determination of any other question between the parties, make such order
or give such judgment as it may think fit, having regard to such admissions.
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                                              Page 12 of 32
the Code when there are admissions made by the plaintiff in the

       plaint and the documents which are admitted by the parties, or there

       being no dispute which would require oral evidence in the context

       of the documents. There is no bar against invoking provisions of

       Order VII Rule 11 and Order XIV Rule 2 together, or even applying

       Order XII Rule 6 while proceeding with demurrer. Provisions of the

       Code are not watertight compartments, unless such statutory

       construction is express or manifestly prohibited. we would not in the

       absence of constraints, deny the trial court or the appellate court

       flexibility in application of the procedural law. Underlying objective

       of prescribing procedure is to advance the cause of justice.

       Therefore unless compelled by express language or clear intend

       barring a course, the provisions of the Code as a procedural

       enactment ought to be construed to leave the court to meet and

       deal with situations in the ends of justice.
15.    Having elucidated in brief the legal position, we would now refer to

       the averments made in the plaint in some detail:
15.1 Initial paragraphs of the plaint state that the plaintiff and

             defendant Nos. 3 to 9 are related to each other as brother,




(2) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under sub-rule (1) a decree shall be drawn up in accordance
with the judgment and the decree shall bear the date on which the judgment was pronounced.”
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                                     Page 13 of 32
sister, and late brother’s wife and sons. They belong to the

             family of Harnam Singh Anand and Harbans Kaur, who had

             since demised on 23rd September 1974 and 6th August 2005

             respectively. Defendant No.1, Praduman Singh Chandhok, is

             the brother of late Harbans Kaur. Defendant No. 2, Pervinder

             Singh Chandhok, is the son of defendant No.1 and also the

             cousin of the plaintiff. Harnam Singh Anand, prior to his

             demise, had prosperous joint Hindu family businesses and

             establishments both in India and Iran. He had purchased

             various properties, including the suit property, in the name of

             his wife, Harbans Kaur, from one Ram Rattan vide sale deed

             dated 20th January 1958 for a consideration of Rs.83,800/- and

             registered with the Sub-Registrar’s Office, Delhi on 17th

             February 1958. It is averred that the suit property is a benami

             property of Harnam Singh Anand. The plaintiff and defendant

             Nos. 3 to 9, being successors-in-interest, are entitled to their

             respective shares in the suit property under the law of

             succession. At the time of purchase, the suit property was

             under tenancy of several tenants who were instructed to pay

             rent and had attorned to Harbans Kaur. However, Harbans

             Kaur was merely the ostensible and benami owner of the suit

             property and never had any right, interest or title.
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                      Page 14 of 32
15.2 Harbans Kaur was very close to her mother Tej Kaur and her

           brother, defendant No.1. To help them, and as a concession, she

           had permitted Tej Kaur and defendant Nos. 1 and 2 to

           temporarily reside in the suit property. Tej Kaur did not have any

           means to support herself and her family members comprising of

           defendant Nos. 1 and 2. Harbans Kaur, to make her mother Tej

           Kaur and her family members, including defendant Nos. 1 and

           2, stay in the suit property considering their financial hardships,

           had negotiated with the tenants and had paid substantial

           amounts to persuade the tenants to vacate the property.

           Harbans Kaur had filed several eviction petitions against the

           tenants who had refused to vacate. Tej Kaur died on 24th July

           2007. However, defendant Nos. 1 and 2, after the demise of Tej

           Kaur, had continued to reside and, thereafter, in spite of

           requests, refused to vacate the suit property. Tej Kaur was

           granted a permissive and limited concession to stay in the suit

           property without conferring any right, interest or title.

   15.3 The plaint also states that defendant No. 1 was in employment

           of Harnam Singh Anand at Iran. This was done to enable

           defendant No. 1 to earn a living and sustain in life and maintain

           his family with dignity. Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 were deeply

           involved in the business activities and affairs at Iran.
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                         Page 15 of 32
15.4 Paragraph 8 of the plaint, which is of some importance, reads as

           under:
“8. That in view of the above it is abundantly clear and
                  evident that (i) Smt. Harbans Kaur was never the owner
                  of suit property, (ii) Factually and legally Sh. Harnam
                  Singh was the owner, (iii) Mrs. Harbans Kaur never
                  have had an right or authority or competence to transfer
                  rights, title or interest in the suit property; (iv) Right to
                  stay was granted to Mrs. Tej Kaur which was a
                  permissive usage only and that too during her life time.
                  On death of Mrs. Tej Kaur and/or Mrs. Harbans Kaur,
                  said permissive use came to an end, (v) Mrs. Harbans
                  Kaur never had right to transfer title through any person
                  claiming by or under her. It has two limbs. Firstly Mrs.
                  Harbans Kaur never enjoyed title. Secondly she had
                  never any right to transfer, thirdly she did not have any
                  competence to confer any right upon any person to act
                  for and on her behalf for any of these acts and deeds,
(vi) Over and above all these issues, even on the touch
                  tone of law, the alleged sale deed is illegal and nullity in
                  law. Sale Deed is without consideration. No
                  consideration was ever paid at the time of execution of
                  alleged sale deed and terms of the deed were never
                  performed. It was at best a contingent agreement which
                  is not fulfilled and thus it gives or creates no right or title
                  or interest thereunder. Sale Deed is bad, illegal and void
                  document. It does not create any right in favour of
                  deceased Mrs. Tej Kaur and/or the defendants 1 and 2.
Plaintiff has therefore, sought a declaration with respect
                  to said sale deed and has also prayed for its
                  cancellation and finally (vii) After death of Mrs. Harbans
                  Kaur and/or Mrs. Tej Kaur, the Defendants 1 and 2 were
                  bound in law to hand over vacant peaceful possession
                  of the suit property when called upon to do so which
                  they have failed. Their possession IS absolutely illegal,
                  unlawful and unauthorized and they are liable to pay
                  charges towards illegal/unlawful and unauthorized use
                  and occupation / mesne / profits / damages. These
                  charges are payable from date of possession till date of
                  delivery of vacant peaceful possession of suit property
                  unto plaintiff and her family members. Inquiry is
                  required to be caused by the Hon’ble Court to determine
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                               Page 16 of 32
the quantum of damages/mesne profits admissible and
                  payable by Defendants 1 and 2 in the present case.”

   15.5 Paragraphs 12, 13, 14 of the plaint read as under:
“12. That the plaintiff now has learnt recently that Smt.
                  Tej Kaur together with Defendants 1 & 2 actuated with
                  greed and taking undue advantage of the faith and trust
                  reposed by Smt. Harbans Kaur, conspired to usurp the
                  assets and properties of the Plaintiff’s family. Late Smt.
                  Tej Kaur and Defendants No. 1 & 2 fraudulently and
                  deceitfully got signed from Late Smt. Harbans Kaur
                  through her attorney the Defendant No. 3 a document
                  purporting to be Sale Deed dated 23.08.1969 seeking
                  to transfer/convey the right/interest/title in the said
                  property in favour of Smt. Tej Kaur against purported
                  consideration of Rs. 90,000/- and by falsely alleging
                  that Rs. 20,000/- will be as an advance and Rs. 30,000/-
                  will be paid before Sub-Registrar, Delhi and balance Rs.
                  40,000/- would be paid in equal 4 instalments in four
                  years. Not only the documents created are forged,
                  fictitious, sham, inconsequential in law but also a nullity
                  being void ab-initio in as much neither Smt. Harbans
                  Kaur was ever entitled/competent to create any third-
                  party rights/interest/title in the said property but also
                  Smt. Tej Kaur never had any ability to pay any amount
                  and much less the alleged amounts in question and
                  which till date has not been received. All this while Smt.
                  Tej Kaur had been representing herself to be using the
                  said property on the basis of the permission/consent
                  granted by the family of the Plaintiff.
13. That pursuant to and acting on the basis of the
                  fictitious Sale Deed dated 23.08.1969 claimed to have
                  been registered on 27.08.1969 Late Smt. Tej Kaur
                  purportedly acting as owner without any valid/lawful
                  authority conferred upon her by the family of the Plaintiff
                  and acting dishonestly to dilute the rights/interest/title of
                  the Plaintiff and her family members fraudulently
                  executed a fictitious General Power of Attorney dated
                  04.04.1982 in favour of the Defendant No. 1 in respect
                  of the said property. That pursuant to the fictitious Sale
                  Deed dated 23.08.1969 Late Smt. Tej Kaur purportedly
                  made the document purporting to be a Sale deed dated
                  12.10.1995 in favour of the Defendant No. 2 for the
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                             Page 17 of 32
afore-said property against the purported sham
                  consideration of Rs. 4,00,000/-. The same is totally and
                  absolutely illegal, null and void, non-est, fraudulent,
                  sham and bogus transaction. No consideration was
                  received by the family members of the plaintiff in any
                  manner whatsoever nor the transaction permitted or
                  even ratified by her family members.
14. That it is pertinent to mention that the Plaintiff has
                  further come to know from the certified copies of
                  proceedings before this Hon’ble Court in C.M. (Main)
                  No. 982 of 2004 that during the pendency of the said
                  proceedings Smt. Tej Kaur demised on 24.07.2007 and
                  the defendant No. 1 filed an application under Order 22
                  Rule 3 read with
Section 151
CPC registered as C.M.
                  No. 5848 of 2008 seeking impleadment of LRs of
                  deceased Smt. Tej Kaur wherein he placed on record
                  the copy of the Will dated 03.05.2007 executed by Smt.
                  Tej Kaur allegedly claiming herself to the exclusive and
                  sole owner of the said property having purchased vide
                  the purported fictious Sale Deed dated 23.08.1969
                  claimed to have been registered on 27.08.1969 and
                  bequeathing the same in favour of the Defendant No. 2
                  which is totally contradictory to the purported
                  sham/illegal and null and void transaction made out
                  herein above.”

   15.6 Paragraphs 15 to 18 of the plaint refer to an order passed by this

           Court dated 30th January 1973, which is a reported decision,

           relating to eviction proceedings filed by Harbans Kaur for misuse

           of property for commercial purposes by one of the tenants. The

           matter was remanded to the Rent Controller to adjudicate the

           issues afresh. Thereupon, one of the tenants had filed a second

           appeal against the order of the Rent Controller before the Delhi

           High Court. In 2004, Tej Kaur had also filed a petition under
Article 227
before the High Court against an order passed by the
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                          Page 18 of 32
Rent Controller. After the death of Tej Kaur, defendant No.1 had

           moved an application seeking impleadment as a legal heir

           disclosing and relying upon the Will dated 3rd May 2007. In terms

           of the said Will, defendant No.1 had become the sole and

           exclusive owner of the suit property. The Will, it is stated, does

           not refer to the sale deed dated 12th October 1995 and rather

           claims to have been executed by Tej Kaur in favour of defendant

           No.2. The plaintiff had appeared in the said proceedings after

           the publication of notices in the newspaper and opposed the

           prayer claiming that she too is a legal representative, being the

           daughter of Harbans Kaur. Immediately thereafter, defendant

           Nos. 1 and 2 compromised the matter with the tenant. The

           petition filed under
Article 227
was withdrawn by defendant

           Nos.1 and 2, but the court vide order dated 29th September 2008

           had given liberty to the legal representative of Harbans Kaur to

           raise claim/right as and when any subsequent proceeding

           arises. First Appeal filed by the tenant was also withdrawn on

           the same day. It is pleaded that Harbans Kaur had continued to

           prosecute the eviction proceedings against the tenants and there

           was no attornment of rights as Harbans Kaur had retained all

           rights with her. There were judicial findings on title against Tej

           Kaur by the Rent Controller against which no steps were taken
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                    Page 19 of 32
to perform or conclude the sale transaction, and it remained

           inconclusive. It is averred that Tej Kaur had never acquired any

           right or title in the property because of which Harbans Kaur was

           always impleaded and remained a party in the eviction

           proceedings as an owner and landlord.
15.7 Paragraphs 19 to 21 of the plaint refer to the legal notice dated

           10th October 2008 served by the plaintiff and her family

           members, including defendant No. 3, on defendant Nos.1 and 2;
the reply thereto dated 15th October 2008 by defendant Nos.1

           and 2 without furnishing details; rejoinder dated 24th October

           2008, followed by specific legal notice dated 24th October 2008

           to defendant Nos. 1 and 2; and the reply thereto dated 4th

           November 2008, which again was without providing any details

           or documents. we shall subsequently refer to these letters/legal

           notices as they are of substantial importance and relevance. It is

           pleaded that defendant Nos. 1 and 2, acting illegally and

           arbitrarily, have instigated and induced defendant Nos. 6 to 8,

           namely Damanpal Kaur Anand, Jaspreet Singh Anand and

           Gursimar Singh Anand (wife and children of late Kultaran Singh

           Anand, brother of the plaintiff), to rake up false, inconsistent

           claims and issues to divide the family and drag them into inter

           se litigation. At the behest and insistence of defendant Nos. 1
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                    Page 20 of 32
and 2, defendant Nos. 6 to 8 have initiated several proceedings

           against the plaintiff, her brother and other family members, which

           are still pending. In one such proceeding, from the written

           statement filed by defendant Nos. 7 and 8 on 16th December

           2010, the plaintiff for the first time came to vaguely know about

           the purported sale of the suit property by Harbans Kaur to Tej

           Kaur. The plaintiff and other family members were utterly

           shocked and surprised and thus became suspicious about the

           intentions of defendant Nos. 1 and 2. Thereafter, the plaintiff had

           made enquiries of various court proceedings, pending and

           disposed of matters. Whereas at one such enquiry made in the

           Office of the Sub-Registrar, Delhi, they came to know about the

           fictitious, sham, illegal, fraudulent transactions created by

           defendant Nos. 1 and 2.
15.8 Paragraph Nos. 22 and 33 of the plaint state that the plaintiff was

           completely in the dark and had no knowledge of the sale deed

           dated 23rd August 1969 and the subsequent sale deed dated 12th

           October 1995. Regarding the date on which the cause of action

           arose, the plaint states:
“22. That Smt. Harbans Kaur including the Plaintiff and
                  her family members have been totally kept in dark about
                  these false, mischievous and fraudulent deals entered
                  into amongst Late Tej Kaur and the defendant No. 1 &
                  2 as made out herein above. The Plaintiff or even his
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                        Page 21 of 32
mother Smt. Harbans Kaur deceased was at no point of
                   time either apprised about the same or her concurrence
                   or even her signatures were ever obtained in the said
                   purported illegal and sham Deed of Sale dated
                   23.08.1969 claimed to have been registered on
                   27.08.1969 or even the subsequent purported fictitious
                   documents/sale deeds dated 12.10.1995 and Will dated
                   30.05.2007 which are null and void ab initio being nullity
                   and fraud conveying no right/interest/title upon the
                   defendants No. 1 & 2 or even Smt. Tej Kaur in any
                   manner at any point of time and thus does not affect the
                   right/interest/title of the plaintiff and her family members
                   to own, enjoy and possess the same.
xx            xx             xx
33. That the cause of action first arose on 23.08.1969
                   claimed to be registered on 27.08.1969 when the
                   purported fictitious sale deed was executed by Late
                   Harbans Kaur in favour of Late Smt. Tej Kaur in respect
                   of the subject property. It again arose on 04.05.1982
                   when purported General Power of Attorney was
                   executed by Late Tej Kaur in favour of defendant no. 1.
It again arose on 12.10.1995 when purported fictitious
                   sale deed was executed by Late Smt. Tej Kaur in favour
                   of defendant no. 2 in respect of the subject property.
                   The cause of action further arose on 30.05.2007 when
                   purported Will bequeathing the subject property was
                   executed by Smt. Tej Kaur in favour of Defendant No. 2
                   on the basis of the purported fictitious sale deed dated
                   23.08.1969 claimed to be registered on 27.08.1969.
                   The cause of action again arose in on 10.10.2008,
                   24.10.2008, when the defendants No.1 & 2 when called
                   upon to admit and acknowledge the rights/interest/title
                   of the Plaintiff and her family members and handover
                   the possession of the suit property denied vide reply
                   dated 15.10.2008 and 04.11.2008…”16

16The plaintiff had filed an application under Order VI Rule 17 of the code (I.A. No. 7950 of 2014),
seeking to amend paragraph 33 of the plaint by incorporating the following additional facts:
“The cause of action further arose on 27.02.2012 and on 29.02.2012/15.06.2012 when
         the plaintiff upon coming to know about the frauds played by the Defendants Nos.1
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                                       Page 22 of 32
15.9 Paragraphs 23 to 28 of the plaint state that defendant Nos. 1 and

             2, along with Tej Kaur, had a mala fide and ulterior intention in

             usurping the suit property and assets of the plaintiff and her

             family members. Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 in their possession

             have certain blank papers and other documents of other

             properties allegedly signed by Harbans Kaur and other family

             members of the plaintiff and Tej Kaur, and based upon which

             they are now trying to forge and create fictitious documents. The

             sale deed executed by Harbans Kaur in favour of Tej Kaur and

             the sale deed executed by Tej Kaur in favour of defendant No.1

             are null and void, being vitiated by fraud, cheating, fraudulent

             misrepresentation,              forgery,         illegality       etc.       and       thus,

             inconsequential in law. It is averred that Harbans Kaur could not

             have transferred a better title in favour of Tej Kaur, and further,

             Tej Kaur could not have transferred a better title than she had.
and 2 in resorting to illegal/unlawful creation of purported sale deeds applied and
          obtained certified copies of the purported sale deeds dated 12.10.1995 and the
          purported sale deed dated 23.08.1969 registered on 27.08.1969 respectively from the
          office of the Sub-Registrar, Delhi pursuant to the disclosures made in the Written
          Statement dated 16.12.2010 filed by the defendants Nos. 7 and 8 in C.S. (O.S.) No.
          1677 of 2010 titled as Gurdev Singh Anand and Ors. v. Jaspreet Singh Anand and
          Anr., legal notices and responses received and the extensive inquries/searches made
          in the office of the Sub-Registrar Delhi.”

The additional facts, as mentioned, would not make any difference to the present outcome in view of
the finding that the plaintiff had knowledge about execution of the sale deed dated 23 rd August 1969,
if not earlier at least in 2008. It is also discernible that she could have with reasonable diligence in the
given facts as pleaded in the plaint, ascertained and known facts relating to the execution of the sale
deed dated 23rd August 1969.
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                                              Page 23 of 32
The sale deeds are also fraudulent on the count of being without

           consideration. They are a result of a conspiracy hatched by the

           defendant Nos. 1 and 2 amongst themselves with Harbans Kaur

           and Tej Kaur with the sole and cheap objective to usurp the

           lawful ownership and title of the plaintiff and the defendant Nos.

           3 to 9. The plaintiff’s deceased mother could never have and had

           no intent or purpose or necessity to execute the sale deed in

           favour of Tej Kaur. Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 are in permissive

           possession, having limited and restricted rights to use and

           occupy the property through late Tej Kaur. The ownership, title

           and interest claim predicated by them are based on documents,

           mutations, etc., that are inconsequential in law, not valid, being

           fraudulent,        concocted          act   of   forgery,   fabrication,

           misrepresentation, etc. Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 are liable to be

           removed from the suit property once the purpose and object of

           granting permissive possession, restricted and limited right to

           use and occupy the suit premises has been served. It is claimed

           that the plaintiff is entitled to seek recovery of mesne profits at

           the rate of Rs. 1 lakh per year or such rate as determined by

           courts from defendant Nos. 1 and 2 for the illegal, unlawful and

           unauthorised use and occupation of the suit property.
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                         Page 24 of 32
16.    The sale deed dated 23rd August 1969 in favour of Tej Kaur was

       executed by Gurdev Singh Anand as the attorney of Harbans Kaur.

       Gurdev Singh Anand, the third defendant in the suit, is the brother

       of the plaintiff. Execution of the sale deed and signatures of Gurdev

       Singh Anand acting as the attorney of his mother Harbans Kaur are

       undisputed. The sale deed is a registered document. The plaint

       accepts that the sale was for a consideration of Rs.90,000/- . The

       sale deed states that Rs.20,000/- was received in advance and

       Rs.30,000/- was paid before the Sub-Registrar. The balance

       amount of Rs.40,000/- was to be paid to the vendor by the vendee

       in four equal monthly instalments. The plaint does not state if any

       suit or proceedings were initiated for the recovery of Rs.40,000/-.

       Any suit or proceedings for recovery of Rs.40,000/- would be barred

       by limitation. The sale deed mentions that on the date of execution

       Harbans Kaur was present in Tehran, Iran, and therefore, her son

       Gurdev Singh Anand, who is the brother of the plaintiff, as an

       attorney, was executing the sale deed as authorised vide Special

       Power of Attorney authenticated on 23rd August 1969. These facts

       are again not challenged and contested in the plaint. Sale deed

       dated 23th August 1969 is more than thirty years old, and during the

       lifetime of Harbans Kaur or Tej Kaur it was never challenged and

       questioned by Harbans Kaur or any of their family members. In
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                   Page 25 of 32
terms of
Section 90
of the Evidence Act, the presumption is that the

       signature and every other part of the document, its execution and

       attestation is by persons by whom it purports to be executed and

       attested.
17.    Legal notice dated 10th October 2008, states that late Harbans

       Kaur, after her marriage, took steps to establish late Tej Kaur and

       her son Praduman Singh Chandhok, the first defendant. The legal

       notice dated 10th October 2008 regarding the suit property states:
“3. In fact property No. 4-C/7, New Rohtak Road, New
                  Delhi – 110005 was given by Smt. Harbans Kaur unto
                  her mother Ms. Tej Kaur and she took all steps to
                  establish her brother namely Praduman Singh
                  Chandhok. Smt. Harbans Kaur settled her brother by
                  entrusting him with jobs of managing various
                  business(s) and estate of her late husband Shri Harnam
                  Singh in Iran and elsewhere.
4. Since Ms. Tej Kaur died intestate, Ms. Harbans Kaur
                  legally succeeds to her share in estate of Ms. Tej Kaur
                  along with other remaining legal heirs, Praduman Singh,
                  Chandhok and others. Her share to the estate is joint
                  and undivided and is to be succeeded upon my clients
                  jointly.”

                                     xx          xx      xx

                  “9 (iii) All my clients being sons daughters and
                  grandsons of deceased Ms. Harbans Kaur are jointly
                  entitled and have their claims in joint undivided share to
                  the estate of Ms. Tej Kaur claiming by or under or
                  through Ms. Harbans Kaur and further notify that they
                  are no longer interested in having unity of the and
                  possession in said estate of Ms. Tej Kaur.”
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                          Page 26 of 32
Legal Notice dated 24th October 2008 states:
“3. Post to marriage of Mrs. Harbans Kaur to Shri
                   Harnam Singh, she took all steps to establish home for
                   her mother & brother (late Ms. Tej Kaur and her son-
                   noticee No/1) in furtherance thereof, property No. 4-
                   C/7 New Rohtak Road, New Delhi 110 005 was given
                   by Smt. Harbans Kaur into her mother Ms. Tej Kaur
                   and she also took all steps to establish & same her
                   brother, noticee No.1. Smt. Harbans kaur settled her
                   brother in his life by entrusting him with jobs of
                   managing various business(s) and estate of her
                   husband Shri Harnam Singh (since deceased now) in
                   Iran and elsewhere.
xx         xx    xx

                   13 (v). partition property No. 4C/7, New Rohtak Road,
                   New Delhi where deceased Harbans Kaur has acquired
                   her undivided share in the eve of death of Mrs. Tej
                   Kaur.”
                                                    (Emphasis Supplied)
18.    The language and the words used in the legal notices on behalf of

       the plaintiff and other family members are admissions of facts which

       uncover the illusion made by creative and crafty narration to

       obfuscate the patent delay of over four decades. To get over the

       admissions, the plaintiff has submitted that the word/expression

       used in the notices is ‘given’ and not ‘transfer/sale’. That the word

       ‘given’ used is factually correct, albeit when one reads the notices

       holistically it is lucid that the plaintiff, along with her family members

       and defendant No.3, have accepted that there was transfer of the
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                       Page 27 of 32
suit property in favour of Tej Kaur. The notice was for partition of

       the estate left behind by Tej Kaur in the form of the suit property.

       The plaintiff in the notices did not challenge the legal title of Tej Kaur

       but had claimed the right of inheritance being a granddaughter of

       Tej Kaur. Further, the plaintiff was aware and had knowledge of the

       Will dated 3rd May 2007 executed by Tej Kaur. The bequest

       included the suit property is a fact admitted by the plaintiff in

       paragraph 14 of the plaint. Reliance placed on the eviction

       proceedings does not further the plaintiff’s case, as on reading of

       paragraphs 14 to 18 of the plaint it is manifest that the compromise

       between the tenant and defendant Nos. 1 and 2 as owners/landlord

       had led to the withdrawal of the proceedings vide order dated 29th

       September 2008. This order placed on record and relied by the

       plaintiff states that the rights and claims of the plaintiff and the legal

       representatives of Harbans Kaur are protected, while referring to

       the ownership and inheritance claimed by defendant Nos. 1 and 2

       as legal heirs of Tej Kaur. Legal notices dated 10th October 2008

       and 24th October 2008 were issued after the order dated 29th

       September 2008 was passed.
19.    In view of the said background, the assertions made in the plaint by

       the plaintiff against her mother late Harbans Kaur that she had

       acted in an active and joint concert, connivance and conspiracy with
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                       Page 28 of 32
late Tej Kaur are self-serving and phantastic. As per need and

          factual background of the matter, assertions in the pleadings have

          to be examined and understood with other statements and

          documents relied by the plaintiff without feeling helpless and

          paralysed by unclear, illusory or contradictory drafting. Meaningful

          reading of the entire plaint may be required when grossly

          implausible and dubious statements are made.17 The idea is to

          check and weed out manifestly vexatious and meritless cases at

          the threshold.18
20.       The plaint accepts the close relationship inter se the parties as

          relatives and in business activities. The person who had executed

          the sale deed in 1969 as attorney of Harbans Kaur is the brother of

          the plaintiff with whom the plaintiff has no dispute. Tej Kaur and

          defendant Nos. 1 and 2 were residing in the suit property. No claim

          was made until the death of the plaintiff’s mother and grandmother,

          Harbans Kaur and Tej Kaur respectively, on 6th August 2005 and

          24th July 2007. Harnam Singh Anand had died earlier in 1974. For

          42 years post the execution of the sale deed in 1969, there was no

          dispute and challenge to the ownership of Tej Kaur.
In 2008,

          disputes had arisen but regarding inheritance of the estate of Tej



17   See
T. Arivandandam v. T.V. Satyapal
(1977) 2 SCC 467
18   See
Madanuri Sri Rama Chandra Murthy v. Syed Jala
(2017) 13 SCC 174
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                             Page 29 of 32
Kaur however the plaintiff and defendant No. 3 did not challenge

       the title and ownership of Tej Kaur. In this background, as the plea

       of lack of knowledge appears to be conjured and unreal, we read

       the     pleading      and     the     documents   with   discernment    and

       perceptiveness without getting carried away by bald and

       pretentious accusations that do not infuse with the accepted and

       ‘admitted’ facts.
21.    As already observed, the notices dated 10th October 2008 and 24th

       October 2008 are admitted and referred to without reservation in

       the plaint. They have been filed by the plaintiff with the plaint as

       relevant documents relied upon by the plaintiff. The plaint does

       not dispute or explain the contents and admissions made in the two

       notices.
22.    Consequently, on application of the principle of demurrer, it has to

       be held, on the basis of the averments made in the plaint and the

       documents relied upon and admitted by the plaintiff, that even prior

       to 2008, the plaintiff was aware and had knowledge of the sale deed

       dated 23rd August 1969 by which the ownership rights were

       transferred to Tej Kaur. The plaintiff did not, in 2008, question and

       challenge the transfer, though she was fully aware that Tej Kaur

       had acquired ownership rights.
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                         Page 30 of 32
23.    We have denoted the ambit and conditions of
Section 17(1)
of the

       Limitation Act, which is to protect rights of a party defrauded from

       lapse of time till he remains in ignorance of the fraud, or with

       reasonable diligence could have discovered the fraud.
Section

       17(1)
does not assist a person who merely shuts his eyes in spite

       of circumstances requiring him to ascertain facts on which he would

       have discovered the fraud.
Section 17(1)
of the Limitation Act saves

       rights of the party defrauded from lapse of time as long as the party

       is not at fault on his own account. In the aforesaid factual

       background, it is apparent that the plaintiff was aware and had

       knowledge in October 2008 about execution and transfer of the

       ownership rights in favour of late Tej Kaur vide sale deed dated 23rd

       August 1969 executed by defendant No.3, Gurdev Singh Anand.

       Unadorned assertion in the plaint feigning ignorance as to the sale

       deed would not help, as in the facts as pleaded and accepted in the

       plaint, the plaintiff was required to state and indicate that ignorance

       was not due to failure to exercise reasonable diligence.
24.    In view of the aforesaid facts and position of law, we dismiss this

       appeal and uphold the judgment of the Single Judge and the

       Division Bench of the High Court dismissing the suit as being barred

       by limitation. We also affirm the judgment of the Single Judge and
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                    Page 31 of 32
the Division Bench with regard to the dismissal of two applications

       filed by the plaintiff for amendment of pleadings under Order VI

       Rule 17 of the Code, namely IA Nos. 17994/2012 and 7590/2014

       on the ground that when the suit itself has been barred by limitation,

       amendments to such a suit will be unnecessary.
25.    Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
26.    Parties to bear their own costs.
......................................J.
                                                          (SANJIV KHANNA)



NEW DELHI;
MARCH 28, 2022.
Civil Appeal a/o. of SLP (C) No. 27794 of 2016                          Page 32 of 32
REPORTABLE

                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.             OF 2022
                [Arising out of SLP(CIVIL) NO. 27794 OF 2016]


     SARANPAL KAUR ANAND                                  ..... APPELLANT


                                 VERSUS


     PRADUMAN SINGH CHANDHOK & ORS                        ..... RESPONDENTS




                            J U D G M E N T


BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1)    Having gone through the opinion expressed by my esteemed brother

Justice Sanjiv Khanna, I with respect, express my inability to agree with the same.

In my humble opinion, the impugned judgments of the High Court of Delhi,

passed by the Single Bench and the Division Bench are in utter disregard to the

provisions contained in
the Code of Civil Procedure
(
CPC
) as also to the legal

position well settled by this Court in umpteen number of cases. The basic legal

premise on which both the courts have proceeded for rejecting the plaint, being

erroneous the same cannot be vindicated for the reasons to follow.
2)    Special leave to appeal is granted.
1
3)    Though I propose to deal with only the legal issues involved in the case, a

few basic facts emerging from the record need to be stated. For the sake of

convenience, the parties shall be referred as per their original status in the suit.
(i)   The Appellant in the present Appeal Smt. Saranpal Kaur Anand

              (Daughter of Late Sardar Harnam Singh Anand and Smt.

              Harbans Kaur) was the plaintiff in the Civil Suit being CS(OS)

              No. 873 of 2012 filed her in the Delhi High Court in its original

              jurisdiction.
(ii) The respondent nos. 1 to 9 herein were the defendant nos. 1 to

              9 in the suit. The defendant no. 1 Praduman Singh Chandhok

              happened to be the brother of the plaintiff’s mother and

              defendant no. 2 happened to be the son of defendant no.1. The

              defendant nos. 3 to 9 happened to be the legal heirs and

              successors of the Late Sardar Harnam Singh Anand and Smt.

              Harbans Kaur.
(iii) The plaintiff filed the suit in question on 27th March, 2012

              against the defendants seeking a decree of declaration that the

              suit property being No.4-C/7, New Rohtak Road, New Delhi

              was the joint undivided family property of the plaintiff and

              defendant nos. 3 to 9 and that defendants nos. 1 & 2 had no right

              title or interest upon or to the said property. The plaintiff sought

              further declaration that the purported sale deed dated 23 rd
2
August, 1969 alleged to have been executed by Smt. Harbans

     Kaur through her alleged attorney in favour of Smt. Tej Kaur

     was fictitious, sham, nullity and void ab initio and, therefore,

     deserved to be cancelled. The plaintiff also sought a declaration

     that the purported sale deed dated 12.10.1995 executed by Smt.

     Tej Kaur in favour of defendant no. 2 was fictitious, sham,

     nullity and void ab initio. The plaintiff further sought a prayer

     for permanent injunction against defendant nos. 1 and 2 for

     restraining      them        from     carrying       out      any

     construction/addition/alteration, or entering into any agreement

     to sell or creating third party interest in respect of any portion

     of the suit property.
(iv) On 10.05.2012, the defendant nos. 1 & 2 filed their respective

     written statements raising various contentions and praying for

     the dismissal of the suit.
(v) On 15.05.2012, the defendant no. 2 filed an application seeking

     rejection of the plaint under Order VII Rule 11(d)
CPC
being

     I.A. No. 9950 of 2012 in the suit.
(vi) On 11.09.2012, the plaintiff filed an application under
Order VI

     Rule 17 CPC
being I.A.No. 17994 of 2012 seeking amendment

     in the plaint for incorporating the relief of possession in the

     prayer clause.
3
(vii) On 07.02.2014, the Trial Court i.e. the Single Bench of the High

     Court framed a preliminary issue as under:
“1. Whether the suit as framed is liable to be rejected

        under Order VII Rule 11(d)
of the CPC
on the ground of

        limitation? OPD”
(viii) On 28.04.2014, the plaintiff filed another application under

     Order VI, Rule 17 seeking to amend cause of action clause to

     explain/elaborate the incident leading to filing of the suit. The

     said application was registered as I.A. No. 7950/14 in the said

     suit.
(ix) The Single Bench vide the common order dated 6th April, 2015,

     decided the preliminary issue along with the I.A. No. 17994/12

     and IA No. 7950/14, rejecting the plaint. The operative part

     contained in the paras 39 and 40 of the said order reads as under:
“39. The suit is apparently time barred. Hence,
             the plaint is rejected. The issue framed in the
             matter is accordingly decided against the
             plaintiff and in favour of defendant nos. 1 & 2,
             the amendment applications filed by the plaintiff
             are malafide and are not maintainable as the
             same itself is time barred on the face of
             pleadings and documents placed on record. Both
             applications are accordingly dismissed.
40. The plaint is rejected. All pending
             applications are also disposed of consequently”.
(x) Being aggrieved by
the said judgment
and decree passed by the

     Trial Court /Single Bench, the plaintiff preferred an appeal
4
being RFA (OS) No.54 of 2015 under
section 96
of CPC before

             the Appellate Court/Division Bench of the High Court. The

             Division Bench confirmed the order passed by the Single Bench

             and dismissed the said Appeal vide the impugned judgment and

             order dated 25th April, 2016. The Division Bench while

             dismissing the Appeal also took recourse to the provisions

             contained in
Order XII Rule 6 CPC
, which was not the issue

             before the Single Bench.
4)    Being aggrieved by the impugned judgment passed by the Division Bench

of the High Court, the appellant-plaintiff has filed the present Appeal.
5)    Having regard to the impugned orders passed by the Single Bench and the

Division Bench of the High Court, following questions fall for consideration:-
a.    Whether the Single Bench i.e. the trial court could have framed

             the preliminary issue under Order XIV Rule 2 with regard to the

             issue of limitation which was a mixed question of law and fact,

             for the purpose of rejecting the plaint under Order VII Rule

             11(d)
of the CPC
?
b.    Whether the Division Bench i.e. the appellate court could have

             travelled beyond the scope of Appeal and taken recourse to
Order XII Rule 6 CPC
, which was not the issue before the

             Single Bench, for the purpose of rejecting the plaint under Order

             VII Rule 11(d),
CPC
?
5
c.    Whether Single Bench and Division Bench had committed an

             error of law apparent on the face of record by referring to the

             written statements and the other documents which were not part

             of the plaint while rejecting the plaint under Order VII Rule

             11(d) on the ground that the suit was barred by law of

             Limitation?
6)    The learned Senior Counsel Mr. Shyam Divan for the appellant-original

plaintiff has made following submissions:
(i)   Limitation being a mixed question of facts and law, the plaint

             could not be rejected under Order VII Rule 11(d)
CPC
.
(ii) An application under Order VII Rule 11(d) ought to be decided

             solely on the basis of the averments made in the plaint and not

             on the basis of the written statements and other documents or

             material.
(iii) A case involving disputed questions of facts cannot be decided

             by the way of preliminary issue under
Order XIV Rule 2 of the

             CPC
. The issue of limitation cannot be treated as a pure question

             of law under Order XIV Rule 2(2), in view of the settled legal

             position.
(iv) Once fraud has been pleaded in the suit, the plaint cannot be

             rejected without affording an opportunity to the parties to

             adduce the evidence.
6
(v) The Single Bench and the Division Bench had committed gross

     error in referring to the documents which were not part of the

     plaint in the impugned orders. The Single Bench was required

     to first decide the applications of the plaintiff seeking

     amendments in the prayer clause and the cause of action clause

     of the plaint, before deciding the preliminary issue framed by it.
(vi) The Division Bench had travelled beyond the scope of appeal

     by relying upon the provisions contained in Order XII Rule 6

     for rejecting the plaint of the appellant-plaintiff, though it was

     not the issue before the Single Bench. Even otherwise there was

     no admission made by the plaintiff in the plaint or otherwise

     which would entitle the appellate court to pass a judgment

     dismissing the suit of the plaintiff.
(vii) Mr. Divan, learned senior advocate for the appellant-plaintiff

     had drawn the attention of the court to the documents referred

     by the Single Bench and Division Bench which were not part of

     the plaint. He also drew the attention of the court to the

     erroneous findings recorded by the Division Bench while

     confirming the order passed by the Single Bench.
(viii) Reliance has been placed by the learned senior advocate Mr.

     Divan on the various judgments of this court to buttress his

     submission that the plaintiff having alleged commission of
7
fraud, and the issue of limitation being a mixed question of fact

                  and law, the plaint could not be rejected under Order VII Rule

                  11(d)
of the CPC
. Order XIV Rule 2 also does not confer any

                  jurisdiction upon the court to try the issue of limitation as a

                  preliminary issue, the same being not a pure question of law.
7)        The learned Senior Counsel Mr. P.S. Patwalia appearing for the contesting

respondent nos. 1 and 2 (Original defendant no. 1 and 2) made following

submissions:
(i)    The Single Bench had rightly framed the preliminary issue with

                  regard to the issue of limitation, which was a pure question of

                  law, and had rightly rejected the plaint under Order VII Rule

                  11(d)
of CPC
. The said judgment having been confirmed by the

                  Division Bench, this Court may not interfere with the said

                  concurrent findings of the facts recorded by the two courts.
(ii) The plaintiff had filed the applications for amendments in the

                  plaint under Order VI Rule 17 as an afterthought to cover up the

                  issue of limitation, misusing the process of law.
(iii) Placing reliance on the decision of this Court in case of Khatri

                  Hotels Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Union of India1, Mr. Patwalia submitted

                  that if the suit is based on multiple causes of action, the period
1
(2011) 9 SCC 126
8
of limitation would begin to run from the date when the right to

                  sue first accrued.
(iv) Having regard to the nature of the pleadings and admitted

                  documents, the Division Bench of the High Court had rightly

                  exercised its Suo moto powers under Order XII Rule 6 for the

                  purpose of rejecting the plaint.
(v) In view of the admission of the plaintiff with regard to the

                  ownership of Smt. Tej Kaur by seeking succession to her estate

                  and the knowledge of the will dated 03rd May, 2007 executed by

                  late Smt. Tej Kaur in favour of the defendant no. 2 in the year

                  2008, and the suit having been filed in March, 2012, it was

                  clearly beyond the period of limitation of three years prescribed

                  under the
Limitation Act
.
(vi) The Division Bench of the High Court was well within its

                  jurisdiction to exercise the power under
Order XII, Rule 6 CPC
and pass a judgment Suo moto.
In this regard he has placed

                  reliance on the decisions of this court in case of
Karam Kapahi

                  & Ors. Vs. M/S Lal Chand Public Charitable Trust & Anr.2
and in case of
Charanjit Lal Mehra & Ors. Vs. Smt. Kamal

                  Saroj Mahajan & Anr.3
2
(2010) 4 SCC 753
3
(2005) 11 SCC 279
9
(vii) Placing reliance on the decision in case of
T. Arivandandam

                  Vs. T. V. Satyapal & Anr.4
, he submitted that if on a meaningful

                  reading of the plaint, it appears to be manifestly vexatious and

                  meritless, the court should exercise its powers under
Order VII

                  Rule 11 of CPC
, which has been rightly exercised by the High

                  Court.
8)        At the outset, it may be noted that the suit having been filed by the plaintiff

in the High Court in its original jurisdiction, the Single Bench as a trial court and

the Division Bench as an appellate court were required to adhere to the specific

provisions contained in
the CPC
while deciding the suit and the Appeal

respectively.
9)        As discernible from the record, though the defendant no. 2 had filed an

application seeking rejection of plaint under Order VII Rule 11(d)
of CPC
, the

Single Bench instead of deciding the said application, framed a preliminary issue

under Order XIV Rule 2, as to ‘whether the suit as framed is liable to be rejected

under Order VII Rule 11(d)
of CPC
on the ground of limitation’. The Single

Bench then decided the preliminary issue against the plaintiff holding that the

plaint was liable to be rejected under Order VII, Rule 11(d), considering the

written statement and other documents filed by the concerned defendants, which

were not part of the Plaint. The Division Bench in the Regular Appeal filed by the
4
(1977) 4 SCC 467
10
appellant-plaintiff against the judgment and order passed by the Single Bench,

committed further error by relying upon the provisions contained in
Order XII

Rule 6 of CPC
, which was not even the issue before the Single Bench, and

confirmed the order passed by the Single Bench. It is needless to say that the

scope, ambit and parameters for deciding an application under Order VII Rule

11(d) for the rejection of the plaint; for raising a preliminary issue under Order

XIV Rule 2(2); and for passing the judgment on admission of fact in the pleading

or otherwise under Order XII Rule 6 being absolutely different and mutually

exclusive, all the three provisions could not be interchangeably used for the

purpose of rejecting the plaint under Order VII Rule 11(d)
of the CPC
. It is also

well settled proposition of law that when a power is to be exercised by a Civil

Court under an express provision, the inherent power under Section 151 of CPC

cannot be taken recourse to.
10)   In order to make the position more clear, let us refer to the relevant

provisions as contained in
the CPC
.
-Order VII Rule 11 reads as under:
11. Rejection of plaint.— The plaint shall be
                 rejected in the following cases:—
(a) Where it does not disclose a cause of action;
(b) …
(c) …
(d) where the suit appears from the statement in
                 the plaint to be barred by any law;
(e) …
(f) …
-Order XII Rule 6 reads as under:
11
6. Judgment on admissions—(1) Where
                   admissions of fact have been made either in the
                   pleading or otherwise, whether orally or in
                   writing, the Court may at any stage of the suit,
                   either on the application of any party or of its
                   own motion and without waiting for the
                   determination of any other question between the
                   parties, make such order or give such judgment
                   as it may think fit, having regard to such
                   admissions. (2) Whenever a judgment is
                   pronounced under sub-rule (1) a decree shall be
                   drawn up in accordance with the judgment and
                   the decree shall bear the date on which the
                   judgment was pronounced.
-Order XIV Rule 2 reads as under:
1. Framing of issue:…
2. Court to pronounce judgment on all issues.—
                   (1) Notwithstanding that a case may be disposed
                   of on a preliminary issue, the Court shall, subject
                   to the provisions of sub-rule (2), pronounce
                   judgment on all issues.
(2) Where issues both of law and of fact arise in
                   the same suit, and the Court is of opinion that the
                   case or any part thereof may be disposed of on
                   an issue of law only, it may try that issue first if
                   the issue relates to— (a) the jurisdiction of the
                   Court, or (b) a bar to the suit created by any law
                   for the time being in force, and for that purpose
                   may, if it thinks fit, postpone the settlement of
                   the other issues until after that issue has been
                   determined, and may deal with the suit in
                   accordance with the decision on that issue.
11)   The basic postulate underlined in clause (a) and clause (d) of Rule 11 Order

VII is that while rejecting the plaint under the said provisions, the court is required

to see only the averments made in the plaint and the documents, if any, annexed

to the plaint, and not to the written statement or other documents which are not
12
part of the plaint.
In case of
Kamala & Ors Vs. K.T. Eshwara Sa & Ors.5
, it has

been observed that for the purpose of invoking Order VII Rule 11 (d)
of CPC
, no

amount of evidence can be looked into and that the conclusion that the suit is

barred under any law must be drawn from the averments made in the plaint. To

be precise, it was held as under:-
“21. Order VII, Rule 11(d) of the Code has
                        limited application. It must be shown that the
                        suit is barred under any law. Such a conclusion
                        must be drawn from the averments made in the
                        plaint. Different clauses in Order VII, Rule 11,
                        in our opinion, should not be mixed up. Whereas
                        in a given case, an application for rejection of
                        the plaint may be filed on more than one ground
                        specified in various sub-clauses thereof, a clear
                        finding to that effect must be arrived at. What
                        would be relevant for invoking Clause (d) of
                        Order VII, Rule 11 of the Code is the averments
                        made in the plaint. For that purpose, there cannot
                        be any addition or subtraction. Absence of
                        jurisdiction on the part of a court can be invoked
                        at different stages and under different provisions
                        of the Code. Order VII, Rule 11 of the Code is
                        one, Order XIV, Rule 2 is another.
22. For the purpose of invoking Order VII, Rule
                        11(d) of the Code, no amount of evidence can be
                        looked into. The issues on merit of the matter
                        which may arise between the parties would not
                        be within the realm of the court at that stage. All
                        issues shall not be the subject matter of an order
                        under the said provision.
……….
25. The decisions rendered by this Court as also by
                        various High Courts are not uniform in this behalf.
But, then the broad principle which can be culled
5
(2008) 12 SCC 661
13
out therefrom is that the court at that stage would
                       not consider any evidence or enter into a disputed
                       question of fact of law. In the event, the jurisdiction
                       of the court is found to be barred by any law,
                       meaning thereby, the subject matter thereof, the
                       application for registration of plaint should be
                       entertained.”
12)       In case of Salim Bhai and Ors. Vs. State of Maharashtra and Ors.6, it was

made clear that for the purpose of deciding an application under clauses (a) and
(d) of Rule 11 of
Order VII, CPC
, the averments in the plaint are germane; the

plea taken by the defendant in the written statement would be wholly irrelevant.

Similar view has been taken by this Court in case of
Soumitra Kumar Sen Vs.

Shyamal Kumar Sen and Ors.7
, in para 9 thereof, it was observed as under:-
“9. In the first instance, it can be seen that insofar
                       as relief of permanent and mandatory injunction
                       is concerned that is based on a different cause of
                       action. At the same time that kind of relief can
                       be considered by the trial court only if the
                       plaintiff is able to establish his locus standi to
                       bring such a suit. If the averments made by the
                       appellant in their written statement are correct,
                       such a suit may not be maintainable in as much
                       as, as per the appellant it has already been
                       decided in the previous two suits that respondent
                       no. 1/plaintiff retired from the partnership firm
                       much earlier, after taking his share and it is the
                       appellant (or appellant and respondent no. 2)
                       who are entitled to manage the affairs of M/s.
                       Sen Industries. However, at this stage, as rightly
                       pointed out by the High Court, the defense in the
                       written statement cannot be gone into. One has
6
(2003) 1 SCC 557
7
(2018) 5 SCC 644
14
to only look into the plaint for the purpose of
                       deciding application under Order VII Rule 11,
CPC
. It is possible that in a cleverly drafted
                       plaint, the plaintiff has not given the details
                       about Suit No. 268 of 2008 which has been
                       decided against him. He has totally omitted to
                       mention about Suit No. 103 of 1995, the
                       judgment wherein has attained finality. In that
                       sense, the plaintiff/respondent no. 1 may be
                       guilty of suppression and concealment, if the
                       averments made by the appellant are ultimately
                       found to be correct. However, as per the
                       established principles of law, such a defence
                       projected in the written statement cannot be
                       looked into while deciding application under
                       Order VII Rule 11,
CPC
.”
13)       In one more recent judgment in case of Shakti Bhog Food Industries Ltd.
Vs. Central bank of India and Another 8, it was also observed as under:-
“18. It is clear that in order to consider Order VII
                       Rule 11, the court has to look into the averments
                       in the plaint and the same can be exercised by
                       the trial court at any stage of the suit. It is also
                       clear that the averments in written statement are
                       immaterial and it is the duty of the Court to
                       scrutinize the averments/pleas in the plaint. In
                       other words, what needs to be looked into in
                       deciding such an application are the averments
                       in the plaint. At that stage, the pleas taken by the
                       defendant in the written statement are wholly
                       irrelevant and the matter is to be decided only on
                       the plaint averment. These principles have been
                       reiterated in
Raptakos Brett & Co. Ltd. V.
                       Ganesh Property
, (1998) 7 SCC 184 and Mayar
                       (H.K.)
Ltd. V. Vessel M.V. Fortune Express
,
                       (2006) 3 SCC 100.”
8
2020 SCC Online SC 482
15
14)       In the latest decision in case of
Srihari Hanumandas Totala Vs. Hemant

Vithal Kamat9
, also it has been categorically stated that whether the suit is barred

by any law or not must be determined from the statements made in the plaint and

it is not open to decide the issue on the basis of any other material including the

written statement filed in the case.
15)       From the afore-stated legal position, it is absolutely clear that for invoking

Order VII Rule 11 (d), and for the purpose of rejecting the plaint on the ground

that the suit is barred by any law, only the averments made in the plaint have to

be referred to and that the defence taken by the defendant in the written statement

being wholly irrelevant, must not be considered.
16)       As regards framing of preliminary issue under Order XIV Rule 2(2) also,

the legal position is well settled. Sub Rule 2 of Rule 2 of Order XIV specifies that

where issues both of law and of fact arises in the same suit and the court is of the

opinion that the case or any part thereof may be disposed of on an issue of law

only, it may try that issue first if the issue relates to – (a) the jurisdiction of the

court, or (b) a bar to the suit created by any law for the time being in force.
17)       In
Satti Paradesi Samadhi & Philliar Temple Vs. M. Sakuntala10
, it

has been observed as under:-
“15. In the case at hand, we find that unless there
                        is determination of the fact which would not
                        protect the plaintiff under
Section 10
of the
9
(2021) 9 SCC 99
10
(2015) 5 SCC 574
16
Limitation Act
the suit cannot be dismissed on
the ground of limitation. It is not a case which
will come within the ambit and sweep of Order
14 Rule 2 which would enable the court to frame
a preliminary issue to adjudicate thereof. The
learned Single Judge, as it appears, has remained
totally oblivious of the said facet and
adjudicated the issue as if it falls under Order 14
Rule 2. We repeat that on the scheme of Section
10 of the
Limitation Act
we find certain facts are
to be established to throw the lis from the sphere
of the said provision so that it would come
within the concept of limitation. The Division
Bench has fallen into some error without
appreciating the facts in proper perspective. That
apart, the Division Bench, by taking recourse to
Articles 92
to 96 without appreciating the
factum that it uses the words “transferred by the
trustee for a valuable consideration” in that
event the limitation would be twelve years but in
the instant case the asseveration of the plaintiff
is that the trustee had created three settlement
deeds in favour of his two daughters and a
granddaughter. The issue of consideration has
not yet emerged. This settlement made by the
father was whether for consideration or not has
to be gone into and similarly whether the
property belongs to the Trust as Trust is
understood within the meaning of
Section 10
of
the Limitation Act has also to be gone into. Ergo,
there can be no shadow of doubt that Issue 1 that
was framed by the learned Single Judge was an
issue that pertained to the fact and law and
hence, could not have been adjudicated as a
preliminary issue. Therefore, the impugned
order [
Satti Paradesi Samadhi v. M. Sankuntala
,
(2012) 2 LW 865 (Mad)] is wholly
unsustainable.”
17
18)       In
Ramesh B. Desai Vs. Bipin Vadilal Mehta11
, it has been held as under:-
“13. Sub-rule (2) of
Order 14 Rule 2 CPC
lays
                        down that where issues both of law and of fact
                        arise in the same suit, and the court is of the
                        opinion that the case or any part thereof may be
                        disposed of on an issue of law only, it may try
                        that issue first if that issue relates to (a) the
                        jurisdiction of the court, or (b) a bar to the suit
                        created by any law for the time being in force.
                        The provisions of this Rule came up for
                        consideration before this Court in
Major S.S.
                        Khanna v. Brig
. F.J. Dillon [(1964) 4 SCR 409
                        : AIR 1964 SC 497] and it was held as under:
(SCR p. 421)”

                        “Under Order 14 Rule 2,
Code of Civil
                        Procedure
where issues both of law and of fact
                        arise in the same suit, and the court is of opinion
                        that the case or any part thereof may be disposed
                        of on the issues of law only, it shall try those
                        issues first, and for that purpose may, if it thinks
                        fit, postpone the settlement of the issues of fact
                        until after the issues of law have been
                        determined. The jurisdiction to try issues of law
                        apart from the issues of fact may be exercised
                        only where in the opinion of the court the whole
                        suit may be disposed of on the issues of law
                        alone, but the Code confers no jurisdiction upon
                        the court to try a suit on mixed issues of law and
                        fact as preliminary issues. Normally all the
                        issues in a suit should be tried by the court; not
                        to do so, especially when the decision on issues
                        even of law depend upon the decision of issues
                        of fact, would result in a lopsided trial of the
                        suit.”

                        Though there has been a slight amendment in the
                        language of
Order 14 Rule 2 CPC
by the
                        amending Act, 1976 but the principle enunciated
11
(2006) 5 SCC 638
18
in the abovequoted decision still holds good and
                        there can be no departure from the principle that
                        the Code confers no jurisdiction upon the court
                        to try a suit on mixed issues of law and fact as a
                        preliminary issue and where the decision on
                        issue of law depends upon decision of fact, it
                        cannot be tried as a preliminary issue.”
19)       The issue of limitation has not been considered to be a pure question of law

to be decided as a preliminary issue under
Order XIV Rule 2 of CPC
, by three

Judge Bench of this Court in case of
Nusli Neville Wadia Vs. Ivory Properties12
.
In the said case, a reference was made to the three Judge Bench with respect to

the interpretation of the provisions contained in
section 9 A
of CPC as inserted

by the Maharashtra Amendment Act, 1977 and the court held that the provisions

contained in
section 3
read with
sections 4
to
24
of the Limitation Act, 1963 do

not provide that the court has no jurisdiction to deal with the matter. It has been

further held that so long as the court has the jurisdiction to try the suit, it cannot

proceed to dismiss it on the ground of limitation under
section 3
, and that unless

the question is a pure question of law, it cannot be decided as a preliminary issue

under Order XIV Rule 2. The Bench further opined that mixed question of law

and fact cannot be decided as a preliminary issue under Order XIV Rule 2. The

court elaborately dealt with the provisions contained in Order XIV Rule 2 (2) in

the light of the
Limitation Act
and observed as under:-
12
(2020) 6 SCC 557
19
“51. - - - - As per Order XIV Rule 1, issues arise
when a material proposition of fact or law is
affirmed by the one party and denied by the
other. The issues are framed on the material
proposition, denied by another party. There are
issues of facts and issues of law. In case specific
facts are admitted, and if the question of law
arises which is dependent upon the outcome of
admitted facts, it is open to the Court to
pronounce the judgment based on admitted facts
and the preliminary question of law under the
provisions of Order XIV Rule 2. In Order XIV
Rule 2(1), the Court may decide the case on a
preliminary issue. It has to pronounce the
judgment on all issues. Order XIV Rule 2(2)
makes a departure and Court may decide the
question of law as to jurisdiction of the Court or
a bar created to the suit by any law for the time
being in force, such as under the
Limitation Act
.
52. In a case question of limitation can be
decided based on admitted facts, it can be
decided as a preliminary issue under Order XIV
Rule 2(2)(b). Once facts are disputed about
limitation, the determination of the question of
limitation also cannot be made under Order XIV
Rule 2(2) as a preliminary issue or any other
such issue of law which requires examination of
the disputed facts. In case of dispute as to facts,
is necessary to be determined to give a finding
on a question of law. Such question cannot be
decided as a preliminary issue. In a case, the
question of jurisdiction also depends upon the
proof of facts which are disputed. It cannot be
decided as a preliminary issue if the facts are
disputed and the question of law is dependent
upon the outcome of the investigation of facts,
such question of law cannot be decided as a
20
preliminary issue, is settled proposition of law
                 either before the amendment
of CPC
and post
                 amendment in the year 1976.
53. The suit/application which is barred by
                 limitation is not a ground of jurisdiction of the
                 court to entertain a suit. If a plea of adverse
                 possession has been taken under
Article 65
of
                 the
Limitation Act
, in case it is successfully
                 proved on facts; the suit has to be dismissed.
However, it is not the lack of the jurisdiction of
                 the Court that suit has to be dismissed on the
                 ground of limitation, but proof of adverse
                 possession for 12 years then the suit would be
                 barred by limitation such question as to
                 limitation cannot be decided as a preliminary
                 issue.
……..
55. Reliance has been placed on the provisions
                 of
Section 3
of the Limitation Act to submit that
                 the Court cannot proceed with the suit which is
                 barred by limitation although limitation has not
                 been set up as a defence. No doubt about it that
Section 3
of the Act provides that subject to the
                 provisions contained in
Section 4
and
24
of the
                 Limitation Act, every suit instituted, appeal
                 preferred, and the application made after the
                 prescribed period shall be dismissed, it nowhere
                 provides that Court has no jurisdiction to deal
                 with the matter. Until and unless Court has the
                 jurisdiction, it cannot proceed to dismiss it on
                 the ground of limitation under
Section 3
.”
20)   From the afore-stated decisions of this Court, there remains no shadow of

doubt that a plea of limitation cannot be decided as an abstract principle of law
21
divorced from the facts as in every case the starting point of limitation has to be

ascertained which is entirely a question of fact. A plea of limitation being mixed

question of law and fact cannot be decided as a preliminary issue under Order

XIV, Rule 2(2).
21)        Now, so far as pronouncing a judgement on admission under Order XII

Rule 6 is concerned, again the law is well settled that for an admission to qualify

as a valid admission, it necessarily has to be an unequivocal, unambiguous and

unconditional. Considering the objects and reasons for amending Order XII, Rule

6, it has been held in case of
Uttam Singh Dugal & Co. Ltd. Vs. United Bank of

India & Ors13
. that:-
“10. As to the object of the Order XII Rule 6, we
                         need not say anything more than what the
                         legislature itself has said when the said provision
                         came to be amended. In the objects and reasons
                         set out while amending the said rule, it is stated
                         that where a claim is admitted, the court has
                         jurisdiction to enter a judgment for the plaintiff
                         and to pass a decree on admitted claim. The
                         object of the Rule is to enable the party to obtain
                         a speedy judgment at least to the extent of the
                         relief to which according to the admission of the
                         defendant, the plaintiff is entitled. We should not
                         unduly narrow down the meaning of this Rule as
                         the object is to enable a party to obtain speedy
                         judgment. Where other party has made a plain
                         admission entitling the former to succeed, it
                         should apply and also wherever there is a clear
                         admission of facts in the face of which, it is
                         impossible for the party making such admission
                         to succeed.”
13
2000 (4) RCR Civil 89
22
22)        In the case of
Himani Alloys Ltd. Vs. Tata Steel Ltd.
14, it has been

categorically observed that the admission made by the party should be clear,

unambiguous and unconditional and the court should exercise its judicial

discretion on examination of facts and circumstances of the case. Para 10 thereof

reads as under:-
“10. It is true that a judgment can be given on an
                          “admission” contained in the minutes of a
                          meeting. But the admission should be
                          categorical. It should be a conscious and
                          deliberate act of the party making it, showing an
                          intention to be bound by it. Order XII Rule 6
                          being an enabling provision, it is neither
                          mandatory nor peremptory but discretionary.
                          The court, on examination of the facts and
                          circumstances, has to exercise its judicial
                          discretion, keeping in mind that a judgment on
                          admission is a judgment without trial which
                          permanently denies any remedy to the
                          defendant, by way of an appeal on merits.
Therefore, unless the admission is clear,
                          unambiguous and unconditional, the discretion
                          of the Court should not be exercised to deny the
                          valuable right of a defendant to contest the
                          claim. In short, the discretion should be used
                          only when there is a clear “admission” which
                          can be acted upon. (See also Uttam Singh
                          Duggal & Co. Ltd. Vs. united
Bank of
                          India [2000 (7) SCC 120], Karam Kapahi Vs.
                          Lal Chand
public
Charitable Trust [2010 (4)
                          SCC 753] and Jeevan Diesels and Electricals
                          Ltd. Vs. Jasbir Singh Chadha
[2010 (6) SCC
                          601].”
14
2011 (3) Civil Court Cases 721
23
23)       Though the learned senior Advocate Mr. Patwalia for the respondents has

placed heavy reliance on the decision in case of
Karam Kapahi & Ors Vs. M/S

Lal Chand Public Charitable Trust15
and in case of
Charanjit Lal Mehra & Ors

Vs. Smt.Kamal Saroj Mahajan &Anr16
, they are hardly helpful to the

respondents. There cannot be any disagreement to the proposition of law
laid

down in
the said judgments that the principle behind Order XII, Rule 6 is to give

the plaintiff a right to speedy judgment. As such, under this Rule, either party

may get rid of so much of the rival claims about which there is no controversy.
Even the admissions made by the parties to the interrogatories and recorded by

the court as contemplated in
Order X CPC
also could be taken into consideration,

nonetheless Order XII, Rule 6 could be resorted to only when there is clear and

unambiguous admission of facts, and not otherwise. The said Rule 6 also could

not be invoked by the Appellate Court suo moto in the Appeal, when the trial

court had not dealt with such issue, and had rejected the plaint under Order VII,

Rule 11(d)
CPC
.
24)       So far as the facts of the present case are concerned, as stated earlier the

Single Bench had rejected the plaint under Order VII Rule 11(d) after framing a

preliminary issue under Order XIV Rule 2(2)
of CPC
. The Single Bench after

taking into consideration the written statement and other documents held that the

suit was barred by law of Limitation and rejected the plaint under Order VII, Rule
15
(2010) 4 SCC 753
16
(2005) 11 SCC 279
24
11(d)
CPC
. Apart from the fact that no preliminary issue could have been framed

under Order XIV, Rule 2(2) with regard to the issue of limitation which was a

mixed question of law and fact, the Single Bench erroneously considered the

written statement and the documents filed by the defendant while rejecting the

plaint under Order VII Rule 11(d)
of CPC
. The Division Bench also fallaciously

referred to the contentions raised in the written statement and referred to the

documents namely CM Applications filed in some eviction proceedings, which

were neither referred to in the plaint nor annexed to the plaint. The Division

Bench further erroneously relied upon some statements made in the legal notices

dated 10.10.2008 and 24.10.2008 construing them as an admission on the part of

the plaintiff for passing judgment under Order XII, Rule 6 against the plaintiff,

while confirming the order passed by the Single Bench rejecting the plaint of the

plaintiff under Order VII, Rule 11(d)
CPC
. In the opinion of the Court there was

no clear, unambiguous and unconditional admission made by the plaintiff in any

of the said legal notices which could be termed as an admission of the claim made

by the defendant with regard to the knowledge of the plaintiff in respect of the

execution of the alleged sale deeds. On the contrary, the plaintiff had pleaded

fraud committed against her and other defendants who were the legal

representatives of Smt. Harbans Kaur. The Court at this juncture is not inclined

to go into the merits of the issues involved in the suit. Suffice it to say that the

Single Bench and the Division Bench have passed the impugned orders de hors
25
the specific provisions
of CPC
and in utter disregard of the position of law settled

by this Court.
25.       Even if, the Single Bench had found that the suit was filed misusing the

process of law or that an illusion was created with regard to the cause of action

by clever drafting
,
in that case
also Order VII Rule 11 could not have been

resorted to. As held by Supreme Court in a well-known case of
T. Arivandandam

Vs. T.V. Satyapal & Anr.17
, the powers under
Order VII Rule 11 of CPC
have to

be exercised taking care to see that the ground mentioned therein is fulfilled. It is

further held therein that if clever drafting has created an illusion of a cause of

action, the Court should nip it in the bud at the first hearing by examining the

party searchingly under
Order X, CPC
.
26)       It is also a trite law that the inherent jurisdiction under
Section 151
CPC

cannot be exercised to nullify the provisions
of the CPC
. The inherent powers of

the court are in addition to the powers specifically conferred on the court by the

Code, and cannot be exercised in a manner which will be contrary or different

from the procedure expressly provided in the Code. The scope of Section 151 was

considered by this Court as back as in 1964 in case of
Arjun Singh Vs. Mohindra

Kumar & Ors18
, in which it was aptly held as under:-
“It is common ground that the inherent power
                        of the Court cannot override the express
                        provisions of the law. In other words, if there are
17
(1977) 4 SCC 467
18
AIR 1964 SC 993
26
specific provisions of the Code dealing with a
                  Particular topic and they expressly or by
                  necessary implication exhaust the scope of the
                  powers of the Court or the jurisdiction that may
                  be exercised in relation to a matter the inherent
                  power of the Court cannot be invoked in order to
                  cut across the powers conferred by the Code.”
27.
In that view of the matter, the scope, ambit and parameters for deciding an

application for rejection of the plaint under Order VII Rule 11(d), for deciding

the preliminary issue on pure question of law under Order XIV Rule 2(2) and for

pronouncing a judgment on admission under Order XII Rule 6 being absolutely

different and independent of each other, Single Bench and Division Bench were

required to strictly adhere to the procedures
laid down in
the said provisions, and

could not have exercised inherent powers or suo moto powers dehors the specific

provisions contained in the Code. The impugned orders passed by the High Court

being in utter disregard of the said provisions and of the settled legal position,

deserve to be quashed and set aside and are accordingly set aside. The suit is

restored on the file of the Single Bench. The Single Bench is directed to proceed

with the suit in accordance with law. It is made clear that the Court has not

expressed any opinion either on the issue of limitation or on the merits of the suit.
28.   The appeal stands allowed.
…..................................J.
                                                      [BELA M. TRIVEDI]
NEW DELHI;
MARCH 28, 2022.
27
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF 2022
                         (SLP C) No.   27794/2016)




SARANPAL KAUR ANAND                                         APPELLANT

                                    VERSUS

PRADUMAN SINGH CHANDHOK & ORS.                              RESPONDENTS


                               O R D E R
In view of the difference of opinion expressed by two

 separate judgments,      the Registry is directed to place the

 matter   before    Hon’ble   the   Chief    Justice   of   India   for

 appropriate orders/directions.
……………………………………………. .J.
                                                     [SANJIV KHANNA]



                                              ……………………………………………. .J.
                                                  [ BELA M. TRIVEDI]



   NEW DELHI;
MARCH 28, 2022