[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sanjeev vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 9 March, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1

                                                                      NON-REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.870 OF 2016

      SANJEEV & ANR.                                                    Appellant


                                                    VERSUS


      STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH                                          Respondent



                                          J U D G M E N T
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.                  This appeal under the provisions of
Section 379
of the

      Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 read with Section 2(A) of the

      Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction)

      Act, 1970 is directed against the judgment dated 26.05.2016

      passed by the High Court1 reversing the acquittal rendered in

      favour of the appellants by the Trial Court2 and order dated

      20.06.2016 passed by the High Court imposing punishment of

      rigorous imprisonment of ten years, with imposition of fine in

      the sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lakh Only) in respect of

      the offence punishable under
Section 20
of the Narcotic Drugs
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by Dr.
Mukesh Nasa
and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (“the
NDPS Act
” for
Date: 2022.03.10
17:10:42 IST
Reason:
short).
1 The High Court of Himachal Pradesh at Shimla
      2 The Special Judge, Fast Track, Kullu, Himachal Pradesh
2
2.   For the sake of facility, we may reproduce the case of

the prosecution as narrated by the High Court in its judgment

and order under challenge:
“2. The case of the prosecution, in a nut shell, is that
     on 22.12.2010, HC Nand Lal along with other police
     personnel was on patrolling duty in official vehicle.
     They spotted the accused of Ruara Bridge sitting by the
     side of the road.    The accused tried to abscond.    They
     were apprehended. The bag was also lifted and brought to
     the vehicle.    Word ‘COASTER’ was inscribed on the red
     coloured bag.   The place was solitary and no independent
     person was available on the spot. The I.O. sent Const. Om
     Prakash (PW-7) to search for independent witnesses,
     however, he could not trace any independent witnesses.
     The I.O. associated Const. Om Prakash (PW-7) and Const.
     Bhupinder Singh as witnesses and checked the bag.       On
     checking, stick and pancake like charas was recovered from
     the bag and some of the sticks were found to be wrapped in
     a polythene.    The charas was weighed with the help of
     electronic scale. It weighed 1 kg. 500 grams. The charas
     was repacked in the same bag and bag was sealed in a cloth
     parcel with three seals of seal impressions “A”. The
     specimen of seal was obtained separately. Seal after use
     was handed over to Const. Om Prakash (PW-7).      The I.O.
     filled in the NCB-I form in triplicate. Thereafter, I.O.
     prepared rukka. It was sent to the Police Station. FIR
     Ext. PW-2/B was registered.    The I.O. prepared the spot
     map and handed over the case properly for resealing to ASI
     Naresh Chand (PW-2).    He resealed the same with three
     seals of seal impression “T” and filed in column nos.9 to
     11 of NCB-I form.      On 23.12.2010, I.O. prepared the
     special report and produced the same before Dy. S.P.
     Kullu. ASI Naresh Chand deposited the parcel containing
     charas sealed with seal “A” and resealed with seal
     impression “T” along with NCB-I form in triplicate with
     MHC Chaman Lal, PW-1.     He made necessary entry in the
     relevant register at Sr. No.149.    The case property was
     sent to FSL, Junga. The report of the FSL is Ext. PX. The
     investigation was completed and the challan was put up
     before   the  Court   after  completing   all   the  codal
     formalities.”
3.   The prosecution mainly relied upon the testimonies of PW7

and PW8, namely Constable Om Prakash and Head Constable Nand

Lal respectively. According to these witnesses, on the day in

question at about 9.00 p.m. when the police party had reached
3
the other side of the Ruara Bridge, they found the appellants

sitting by the side of bonfire and a bag was lying on the

ground near them.     As the police put search light towards the

direction of the appellants, the appellants tried to run away.

The police party followed them and after having crossed a

distance of about 100 meters, they were nabbed.            Thereafter,

the bag was also retrieved which was found to contain charas

weighing    about   1.5   kgs.   According   to   the   witnesses,   the

electronic weighing scale which was with the police party was

utilized to check the weight of the contraband. Thereafter,

the procedure for taking personal search of the accused was

followed.
4.   The entire evidence was considered by the Trial Court and

in the opinion of the Trial Court, broadly three features

emerged from the evidence:
1.     The Report of the FSL Ex.PX did not show anywhere
            that the resin was of cannabis plant in order to
            bring it within the definition of “Charas”.
2.     The Police did not give any option to the
            appellants to be searched before a Magistrate of
            a competent Gazetted Officer.
3.     Going by the evidence on record, the case of the
            prosecution could not be believed.
With this view, the Trial Court by its judgment and order

dated 31.08.2012 acquitted the appellants of the offence for

which they were charged.
4
5.     The     State      being          aggrieved    preferred       Criminal   Appeal

No.546 of 2012 in the High Court, which appeal was allowed by

the    High      Court      by      its     judgment       under    challenge.   By    a

subsequent        order,      the        sentence     as   stated     hereinabove     was

imposed upon the appellant.
6.     In this appeal, we have heard Mr. A. Sirajudeen, learned

Senior Advocate assisted by Mr. S. Mahendran and Mr. Parnam

Prabhakar, learned Advocates, and Mr. Aditya Dhawan, learned

Advocate for the appellants and Mr. Abhinav Mukerji, learned

Advocate for the State.
7.     It is well settled that:-
(A) While dealing with an appeal against acquittal, the

       reasons       which         had    weighed     with    the     Trial   Court   in

       acquitting the accused must be dealt with, in case the

       appellate        Court        is    of   the    view    that     the   acquittal

       rendered by the Trial Court deserves to be upturned (See
Vijay Mohan Singh v. State of Karnataka3
,
Anwar Ali and

       another v. State of Himachal Pradesh4
).
(B) With an order of acquittal by the Trial Court, the

       normal presumption of innocence in a criminal matter gets

       reinforced (See
Atley v. State of Uttar Pradesh5
).
3 (2019) 5 SCC 436 at para 31
4 (2020) 10 SCC 166 at para 14.3
5 AIR 1955 SC 807 at page 809
5
(C) If       two    views         are   possible    from     the   evidence     on

         record, the appellate Court must be extremely slow in

         interfering         with      the       appeal     against    acquittal     (See
Sambasivan and others v. State of Kerala6
).
8.       A perusal of the judgment passed by the High Court does

not show that the High Court had considered the matter from

the perspective stated above. As a matter of fact, the High

Court         proceeded          to        consider    the     evidence      on    record

straightaway without considering the reasons that had weighed

with the Trial Court.                      The approach to be adopted was
laid

down       by
this     Court       in
Ramesh    Babulal   Doshi       v.   State   of

Gujarat7
as under:-
“7. Before proceeding further it will be pertinent to
         mention that the entire approach of the High Court in
         dealing with the appeal was patently wrong for it did
         not at all address itself to the question as to whether
         the reasons which weighed with the trial court for
         recording the order of acquittal were proper or not.
         Instead thereof the High Court made an independent
         reappraisal of the entire evidence to arrive at the
         above-quoted conclusions. This Court has repeatedly laid
         down that the mere fact that a view other than the one
         taken by the trial court can be legitimately arrived at
         by the appellate court on reappraisal of the evidence
         cannot constitute a valid and sufficient ground to
         interfere with an order of acquittal unless it comes to
         the conclusion that the entire approach of the trial
         court in dealing with the evidence was patently illegal
         or the conclusions arrived at by it were wholly
         untenable. While sitting in judgment over an acquittal
         the appellate court is first required to seek an answer
         to the question whether the findings of the trial court
         are palpably wrong, manifestly erroneous or demonstrably
         unsustainable. If the appellate court answers the above
         question in the negative the order of acquittal is not
         to be disturbed. Conversely, if the appellate court

6   (1998) 5 SCC 412 at para 8
7   (1996) 9 SCC 225
6
holds, for reasons to be recorded, that the order of
       acquittal cannot at all be sustained in view of any of
       the above infirmities it can then — and then only —
       reappraise the evidence to arrive at its own conclu-
sions.   In  keeping   with  the   above  principles we
       have therefore to first ascertain whether the findings
       of the trial court are sustainable or not.”
9.     We have checked the original record to satisfy ourselves.

Exhibits      PW8/B,   PW8/C,   PW8/D   and    PW8/E,   which   are    arrest

memos, do not reflect that any option or choice was given to

the accused before their personal search was undertaken.                   It

is true that the personal search did not result in recovery of

any contraband material but the non-compliance of requirement

of affording an option, was one of the reasons which weighed

with    the    Trial    Court   in   disbelieving       the   case    of   the

prosecution.
10. Considering        the   totality   of    the   circumstances,    in   our

view, the assessment on facts made by the Trial Court was

absolutely correct and did not call for any interference by

the High Court.
11. We, therefore, allow this appeal, set-aside the judgment

and order passed by the High Court and restore the order of

acquittal recorded by the Trial Court.              The fine, if any, paid

by the appellants be returned to them.
12. The appellants shall be set at liberty forthwith unless

their custody is required in connection with any other crime.
7
13. We express our gratitude for the assistance rendered by

Mr. A. Sirajudeen, learned Senior Advocate, Mr. S. Mahendran

and Mr. Parnam Prabhakar, learned Advocates, who appeared on

behalf of the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee.
............................J.
                               (UDAY UMESH LALIT)




                               ............................J.
                               (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)




                               ............................J.
                               (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)

New Delhi,
March 09, 2022.