[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Puran Mal vs State Of Haryana on 10 March, 2022
Bench:
Aniruddha Bose
,
Vineet Saran
1


2022 INSC 297
                                                                    REPORTABLE
                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 398 OF 2022
                           (Arising out of Special Leave Petition
                                   (Crl.) No. 1168 of 2021)


            PURAN MAL                                          Appellant(s)

                                           VERSUS

            STATE OF HARYANA & ANR.                            Respondent(s)




                                          ORDER
Leave granted.
The respondent no. 2 (Mahesh Kumar) is an accused in a case

            for offence under
Section 302
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for

            short ‘
IPC
’). The bail application of the respondent no. 2 was

            rejected by the Trial Court on two occasions. Thereafter, the High

            Court has allowed the bail application of the respondent no. 2. The

            complainant has filed this appeal by way of special leave petition

            questioning legality of the order granting bail to the respondent

            no.2.
In brief, the facts of the case are that the deceased, who was the

            brother of the complainant/appellant, had received fatal injuries
2
and died between the night intervening 16/17.06.2020.

   The submission of the learned counsel for the appellant seeking,

in substance, cancellation of the order granting bail is that there

was a long standing rivalry between the deceased and the

respondent no. 2 and on 16.06.2020 evening itself there was a

scuffle between the two in which the deceased had received injuries

and he had lodged a complaint in his own handwriting with the

police station at 08.00 p.m. (which was registered subsequently on

the next date). After lodging FIR, the deceased had gone to the

hospital for treatment. It is contended that the respondent no. 2

also reached the hospital and according to the appellant, the call

records would show that he called his son to the hospital who then

attacked the deceased with knife causing grievous injuries on

account of which the deceased expired. It is further submitted that

in this background the bail applications of the respondent no. 2

were twice rejected by the Trial Court and the High Court has

granted the bail without considering these aspects and without

assigning any cogent reasons. It is also submitted that after being

released on bail there are allegations against the respondent no. 2

threatening the family members of the deceased. It is also

contended that the charges have now been framed against the
3
respondent no. 2 under
Section 302
read with
Section 120B
of the

IPC.
Mr.   Anil   Kaushik,   learned   Additional   Advocate   General

appearing for the State of Haryana has supported the case of the

appellant and submitted that when twice the bail has been rejected

by the Trial Court with detailed reasons, the High Court ought to

have given proper reasons for granting bail and could not have

passed the order without assigning such reasons.

   Per contra, Mr. Shishir Mathur, learned counsel for respondent

no. 2 has submitted that the High Court has considered the

discrepancies with regard to the role assigned to the respondent no.

2 in the FIR and the statement of the complainant and has also

considered the CCTV footage which was filed before the High Court

and then granted bail.
We have heard Mr. R. Basant, learned senior counsel for the

appellant, Mr. Anil Kaushik, learned Additional Advocate General

appearing for the State/respondent no.1, as well as Mr. Shishir

Mathur, learned counsel for the respondent no. 2 (accused) and

perused the record.
What we notice from the impugned order is that the High Court,

while granting bail, has only made the following observations and
4
passed the order for grant of bail:
“As per the FIR, the petitioner had allegedly caught
      hold of the left hand of the deceased and Manish and
      Piyush @ Passu had inflicted knife blows upon the
      deceased, whereas the complainant got his
      supplementary statement recorded by improving his
      version that the petitioner and Deepak had come
      running and asked the boy to kill him (deceased)
      and ensure that he might not survive. The petitioner
      has been in custody since 18.07.2020. Trial of the
      case would take time to conclude. Therefore, no
      useful purpose would be served by keeping the
      petitioner behind the bars.”

   It is settled law that when the Trial Court has dismissed the bail

application (and in the present case it has been dismissed twice),

what is expected from the High Court, while taking a view different

from that of the Trial Court, some cogent and valid reasons ought

to have been given for grant of bail. The nature of offence in the

present case is very grave. The fact that the son of the respondent

no. 2 had stabbed the deceased in the presence of the respondent

no. 2 is prima facie clear from the materials available before this

Court and the CCTV footage which was filed before the High Court.

The details of the phone calls made between the respondent no. 2

(accused no. 2) and his son (accused no. 1) are also on record. All

these factors ought to have been considered by the High Court

while passing the impugned order, which has not been done in the

present case.
5
Though an order for grant or rejection of plea for bail is a

discretionary remedy, several decisions of this Court have been

cited before us, which discusses the principles guiding this field of

law.
In
Niranjan Singh & Anr. vs. Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote &

Ors.
[(1980) 2 SCC 559], it has been held that at that stage, Court

should be satisfied of a prima­facie case and detailed examination

of evidence is not necessary for considering this question.
In
Ram

Govind Upadhyay vs. Sudarshan Singh and Ors.
[(2002) 3 SCC

598], this Court opined that once the High Court refuses bail, to

consider such plea and grant of bail subsequently must be

supported by reasons.
In the judgment of a Coordinate Bench in the case of

Jaibunisha vs. Meharban & Anr. [(2022) SCC OnLine SC 58] and

Criminal Appeal No.227 of 2022 (
Sabir vs. Bhoora & Nadeem &

Anr.
) decided on 15th February, 2022 by this very Bench, the need

of a bail order in serious offences to be supported by reason was

emphasised.
Same view was taken by a Coordinate Bench in the

case of
Brijmani Devi vs. Pappu Kumar & Anr.
[(2021) SCC

Online SC 1280].
This question had been dealt with in the case of
X vs. State of Telangana and Anr.
[(2018) 16 SCC 511].
6
In the present case, however, there were earlier two rejection

orders by the Court of Session but the High Court had granted bail

under
Section 439
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 the first

time its jurisdiction was invoked under that provision.
In the case

of
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar vs. Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and

Anr.
[(2004) 7 SCC 528], gravity of the offence alleged has been

held to be an important factor for considering the question of grant

of bail.
Judgments in the cases of
Prabhakar Tewari vs. State of Uttar

Pradesh and Anr.
[(2020) 11 SCC 648] and State of U.P. through

CBI vs. Amarmani Tripathi [(2005) 8 SCC 21] deal with the

question of considering orders of the High Court granting bail by

this Court at the appellate stage. In Prabhakar Tewari (in which

one of us, Aniruddha Bose J. was a party), bail order by the High

Court was sustained as it was found by this Court that there was

no error in exercise of discretion by the High Court in granting bail

to the accused persons. The offence, though, was grave and serious

and involved
Section 302
of IPC.
In the case of Amarmani Tripathi

(supra), post­release conduct of the accused was considered. A

Coordinate Bench of this Court found that the High Court had

practically failed to take into consideration voluminous materials
7
collected by the investigating agency. In that perspective, the order

granting bail to the accused was set aside.
In the facts of the present case we have taken into consideration

the seriousness of the offence as well as the conduct of the

respondent no. 2. We also find that the respondent no. 2 in a

serious case like this remained in prison only for about four

months before bail was granted. There are allegations that the

family of the deceased had been threatened on behalf of the

respondent no. 2. We have taken into consideration the ratio of

different authorities cited by the learned counsel for the parties and

are of the opinion that the order passed by the High Court granting

bail to the respondent no. 2 is liable to be set aside.
Accordingly, for the reasons given above, we allow this appeal

and quash the order of the High Court dated 17.11.2020.
No orders as to costs.
………………………………………………,J.
(VINEET SARAN)


                           ………………………………………………,J.
(ANIRUDDHA BOSE)
NEW DELHI;
MARCH 10,2022.
8
ITEM NO.4                COURT NO.9                   SECTION II-B

                S U P R E M E C O U R T O F        I N D I A
                        RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.)       No(s).    1168/2021
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 17-11-2020
in CRMM No. 37527/2020 passed by the High Court Of Punjab & Haryana
At Chandigarh)

PURAN MAL                                               Petitioner(s)

                                   VERSUS

STATE OF HARYANA                                   Respondent(s)
 IA No. 12099/2021 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED
JUDGMENT
 IA No. 15286/2021 - PERMISSION TO FILE ADDITIONAL
DOCUMENTS/FACTS/ANNEXURES)

Date : 10-03-2022 This matter was called on for hearing today.
CORAM :   HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VINEET SARAN
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIRUDDHA BOSE

For Petitioner(s)    Mr. R. Basant, Sr. Adv.
                     Mr. Ishaan George, AOR

For Respondent(s)    Mr. Anil Kaushik, Addl. AG
                     Ms. Anju Kaushik, Adv.
                     Mr. Vishwa Pal Singh, AOR

                     Mr. Shishir Mathur, Adv.
                     Mr. Viresh B. Saharya, AOR
                     Mr. Akshat Agarwal, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R

    Leave granted.
The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed reportable order.

    Pending      application(s),    if      any,   stands     disposed     of

accordingly.
(ARJUN BISHT)         (PRADEEP KUMAR)        (ASHWANI THAKUR)
(COURT MASTER (SH)   (BRANCH OFFICER)            AR-CUM-PS
          (Signed reportable order is placed on the file)