[Cites
7
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Chandra Prakash Mishra vs Flipkart India Private Limited on 30 March, 2022
Author:
Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench:
Aniruddha Bose
,
Dinesh Maheshwari
1
                                                                             REPORTABLE
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2859-2861 OF 2022
                             (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) Nos. 3384-3386 OF 2017)

     CHANDRA PRAKASH MISHRA                                                      APPELLANT(S)
                                                      VERSUS

     FLIPKART INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED & ORS.                                       RESPONDENT(S)

                                                     JUDGMENT
DINESH MAHESHWARI, J.
Leave granted.
2.                  In these appeals, the appellant, presently working as Joint

     Commissioner, Commercial Tax, Moradabad, has questioned the order

     dated 29.02.2016 in Writ Petition Nos. 80 of 2016 and 168 of 2016

     as also the order dated 02.08.2016 in Writ Tax No. 546 of 2016, as

     passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad.

     2.1. The appellant is aggrieved of the orders impugned, insofar as

     adverse observations and remarks have been made and directions have

     been issued in relation to his acts and omissions while functioning

     as the Deputy Commissioner, Commercial Tax, Range-II, Sector-2,

     Noida,                viz.,   passing    ex   parte   assessment   orders   and   enforcing

     recovery proceedings under the Uttar Pradesh Value Added Tax Act,

     20081, concerning the writ petitioner (respondent No. 1 herein)2.
3.                  The impugned orders have otherwise not been challenged by the

     State or by the writ petitioner. Therefore, dilation on all the

     factual aspects is not necessary. The aspects relevant for the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
present purpose are as follows:
Date: 2022.04.08
18:32:17 IST
Reason:
1 Hereinafter referred to as ‘the
UP VAT Act
’.
     2 The impugned orders had been passed in the writ petitions filed by the
     respondent No. 1. For continuity of narrations and in the given context, the
     respondent No. 1 has also been referred to as ‘the writ petitioner’.
2
3.1. By way of Writ Petition No. 80 of 2016, the writ petitioner

questioned       the     recovery    proceedings,            as   taken        up   against       it

pursuant to the ex parte provisional assessment order passed by the

appellant in his capacity as the Assessing Authority. In response

to the said writ petition, it was pointed out on behalf of the

department that an application made by the writ petitioner for

registering       the    changed     address      had     already        been       rejected      on

02.09.2014 and, therefore, ex parte order had rightly been passed

after taking due steps for service of notice.
3.2. The said order dated 02.09.2014, as passed by the Registering

Authority (not the appellant) rejecting the prayer for registering

the    changed    address     was    challenged      in       the      other    writ    petition

bearing No. 168 of 2016.
3.3. Thus,       in     sum   and    substance,         the       ex     parte      provisional

assessment order dated 15.12.2015 and the recovery proceedings as

also     the     order     dated     02.09.2014         rejecting         the       prayer       for

registration of the changed address were in challenge before the

High Court in the said writ petitions bearing Nos. 80 of 2016 and

168 of 2016. As noticed, the appellant had been functioning as the

Deputy Commissioner, Commercial Tax, Range-II, Sector-2, Noida and

had passed the aforesaid ex parte order in his capacity as the

Assessing Authority. However, the aforesaid order rejecting the

prayer    for    registering        the    changed      address        was     passed       by   the

Registering Authority, being the Assistant Commissioner, Commercial

Tax, Divison-2, Noida.
4.     The issues involved in the said writ petitions were considered

and    dealt    with     by   the   High    Court       in    its      common       order    dated
3
29.02.2016.
4.1. The High Court essentially found that the ex parte order was

passed   against    the    writ   petitioner     without    proper   service   of

notice. The facts were taken note of that, according to the writ

petitioner, it had shifted its place of business from Noida to

Ghaziabad, which was very much in the knowledge of the department

in view of the applications made and other communications addressed

by it. There was a suggestion on behalf of the State as regards

service of notice at Ghaziabad but, that service was also not taken

as sufficient by the High Court after its interpretation of the

requirements under the rules.
4.2. The High Court, therefore, set aside the ex parte assessment

order dated 15.12.2015 and quashed the recovery proceedings. The

High Court also set aside the order dated 02.09.2014, rejecting the

writ petitioner’s application for registration of the change of

place of business and directed the Registering Authority to process

the   application   made    by    the   writ   petitioner   on   05.12.2013    for

change of place of business after permitting the writ petitioner to

deposit the requisite fees.
4.3. The High Court found that a huge amount to the tune of Rs.

49,82,01,250/- had been withdrawn by the department from the writ

petitioner’s account without authority of law. Hence, the Deputy

Commissioner, Commercial Taxes, Range-II, Noida was directed to

refund the said amount together with interest as per
Section 40
of

the UP VAT Act after adjusting the admitted tax. The High Court, of

course, left it open for the Assessing Authority to make fresh

assessments in accordance with law, after proper service of notice
4
upon the writ petitioner and after giving them an opportunity of

hearing.
5.     In   the    aforesaid       part     of    the      impugned      common    order   dated

29.02.2016 i.e., upto paragraph 34, the High Court dealt with the

core issues involved in the case and contentions of the respective

parties     and,     thereafter,          passed       the    orders     consequent      to   its

findings on the material issues that there had not been proper

service of notice upon the writ petitioner and the ex parte orders

were not sustainable.
6.     However, before closing the matter, the High Court proceeded

to express its opinion that the impugned actions, leading to ex

parte orders/proceedings without proper service of notice, were of

deliberate        attempt    on     the    part       of     the   department      against    the

interests     of    the     writ    petitioner;            and     the   Assessing   Authority

adopted unfair tactics in getting the service effected in gross

violation of the applicable rules.
6.1.    The High Court, therefore, imposed costs to the tune of Rs.

2,00,000/-, to be paid by the department to the writ petitioner,

and left it open for the Commissioner, Commercial Tax, Lucknow to

institute     an    inquiry        and    to     fix    responsibility        on   the     erring

officer for recovery of the amount of costs. The said part of the

order dated 29.02.2016, which has been questioned by the appellant

in this appeal, reads as under: -
“35. Before parting, we must observe the manner in which
       the respondents have proceeded with the assessment and
       recovered the amount from the petitioner's Bank account in
       haste is deplorable and in gross violation of the
       provisions of the Act. We find that for the assessment
       years 2011-12, 2013-14 and 2014-15 ex-parte assessment
5
orders were made without adequate service of notices upon
the petitioner. These assessment proceedings were set aside
in appeal on the short ground that the service of the
summons were sent at the address where the petitioner was
no longer carrying on its business. Inspite of this
knowledge, the respondents chose deliberately to serve the
notice for provisional assessment for the period April to
October, 2015 upon the petitioner at the Noida address
knowing fully well that the petitioner was not carrying any
business from the Noida address. The respondents knew very
well that the petitioner had shifted its place of business
from Noida to Ghaziabad as they made a futile attempt to
serve the notice at Ghaziabad but later for the reasons
best known to them, chose deliberately to serve the notice
by affixation at the Noida address. Such tactics adopted by
the assessing authority in getting the service effected
upon the petitioner was in gross violation of Rule 72 of
the Rules.
36. We also find that the entire exercise of service was
done within four days without taking recourse to the other
mode   of  service,   namely   simultaneously  service   by
registered post with acknowledgment due. The assessment
order indicates that the first and last date of hearing of
the assessment proceedings was 10.12.2015 and that the
assessment order was passed on 15.12.2015. The counter
affidavit reveals that the assessment order was served by
attachment at the Noida address. This was done deliberately
by the respondents so that the respondents could withdraw
the amount through garnishee notices by exerting pressure
upon the bank authorities. The Court gets an uncanny
feeling that a deliberate attempt was made by the
respondents to withdraw the money from the petitioner's
bank account through dubious mean by passing ex-parte
assessment orders and not allowing it to be served validly
upon the petitioner. If in this cavalier fashion the
Commercial Tax Department functions and withdraws huge sums
of money without valid service, it would be difficult for
big business houses to carry on their business. Such
business houses would be forced to shift their business
outside the State of Uttar Pradesh.
37. Consequently, the petitioners are entitled for cost.
The writ petitions are allowed with cost amounting to
Rs. 2,00,000/- (Rupees two lakhs only), which will be paid
by the Commercial Tax Department to the petitioner within
two weeks from the date of filing of a certified copy of
this order. If the amount is not paid, it would be open to
6
the petitioner to move an appropriate application in this
       petition.
38. It would be open to the Commercial Tax Commissioner,
       Lucknow to institute an enquiry and fix responsibility on
       the erring officer for recovery of the said amount.”
7.     Even    after   the    order    so   passed    by   the   High   Court,     the

appellant, again in his capacity as the Assessing Authority, drew

up   another     assessment    order    dated    04.05.2016      against   the    writ

petitioner. This order was again questioned by the writ petitioner

by way of another writ petition in the High Court, being Writ Tax

No. 546 of 2016. In this subsequent writ petition, the present

appellant was personally impleaded as respondent No. 1.

7.1. On 11.07.2016, while initially dealing with the said petition,

Writ Tax No. 546 of 2016, the High Court referred to the background

aspects, in particular to the aforesaid order dated 29.02.2016 and

then, took exception that the present appellant at all chose to

pass the impugned assessment order on 04.05.2016, which was not in

conformity with what was held in the order dated 29.02.2016. The

High    Court,   while   issuing      notice    and   staying    operation   of   the

impugned assessment order and the consequential notice, observed as

under: -
“1. It is contended that petitioners' registered office
        address has been changed to Ghaziabad and Deputy
        Commissioner of Commercial Tax, Noida had no jurisdiction
        to make assessment and this was also observed by this
        Court in its judgment dated 29.02.2016 in
Flipkart India
        Pvt. Ltd. Vs State of U.P. and others
, reported in 2016
        NTN (Vol. 60) 313 wherein Court observed that authority
        at Noida had no jurisdiction to make assessment after
        change   of  place   of  business/registered    office of
        petitioner company at Ghaziabad, still respondent no. 1
        has proceeded to serve notice at the supposed address at
        Noida and thereafter has passed impugned order.
7
2. It is contended that the order impugned is patently
       illegal, without jurisdiction and has been passed to
       frustrate the judgment of this Court in which serious
       strictures had been passed against the officer concerned
       and this Court had imposed cost of Rs. Two Lacs.
3. We find it a serious matter. Let respondent 1 himself
       appear along with relevant records on 02.08.2016 before
       this Court. He shall also file para-wise reply to the
       writ petition on the next date.
4. Until further orders, the effect and operation of
       impugned assessment order dated 04.05.2016 and notice
       dated 07.04.2016 shall remain stayed.”

7.2.   When the matter was taken up for further consideration by the

High Court on 02.08.2016, it was submitted by the learned standing

counsel for the department that the impugned assessment orders had

since been withdrawn by the present appellant on 23.07.2016 and,

therefore, the writ petition was practically rendered infructuous.
It was also stated on behalf of the appellant, who was present in

Court,   that   there    had   been   a   mistake      on   his   part   and   he   was

tendering an apology, which could be considered by the Court.

7.3.   The   High   Court,     however,       viewed   the   functioning       of   the

appellant seriously questionable, particularly for his acts and

omissions after the strictures in, and penal costs imposed by, the

order dated 29.02.2016. Thus, while imposing costs of Rs. 50,000/-

personally on the appellant, the High Court made the observations

that departmental action be taken and finalised at the earliest and

the department would also consider as to whether the appellant was

a   person   fit    to    be   assigned        such    important     quasi-judicial

functions. The relevant part of the order dated 02.08.2016 could be

usefully extracted as under:-
“13. Additional Commissioner, Commercial Tax, Noida,
       sought a clarification from Commissioner, Commercial Tax,
8
vide letter dated 29.06.2016 whereupon the Commissioner
     vide letter dated 20.07.2016 directed the registering
     authority to pass appropriate order in accordance with
     directions of this Court. The registering authority has
     passed an order on 23.07.2016 under
Section 17(14)(a)
of
     the Act transferring the place of business of petitioner
     from   Noida    to   Ghaziabad   w.e.f.    20.01.2013   and
     consequently now the Deputy Commissioner, Commercial Tax,
     Sector 7, Ghaziabad becomes Assessing authority of
     petitioner w.e.f. 20.01.2013. Pursuant thereto respondent
     1 has passed an order on 23.03.2016 (sic)3 withdrawing
     the assessment orders dated 04.05.2016 impugned in this
     writ petition.
14. It is admitted that application for transfer of
     business address was filed on 05.12.2013 which was
     rejected by respondent 1 on 02.09.2014 and the said order
     was set aside by this Court vide judgment dated
     29.02.2016.
15. Learned Standing Counsel at the outset clearly stated
     that since the assessment orders impugned in this writ
     petition have now been withdrawn by respondent No. 1 by
     order dated 23.07.2016 in substance, writ petition has
     rendered infructuous and be dismissed accordingly.
16. We however required him to tell us as to how
     respondent 1 could dare to pass further assessment
     orders, when earlier orders passed by him were declared
     without jurisdiction by this Court by referring to the
     similar application of petitioner for change of business
     address. In reply thereto a very bulky counter affidavit
     has been filed separately by respondent l. Despite he
     could not explain as to what was the occasion for any
     confusion when the needs were very clearly disclosed and
     decided in Courts' judgment dated 29.02.2016 and why
     respondent 1 was in so such a hurry so as to pass the
     impugned assessment orders on 04.05.2016.
17. Sri S.D. Singh, learned Senior Counsel, representing
     respondent 1 who is also present in person before this
     Court at the outset stated that there is a mistake on the
     part   of   respondent   1  which   cannot   be   explained
     satisfactorily but respondent 1 dedicates apology and
     therefore, Court may consider the same and pass
     appropriate order.
18. In these facts and circumstances we are satisfied
     that here is a forced litigation by unmindful illegal act

3 The date ‘23.03.2016’   is   of   typographical   error.   The   correct   date   is
‘23.07.2016’.
9
on the part of respondent 1 and realizing the same he has
     also withdrawn the impugned orders and also considered
     the fact he is an authority which was already adversely
     commenced by this Court in its order dated 29.02.2016
     still he did not care to such observations. It is again a
     fit case where respondent 1 himself would be saddled with
     cost by this litigation. Since the impugned order of
     assessment have already been recalled by order dated
     23.07.2016 in this regard no further order is required
     but we hold that respondent 1 being guilty of compelling
     and forcing second round of litigation upon petitioner
     must be saddled with cost which we quantify to
     Rs. 50,000/-.
19. We also direct Principal Secretary, Trade Tax, U.P.
     Government to look into the manner in which respondent 1
     has functioned in this case and despite strictures and
     penal cost imposed by this Court in earlier judgment
     dated 29.02.2016 and also directing Commissioner Trade
     Tax to get an inquiry conducted against erring officials,
     respondent 1 has not cared to mend his ways to conduct
     but has proceeded to harass a dealer like petitioner and
     appropriate disciplinary action be taken at the earliest
     and finalise the same. It may also be considered by
     Principal Secretary, Trade Tax, U.P. Government as to
     whether, respondent 1 is a person fit to be assigned such
     important quasi-judicial functions.
20. A copy of this order shall be communicated forthwith
     for communication and compliance of the direction.
21. Writ petition is accordingly disposed of.”
8.   Seeking to question the orders aforesaid, insofar they operate

against the appellant, Mr. Pallav Shishodia, learned senior counsel

has submitted that the adverse observations and directions by the

High Court against the appellant were not called for, even if the

orders passed by the appellant in his capacity as the Assessing

Authority were not approved because, there had not been any malice

on the part of the appellant, who only carried out his statutory

duties of timely completing the assessments and taking follow up

actions.
10
8.1. Learned         senior       counsel       has    forcefully           submitted      that    the

proposition of change of address by the writ petitioner (respondent

No.1) had been suffering from several shortcomings including the

fundamental         one    that    the     application          made    on       05.12.2013       while

alleging the change of business address in the month of January

2013, was not in conformity with the requirement of
Section 75
of

the UP VAT Act whereunder, such an application was required to be

made within 30 days of the event.
8.2. Learned senior counsel for the appellant would submit that

when    the     belatedly          filed        application       had        been       rejected     on

02.09.2014, the appellant, acting as an Assessing Authority, could

have    only    proceeded          on    the      basis    of     the       registered          address

available      on    the    record.        Moreover,       it    is    clear        that   when     the

respondent No. 1 was not available at the registered address, the

appellant,      acting        in    bonafide          discharge        of    his     duties,       even

attempted to get the notices served at Ghaziabad but, the High

Court did not accept that service to be a proper service.

8.3. Learned senior counsel would submit that the appellant as an

Assessing Authority only proceeded in accordance with the facts

available on record and nothing of want of good faith could be

imputed on him. Learned senior counsel has further referred to the

subsequent facts that the application for change of address was

ultimately granted on 22.07.2016 whereby, the department accepted

the    change       of    address       with     effect        from    20.01.2013;         and     that

immediately      after      passing        of    such     an    order       by    the    Registering

Authority       i.e.,       the     Assistant          Commissioner,             Commercial        Tax,

Division-2,         Noida,        the    appellant         withdrew          the        order    dated
11
04.05.2016 passed by him because with such change of address, he

ceased to be having jurisdiction in the matter. The contention of

the learned senior counsel, however, is that before passing of such

an order by the competent authority, the appellant could have only

proceeded on the basis of position obtainable on record and as

such, want of bonafide cannot be imputed on him. Thus, according to

the learned counsel, the strictures and other observations made in

the orders impugned deserve to be set aside.
8.4.    Learned senior counsel for the appellant has also referred to
Section 67
of the UP VAT Act to submit that statutory protection is

available     to     the   officers   like    the     appellant    against         legal

proceedings in relation to anything done in good faith in discharge

of their duties and jurisdiction.
9.     Mr. R. K. Raizada, learned senior counsel appearing for the

State   has   submitted     that   the   State      has    proceeded   in    adequate

compliance of the orders passed by the High Court; and has carried

out inquiry as contemplated by the order dated 29.02.2016 but,

further proceedings are put on hold, in view of the stay order

passed by this Court in this matter on 27.01.2017.
10.    Mr. Tarun Gulati, learned senior counsel appearing for the

respondent     No.     1   (writ   petitioner)       has     submitted      that     the

respondent No. 1 had not taken up any personal lis against the

present appellant nor the first two petitions were founded on any

grounds personal to the appellant; and only the action of the State

and its officers were questioned, particularly because of denial of

adequate opportunity of hearing with proper notice.

10.1. Learned senior counsel has further submitted that the High
12
Court had rightly disapproved the actions as taken and the orders

as passed ex parte by the present appellant in his capacity as the

Assessing Authority. The other part of the order dated 29.02.2016,

according to the learned counsel, had been based on the views of

the High Court because of the harassment apparently faced by the

respondent No. 1 and because of want of appropriate and lawful

action by the functionaries of the State. The learned counsel would

further submit that in the later writ petition i.e., Writ Tax No.

546 of 2018, the appellant was personally impleaded as a party-

respondent for the reason that he chose to pass the order dated

04.05.2016, rather at conflict with the High Court’s order dated

29.02.2016.
10.2. Learned senior counsel has, however, frankly submitted that

the respondent No. 1 is otherwise carrying no grievance personally

against the appellant; and respondent No. 1 is not keen to even

retain the amount of costs awarded by the High Court and would be

willing to return the same as may be directed by this Court. It has

also been pointed out that the respondent No. 1 has only received

the amount of Rs. 2,00,000/- towards cost, as awarded by the order

dated 29.02.2016; and the other amount of Rs. 50,000/-, as awarded

by the order dated 02.08.2016, has not been received in view of the

stay order passed by this Court.
11.    Having given thoughtful consideration to the submissions made

and having examined the material placed on record, we are clearly

of    the   view   that   the   questioned   parts   of   the   orders   impugned

deserve to be annulled with appropriate order towards the amount of

Rs. 2,00,000/- awarded as costs, which has been fairly given up by
13
the respondent No. 1.
12.    So far as the observations and findings in the impugned order

dated 29.02.2016 relating to the merits of the case are concerned,

no comments are required in that relation, for the same having not

been challenged by the State. However, in our view, even when all

the findings of the High Court in the principal part of order dated

29.02.2016 are accepted, they would only lead to the result that

the impugned actions in drawing up ex parte assessment orders and

then seeking to enforce recovery as also the impugned action in

rejecting the application for registration of change of place of

business did not meet with the approval of the High Court. Such

disapproval of the High Court had been essentially based on its

interpretation of the applicable rules as also its analysis of the

factual      aspects    concerning    the      issues   involved    in   the    writ

petition.
13.    Having examined the matter in its totality, we are of the view

that even if the High Court found that the impugned actions of the

authorities concerned, particularly of the appellant, had not been

strictly in conformity with law or were irregular or were illegal

or even perverse, such findings, by themselves, were not leading to

an inference as corollary that there had been any deliberate action

or    omission   on     the   part   of   the    Assessing    Authority    or     the

Registering Authority; or that any ‘tactics’ were adopted, as per

the expression employed by the High Court. Every erroneous, illegal

or    even   perverse    order/action,      by   itself,   cannot   be   termed    as

wanting in good faith or suffering from malafide.
14.    In the present case, when admittedly the respondent No. 1
14
itself had applied for registration of the change of place of

business nearly 11 months after the alleged event; and at the time

of drawing up the assessment orders, the appellant as the Assessing

Authority had no other registered address of the respondent No. 1

on record, his actions of passing ex parte assessment orders could

not have been termed as being deliberate or wanting in good faith,

particularly in view of the facts that attempts were indeed made

from his office to get the notices served on the respondent No. 1

at its registered address and even at its alleged changed address

at Ghaziabad. Even if such attempts, of serving notices, were held

to be illegal or irregular by the High Court, its deduction that

the impugned actions were deliberate or lacking in good faith is

difficult to be endorsed.
14.1. The appellant, while functioning as an Assessing Authority

could    not   have   kept   the   assessment     proceedings      pending   for   an

indefinite     length   of   time.   In   this    context,   the    aforementioned

facts relating to shortcomings on the part of the respondent No. 1

in first of all not seeking registration of the changed business

address for nearly 11 months and then, rejection of its belatedly

made prayer by the competent authority (not the appellant) cannot

be ignored altogether.
15.       What    has    been      observed      hereinabove,      with   necessary

variations, would equally apply to the later order dated 04.05.2016

passed    by   the    appellant,     in    his    capacity   as     the   Assessing

Authority. Though, in the face of the order dated 29.02.2016, the

appellant could have waited for consideration of the application

for change of address, as directed by the High Court or could have
15
taken instructions from the Commissioner but, in any case, even

such    mistakes     or    errors      or    omissions    on     his    part   cannot   be

considered as carrying the elements of malice or want of good

faith.
16.    In our view, for imputing motives and drawing inference about

want     of   good    faith      in    any     person,   particularly      a   statutory

authority, something more than mere error or fault ought to exist.

Nothing concrete is available on record to impute motives in the

appellant,     even       if   his    actions/omissions        while    functioning     as

Assessing Authority otherwise called for disapproval.
17.    In the questioned parts of the impugned orders, the High Court

seems to have taken rather a sterner view of the matter, which was

not    required      in    the    given      set    of   facts    and    circumstances.

Noticeably, the appellant was not impleaded personally a party in

the first two writ petitions which were decided by the common order

dated 29.02.2016. The comments or remarks which were to operate

personally against the appellant were not even called for without

the appellant having been joined personally a party and having been

extended an opportunity of hearing and explanation. In the third

writ petition decided by the order dated 02.08.2016, though the

appellant was personally joined as a party-respondent, when he had

withdrawn the order dated 04.05.2016 immediately after registration

of changed address by the registering authority and had tendered an

apology before the High Court, in our view, the matter could have

been closed at that; and there was no necessity of stretching the

matter too far and passing further orders for imposition of costs

and    for    departmental           actions     with    other    comments     regarding
16
competence of the appellant to discharge quasi-judicial functions4.

Having said that, we deem it appropriate to close this matter with

annulment of strictures and observations against the appellant in

both the impugned orders dated 29.02.2016 and 02.08.2016.
21.   As regards the amount of costs, we appreciate the fair stand

taken on behalf of the respondent No. 1. Having regard to the

circumstances, we deem it appropriate and hence order that the said

amount of Rs. 2,00,000/- shall be deposited by the respondent No. 1

with the Uttar Pradesh State Legal Services Authority.
22.   With the requirements aforesaid, the remarks and observations

against the appellant in the impugned orders are expunged; and the

questioned parts of the impugned orders, as reproduced hereinabove,

are annulled and set aside.
23.   Needless to observe that any action taken or in contemplation

pursuant to the aforesaid parts of the impugned orders are also

rendered redundant.
24.   The appeals stand allowed to the extent and in the manner

indicated above.
……………………………………………J.
                                                        (DINESH MAHESHWARI)



                                                        ……………………………………………J.
                                                          (ANIRUDDHA BOSE)

New Delhi;
March 30, 2022.
4 The mistakes, errors or lapses, of course, need to be dealt with by the
persuasive reasoning by the Court and necessary orders are also to be passed as
may be required in the given set of circumstances but, it is not necessary to
‘crack the whip’ on every mistake [vide the observations of this Court in
V.K.
Jain v. High
Court of Delhi: (2008) 17 SCC 538].