[Cites
31
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Abdul Vahab vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 4 March, 2022
Author:
Hrishikesh Roy
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
K.M. Joseph
[REPORTABLE]

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.340 OF 2022
                                   (@ SLP (Crl.) No. 8964 OF 2019)

          ABDUL VAHAB                                                  APPELLANT(S)

                                                 VERSUS


          STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                                      RESPONDENT(S)



                                            J U D G M E N T
Hrishikesh Roy, J.
1.             Heard Mr. Pulkit Tare, learned counsel appearing

          for the appellant. Also heard Mr. Abhinav Shrivastava

          learned               counsel   appearing       for    the    State    of    Madhya

          Pradesh.
2.             Leave granted.
3.
Signature Not Verified   The    primary   challenge       in    this   appeal    is    to   the
Digitally signed by
Nidhi Ahuja
Date: 2022.03.04
Confiscation Order dated 09.08.2017 for the appellant’s
16:51:08 IST
Reason:
truck                (bearing   No.MP/09/GF/2159),            passed        by    the
1
District Magistrate, Agar Malwa, purporting to exercise

powers under Section 11(5) of the M.P. Prohibition of

Cow Slaughter Act, 2004 (hereinafter referred to as,

‘the 2004 Act’) and Rule 5 of the M.P Govansh Vadh

Pratishedh     Rules,      2012.       The    Confiscation          order      was

affirmed      on     22.9.2018     by       the     Court     of    Additional

Commissioner, Ujjain. The Revision Petition challenging

the     confiscation       order       was        dismissed        by   the    3rd

Additional         Sessions     Judge,       Ujjain     in    the       Criminal

Revision      No.211/2018.        The       Truck     owner       preferred      a

Petition under
section 482
CrPC before the High Court

of Madhya Pradesh, wherein, the High Court affirmed the

orders passed by the forums below, while holding that

no error has been committed by the District Magistrate

in    ordering       the   truck’s          confiscation,          even     after

acquittal     of     the   accused       persons      from     the      criminal

case.
4.    The necessary facts for the present appeal are that

the appellant’s truck, loaded with 17 cow progeny, was

intercepted and the driver of the vehicle, Surendra and

one   other    person,        Nazir,    sitting       in    the     truck     were
2
arrested. Thereafter, Crime No.102/2013 was registered

at    Police    Station    Kannad,        District       Agar   Malwa    for

offences under
Sections 4
and
9
of the 2004 Act read

with
Section 11 (d)
of the Prevention of Cruelty to

Animals    Act,    1960    (for     short    ‘the    1960       Act’).   The

vehicle was seized and the accused persons, including

the     truck     owner,     were        charge     sheeted       for    the

aforementioned offences.
5.     The Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Agar Malwa,

formulated,       inter    alia,    the     following      question      for

consideration as the trial Court:
“1.Whether on the above date, time and place of
       occurrence accused with motive of slaughter of
       17 bulls or with knowledge that the bulls will
       be   slaughtered,  transported   or  aided   in
       transportation or surrendered of the same for
       slaughter of the aforesaid bulls outside the
       territory of M.P. to Nasik?”
6.     Under the judgment dated 28.11.2016 (Annexure P-1),

on evaluation of evidence, the learned Judge concluded

that    the     prosecution    had       failed     to    establish      the

primary ingredient of the charge, that                   the cow progeny
3
was    being   transported       “for   the     purpose     of    its

slaughter” and as such no offence was made out under

the 2004 Act. Thus, the aforequoted question no.1, as

formulated by the Court, was specifically held to be

not proved. All four accused were accordingly acquitted

of charges under the 1960 Act and also the charges

under
Section 4
read with
Section 9
of the 2004 Act.

The   appellant,    who    was   additionally        charged     under

different sections of the
Motor Vehicles Act
, was also

acquitted of those charges.
7.    Subsequently, however, the District Magistrate on

09.08.2017     ordered    confiscation     of    the    appellant’s

truck,   for   violation   of
section   6
of   the   2004    Act

despite being apprised of the acquittal of the accused

persons by the Trial Court. In the acquittal order, it

was pertinently recorded that the prosecution witnesses

including the Investigating Officer (IO) and the main

witnesses PW1 and PW2 had not testified on involvement

of the accused with the act of intended slaughtering of

cattle. The veterinary doctor (PW4) commented tellingly

that the animals were healthy and fit for agricultural
4
purpose.      The    Trial         Court      also      observed    that      the

prosecution’s case of proposed slaughter was not at all

supported by the medical evidence on record.
8.   Assailing the order of confiscation of the truck

and the consequential rejection of the challenge to the

District Magistrate’s order, the learned counsel for

the appellant, Mr. Pulkit Tare makes his submissions.

He contends that confiscation of the vehicle is wholly

unjustified when all four accused were acquitted of the

criminal      charges         in    the       related     proceedings.        The

appellant’s       counsel          refers     to    the   decision       of   the

Coordinate Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in

Nitesh s/o
Dhannalal vs. State of M.P.1
wherein, in

circumstances of confiscation of a vehicle, under the

relevant      provisions           of     the      2004   Act,     the     Court

interpreted various provisions of the Act to hold that,

unless the criminal offence is committed, seizure of

the vehicle which was involved in the incident, would

be unwarranted.
1 (2016) SCC Online MP 7622
5
9.    On the other hand, Mr. Abhinav Shrivastava, learned

counsel    appearing    for    the        State      of    Madhya    Pradesh

refers to various judgments to contend that proceedings

towards confiscation of the offending vehicle and also

criminal prosecution against the accused are parallelly

maintainable.    The     State’s          counsel         then    refers     to

Section 13A of the 2004 Act to point out that the

burden of proof is on the accused when he is being

prosecuted    under    the    Act.       He   further       refers   to     the

evidence of the Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Arvind

Mahajan (PW-4) who examined the animals to contend that

there is adequate justification for confiscation of the

truck, on the basis of the evidence of PW-4.
10. The High Court upheld the order of confiscation by

the   District   Magistrate          with      the    observation          that

separate     proceedings      before          two    Forums,        one    for

prosecution of the accused charged with the offence and

the other for confiscation of the vehicles/equipment

used for the commission of the offence, are legally

maintainable.     According          to       the    High        Court,     the

jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
6
Procedure for quashing of the confiscation proceedings

initiated under the 2004 Act, is not available to the

Court.
11.1       The impugned judgment , relied on a line of

cases under the
Indian Forest Act, 1927
, particularly,
State of MP. Vs Smt. KalloBai2
wherein, it was clarified

that confiscatory proceedings are independent of main

criminal proceedings and its main purpose is to provide

a deterrent mechanism and to stop further misuse of the

subject vehicle.
11.2       In    the    same    case,     in   the    context      of    the

confiscation proceedings under the
Indian Forest Act,

1927
and the local legislation i.e. Madhya Pradesh Van

Upaj    (Vyaapar       Viniyam)     Adhiniyam,       1969,      this    Court

observed that under Section 15-C of the Adhiniyam, a

jurisdictional         bar     on    Courts    and        Tribunals      are

provided. Commenting on the power of the Authority to

order     confiscation       under
Section     15
of    the    1969

Adhiniyam, it was found;
2(2017) 14 SCC 502
7
“that
Section 15
gives independent power to
        the authority concerned to confiscate the
        articles,   as  mentioned thereunder,  even
        before the guilt is completely established.
        This power can be exercised by the officer
        concerned if he is satisfied that the said
        objects were utilized during the commission
        of a forest offence.”


11.3    According to the scheme of the legislation, it

was    also      observed        in
Kallo    Bai
(supra)   that    the

jurisdiction of the criminal courts, regarding disposal

of property, are made subject to the jurisdiction of

the Authorized Officer under the Act.
12. The learned Judge in the impugned judgment, also

placed reliance on
State of M.P Vs. Uday Singh3
, wherein

it was held that the High Court erred in directing the

Magistrate to release the seized vehicle in exercise of

its inherent jurisdiction under
Section 482
CrPC. Since

the    confiscation             proceedings    were     initiated      under
Section 52(3)
of the Forest Act, 1927 (as substituted

by    the   MP    Act      25    of   1983),   further    procedure     was

governed by the relevant provisions of the said act

(and the M.P amendments to the
Forest Act
) and the

jurisdiction          of   the    criminal     courts   stood   excluded.
3 (2020) 12 SCC 733
8
Further,   the   non-obstante       clause   in   Section   52-C(1)

gave overriding effect to the legislation. Resultantly,

the powers vested in the magistrate under the
CrPC
were

taken away. The relevant passage in the relied upon

judgment reads as under:-
29.3. Section 52-C stipulates that on the receipt of an
    intimation by the Magistrate under sub-section (4) of
Section 52
, no court, tribunal or authority, other than
    an authorised officer, an appellate authority or Court
    of Session (under
Sections 52
, 52-A and 52-B) shall
    have jurisdiction to pass orders with regard to
    possession, delivery, disposal or distribution of the
    property in regard to which confiscation proceedings
    have been initiated. Sub-section (1) of Section 52-C
    has   a   non   obstante   provision   which   operates
    notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
    the
Forest Act, 1927
or in any other law for the time
    being in force. The only saving is in respect of an
    officer duly empowered by the State Government for
    directing the immediate release of a property seized
    under
Section 52
, as provided in
Section 61
. Hence,
    upon the receipt of an intimation by the Magistrate of
    the initiation of confiscation proceedings under sub-
section (4)(a) of
Section 52
, the bar of jurisdiction
    under sub-section (1) of Section 52-C is clearly
    attracted


    29.4. The scheme contained in the amendments enacted to
    the
Forest Act, 1927
in relation to the State of Madhya
    Pradesh, makes it abundantly clear that the direction
    which was issued by the High Court in the present case,
    in a petition under
Section 482
CrPC, to the Magistrate
    to direct the interim release of the vehicle, which had
    been seized, was contrary to law. The jurisdiction
    under
Section 451
CrPC was not available to the
    Magistrate, once the authorized officer initiated
    confiscation proceedings.
9
13. The above would show that the powers of seizure,

confiscation     and     forfeiture       of     produce     illegally

removed from forest is vested exclusively in Authorized

Officers. As such, once the confiscation proceedings

are initiated under the provisions of the aforenoted

legislation,     the    jurisdiction      of    criminal     courts    is

ousted,     since it is the authorized officer who is

vested with power to pass orders for interim custody of

vehicles and the Magistrate is kept away.
14. The aforenoted cases were cited in the impugned

judgment    to    hold    that      the    Court       did   not     have

jurisdiction under
Section 482
, CrPC to grant relief to

the appellant. This in our view is unacceptable since

the applicable provisions in the aforementioned cases

are not pari materia to the provisions of the 2004 Act.

Most   significantly,     the    2004     Act   with    which   we    are

concerned here, does not have any non obstante clause

as in the
Section 52-C(1)
of the Forest Act,1927 (as

amended in relation to the State of Madhya Pradesh by

M.P Act 25 of 1983) or Section 15-C of the                         Madhya

Pradesh    Van   Upaj    (Vyaapar     Viniyam)     Adhiniyam,        1969
10
which       create     bar   on     jurisdiction          of    the     criminal

courts. Returning to the present matter and the law

that was invoked, we may gainfully notice that
Section

11(4)
of   the      2004    Act,        specifically       applies       the

provisions of
CrPC
, in relation to search and seizure

and
Section 11
A(4) empowers the Appellate Authority to

release the vehicle at interim stage itself. The Rules

5 and 6 of the MP Govansh Vadh Pratishedh Rules, 2012

empower the police to seize vehicle, the cow progeny

and beef in case of violation of
Sections 4
,
5
,
6
,6A

and 6B of the 2004 Act, as per
Section 100
of the CrPC.

As     is    discernible,          the        provisions       of
CrPC
are

specifically made applicable in the 2004 Act and the

2012    Rules.       Therefore,      an       erroneous        conclusion      was

drawn on absence of power, to entertain the petition of

the vehicle owner.               In the context of the proceedings

initiated under the M.P. Prohibition of Cow Slaughter

Act,    2004     and      there    being       no   bar    to       exercise    of

jurisdiction         of    Criminal      Courts      including         the     High

Court, under
Section 482
CrPC, the High Court in our
11
opinion was competent to entertain the petition under
Section 482
CrPC.
15. We find support for the above view, from the ratio

in the
State of M.P Vs. Madhukar Rao4
, wherein this

Court    while        adverting      to    the       provisions    of   another

legislation i.e. the
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972
opined     that       the    power    of       the    Magistrate    to    order

interim release of confiscated vehicle under
Section

451
CrPC,    is      not   affected.         The     Court   reasoned     that

withdrawal of the power of interim release conferred on

the     Authorities          under
Section       50(2)
,     cannot    be

construed to mean a bar on the powers of the Magistrate

under
Section 451
of the Code of Criminal Procedure. It

was next noted that a clear intention to the contrary

can be found in the Act in
Section 50(4)
under which,

any person detained, or things seized shall be taken

before a Magistrate to be dealt with according to law

(and not according to the provisions of the Act) .




4 2008 (14) SCC 624
12
16.
Pertinently, State of M.P Vs. Madhukar Rao5
affirmed

the decision of the High Court in
Madhukar Rao v. State

of MP6
, wherein Justice D.M Dharmadhikari, writing for

the Full Bench, opined that the provision of Section

39(1)(d)     of    the        Wildlife       (Protection)     Act,      1972,

providing for absolute vesting of seized property with

State Government, without a finding by the Competent

Court    that     the       property        was   being    used   for    the

commission        of     an     offence,          runs    afoul   of     the

Constitutional provisions. It is succinctly observed in

Para 18,

     “18… If the argument on behalf of the State is accepted
     a property seized on accusation would become the
     property of the State and can never be released even on
     the compounding of the offence. The provisions of Clause
(d) of
section 39
have to be reasonably and harmoniously
     construed with other provisions of the Act and the Code
     which together provide a detailed procedure for the
     trial of the offences. If, as contended on behalf of the
     State, seizure of property merely on accusation would
     make the property to be of the Government, it would have
     the result of depriving an accused of his property
     without proof of his guilt. On such interpretation
     Clause (d) of
section 39(1)
of the Act would suffer from
     the vice of unconstitutionality. The interpretation
     placed by the State would mean that a specified officer
     under the Act merely by seizure of property of an
     accused would deprive him of his property which he might
     be using for his trade, profession or occupation. This
     would be serious encroachment on the fundamental right
     of a citizen under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution
     to carry on his trade, occupation or business.”

5 2008 (14) SCC 624
6 (2000) 1 MP LJ 289 (FB)
13
17. By reason of an order of confiscation, a person is

deprived of the enjoyment of his property.
Article 300A
of the Constitution provides that no person shall be

deprived     of      his     property         save   by   authority      of   law.

Therefore, to deprive any person of their property, it

is necessary for the State, inter-alia, to establish

that the property was illegally obtained or is part of

the proceeds of crime or the deprivation is warranted

for public purpose or public interest.
18. At      this      stage,       we    may      usefully      refer    to   this

Court’s opinion in
State of W.B vs. Sujit Kumar Rana7
.

Here it was emphasized on the need to maintain balance

between statutes framed in public interest such as the
Forest Act, 1927
(and the relevant insertions under W.B

Act    22   of     1988)      and       the     consequential     proceedings,

depriving a person of his property, arising therefrom.

It    was   accordingly            observed       that    “commission      of   an

offence”      is      one     of     the      requisite      ingredients        for

passing     an       order    of     confiscation         and    an     order   of

7 (2004) 4 SCC 129
14
confiscation should not be passed automatically. The

relevant passage is reproduced below:
“26. An order of confiscation of forest produce in a
      proceeding under
Section 59-A
of the Act would not amount
      either to penalty or punishment. Such an order, however, can
      be passed only in the event a valid seizure is made and the
      authorized officer satisfies himself as regards ownership of
      the forest produce in the State as also commission of a
      forest offence. An order of confiscation is not to be passed
      automatically, and in terms of sub-section (3) of Section
      59-A a discretionary power has been conferred upon the
      authorized officer in relation to a vehicle. Apart from the
      ingredients which are required to be proved in terms of sub-
      section (3) of Section 59-A by reason of the proviso
      appended to Section 59-B, a notice is also required to be
      issued to the owner of the vehicle and furthermore in terms
      of sub-section (2) thereof an opportunity has to be granted
      to the owner of the vehicle so as to enable him to show that
      the same has been used in carrying forest produce without
      his knowledge or connivance and by necessary implication
      precautions therefor have been taken.”
19. Insofar as the submission of the State Counsel that

the   burden      of    proof   is    on    the     truck   owner   in   the

process of confiscation, we must observe that Section

13A of the 2004 Act, which shifts the burden of proof,

is not applicable for the confiscation proceedings but

for the process of prosecution. By virtue of Section

13A of the 2004 Act, the burden on the State authority

to legally justify the confiscation order, cannot be

shifted      to        the   person        facing     the    confiscation
15
proceeding.        The       contention      to    the    contrary    of    the

State’s counsel, is accordingly rejected.
20. In     the   present       case,      the     appellant’s      truck    was

confiscated      on     account      of     the    criminal       proceedings

alone    and     therefore, under the applicable law,                      the

vehicle cannot          be     withheld and then confiscated by

the     State, when           the    original         proceedings          have

culminated into acquittal. It is also not the projected

case that there is a likelihood that the appellant’s

truck will be used for committing similar offence.
21. It should be noted that the objective of the 2004

Act is punitive and deterrent in nature.
Section 11
of

the 2004 Act and Rule 5 of M.P Govansh Vadh Pratishedh

Rules, 2012, allows for seizure and confiscation of

vehicle, in case of violation of
sections 4
,
5
,
6
, 6A and

6B. The confiscation proceeding, before the District

Magistrate,      is     different      from       criminal       prosecution.
However,    both      may     run   simultaneously,          to    facilitate

speedy     and   effective          adjudication          with    regard     to

confiscation       of    the    means       used    for    committing       the
16
offence.   The      District   Magistrate      has   the     power   to

independently       adjudicate   cases    of     violations        under
Sections 4
,
5
,
6
, 6A and 6B of the 2004 Act and pass

order of confiscation in case of violation. But in a

case where the offender/accused are acquitted in the

Criminal     Prosecution,      the    judgment       given    in     the

Criminal Trial should be factored in by the District

Magistrate while deciding the confiscation proceeding.

In the present case, the order of acquittal was passed

as evidence was missing to connect the accused with the

charges. The confiscation of the appellant’s truck when

he is acquitted in the Criminal prosecution, amounts to

arbitrary deprivation of his property and violates the

right guaranteed to each person under
Article 300A.
Therefore,    the    circumstances     here    are    compelling      to

conclude     that    the   District    Magistrate’s          order    of

Confiscation (ignoring the Trial Court’s judgment of

acquittal), is not only arbitrary but also inconsistent

with the legal requirements.
17
22. In view of the foregoing, the confiscation order of

the District Magistrate cannot be sustained and it is

declared so accordingly. Consequently, the High Court’s

decision   to   the   contrary    is   set   aside.   The   appeal

stands allowed with this order without any order on

cost.
……………………………………………………J.
                                        [K.M. JOSEPH]



                                        ……………………………………………………J.
                                        [HRISHIKESH ROY]
NEW DELHI
MARCH 04, 2022
18