[Cites
5
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Ramji Lal Sharma on 9 March, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
B. V. Nagarathna
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.293 OF 2022


         State of M.P.                                                 ..Appellant(S)


                                                 Versus


         Ramji Lal Sharma & Anr.                                     ..Respondent(S)


                                           JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 13.12.2018 passed by the High

                         Court of Madhya Pradesh, Bench at Gwalior in Criminal

                         Appeal No.339 of 2006, by which, the High Court has

                         allowed the said appeal and has acquitted respondent No.1

                         and 2 herein – original accused No.1 and 3, for the offences
Signature Not Verified   punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.03.09
IPC
, by giving benefit of doubt, the State of Madhya Pradesh
16:30:33 IST
Reason:
1
has preferred the present appeal.
2.   As per the prosecution case sometime prior to 8:30 in the

     morning of 17.01.2002, one Devendra, son of Bhagirath,

     brother of deceased Munshilal, went to the house of

     accused Ramjilal for demanding money for grinding of

     wheat in the flour mill and accused persons Mukesh (A­4)

     and Brijesh (A­3) met him. When Devendra demanded

     money, then, accused No.3 and accused No.4 assaulted him

     with kicks and punches. Somehow, he rescued himself. The

     said incident was brought to the notice of the complainant

     Laxminarayan. The brother of Devendra, namely, Ramgopal

     and father Bhagirath, went to the house of accused persons

     for enquiring about the scuffle. All the accused were going

     towards the house of the deceased Munshilal. While seeing

     them, the cousin brother of deceased namely Laxminarayan

     also reached the door of Munshilal. The accused­Mukesh

     was carrying 12 bore double barreled firearm, accused­Kallu

     Brijkishore was carrying 12 bore single barreled firearm and

     accused Brijesh alias Sadhu alias Brijnandan and Ramjilal

     were carrying axe. At that time, the deceased was returning

     after urinating in Goda of Ramswaroop. All the accused
2
persons surrounded him. Accused­Ramjilal hit with the axe

on Munshilal, which was obstructed and held by the

deceased and thereafter, accused Mukesh fired from his

firearm. The accused­Kallu also fired from his firearm. The

deceased Munshilal fell down in the Goda of Ramswaroop.

The entire incident was seen by eye witnesses including the

original   complainant   –       Laxminarayan       (PW­1).        When

Laxminarayan, Devendra and Surender put Munshilal on

the Cot (charpai) to take him to the Police Station but

Munshilal died while he was being taken to the Police

Station. The complainant Laxminarayan got recorded the

First Information Report of the incident in the morning at

9:20 against all the four accused for the offences punishable

under
Sections 302
,
307
,
34
of IPC and Section 3(2)(v) of the

Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of

Atrocities) Act. The Investigating        Officer    initiated the

investigation and recorded the statements of the witnesses.

He prepared the punchnama. He collected the post mortem

report/medical    evidence.       After   conclusion          of    the

investigation, the Investigating Officer filed a chargesheet

against all the accused for the offences punishable under
3
Sections 302
,
307
and
34
of the IPC and Section 3(2)(5) of

     the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of

     Atrocities) Act. As the case was exclusively triable by the

     Court of Sessions, the case was committed to the Court of

     Sessions. The accused pleaded not guilty and therefore, all

     of them came to be tried by the learned Trial Court for the

     aforesaid offences.
3.   To prove the case, the prosecution examined five eye

     witnesses including PW1, PW3 and PW5. The prosecution

     also examined Dr. R.K. Taneja as PW6. The Investigating

     Officer was also examined by the prosecution. After closure

     of the evidence on the side of the prosecution, further

     statements of accused under
Section 313
of Cr.PC were

     recorded. Their case was of total denial. That thereafter, on

     appreciation of evidence on record oral as well as the

     documentary, the learned Trial Court held that all the

     accused shared the common intention to kill the deceased.

     On appreciation of evidence on record, the learned Trial

     Court held all the accused guilty for the offences punishable

     under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
of the IPC and

     sentenced all the accused to undergo life imprisonment with
4
a fine of Rs.5,000/­ each.
3.1   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

      judgment and order of conviction the accused preferred

      Criminal Appeal No.339/2006 before the High Court. By the

      impugned judgment and order, the High Court has allowed

      the appeal preferred by respondent No.1 and 2 herein –

      original accused No.1 and 3, by giving them benefit of doubt

      and by observing that there is a contradiction in the ocular

      and the medical evidence and therefore their presence itself

      is doubtful.
3.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court acquitting

      respondent No.1 and 2 herein – original accused No. 1 and

      3, by giving them benefit of doubt, the State has preferred

      the present appeal.
4.    Having heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      respective parties at length and on going through the

      impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court, it

      appears that while acquitting the accused the High Court

      has observed in paragraph 14 as under: ­
           “14. After hearing the arguments and going through the
           record, two things are apparent; one, involvement of
5
appellant No.1 Ramjilal Sharma and Appellant No.3
           Brajmohan @ Kallu is not made out as ocular evidence is not
           corroborated by medical evidence given by Dr. Taneja (P.W.6)
           and secondly, as far as appellant No.2 Brijkishore Sharma @
           Kallu is concerned, in view of specific finding given by Dr.
           R.K.Taneja (P.W.6), that cause of death was homicidal and it
           occurred because of injury in femoral artery as well as gun
           shot injury in lungs, it can not be said that femoral artery is
           not a vital organ. Thus, it is apparent that Kallu shared
           common intention, whereas presence of appellant No.1 and 3
           is doubtful. Therefore, appellants No.1 and 3 should have
           been extended benefit of doubt which has been wrongly
           denied by the trial court. When no independent witnesses are
           examined and medical evidence is not corroborated by the
           prosecution story, then conviction was reversed as held by
           the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Lilia Vs. State of
           Rajasthan as reported in (2014) 16 SCC 303. Therefore, this
           court finds that this is a fit cases to record acquittal in favour
           of appellants No.1 Ramjilal and No.3 Brijnandan @ Brijesh
           Sharma. As far as conviction of appellant No.2 under
Section
           302
with the aid of
Section 34
of IPC is concerned, it is clearly
           made out.”

           Except the above findings/reasoning no other findings

      are recorded by the High Court.
4.1   From the impugned judgment and order passed by the High

      Court, it appears that what has weighed with the High

      Court is that there is discrepancy in the ocular evidence as

      well as the medical evidence and/ or the ocular evidence is

      not corroborated by the medical evidence and therefore, the

      presence of accused No.1 and 3 is doubtful. According to

      the High Court, eye witnesses PW1, PW3 and PW5 stated

      that accused No.1 and 3 were having axe in their hands,

      they attacked the deceased by their axe, however, as per the
6
medical evidence no such injury by axe is found. However, it

is required to be noted that PW1, PW3 and PW5 are all eye

witnesses to the incident and they are believed so far as the

other accused are concerned. It is also to be noted that right

from the very beginning of filing/lodging the FIR the names

of all the accused were disclosed. Accused No.1 and 3 were

also named in the FIR. All the eye witnesses are common in

saying that accused No.1 and 3 also came along with other

accused. Therefore, their presence has been established and

proved by the prosecution. Even on going through the

deposition of PW1, his case was that Ramjilal – accused

No.1 first hit Munshilal with an axe which was caught by

Munshilal with his hand. If that be so naturally there could

not be any injury on the hand of Munshilal. Even PW5, who

is also one of the witnesses, has also deposed and stated

even in cross­examination that Ramjilal hit axe and that

Munshilal caught head of axe, therefore, axe could not hit

Munshilal. Therefore, as such it cannot be said that there

are any material contradictions in the ocular and the

medical evidence of which benefit of doubt should be given

to the accused.
7
4.2   Even otherwise once it has been established and proved by

      the prosecution that all the accused came at the place of

      incident with a common intention to kill the deceased and

      as such, they shared the common intention, in that case it

      is immaterial whether any of the accused who shared the

      common intention had used any weapon or not and/or any

      of them caused any injury on the deceased or not.

4.3   As such the learned Trial Court in paragraph 35 gave

      specific findings on the common intention shared by all the

      accused to kill the deceased. However, the High Court has

      not at all considered the aforesaid vital aspect of the case.

      The High Court has also not discussed and/or re­

      appreciated the entire evidence on record and has acquitted

      accused No.1 and 3 by simply observing that there are

      contradictions in the ocular and medical evidence, and

      therefore the presence of accused No.1 and 3 is doubtful

      and therefore, they are entitled to the benefit of doubt. As

      observed hereinabove as such there are no material

      contradictions between the ocular and medical evidence.

      The presence of all the accused have been established and

      proved and the prosecution has also been successful in
8
proving that all the accused including accused No.1 and 3

     shared the common intention. Therefore, as such the

     learned Trial Court rightly convicted all the accused

     including accused No.1 and 3 for the offences punishable

     under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
of the IPC. The High

     Court has erred in reversing the conviction and acquitting

     accused No.1 and 3 – respondent No.1 and 2 herein, by

     giving them the benefit of doubt.
5.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the

     present appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and order

     passed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in Criminal

     Appeal No.339/2006 in so far as acquitting respondent No.1

     and 2 herein – original accused No.1 and 3 for the offences

     punishable under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
of the

     IPC is hereby quashed and set aside. The judgment and

     order   passed   by   the   learned   Trial   Court   convicting

     respondent No.1 and 2 herein ­ original accused No.1 and 3

     for the offences punishable under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
of the IPC is hereby restored.        The sentence

     imposed by the learned Trial Court is also restored. Now

     respondents herein – original accused to undergo the
9
remaining sentence as per the judgment and order of

    conviction and sentence passed by the learned Trial Court.

    Respondent No.1 and 2 to surrender before the concerned

    Jail authorities or Court within a period of four weeks from

    today. The present appeal is accordingly allowed.
…………………………………J.
                                    (M. R. SHAH)



                                    …………………………………J.
                                    (B. V. NAGARATHNA)

New Delhi,
March 09, 2022
10