[Cites
38
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Nahar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 16 March, 2022
Author:
Aniruddha Bose
Bench:
Aniruddha Bose
,
Vineet Saran
REPORTABLE



                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 443 OF 2022
                              (Arising out of Petition for Special Leave to Appeal
                                            (Crl.) No.8447 OF 2015)



                         NAHAR SINGH                                    .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                     VERSUS

                         THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH
                         & ANR.                                      …..RESPONDENT(S)




                                                 JUDGMENT
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J.
Leave granted.
2.    The question which we shall be addressing in this appeal

                         is whether a Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence on the
Signature Not Verified   basis of a police report in terms of Section 190 (1)(b) of The Code
Digitally signed by
Rachna
Date: 2022.03.16
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (the Code) can issue summons to
16:16:52 IST
Reason:
any person not arraigned as an accused in the police report and
                                                                                      Page | 1
whose name also does not feature in column (2) of such report.

In this case the person concerned, being the appellant, was not

named in the First Information Report either. The High Court of

Judicature at Allahabad has opined on this question in the

affirmative in the judgment delivered on 14th May, 2015. This

judgment is under appeal before us. The Chief Judicial

Magistrate (CJM), Bulandshahr, Uttar Pradesh had taken

cognizance of offences under
Sections 363
,
366
and
376
of the

Indian Penal Code, 1860 (1860 Code) on 8th August, 2012 on the

basis of police report. These are offences triable before a Court

of Session. The police report had named two individuals as

accused-Yogesh and Rupa (the spelling of the name of the latter

has   been   interchangeably   used   in   different   proceedings

emanating from the First Information Report (F.I.R.) as Roopa

and Rupa). The police report was made on the basis of an F.I.R

made by the mother of a lady victim (prosecutrix) on 9th May,

2012 in Police Station Chhatari, sub-district Shikarpur in the

district of Bulandshahr, Uttar Pradesh. In this F.I.R, she stated

that on 4th May, 2012, her minor daughter was enticed away by

said Yogesh and his two or three associates. Later on, a

                                                            Page | 2
radiologist on the basis of x-ray had found her to be a major,

aged about 18 years. But the age-issue of the victim is not in

controversy involved in this appeal.
3.    The Investigating Officer recovered the prosecutrix on 10th

May, 2012. Her statement under
Section 161
of the Code was

recorded on 10th May itself. In her statement, in substance, she

stated that Yogesh had committed rape upon her. The victim

was, thereafter, produced before the Additional Chief Judicial

Magistrate, Bulandshahr and her statement under
Section 164
of the Code was recorded on 14th May, 2012. In that statement,

she had disclosed the names of the accused Rupa, Yogesh as also

the appellant herein-Nahar Singh, as the persons who had

committed rape upon her. Her statement, inter-alia, was

recorded in the following terms:-
“It is an incident of 02.5.2012. It was 12 O’clock in the day.
      I was standing at the bus stand at that time. Two persons
      Rupa and Yogesh were standing there. Both of them
      forcibly took me to Pahasu. Both of them telephoned Nahar
      Singh there. He came there with a vehicle and all of them
      made me sit in that four wheeler vehicle and took me from
      there to Khurja. After closing the vehicle all of them took
      turns of rape on me. Thereafter, all of them consumed
      liquor and also forcibly made me drink liquor by putting it
      in Pepsi. Then again all of them forcibly raped me and
      threatened me if you may not live as wife of Yogesh we will
      ruin your family. These people made me unconscious and
      dressed me in bangles, Bichhia and also filled my Maang
                                                                       Page | 3
      and left me at Kamauna. I want to go with my father and
      mother.”
      (quoted verbatim from the copy of the statement as
      annexed to the paperbook)
4.     In her initial statement recorded under
Section 161
of the

Code, the name of Nahar Singh did not figure. The chargesheet

was submitted subsequently, in which Yogesh and Rupa were

arraigned as accused persons. On 8th August, 2012, the CJM,

Bulandshahr took cognizance of offence under
Sections 363
,
366
and
376
of the 1860 Code against accused Yogesh and Rupa.

The de facto complainant, being mother of the victim thereafter

had filed an application before the Court of the CJM in Criminal

Case No. 102/2012 praying for an order requiring appearance of

the appellant before the Court. In this application, it was inter-

alia, stated:-
“Accused Yogesh and Rupa are in judicial custody of the
      District Jail. Accused Nahar Singh is not arrested.
      Accused Nahar Singh has threatened the complainant and
      her family for number of times that they may withdraw the
      case against him otherwise he will implicate them in any
      false case. In this regard the complainant has submitted
      application before the Police Officers for arrest of Nahar
      Singh and for the safety and security of her family.
      Thereafter, the investigation of this case is transferred
      from PS: Chhattari to PS: Dibai. The Investigating Officer
      of PS: Dibai didn’t conduct impartial investigation. Despite
      having sufficient evidence against accused Nahar Singh
      the charge sheet is not submitted and the name of Nahar
                                                                     Page | 4
         Singh is deleted whereas accused Rupa and Nahar Singh
         have committed an offence of rape with xxxx against her
         consent, as is evident from statement recorded under
sections 161
and
164
Cr.P.C. There are sufficient grounds
         in the case diary to summon accused Nahar Singh in the
         matter. The complainant and her daughter had also given
         statement before the I.O. of PS: Dibai for commission of
         offence of rap by Nahar Singh. As per the provisions of
Section 190
Cr.P.C. the court takes cognizance for the
         offence and not for the accused.
Therefore, it is prayed that this Hon’ble Court may pass
         an order against accused Nahar Singh son of Megh Singh,
         resident of village Waan, PS: Chhattari to appear before
         the court. I shall be grateful to you.”
         (quoted verbatim from the copy of the application as
         annexed to the paperbook. Name of the victim has been
         masked with xxxx)
5.       In an order passed on 7th November, 2012, the CJM found

that there was no ground to summon the appellant for trial and

the said application was dismissed. The file was directed to be

presented for commitment on 16th November, 2012. Against this

order,     the   de   facto   complainant      invoked    the    revisional

jurisdiction of the Sessions Judge. Her application was registered

as Criminal Revision No.588/2012 and was listed before

Additional       District   and   Sessions     Judge     Court       No.    1,

Bulandshahr. We find from the order of the Revisional Court

passed on 13th January, 2015 that investigation of this case was

transferred from the first Investigating Officer of police station

                                                                       Page | 5
Chhatari to the Inspector in-charge of Police Station, Dibai, Shri

Ashok Kumar Yadav.         There was thus, change of the police

station also. The chargesheet was submitted by the latter on the

basis of which cognizance was taken. In the aforesaid order, the

sequence of events showing the trajectory of the investigation

was recorded by the Revisional Court in the following manner:-
“After the recovery of the daughter of the complainant the
      I.O. recorded her statement on 10.5.2012 under
Section
      161
Cr.P.C. Accused xxxx mentioned the name of accused
      Yogesh only in her statement whom she has stated to have
      induced and abducted her. Thereafter, the statement of
      the abducted was recorded under
Section 164
Cr.P.C. on
      14.5.2012 before the Magistrate wherein the victim stated
      that other than Yogesh two more persons being Rupa and
      Nahar Singh were involved in the offence. While
      mentioning the aforesaid statement made under
section
      164
Cr.P.C. on 19.50.2012 in Case Diary the I.O. added
section 376(g)
I.P.C. as two more persons being Rupa and
      Nahar Singh were implicated in the offence. Upon adding
      section 376(g) in the matter the then S.H.O. Harish
      Vardhan Singh took over the investigation and recorded
      the statements of the brother of the victim Sonu son of Sh.
Ramesh Chand resident of villag Waan and another person
      Boby son of Babu Lal resident of village Waan on 3.6.2012.
      Both the witnesses substantiated the occurrence of
      incident. It appears from the perusal of records that on an
      application of proposed accused Nahar Singh the
      Superintendent of Police, Bulandshehar transferred the
      investigation from Police Station Chhattari to Police
      Station Dibai on 14.6.2012 and entrusted the
      investigation to I.O. Ashok Kumar. The aforesaid Ashok
      Kumar Yadav, the in-charge Inspector of Police Station
      Dibai, during the investigation, again recorded the
      statements of victim xxxx, her mother Smt. Kamlesh,
      complainant under
Section 161
Cr.P.C and concluded that
      Nahar Singh son of Sh. Megh Singh resident of village
      Waan had no role in the abduction of xxxx nor he

                                                                    Page | 6
      committed any offence like rape with her. He was
      implicated by complainant and the opposite party of Nahar
      Singh only due to enmity in the village. As a result, the I.O.
      filed charge sheet against the nominated accused Yogesh
      and co-accused Rupa.”
      (quoted verbatim from the copy of the Revisional Court’s
      judgment     as     annexed    to     the    paperbook.
Name of the victim has been masked with xxxx)
6.    The Revisional Court set aside the order passed by the

CJM on 7th November, 2012 by which the application of the

de facto complainant was rejected. The matter was remanded to

the Court of the CJM and the latter was directed to dispose of

the said application in view of the observations made in the

judgment of the Revisional Court. It was also observed in the

order of the Revisional Court that the Magistrate should pass a

lawful order to summon the accused, Nahar Singh in the matter.

This order was passed on 13th January, 2015.
7.    Thereafter, the CJM heard the matter on remand and in

an order passed on 5th February 2015, Nahar Singh (the

appellant) was directed to be summoned for trial on 21st

February, 2015. This order of the CJM was challenged by the

appellant by filing a Criminal Revision Petition before the

Sessions Judge, Bulandshahr. By a decision delivered on 20th

                                                                       Page | 7
April, 2015, the revisional application was dismissed. Against

this order of dismissal, the appellant approached the High Court

of Judicature at Allahabad by filing a Criminal Miscellaneous

Writ Petition bearing No. 11538/2015. Before the High Court,

apart from other points, it was argued that exercise of

jurisdiction by the CJM, under
Section 190 (1)(b)
of the Code was

impermissible in the subject case. The appellant’s case was that

as he had not been named as accused in the chargesheet, he

could only be summoned in exercise of jurisdiction under
Section

319
of the Code. Such submissions have been recorded in the

judgment under appeal.
Section 190
of the Code reads:-
“190. Cognizance of offences by Magistrates.
(1)   Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any
      Magistrate of the first class, and any Magistrate of the
      Second class specially empowered in this behalf under
      sub-section (2), may take cognizance of any offence-
(a) Upon receiving a complaint of facts which
                constitute such offence;
(b) Upon a police report of such facts;
(c) Upon information received from any person other
                than a police officer, or upon his own knowledge,
                that such offence has been committed.
(2)   The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any
      Magistrate of the second class to take cognizance under
      sub-section (1) of such offences as are within his
      competence to inquire into or try.”

                                                                    Page | 8
8.    In the judgment under appeal delivered on 14th May, 2015,

the High Court reiterated the well established principle of

criminal jurisprudence that cognizance taken by the Magistrate

is of an offence and not of an offender. The High Court held that

it was the duty of the Magistrate to find out with respect to the

complicity   of   any    person     apart    from    those    who     were

chargesheeted by sifting the corroborative evidence on record. In

case the Magistrate came to the conclusion that there was

clinching evidence supporting the allegations made against

persons who have not been chargesheeted, it was his duty to

proceed against such persons as well by summoning them. It

was, inter-alia, held by the High Court in the judgment under

appeal:-
“The summoning of additional accused person is an
      integral part of the proceedings where allegations of facts
      constituting an offence is made out for taking cognizance.
      At the time of taking cognizance, the Magistrate has only
      to see whether prima facie there are cogent reasons for
      issuing the process. The Magistrate is fully competent to
      take cognizance of an offence and there is no bar under
section 190
Cr.P.C. that once the process is issued against
      some of the accused persons, the Magistrate can not issue
      process to some other person against whom charge sheet
      was not submitted and against whom there is some
      material on record. The investigation was transferred at
      the instance of the accused persons who did not have any
      locus to direct the investigation to be transferred from one
                                                                     Page | 9
      police station to another police station. Only when the
      investigation was transferred to another police station on
      further investigation the witnesses were re-examined
      under
section 161
Cr.P.C pursuant to which the charge
      sheet was submitted against Yogesh and Roopa.
Section
      376(g)
IPC was also added after recording the statement of
      the victim recorded under
section 164
Cr.P.C which is a
      public document but the investigating officer did not
      seriously show or attach any importance to the statement
      recorded under
section 164
Cr.P.C before the court and
      proceeded to exonerate the applicant which clearly show
      the manner in which the investigation was done by Sri
      Harsh Vardhan, the investigating officer on the direction
      of S.S.P.Bulandshahar. The mere fact that the statement
      of the victim was subsequently recorded will not
      overshadow the statement recorded under
section 164
Cr.P.C. The victim cannot be treated with suspicion or
      discredited that she had not disclosed the complicity of the
      applicant in her statement under
section 161
Cr.P.C.”
      (quoted verbatim from the copy of the impugned
      judgment as annexed to the paperbook)
9.    As regards the point of law with which we are dealing with

in this appeal, in the impugned judgment, the High Court had

relied on decision of a Coordinate Bench of this Court in the case

of
SWIL Ltd. vs. State of Delhi and Another
[(2001) 6 SCC 670].
In this decision, argument was advanced that under
Section 190
of the Code, once process is issued against some accused, the

Magistrate cannot issue process to any other accused against

whom there might be materials on record. Such argument was

repelled. It was held by the Coordinate Bench in this case:-
Page | 10
      “7. Further, in the present case, there is no question of
      referring to the provisions of
Section 319
CrPC. That
      provision would come into operation in the course of any
      enquiry into or trial of an offence. In the present case,
      neither the Magistrate was holding enquiry as
      contemplated under
Section 2(g)
CrPC nor had the trial
      started. He was exercising his jurisdiction under
Section
      190
of taking cognizance of an offence and issuing process.
There is no bar under
Section 190
CrPC that once the
      process is issued against some accused, on the next date,
      the Magistrate cannot issue process to some other person
      against whom there is some material on record, but his
      name is not included as accused in the charge-sheet.”
10.   There was divergence of views of different Benches of this

Court on this point and ultimately the issue has been settled by

a Constitution Bench in the case of
Dharam Pal and Others vs.

State of Haryana and Another
[(2014) 3 SCC 306].
Before

dealing with the ratio of this decision, we shall narrate the

journey of the legal dispute to that stage, which has been

recorded in the judgment of
Dharam Pal
(supra) itself by the

Constitution Bench:-
“1. This matter was initially directed to be heard by a
      Bench of three Judges in view of the conflict of opinion in
      the decisions of two two-Judge Benches, in
Kishori
      Singh v. State of Bihar
, [(2004) 13 SCC 11: (2006) 1 SCC
      (Cri) 275];
Rajinder Prasad v. Bashir
[(2001) 8 SCC 522:
2002 SCC (Cri) 28] and SWIL Ltd. v. State of Delhi, [(2001)
      6 SCC 670: 2001 SCC (Cri) 1205]. When the matter was
      taken up for consideration by the three-Judge Bench on 1-
12-2004 [
Dharam Pal v. State of Haryana
, (2004) 13 SCC
      9: (2006) 1 SCC (Cri) 273], it was brought to the notice of
      the Court that two other decisions had a direct bearing on
      the question sought to be determined.
The first is Kishun
                                                                    Page | 11
Singh v. State of Bihar, [(1993) 2 SCC 16: 1993 SCC (Cri)
470], and the other is a decision of a three-Judge Bench
in
Ranjit Singh v. State of Punjab
, [(1998) 7 SCC 149: 1998
SCC (Cri) 1554].
2.
Ranjit Singh
case [(1998) 7 SCC 149 : 1998 SCC (Cri)
1554] disapproved the observations made in Kishun Singh
case [(1993) 2 SCC 16 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 470] which was to
the effect that the Sessions Court has power under
Section
193
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, hereinafter
referred to as “the Code”, to take cognizance of an offence
and summon other persons whose complicity in the
commission of the trial could prima facie be gathered from
the materials available on record.
3. According to the decision in Kishun Singh case [(1993)
2 SCC 16 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 470], the Sessions Court has
such power under
Section 193
of the Code.
On the other
hand, in
Ranjit Singh
case [(1998) 7 SCC 149 : 1998 SCC
(Cri) 1554], it was held that from the stage of committal till
the Sessions Court reached the stage indicated in
Section
230
of the Code, that Court could deal only with the
accused referred to in
Section 209
of the Code and there is
no intermediary stage till then enabling the Sessions Court
to add any other person to the array of the accused.
4. The three-Judge Bench [Dharam Pal v. State of
Haryana, (2004) 13 SCC 9 : (2006) 1 SCC (Cri) 273] took
note of the fact that the effect of such a conclusion is that
the accused named in column 2 of the charge-sheet and
not put up for trial could not be tried by exercise of power
by the Sessions Judge under
Section 193
read with
Section 228
of the Code. In other words, even when the
Sessions Court applied its mind at the time of framing of
charge and came to the conclusion from the materials
available on record that, in fact, an offence is made out
against even those who are shown in column 2, it has no
power to proceed against them and has to wait till the stage
under
Section 319
of the Code is reached to include such
persons as the accused in the trial if from the evidence
adduced, their complicity was also established. The
further effect as noted by the three-Judge Bench was that
in less serious offences triable by the Magistrate, he would
have the power to proceed against those mentioned in
column 2, in case he disagreed with the police report, but
in regard to serious offences triable by the Court of

                                                                 Page | 12
      Session, the Court would have to wait till the stage of
Section 319
of the Code was reached.
5. The three-Judge Bench disagreed with the views
      expressed in
Ranjit Singh
case [(1998) 7 SCC 149 : 1998
      SCC (Cri) 1554], but since the contrary view expressed
      in
Ranjit Singh
case [(1998) 7 SCC 149 : 1998 SCC (Cri)
      1554] had been taken by a three-Judge Bench, the three-
      Judge Bench hearing this matter, by its order dated 1-12-
      2004 [
Dharam Pal v. State of Haryana
, (2004) 13 SCC 9 :
(2006) 1 SCC (Cri) 273] , directed the matter to be placed
      before the Chief Justice for placing the same before a larger
      Bench.”
11.   The questions which were formulated for answer by the

Constitution Bench in the case of
Dharam Pal
(supra) were:-
“7.1. Does the Committing Magistrate have any other role
      to play after committing the case to the Court of Session
      on finding from the police report that the case was triable
      by the Court of Session?
7.2. If the Magistrate disagrees with the police report and
      is convinced that a case had also been made out for trial
      against the persons who had been placed in column 2 of
      the report, does he have the jurisdiction to issue summons
      against them also in order to include their names, along
      with Nafe Singh, to stand trial in connection with the case
      made out in the police report?
7.3. Having decided to issue summons against the
      appellants, was the Magistrate required to follow the
      procedure of a complaint case and to take evidence before
      committing them to the Court of Session to stand trial or
      whether he was justified in issuing summons against them
      without following such procedure?
7.4. Can the Sessions Judge issue summons under
Section 193
CrPC as a court of original jurisdiction?

      7.5. Upon the case being committed to the Court of
      Session, could the Sessions Judge issue summons
      separately under
Section 193
of the Code or would he have

                                                                      Page | 13
      to wait till the stage under
Section 319
of the Code was
      reached in order to take recourse thereto?

      7.6.
Was Ranjit Singh
case [(1998) 7 SCC 149 : 1998 SCC
      (Cri) 1554], which set aside the decision in Kishun Singh
      case [(1993) 2 SCC 16 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 470] , rightly
      decided or not?”
12.   As regards scope of jurisdiction of the Magistrate in a

situation of this nature, it was held by the Constitution Bench in

the case of
Dharam Pal
(supra):-
“35. In our view, the Magistrate has a role to play while
      committing the case to the Court of Session upon taking
      cognizance on the police report submitted before him
      under
Section 173(2)
CrPC. In the event the Magistrate
      disagrees with the police report, he has two choices. He
      may act on the basis of a protest petition that may be filed,
      or he may, while disagreeing with the police report, issue
      process and summon the accused. Thereafter, if on being
      satisfied that a case had been made out to proceed against
      the persons named in column 2 of the report, proceed to
      try the said persons or if he was satisfied that a case had
      been made out which was triable by the Court of Session,
      he may commit the case to the Court of Session to proceed
      further in the matter.
36. This brings us to the third question as to the
      procedure to be followed by the Magistrate if he was
      satisfied that a prima facie case had been made out to go
      to trial despite the final report submitted by the police. In
      such an event, if the Magistrate decided to proceed against
      the persons accused, he would have to proceed on the
      basis of the police report itself and either inquire into the
      matter or commit it to the Court of Session if the same was
      found to be triable by the Sessions Court.”
13.   Another Constitution Bench in the case of
Hardeep Singh

vs. State of Punjab and Others
[(2014) 3 SCC 92] followed
Page | 14
Dharam Pal
(supra).
It was opined by the Constitution Bench in

the case of
Hardeep Singh
(supra):-
“111. Even the Constitution Bench in Dharam Pal
      (CB) [(2014) 3 SCC 306 : AIR 2013 SC 3018] has held that
      the Sessions Court can also exercise its original
      jurisdiction and summon a person as an accused in case
      his name appears in Column 2 of the charge-sheet, once
      the case had been committed to it. It means that a person
      whose name does not appear even in the FIR or in the
      charge-sheet or whose name appears in the FIR and
      not in the main part of the charge-sheet but in Column
      2 and has not been summoned as an accused in
      exercise of the powers under
Section 193
CrPC can
      still be summoned by the court, provided the court is
      satisfied that the conditions provided in the said
      statutory provisions stand fulfilled.”
                                             (emphasis added)
14.   Earlier, a Coordinate Bench in the case of
Raj Kishore

Prasad vs. State of Bihar and Another
[(1996) 4 SCC 495]

expressed the view that power under
Section 209
of the Code to

summon a new offender was not vested with a Magistrate.
In this

decision, the correctness of the view taken in the cases of
Kishun

Singh & Others vs. State of Bihar
[(1993) 2 SCC 16] and Nisar

and Another vs. State of U.P. [(1995) 2 SCC 23] was doubted.
The latter decision followed Kishun            Singh (supra).
The

Constitution Bench in the case of
Dharam Pal
(supra) affirmed

the view taken by this Court in the case of Kishun Singh (supra)

and overruled
Raj Kishore Prasad
(supra).
In fact, again a
                                                                  Page | 15
Coordinate Bench in the case of
Balveer Singh and Another vs.

State of Rajasthan and Another
[(2016) 6 SCC 680] has

followed both
Dharam Pal
(supra) and Kishun Singh (supra). In

the latter authority (i.e., Kishun Singh), it was, inter-alia, held:-
“13. The question then is whether de hors
Section 319
of
      the Code, can similar power be traced to any other
      provision in the Code or can such power be implied from
      the scheme of the Code? We have already pointed out
      earlier the two alternative modes in which the Criminal
      Law can be set in motion; by the filing of information with
      the police under
Section 154
of the Code or upon receipt
      of a complaint or information by a Magistrate. The former
      would lead to investigation by the police and may
      culminate in a police report under
Section 173
of the Code
      on the basis whereof cognizance may be taken by the
      Magistrate under
Section 190(1)(b)
of the Code. In the
      latter case, the Magistrate may either order investigation
      by the police under
Section 156(3)
of the Code or himself
      hold an inquiry under
Section 202
before taking
      cognizance of the offence under
Section 190(1)(a)
or (c), as
      the case may be, read with
Section 204
of the Code. Once
      the Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence he may
      proceed to try the offender (except where the case is
      transferred under
Section 191
) or commit him for trial
      under
Section 209
of the Code if the offence is triable
      exclusively by a Court of Session. As pointed out earlier
      cognizance is taken of the offence and not the offender.
      This Court in
Raghubans Dubey v. State of Bihar
[(1967) 2
      SCR 423 : AIR 1967 SC 1167 : 1967 Cri LJ 1081] stated
      that once cognizance of an offence is taken it becomes the
      Court's duty ‘to find out who the offenders really are’ and
      if the Court finds ‘that apart from the persons sent up by
      the police some other persons are involved, it is its duty to
      proceed against those persons’ by summoning them
      because ‘the summoning of the additional accused is part
      of the proceeding initiated by its taking cognizance of an
      offence’.
Even after the present Code came into force, the
      legal position has not undergone a change; on the contrary
      the ratio of
Dubey
case [(1967) 2 SCR 423 : AIR 1967 SC
      1167 : 1967 Cri LJ 1081] was affirmed in
Hareram
                                                                      Page | 16
      Satpathy v. Tikaram Agarwala
[(1978) 4 SCC 58 : 1978
      SCC (Cri) 496 : (1979) 1 SCR 349 : AIR 1978 SC 1568].
      Thus far there is no difficulty.”
15.   There is a difference so far as the position of law on which

the opinions of the two Constitution Benches were delivered in

relation to the facts of the present case.
In the cases of
Dharam

Pal
(supra) and
Hardeep Singh
(supra), summons were issued

against the persons whose names had figured in column (2) of

the chargesheet. Both these authorities also dealt with exercise

of jurisdiction of the Court of Session under
Section 193
of the

Code. This provision reads:-
“193. Cognizance of offences by Courts of Session.

      Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Code or by
      any other law for the time being in force, no Court of
      Session shall take cognizance of any offence as a Court of
      original jurisdiction unless the case has been committed
      to it by a Magistrate under this Code.”
16.   It would appear from the Code that the jurisdiction to take

cognizance has been vested in the Magistrate (under
Section 190
thereof) as also Court of Session under
Section 193
, which we

have quoted above. This question has been examined in the case

of
Dharam Pal
(supra) and on this point it has been held:-
Page | 17
      “39. This takes us to the next question as to whether
      under
Section 209
, the Magistrate was required to take
      cognizance of the offence before committing the case to the
      Court of Session. It is well settled that cognizance of an
      offence can only be taken once. In the event, a
      Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence and then
      commits the case to the Court of Session, the question
      of taking fresh cognizance of the offence and,
      thereafter, proceed to issue summons, is not in
      accordance with law. If cognizance is to be taken of the
      offence, it could be taken either by the Magistrate or
      by the Court of Session. The language of
Section 193
of
      the Code very clearly indicates that once the case is
      committed to the Court of Session by the learned
      Magistrate, the Court of Session assumes original
      jurisdiction and all that goes with the assumption of such
      jurisdiction. The provisions of
Section 209
will, therefore,
      have to be understood as the learned Magistrate playing a
      passive role in committing the case to the Court of Session
      on finding from the police report that the case was triable
      by the Court of Session. Nor can there be any question of
      part cognizance being taken by the Magistrate and part
      cognizance being taken by the learned Sessions Judge.”
                                               (emphasis added)


    The scope of jurisdiction of the Magistrate in taking

cognizance of an offence was earlier examined by a three-judge

Bench of this court in the case of
Raghubans Dubey vs. State

of Bihar
[AIR 1967 SC 1167].
This authority was relied upon by

the Coordinate Bench in the case of Kishun Singh (supra).
Dealing with broadly similar provisions of the old Code, of 1898,

it was observed by this Court:-
“8. ……….In our opinion, once cognizance has been taken by
      the Magistrate, he takes cognizance of an offence and not
      the offenders; once he takes cognizance of an offence it is
      his duty to find out who the offenders really are and once

                                                                     Page | 18
      he comes to the conclusion that apart from the persons
      sent up by the police some other persons are involved, it is
      his duty to proceed against those persons. The summoning
      of the additional accused is part of the proceeding initiated
      by his taking cognizance of an offence. As pointed out by
      this Court in
Pravin Chandra Mody v. State of Andhra
      Pradesh
[(1965) 1 SCR 269] the term “complaint” would
      include allegations made against persons unknown. If a
      Magistrate takes cognizance under
Section 190(1)(a)
on
      the basis of a complaint of facts he would take cognizance
      and a proceeding would be instituted even though persons
      who had committed the offence were not known at that
      time. The same position prevails, in our view, under
Section 190(1)(b)
.”
17.
In the case of Kishun Singh (supra), the scope of

jurisdiction of the Court of Session under
Section 193
of the Code

was explained, relying on an authority dealing with similar

provision under the 1898 Code (
P.C. Gulati vs. Lajya Ram and

Others
[AIR 1966 SC 595]).
The phrase used to explain the

implication of taking cognizance by a Court of Session in the

judgment of Kishun Singh (supra) was “cognizance in the limited

sense.” In paragraph 8 of the report (in Kishun Singh’s case), it

has been held observed:-
“8.
Section 193
of the old Code placed an embargo on the
      Court of Session from taking cognizance of any offence as
      a court of original jurisdiction unless the accused was
      committed to it by a Magistrate or there was express
      provision in the Code or any other law to the contrary.
In
      the context of the said provision this Court in
P.C.
      Gulati v. L.R. Kapur
[(1966) 1 SCR 560, 568 : AIR 1966 SC
      595 : 1966 Cri LJ 465] observed as under:
“When a case is committed to the Court of
           Session, the Court of Session has first to
                                                                      Page | 19
          determine whether the commitment of the case
          is proper. If it be of opinion that the commitment
          is bad on a point of law, it has to refer the case
          to the High Court which is competent to quash
          the proceeding under
Section 215
of the Code. It
          is only when the Sessions Court considers the
          commitment to be good in law that it proceeds
          with the trial of the case. It is in this context that
          the Sessions Court has to take cognizance of the
          offence as a court of original jurisdiction and it
          is such a cognizance which is referred to in
Section 193
of the Code.””
18.   Jurisdiction of the Magistrate to take cognizance of an

offence triable by a Court of Session is not in controversy before

us. The course open to a Magistrate on submission of a police

report has been discussed in the case of
Dharam Pal
(supra). In

paragraph 39 of the report in Dharam Pal’s case, such power or

jurisdiction of the Magistrate has been spelt out. We have quoted

this passage earlier in this judgment.
19.   The other difference so far as this case is concerned in

relation to the factual basis on which the decision of the

Constitution Bench in
Dharam Pal
(supra) as also the judgment

in the case of
Raghubans Dubey
(supra) were delivered is that

in both these cases, the names of the persons arraigned as

accused had figured in column (2) of the charge sheet.
This

column, as it appears from the judgment in the case of
Page | 20
Raghubans Dubey
(supra), records the name of a person under

the   heading   “not    sent    up”.   In   that    case,   the   person

concerned was named in the F.I.R. But that factor, by itself, in

our opinion ought not to be considered as a reason for the

Court in not summoning an accused not named in the F.I.R. and

whose name also does not feature in chargesheet at all. These

judgments were delivered in cases where the names of the

persons sought to be arraigned as accused appeared in

column    (2)   of   the    police   report.   In   our     opinion   the

legal proposition laid down while dealing with this point was not

confined to the power to summon those persons only, whose

names featured in column (2) of the chargesheet.
In the case of
Dharam Pal
(supra), the second point formulated (para 7.2)

related to persons named in column (2), but the issue

before the Constitution Bench related to that category of persons

only.
This is the position of law enunciated in the cases of
Hardeep Singh
(supra) and
Raghubans Dubey
(supra). In the

latter authority, the      duty of the Court taking cognizance of an

offence has been held “to find out who the offenders really are

and once he comes to the conclusion that apart from the persons

                                                                  Page | 21
sent up by the police some other persons are involved, it is his

duty to proceed against those persons”. Such duty to proceed

against other persons cannot be held to be confined to only those

whose names figure in column (2) of the chargesheet. As we have

already observed that in the aforesaid authorities, the question

of summoning the persons named in column (2) of the

chargesheet was involved, in our opinion inclusion in column (2)

was not held to be the determinant factor for summoning persons

other than those named as accused in the police report or

chargesheet.
The principle of law enunciated in
Raghubans

Dubey
(supra),
Dharam Pal
(supra) and
Hardeep Singh
(supra)

does not constrict exercise of such power of the Court taking

cognizance in respect of this category of persons (i.e., whose

names feature in column (2) of the chargesheet).
20.
In the cases of
Raghubans Dubey
(supra), SWIL Ltd.
(supra) and
Dharam Pal
(supra), the power or jurisdiction of the

Court or Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence on the basis

of a police report to summon an accused not named in the police

report, before commitment has been analysed. The uniform view

on this point, irrespective of the fact as to whether cognizance is
                                                            Page | 22
taken by the Magistrate under
Section 190
of the Code or

jurisdiction exercised by the Court of Session under
Section 193
thereof is that the aforesaid judicial authorities would not have

to wait till the case reaches the stage when jurisdiction under
Section 319
of the Code is capable of being exercised for

summoning a person as accused but not named as such in police

report. We have already expressed our opinion that such

jurisdiction to issue summons can be exercised even in respect

of a person whose name may not feature at all in the police

report, whether as accused or in column (2) thereof         if the

Magistrate is satisfied that there are materials on record which

would reveal prima facie his involvement in the offence. None of

the authorities limit or restrict the power or jurisdiction of the

Magistrate or Court of Session in summoning an accused upon

taking cognizance, whose name may not feature in the F.I.R. or

police report.
21.   In the present case, the name of the accused had

transpired from the statement made by the victim under
Section

164
of the Code.
In the case of
Dharam Pal
(supra), it has been
laid down in
clear terms that in the event the Magistrate
                                                           Page | 23
disagrees with the police report, he may act on the basis of a

protest petition that may be filed and commit the case to the

Court of Session. This power of the Magistrate is not exercisable

only in respect of persons whose names appear in column (2) of

the chargesheet, apart from those who are arraigned as accused

in the police report. In the subject-proceeding, the Magistrate

acted on the basis of an independent application filed by the de

facto complainant. If there are materials before the Magistrate

showing complicity of persons other than those arraigned as

accused or named in column 2 of the police report in commission

of an offence, the Magistrate at that stage could summon such

persons as well upon taking cognizance of the offence.
As we have

already discussed, this was the view of this Court in the case of
Raghubans Dubey
(supra).
Though this judgment dealt with the

provisions of the 1898 Code, this authority was followed in the

case of Kishun Singh (supra). For summoning persons upon

taking cognizance of an offence, the Magistrate has to examine

the materials available before him for coming to the conclusion

that apart from those sent up by the police some other persons

are involved in the offence. These materials need not remain

                                                          Page | 24
confined to the police report, charge sheet or the F.I.R.        A

statement made under
Section 164
of the Code could also be

considered for such purpose.
22.   Turning to the facts of the present case, we do not find any

error in the order of the Magistrate, which was affirmed by the

High Court. We accordingly affirm the judgment under appeal.
23.   The appeal is dismissed and the interim order passed in

this matter shall stand dissolved.
24.   Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
…………………………J.
                                            (VINEET SARAN)




                                          ..……………………….J.
                                            (ANIRUDDHA BOSE)


NEW DELHI;
16th March, 2022




                                                           Page | 25