[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Bata India Ltd. vs Workmen Of Bata India Ltd on 29 March, 2022
Author:
Ajay Rastogi
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
Ajay Rastogi
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6794 OF 2010

                          BATA INDIA LIMITED                             .....      APPELLANT

                                                     VERSUS

                          WORKMEN OF BATA INDIA LIMITED AND
                          ANOTHER                                        .....   RESPONDENTS




                                                         ORDER
It is an admitted position that the appellant - Bata India

                                Limited and the first respondent - Workmen of Bata India Limited,

                                an association of the appellant’s employees, had entered into the

                                settlements dated 11.03.1998 and 14.12.1998. As per the

                                appellant, by virtue of the settlements, the workmen had agreed to

                                produce a minimum of 1,200 pairs of shoes per shift. The weekly

                                target for production was fixed at 21,600 pairs of shoes in three

                                shifts working per day. The norm for calculation of incentive on

                                production was fixed at 12,960 pairs of shoes per week.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
2.     It is a case of the appellant that after 01.02.2001, workmen had
Charanjeet kaur
Date: 2022.03.29
18:02:50 IST
Reason:
deliberately adopted “go slow” tactics and did not produce the
C.A. No. 6794 OF 2010                                            Page 1 of 7
minimum agreed production as per the settlement. The production

        was below 50 per cent of the normal production. Despite repeated

        requests and warnings, the workmen did not pay any heed to

        increase production. Consequently, the appellant decided to pay

        pro-rata wages to those not meeting the mutually agreed target.

        However, the workmen refused payment and resorted to stay-in-

        strike. Apprehending danger to safety, the management declared

        lockout on 08.03.2000, which was lifted on 03.07.2000.
3.      The industrial dispute pertaining to justification of the lockout, strike

        of the workmen and “go slow” strategy on the part of the workmen

        was referred by the Government before the Industrial Tribunal,

        Bangalore. Despite referral, the dispute escalated as the strike

        continued for a long time resulting in prohibitory order1 by the

        Government dated 08.02.2001 over the continuance of the strike.

        By another order, the Government invoked power under Section

        10-B2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 19473 whereby the workmen

        were directed to report for duty. Following the order, the workmen

        resumed work from 12.02.2001.
1
Section 10(3)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
2 “Section 10B. Power to issue order regarding terms and conditions of service pending settlement of
dispute” inserted vide
Karnataka Act
5 of 1988,
sec. 3
(w.e.f. 07-04-1988).
3 For short, ‘the Act’.
C.A. No. 6794 OF 2010                                                                   Page 2 of 7
4.      We need not refer to other details as the issue raised is limited but

        observe that the respondent association dispute that the workmen

        had never adopted the “go slow” tactic.
5.      The impugned judgment by the High Court of Karnataka at

        Bangalore dated 11.04.2008 partly allowed the Writ Appeal No.

        2256/2006(L) filed by the appellant, inter alia, holding that “go slow”

        is nothing but sort of intentional refusal to work. In such a situation,

        the management could be justified in reducing or paying pro-rata

        wages. The mere presence of the employee at work without the

        workmen contributing and doing work would not entitle them to

        wages. The judgment observes that the workmen, 40 in number,

        had given normal production but significantly large number of

        workmen had deliberately not given adequate production in view of

        the call to “go slow”. The impugned judgment also records that the

        authorities could not decide the issue under
Section 33-C(1)
4
of the


4 33-C. Recovery of money due from an employer.—(1) Where any money is due to a workman from
an employer under a settlement or an award or under the provisions of Chapter V-A or Chapter V-B,
the workman himself or any other person authorised by him in writing in this behalf, or, in the case of
the death of the workman, his assignee or heirs may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery,
make an application to the appropriate Government for the recovery of the money due to him, and if
the appropriate Government is satisfied that any money is so due, it shall issue a certificate for that
amount to the Collector who shall proceed to recover the same in the same manner as an arrear of
land revenue:
Provided that every such application shall be made within one year from the date on which the
money became due to the workman from the employer:
Provided further that any such application may be entertained after the expiry of the said period of
one year, if the appropriate Government is satisfied that the applicant had sufficient cause for not
making the application within the said period.
C.A. No. 6794 OF 2010                                                                     Page 3 of 7
Act as the amounts could not be determined with certainty.
Nevertheless, the appellant was at fault as it was required to adhere

       to the principles of natural justice, especially when the workmen

       were disputing the factual position that there was fall in production

       by 50 per cent. The appellant should have heard the Union or the

       workmen before the management proceeded to deduct the pro-rata

       wages for “go slow” work. Having held so, the Division Bench took

       notice of the argument of the appellant that they had put notices on

       the notice board justifying the deduction of wages on a pro-rata

       basis. This, the Division Bench observed, was a matter of fact that

       cannot be gone into while exercising writ jurisdiction. What was

       required and necessary was giving proper opportunity to the

       affected person before making any deduction on pro-rata basis.

       Having observed so, the management was directed to pay the

       deducted/reduced wages to the employees within one month from

       the date of receipt of the order passed by the Division Bench.

       However, liberty was reserved for the appellant to take appropriate

       steps regarding “go slow” strategy adopted by a large section of the

       workmen and proceed in accordance with law.
6.     We do not think that most of the findings recorded in the impugned

       judgment require any interference or even clarification. The

       contention of the appellant that the finding in the impugned
C.A. No. 6794 OF 2010                                              Page 4 of 7
judgment pertaining to “go slow” strategy nothing sort of misconduct

       should be set aside does not impress us. The impugned judgment

       does not hold that any inquiry should have been conducted by the

       appellant. However, taking holistic and pragmatic view, it is stated

       that a fair opportunity shall be granted to the Union or workmen,

       especially when there was a dispute whether or not there was

       production on the agreed terms. Further the observations as to

       misconduct have been made in different context to hold that the “go

       slow” work was similar to or like intentional refusal of work.
7.     However, what is highlighted by the appellant before us is the

       failure of the Division Bench to take notice of the public notices

       which were put on the notice board to justify the pro rata reduction

       of wages. The notices are in the form of calculation of the wages

       actually paid. The workers were not given any opportunity to

       respond to these notices. Thus, on this aspect, we do not see any

       reason to disagree with the findings in the impugned judgment.
8.     While issuing notice vide order dated 24.08.2009 in the present

       appeal, the operation of the impugned order had been stayed,

       which order is continuing. In view of the aforesaid findings, we

       vacate the stay with the direction that the appellant would make

       payment of the reduced/deducted wages within one month. This
C.A. No. 6794 OF 2010                                               Page 5 of 7
means that full wages would be paid. We do not feel it will be

       appropriate to direct factual investigation or resort to the procedure

       of issue of notice, reply etc. at this belated stage. Accordingly, we

       also modify the direction given in the impugned judgment giving

       liberty to the appellant to take appropriate steps/actions regarding

       the “go slow” strategy for the period in question.
9.     The appellant has raised the grievance that the “go slow” strategy

       is still in continuation because of which the work and production are

       affected. The respondent herein has interpreted the impugned

       judgment as a direction to pay full wages. This is disputed by the

       counsel for the first respondent. However, the first respondent does

       not dispute and has accepted the findings in the impugned

       judgment that pro rata deduction/reduction in wages is permissible

       if there is a deliberate attempt to not produce or do work by resorting

       to “go slow” strategy. We perceive and believe that the impugned

       judgment protects the interest of the appellant and the workmen by

       prescribing the right procedure which should be followed in case

       the appellant is of the opinion that the workmen, though present on

       duty, are not working and are not giving the agreed production on

       the basis of which wages and incentives have been fixed. This

       would depend upon the factual matrix and have to be ascertained
C.A. No. 6794 OF 2010                                               Page 6 of 7
in case of dispute to render any firm opinion. The procedure

       prescribed should be followed.
10.    Recording the aforesaid, the appeal is disposed of without any

       order as to cost.
......................................J.
                                                         (AJAY RASTOGI)


                                             ......................................J.
                                                      (SANJIV KHANNA)
NEW DELHI;
MARCH 29, 2022.
C.A. No. 6794 OF 2010                                                  Page 7 of 7