[Cites
6
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Sukhdarshan Singh vs The State Of Punjab on 3 March, 2022
Author:
K.M. Joseph
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
K.M. Joseph
REPORTABLE

                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                              CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 811-812 OF 2022



                      SUKHDARSHAN SINGH                                                    APPELLANT(S)

                                                               VERSUS


                      THE STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS.                                           RESPONDENT(S)



                                                         JUDGMENT
K.M. JOSEPH, J.
1.     The appellant was appointed as a Clerk on 27.12.1979

                         by the State Transport Department. A criminal case (FIR)

                         came    to      be     registered     on    02.09.1986.         The     allegations

                         against      him       apparently     pertained       to       alleged     acts    of

                         embezzlement.           It    was    followed       by     a     chargesheet        on

                         06.10.1988. In connection with the said case, the appellant

                         came    to   be       suspended      w.e.f.      02.09.1986.       While    he     was

                         undergoing suspension, yet another occurrence took place

                         which     led     to    FIR    No.    51/1995      being       registered        under
Sections     307
and
506
of    the   Indian        Penal    Code,     1860
Signature Not Verified   (hereinafter referred to as ‘
IPC
’). The appellant came to
Digitally signed by
JAGDISH KUMAR
Date: 2022.03.03
17:54:47 IST
Reason:                  be convicted by the trial court with regard to FIR No.

                         51/1995 by judgment dated 17.09.1996. The appellant filed
1
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

 Criminal Appeal No. 703-SB/1996 against the conviction. The

 appellant was convicted under
Section 324
read with
Section

 506
of the IPC by the trial court.
2.     After a period of six years, the appellant came to be

 served with show cause notice dated 24.07.2002 under the

 Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970

 (hereinafter referred to as ‘1970 Rules’ for brevity). Rule

 13 (i) of the ‘1970 Rules’ reads as follows:
"Special procedure in certain cases-Notwithstanding
      anything contained in rules 8,9, 10, 11 and 12.
(i)     Where any penalty is imposed on a Government
              employee on the ground of conduct which has
              led to his conviction on a criminal charge;
or
               Provided   that  the   Commission  shall  be
               consulted,   where   such   consultation  is
               necessary, before any orders are made in any
               case under this rule.”

        The   appellant   responded    to    the   notice.   However,   by

 order      dated   13.03.2003,   it   was    decided   to   remove     the

 appellant. To continue with the narrative, as regards the

 first FIR relating to embezzlement, the Judicial Magistrate

 acquitted the appellant by order dated 22.12.2006. The fate

 of the criminal appeal against the judgment emanating from

 FIR No.51/1995 was as follows:
The    High   Court   sustained      the   conviction    of     the

 appellant under
Section 324
and
Section 506
of the IPC.

 However, it reduced the sentence under
Section 324
to the
2
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

 period undergone and ordered a sentence of one month for

 offence      under
Section     506
.         This    judgment     was    dated

 09.04.2008.
3.     The   appeal      preferred      by    the   appellant     against    the

 order dated 13.03.2003 came to be disposed of by order

 dated     29.01.2009.       By    the        said   order,    the    appellate

 authority found inter alia and ordered as follows:
“
Section 307
IPC is not fallen under the definition
      of “Mortal Turpitude.      But the sections i.e., 324
      and 506 of the case are very small and the simple
      imprisonment.    Therefore, it is abundantly and nor
      this offence is fallen under the category of “Moral
      Turpitude”   and   nor   this   case   is   belongs   to
      government proceedings. This personal dispute with
      the appellant and on causing some simple injuries to
      the other person by the appellant. The Hon’ble
      Punjab and Haryana High Court, by reducing his
      imprisonment,     has    dispensed    with     remaining
      imprisonment,    only   after    undergoing    39   days
      imprisonment. The Hon’ble High Court has taken this
      matter as sympathetically, therefore in view of the
      above I, also by giving sympathy, is hereby set
      asides   the   termination    order   and    is   hereby
      punishment for the appellant that he will be not
      given nothing for the suspension period and this
      period will be declared as Dies-Non period.          But
      this order, this appeal is disposed off.”
4.     Being     aggrieved       by    the     order    of    the    appellate

 authority      noting     that   the     appellant     will   not    be    given

 anything for the period of suspension and this period will

 be declared as dies-non, a civil suit came to be instituted

 on 09.12.2010 by the appellant. He sought a declaration to

 the     effect    that     the    order       dated    13.03.2003    and     the
3
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

 appellate authority’s order dated 29.01.2009 to the extent

 that the pay of the appellant was denied was illegal and

 arbitrary and against the Rules and that he was entitled to

 full pay for the period that he had been denied, the salary

 and benefits. He sought mandatory injunction to release the

 pay denied to him with 12 per cent interest. Upon contest,

 the suit came to be decreed as follows:
“As per my sequel of discussion on Issue No. 1 to 4
    discussed above, the suit of the plaintiff is decreed
    to the effect that order dated 13.03.2003 and order
    dated 29.01.2009/17.02.2009 to the extent whereby pay
    of the plaintiff has been denied are illegal,
    arbitrary and against the rules. However, it is made
    clear that the plaintiff is entitled to get salary
    which is denied by alleged orders but not of the
    period   during  which   the   plaintiff  and    undergo
    imprisonment.   Decree sheet be prepared.       File be
    consigned to record room after due compliance.”


        The appeal by the respondent-State was unsuccessful.

 This   led   to   the   second   appeal   from   which      the   present

 appeals arise. The second appeal came to be allowed by the

 High Court. In the original judgment, the High Court has

 proceeded to find that the appellate authority has rightly

 found that respondent is not entitled to monetary benefit

 during the intervening period from the date of termination

 till re-instatement having regard to the conviction, there

 being modification only in sentence. It was found that only

 a lenient view was taken by the appellate authority. It was

 in these circumstances, relying on Rule 7.3 of Punjab Civil

 Service Rules, hereinafter referred to as the ‘Rules’, the
4
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

 court found that the trial court and the appellate court

 erred      in    not     appreciating       that        the    appellant       was   not

 acquitted        in     the   criminal      case    and       also    that    Rule   7.3

 empowered         the     competent      authority        to        pass    appropriate

 order.     Therefore,         the    second      appeal       was    allowed    setting

 aside the judgments of the two courts.
In        the     review      filed   by     the        appellant       from   the

 judgment, complaint of the appellant was that the court

 erred      in     interpreting         Rule       7.3     of        the     Rules.   The

 appellant’s case was that Punjab Roadways under which the

 appellant        was     employed     had   adopted       the       1970    Rules.   The

 appellant was placed under suspension in the FIR of the

 year 1986 wherein he stood acquitted whereas the aforesaid

 FIR was different from the later FIR pursuant to which he

 has been convicted and therefore the question of treating

 the suspension period as dies non, in the said case did not

 arise. Appellant relied upon Rules 5, 13 and 15 of the 1970

 Rules. The learned Single Judge found that the appellant

 continued under suspension till 13.3.2003.                                It is further

 found that the appellate authority was entitled to regulate

 the suspension period under rule 15(f) of the 1970 Rules.

 It was further found that in view of Rule 15(f) of the 1970

 Rules and the order of suspension of 1988 not having been

 challenged and it remained intact as on the date of removal

 (13.3.2003), the review petition was allowed, to the extent
5
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

 of finding that a wrong provision, (Rule 7.3) was quoted in

 the    judgment        which     was       sought     to     be     reviewed.    The

 contention        that   dies     non      was   impermissible        because    the

 appellant was not placed under suspension with reference to

 the later FIR, was not accepted as the respondent continued

 to be under suspension.
It    is    feeling      aggrieved        by   the    original     judgment

 passed by the High Court allowing the second appeal and

 also   the    order      passed       in   review     that    the    plaintiff   is

 before us by way of these appeals.
5.     We   have    heard      Shri     Gurminder     Singh,      learned   Senior

 counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant and Shri D.S.

 Patwalia, learned Advocate General appearing on behalf of

 the respondent-State.
6.     Learned senior counsel for the appellant would point

 that once the High Court found that it was in error in

 drawing      support     from    Rule      7.3, it     was    in error      in   not

 noticing that it overturned the premise for the judgment

 allowing the second appeal. The judgment would have no legs

 to stand on and therefore, the appeal filed by the State

 ought to have been dismissed.
He would point out that Rule 7.3 indeed does not apply

 as found by the High Court. As regards Rule 15(v)(f) of the

 1970 Rules relied upon by the High Court, it is pointed out
6
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

 that it only provides for an order passed thereunder which

 can lead to an appeal under the 1970 Rules. In this case,

 learned senior counsel would reiterate the position which

 has    been    accepted     by   the       trial   Court     and     the   first

 appellant Court that once the removal of the employee has

 been found illegal and reversed, the employee is entitled

 to get the wages or the salary for the entire period and it

 is only this that has been done by the trial Court as also

 the first appellate Court and there is no occasion for the

 High Court to interfere thereunder.
Per     contra,   Shri     D.   S.    Patwalia,      learned     Advocate

 General for the respondent-State, would fairly submit that

 no reliance could be placed on Rule 15(v)(f) of the ‘1970

 Rules’ in the manner done by the High Court. He did submit

 that Rule 7.3 of the Rules was originally rightly applied.

 He    sought    to   draw   support        from    Rule    7.3-B.     He   would

 highlight the fact that this is a case where the guilt of

 the    appellant     was    established        before      the     trial   Court

 (conviction under
Section 324
and
Section 506
of the IPC)

 and what is more, the appellate Court viz., the High Court

 has confirmed the verdict. All that the High Court did was

 it reduced the period of imprisonment as already noticed.

 He would, therefore, point out that it is a case where the

 appellant did not deserve to get anything more than what

 was actually done by the appellate authority and it was for
7
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

 this reason that the respondents were prepared to accept

 the order of the appellate authority as it is. He further

 contended        that      the      appellant          would          continue       under

 suspension based on the earlier order of suspension.


 FINDINGS
7.     Admittedly, the appellant stood removed on 13.03.2003.

 This was on the basis of a conviction by the Criminal Court

 for offences under
Sections 324
and
506
of the IPC. Again

 undisputedly, in connection with another FIR, the appellant

 was placed under suspension on 02.09.1986. His services was

 terminated by removal by order dated 13.03.2003. It is this

 order of removal which came to be interfered with by the

 appellate        authority         on        29.01.2009.         As     noticed,        the

 appellate authority, however, directed that the appellant

 will    not     be   entitled      to        any    salary    for      the    period    in

 question and that it will be treated as dies non. It is

 this which triggered the litigation in the civil Court and

 we have noticed the decree which has been granted. The

 civil    Court       has   proceeded           on    the     basis      that     once     a

 termination has been set aside, the employee must get full

 salary without anything more. It is on this premise that

 the     trial    Court       and    the        first       appellate         Court    have

 proceeded       to   allow    the       suit       filed    by   the     appellant       by

 directing       that    subject         to    the    exception,         that    for     the

 period of imprisonment he would not get the salary and
8
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

 other benefits, he would get the salary for the rest of the

 period.
8.     In this regard, Shri Gurminder Singh would point out

 that there was no error committed by the Court for two

 reasons. He would submit that once the appellate authority

 found       the    termination    flawed    and    appellant       was    to    be

 reinstated,           clearly     the      appellate        authority          (in

 disciplinary          proceedings)      exceeded    the     limits       of    its

 authority in proceeding as if it could by the order deny

 him the salary treating it as punishment. It is equally so

 when    the       appellate    authority   ordered      dies     non.    In    this

 regard, he drew our attention to the penalties with which

 an employee can be visited under the Rules viz., Rule 5 of

 the ‘1970 Rules’. He would, therefore, point out that the

 appellate          authority    was     clearly    acting        illegally      in

 contemplating and providing for a punishment which is not

 within the four walls of the ‘1970 Rules’. Secondly, he

 would support the order by pointing out that it is settled

 law that once the termination is set aside, the employee

 must get all the benefits.
9.     We     have    perused    the    Rules   which     have    been    placed

 before us.           Rule 5 provides for the penalties with which

 the employee can be visited with. The scheme of the Rules

 further is that an appeal can be carried against certain
9
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

 orders which are mentioned in Rule 15. The manner in which

 the     appellate     authority       must   exercise       its       appellate

 jurisdiction is delineated in Rule 19.
10.    The punishment as it is so described by the appellate

 authority     viz.,       depriving   the    salary       and    placing    the

 employee under dies non, do not appear to be penalties

 provided in Rule 5. It was open to the appellate authority

 to enhance the punishment. The order, in other words, dated

 29.01.2009 to the extent it became the subject matter of

 the civil suit would appear to be beyond the power of the

 appellate authority. To that extent, the appellant may be

 justified in calling into question the direction to deny

 him the salary by the appellate authority and treating it

 as    dies    non    as    a   punishment.      It   is    not    a    penalty

 contemplated in law. This, however, is not to be the end of

 our enquiry.
11.    The question would arise as to what is to be done with

 regard to the period when the appellant was kept out of

 service as a result of the proceedings against him. This,

 in    turn,   must    be   broadly    divided    into     two    periods.   An

 employee may be kept out of service initially by way of an

 order    of   suspension.       The    disciplinary        proceedings      may

 culminate in an order of removal or dismissal or compulsory

 retirement. The order of suspension would then come to an

 end and it would merge in the order of removal interalia.
10
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

 After the order of removal inter alia till the order of

 reinstatement based on relief granted to the employee, the

 appellant    would    be   out   of   service.    According   to   Mr.

 Gurminder Singh what Rule 7.3 contemplates is power with

 the authority to provide for pay and allowances for the

 period the employee is kept out of service but limited to

 the period prior to the dismissal. The relevant part of the

 Rule 7.3 reads as follows:
“7.3. (1) When a Government employee, who has been
    dismissed,   removed   or  compulsorily   retired,   is
    reinstated as a result of appeal, revision or review,
    or would have been so reinstated but for his retirement
    on superannuation while under suspension or not, the
    authority competent to order re-instatement shall
    consider and make a specific order–
(a) regarding the pay and allowances to be paid to
       the Government employee for the period of his absence
       from duty including the period of suspension,
       preceding his dismissal, removal or compulsory
       retirement, as the case may be; and
(b) whether or not the said period shall be treated
       as a period spent on duty.
(2) Where the authority competent to order re-
instatement is of opinion that the Government employee,
    who had been dismissed, removed or compulsorily
    retired, has been fully exonerated, the Government
    employee shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule
    (6), be paid his full pay and allowances to which he
    would have been entitled, had he not been dismissed,
    removed or compulsorily retired or suspended, prior to
    such dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement, as
    the case may be:
Provided that where such authority is of opinion that
    the termination of the proceedings instituted against
    the Government employee had been delayed due to reasons
    directly attributable to the Government employee it
    may,   after   giving   him   an  opportunity  to  make
    representation      and     after    considering    the
    representation, if any, submitted by him, direct, for
11
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

    reasons to be recorded in writing, that the Government
    employee shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule
    (7), be paid for the period of such delay only such
    amount (not being the whole) of pay and allowances, as
    it may determine.
(3) In a case falling under sub-rule (2), the period of
    absence from duty including the period of suspension
    preceding dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement,
    as the case may be, shall be treated as a period spent
    on duty for all purposes.
(4) In cases other than those covered by sub-rule (2)
    including cases where the order of dismissal, removal
    or compulsory retirement from service is set aside by
    the authority exercising powers of appeal, revision or
    review solely on the ground of noncompliance with the
    requirements of clause (2) of
article 311
of the
    Constitution and no further inquiry is proposed to be
    held, the Government employee shall, subject to the
    provisions of sub-rules (6) and (7), be paid such
    amount (not being the whole) of pay and allowances to
    which he would have been entitled, had he not been
    dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired or suspended
    prior to such dismissal, removal or 106 [7.3] THE
    PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap.
VII] compulsory retirement, as the case may be, as the
    competent authority may determine, after giving notice
    to the Government employee of the quantum proposed and
    after considering the representation, if any, submitted
    by him in that connection within such period as may be
    specified in the notice:
Provided that any payment under this sub-rule to a
    Government employee other than a Government employee
    who is governed by the provisions of the payment of
Wages Act, 1936
(Act 4 of 1936) shall be restricted to
    a period of three years immediately preceding the date
    on which order for re-instatement of such Government
    employee are passed by the authority exercising the
    powers of appeal, revision or review, or immediately
    preceding the date of retirement on superannuation of
    such Government employee, as the case may be.

    (5) In a case falling under sub-rule (4), the period of
    absence from duty including the period of suspension
    preceding   his   dismissal,  removal   or   compulsory
    retirement, as the case may be, shall not be treated as
    a period spent on duty, unless the competent authority
    specifically directs that it shall be so treated for
    any specified purpose:
12
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

    Provided that if the Government employee so desires
    such authority may direct that the period of absence
    from duty including the period of suspension preceding
    his dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement, as the
    case may be, shall be converted into leave of any kind
    due and admissible to the Government employee.
    Note. –The order of the competent authority under the
    preceding proviso shall be absolute and no sanction of
    the higher authority shall be necessary for the grant
    of–
(a) extraordinary leave in excess of three months in
      the case of a temporary Government employee; and
(b) leave of any kind due in excess of five years in
      the case of a permanent and quasi permanent
      Government employee.
(6) The payment of allowances under sub-rule (2) or
    sub-rule (4) shall be subject to all other conditions
    under which such allowances are admissible.
(7) The amount determined under the proviso to sub-rule
    (2), or under sub-rule (4) shall not be less than the
    subsistence allowance and other allowances admissible
    under rule 7.2.
(8) Any payment made under this rule to a Government
    employee on his reinstatement, shall be subject to
    adjustment of the amount, if any, earned by him through
    an employment during the period between the date of
    removal, dismissal or compulsory retirement, as the
    case may be, and the date of reinstatement. Where the
    emoluments admissible under this rule are equal to or
    less than the amounts earned during the employment
    elsewhere nothing shall be paid to the Government
    employee.
Note 1.–This rule is absolute and unconditional and so
    the question of lien does not arise in the case of a
    Government employee who is dismissed from service and
    is reinstated on appeal, revision or review when the
    period of unemployment between the date of dismissal
    and   reinstatement  is   declared by   the  authority
    exercising the powers of appeal, revision or review as
    the period spent on duty.
Note 2.–Clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of this rule does
    not forbid the period spent under suspension being
    treated as leave, and it is open to the authority
    exercising the powers of appeal, revision or review to
    specify the proportion of pay and allowances to be paid
    as the leave salary which would be permissible, if the
13
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

    Government employee were on leave.
Administrative Instruction. –A permanent post vacated
    by the reason of dismissal, removal or compulsory
    retirement of a Government employee should not be
    filled substantively until the expiry of a period of
    one year from the date of such dismissal, removal or
    compulsory retirement. Where, on the expiry of the
    period of one year, the permanent post is filled and
    the original incumbent of the post is reinstated
    thereafter, he should be accommodated against any post
    which may be substantively vacant in the grade to which
    his previous substantive post belonged. If there is no
    such vacant post, he should be accommodated against a
    supernumerary post which should be created in that
    grade with proper sanction and with the stipulation
    that it would terminate on the occurrence of the first
    substantive vacancy in that grade.
Note 3.–If no order is passed under sub-rule (5),
    directing that the period of absence be treated as duty
    for any specified purpose, the period of absence should
    be treated as 'non-duty'. In such event, the past
    service (i.e., service rendered before dismissal,
    removal, compulsory retirement) will not be forfeited.

    Note 4. –There is no bar to the conversion of any
    portion of a period of suspension into extraordinary
    leave. In the case of persons who are not fully
    exonerated, the conversion of the period of suspension
    into leave with or without allowances has the effect of
    removing the stigma of suspension and all the adverse
    consequences flowing therefrom. The moment the period
    of suspension is converted into leave, it has the
    effect of vacating the order of suspension, and it will
    be deemed not to have been passed at all. Therefore, if
    it is found that the total amount of subsistence and
    compensatory allowances that an officer received during
    the period of suspension exceeds the amount of leave
    salary and allowances, the excess will have to be
    refunded and there is no escape from this conclusion.”
12.   Rule   7.3A   deals   with   pay   and   allowances   where   the

 dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement is set aside by

 a court of law and such employee is reinstated without
14
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

 holding any further inquiry.
The relevant part of Rules 7.3 (B) reads as follows:-
“7.3-B. (1) When a Government employee who has been
    suspended is reinstated or would have been so re-
    instated but for his retirement on superannuation while
    under suspension the authority competent to order re-
    instatement shall consider and make a specific order –
(a) regarding the pay and allowance to be paid to the
    Government employee for the period of suspension ending
    with re-instatement or the date of his retirement on
    superannuation, as the case may be; and
(b) whether or not the said period shall be treated as
    a period spent on duty.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 7.3 or
    rule   7.3-A,  where   a  Government   employee  under
    suspension dies before the disciplinary or court
    proceedings instituted against him, are concluded, the
    period between the date of suspension and the date of
    death shall be treated as spent on duty for all
    purposes and his family shall be paid the full pay and
    allowances for that period to which he would have been
    entitled, had he not been suspended, subject to
    adjustment in respect of subsistence allowance already
    paid.
(3) Where the authority competent to order re-
instatement is of opinion that the suspension was
    wholly unjustified, the Government employee shall,
    subject to the provisions of sub-rule (8), be paid the
    full pay and allowances to which he would have been
    entitled, had he not been suspended:
Provided that where such authority is of opinion that
    the termination of the proceedings instituted against
    the Government employee, had been delayed due to
    reasons   directly  attributable   to  the  Government
    employee, it may, after giving him an opportunity to
    make his representation and after considering the
    representation, if any, submitted by him, direct, for
    reasons to be recorded in writing, that the Government
    employee shall be paid for the period of such delay
    only such amount (not being the whole) of such pay and
    allowances as it may determine.
(4) In a case falling under sub-rule (3), the period of
    suspension shall be treated as a period spent on duty
    for all purposes.”
15
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)
13.   If we take up Rule 7.3-B relied upon by the learned

 Advocate    General,    it    gives    us     the     impression      that    its

 intent is to deal with cases where a person is placed under

 suspension but thereafter reinstated. ‘Conspicuous by its

 absence’ in Rule 7.3B are expressions indicating that apart

 from suspension, the matter progressed to a stage where the

 employee came to be visited with any penalties. In other

 words, there can be cases where a person may be placed

 under    suspension     and    without        the      matter       progressing

 further, the authority in its discretion and power decides

 to revoke the suspension and he is reinstated. Rule 7.3, on

 the other hand, deals squarely with the situation where the

 employee    whose   services     are        terminated       succeeds    in   an

 appeal     or   other   remedy        and     there     is     an    order    of

 reinstatement and a question arises as to how the period

 prior to his dismissal is to be reckoned. The orders which

 can be passed are expressly provided for therein. In other

 words, the scheme of the Rules would appear to be that when

 an employee who has been proceeded against, succeeds before

 the higher forum, the question as to what is to be done for

 the period when he was kept out of service would have to be

 determined in the manner provided therein.
14.   Rule 15(v)(f) has been noticed by the High Court to

 find that there was power with the authority. Rule 15(v)(f)
16
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

 reads as follows:
“15. Order against which appeal lies- Subject to the
    provision of Rule 14 a Government employee may prefer
    an appeal against all or any of the following orders,
    namely-
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
    …………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
(v) an order-
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
    …………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
(f) determining whether or not the period from the
    date of his suspension or from the date of his
    dismissal, removal, compulsory retirement or reduction
    to a lower service, grade, post, time scale of pay or
    stage in a time scale of pay to the date of his
    reinstatement or restoration to his service, grade or
    post shall be treated as a period spent on a duty for
    any purpose.
15.    Rule 15(v)(f) indeed contemplates that when there is a

 dismissal, removal, compulsory retirement or reduction to a

 lower    service     inter   alia   and   there    is   an   order   of

 reinstatement, the authority is to pass an order as to

 whether the period from the date of suspension or from the

 date    of   his   dismissal,   removal   or   compulsory retirement

 till the date of his reinstatement, is to be treated as a

 period spent on duty for any purpose. This gives a clear

 indication that upon an order being passed by the appellate

 authority finding the termination of employee to be illegal

 and leaves it there, it would not ipso facto inevitably

 follow that the employee will become entitled to claim the
17
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

 salary   for    the     entire       period    consequent          upon     his    being

 found to be entitled to reinstatement. This is a matter for

 the authority to decide.
16.   In such circumstances, in our view, the proper order

 to be passed would be to find as follows:
(1) The decree of the trial Court as confirmed by the

          first appellate Court is to be sustained viz., we

          find     that        the     first        appellate         authority         in

          proceeding          to     impose     the         condition        that      the

          appellant will not be entitled to any salary for the

          period       and    that    it    will     be     treated    as       dies   non

          cannot be sustained.
(2) However, the further direction by the decree passed

          by    the     trial       Court     and    confirmed        by    the     first

          appellate          authority      that      the     appellant         will    be

          entitled to the salary for the period he was kept

          out of service also cannot be sustained.

    (3) Insofar        as     the    High     Court    has    not     noticed       these

          aspects while allowing the appeal and dismissing the

          review       petition,       we     are     of    the     view     that      the

          impugned judgment also cannot be sustained.
17.   Accordingly,          we     dispose    of     the    appeals       by     setting

 aside    the    impugned         judgment     and    modifying        the      judgment

 passed   by     the    first       appellate       Court     and   set      aside     the
18
CA Nos. 811-812 of 2022 (@ SLP (C) Nos. 3557-3558 of 2019)

    decree   passed    by   the   trial    Court    directing   payment   of

    salary to the appellant for the period that he was kept out

    of service.
There will be a decree directing the second respondent

    to consider as to how the period till the appellant was

    reinstated    is   to   be    treated     and   consequential   effect

    thereof. In other words, the question will be as regards

    the period from 13.03.2003 till 20.03.2009. This exercise

    will be undertaken and concluded within a period of three

    months from today.
Parties are directed to bear their respective costs.

          The civil appeals are allowed as above.
…………………………………………………………………., J.
[K.M. JOSEPH ]




                                          …………………………………………………………………., J.
[HRISHIKESH ROY ]



New Delhi;
March 03, 2022.
19