[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Swaminathan vs Alankamony (Dead) Through Lrs on 9 March, 2022
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Hemant Gupta
2022 INSC 283                                                   REPORTABLE

                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.798­799 OF 2013


           SWAMINATHAN & ORS.                                …APPELLANT(S)


                                         VERSUS


           ALANKAMONY (DEAD) THROUGH LRS.                    ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                         ORDER
1.   The challenge in the present appeals is to an order dated

           05.11.2008 whereby an appeal under
Section 299
of the Indian

           Succession Act, 1925 (for short, ‘the Act’) filed by the brother of the

           testator for revocation of Letters of Administration dated 09.03.2002

           was allowed.
2.   The appellants sought Letters of Administration of a registered

           Will deed dated 23.08.1991 said to have been executed by one

           Thankappan Nadar in favour of the appellant – brother of the testator

           and his two sons. After the grant of Letters of Administration, another
1
brother of testator filed an application for revocation of the Letters of

Administration on the ground that all the legal heirs were not

impleaded       in     the     proceedings                for    the     grant       of    Letters   of

Administration.         The     Civil     Court            dismissed        the     application      for

revocation but the order was set aside in appeal. Aggrieved, the legatee

is in appeal before this Court.
3.   Drawing our attention to the difference in the language employed

between
Section 276
and
Section 278
, the learned counsel for the

appellants contended that what was filed by the appellants was a

petition under
Section 276(1)
and that therefore, the requirement to

make a mention about the details of the family and other relatives of

the deceased, contained in
Section 278(1)
cannot be imported into
Section 276
. According to the learned counsel, the petition filed by the

appellants was one for the grant of Letters of Administration with the

Will annexed. It was not a petition filed under
Section 278(1)
.
4.   In order to appreciate the above contention, it is necessary to

present
Section 276(1)
and
Section 278(1)
in a table as follows:­
Section 276
Section 278
276.      Petition     for    probate.—          278.     Petition    for    letters   of
      (1) Application for probate or for letters       administration.—(1) Application      for
      of administration, with the Will                 letters of administration shall be made
2
annexed, shall be made by a petition              by petition distinctly written as
     distinctly written in English or in the           aforesaid and stating—
     language in ordinary use in proceedings                (a) the time and place of the
     before the Court in which the                          deceased’s death;
     application is made, with the Will or, in              (b) the family or other relatives of
     the cases mentioned in
sections 237
,                   the deceased, and their respective
     238 and 239, a copy, draft, or                         residences;
statement of the contents thereof,                     (c) the right in which the petitioner
     annexed, and stating—                                  claims;
           (a) the time of the testator’s death,            (d) the amount of assets which are
           (b) that the writing annexed is his              likely to come to the petitioner’s
           last Will and testament,                         hands;
           (c) that it was duly executed,                   (e) when the application is to the
           (d) the amount of assets which are               District Judge, that the deceased
           likely to come to the petitioner’s               at the time of his death had a fixed
           hands, and                                       place of abode, or had some
           (e) when the application is for                  property,     situate   within    the
           probate, that the petitioner is the              jurisdiction of the Judge; and
           executor named in the Will.                      (f) when the application is to a
                                                            District Delegate, that the deceased
     (2)…                                                   at the time of his death had a fixed
                                                            place     of   abode    within    the
     (3)…                                                   jurisdiction of such Delegate.

                                                       (2) …
5.   But unfortunately for the appellants, the catch is not to be found

in the distinction between
Section 276
and
Section 278
.                                        It is to be

found in
Section 263
which reads as follows:­
263. Revocation or annulment for just cause. —The grant of probate
     or letters of administration may be revoked or annulled for just cause.

     Explanation. —Just cause shall be deemed to exist where—
(a) the proceedings to obtain the grant were defective in substance;
            or
(b) the grant was obtained fraudulently by making a false
            suggestion, or by concealing from the Court something material to
            the case; or
(c) the grant was obtained by means of an untrue allegation of a
            fact essential in point of law to justify the grant, though such
            allegation was made in ignorance or inadvertently; or
3
(d) the grant has become useless and inoperative through
          circumstances; or
(e) the person to whom the grant was made has wilfully and
          without reasonable cause omitted to exhibit an inventory or
          account in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VII of this
          Part, or has exhibited under that Chapter an inventory or account
          which is untrue in a material respect.
Illustrations
(i) The Court by which the grant was made had no jurisdiction.
(ii) The grant was made without citing parties who ought to have
          been cited.
(iii) The Will of which probate was obtained was forged or revoked.
(iv) A obtained letters of administration to the estate of B, as his
          widow, but it has since transpired that she was never married to
          him.
(v) A has taken administration to the estate of B as if he had died
          intestate, but a will has since been discovered.
(vi) Since probate was granted, a latter Will has been discovered.
(vii) Since probate was granted, a codicil has been discovered
          which revokes or adds to the appointment of executors under the
          Will.
(viii) The person to whom probate was, or letters of administration
          were, granted has subsequently become of unsound mind.
6.   As per
Section 263
, the grant of Letters of Administration may be

revoked for “just cause”.       Explanation (a) under
Section 263
states

that just cause shall be deemed to exist where the proceedings were

defective in substance. Illustration (ii) under
Section 263
deals with a

case where “the grant was made without citing parties who ought to

have been cited”.
4
7.   It may be of interest to note that some of the colonial statutes

contain Illustrations which form part of the statutes themselves.
The

Indian Succession Act, 1925
is one such enactment.
8.   Therefore, the High Court was right in holding that a just cause

existed for revoking the grant. Hence, we do not find any error in the

order of the High Court warranting our interference.       Therefore the

appeals are dismissed.
9.   Pending applications(s), if any, also stand disposed of.
…………………………….J.
                                                   (Hemant Gupta)




                                               …………………………….J.
                                                (V. Ramasubramanian)


NEW DELHI:
9th March, 2022
5
ITEM NO.107                 COURT NO.11               SECTION XII

               S U P R E M E C O U R T O F      I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Civil Appeal   No(s).798-799/2013

SWAMINATHAN & ORS.                                          Appellant(s)

                                  VERSUS

ALANKAMONY (DEAD) THROUGH LRS.                              Respondent(s)

Date : 09-03-2022 These appeals were called on for hearing today.

CORAM :   HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE HEMANT GUPTA
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN

For Appellant(s)        Mr. A. Mariaputham, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Anurag Dayal Mathur, Adv.
                        Mr. Avneesh Arputham, Adv.
M/S. Arputham Aruna And Co, AOR

For Respondent(s)       Mr. Beno Bencigar, Adv.
Mr. M. A. Chinnasamy, AOR

          UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R

           The appeals are dismissed in terms of the signed order.
           Pending application(s), if any, also stand disposed of.
(SWETA BALODI)                                     (RENU BALA GAMBHIR)
COURT MASTER (SH)                                  COURT MASTER (NSH)
                    (Signed order is placed on the file)
6