[Cites
10
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Bharati Bhattacharjee vs Quazi Md. Maksuduzzaman on 23 March, 2022
Author:
Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench:
Dinesh Maheshwari
,
Aniruddha Bose
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2382-2383 OF 2022
                          (Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 20768-20769 of 2019)

       BHARATI BHATTACHARJEE                                                   .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                     VERSUS

      QUAZI MD. MAKSUDUZZAMAN & ORS.                                           .....RESPONDENT(S)

                                                      WITH

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2384-2385 OF 2022
                          (Arising out of SLP(C) Nos. 23401-23402 of 2019)


                                                    JUDGMENT
Dinesh Maheshwari, J.
Leave granted.
2.                  By way of these appeals, the appellant has essentially

     questioned             the    common      judgment    and     order    dated     23.08.2018    in

     Revision             Petition      Nos.   1468-1469     of    2015    whereby     the    National

     Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi1 has reversed the

     order passed by the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission,

     Kolkata2;             and    has   restored    the    order    passed     by    the      District

     Consumer              Disputes     Redressal    Forum,       South     24-Parganas       District

     Court, Alipore3 granting relief to the complainants (respondents

     herein) on their grievances against the appellant for execution of

     the Deed of Conveyance in terms of the agreement for sale. The

     appellant has also challenged the common order dated 27.09.2018,

     whereby              the     National      Commission        has      rejected     the    review
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
Date: 2022.04.04
19:31:06 IST
Reason:
1 Hereinafter referred to as ‘the National Commission’
             2 Hereinafter referred to as ‘the State Commission’
             3 Hereinafter referred to as ‘the District Forum’.
1
applications bearing Nos. 338 and 344 of 2018.
3.       Shorn      of    unnecessary     details,       the    relevant     background

aspects of the matter are as follows: -
3.1.     The contesting respondents herein had preferred respective

complaint cases before the District Forum with the grievance that

the present appellant and the respondent No. 3, in spite of having

received substantial sum of money against total consideration in

terms of respective agreements for sale, had not executed and

registered the Deed of Conveyance in relation to the property in

question.
3.2.     In    Complaint        Case   No.    111   of    2013,    the     complainants

[contesting respondents of SLP(C) Nos. 20768-69 of 2019] asserted

that the total sale consideration had been Rs. 9,00,000/- and they

had paid a sum of Rs. 5,79,000/-. In Complaint Case No. 112 of

2013,   the   complainants          [contesting     respondents      of    SLP(C)      Nos.
23401-02 of 2019] asserted that the total sale consideration had

been Rs. 7,00,000/- and they had made payment of a sum of Rs.

4,92,000/-.      In      Complaint     Case   No.   111    of     2013,    the   present

appellant     attempted        to   suggest   before     the    District    Forum      that

there   had   been       two   separate   agreements      for    sale,     one   for   the

consideration of Rs. 7,00,000/- and another for the consideration

of Rs. 9,00,000/-; and the flat was agreed to be sold for a total

consideration of Rs. 16,00,000/-. In relation to Complaint Case

No. 112 of 2013, the appellant alleged that there had been two

agreements     of     Rs.      7,00,000/-     each,      leading     to     total      sale

consideration of Rs.14,00,000/-.
4.       The District Forum rejected the aforesaid suggestions of
2
the appellant about existence of two agreements in each case; and

while     finding        that    there    was     no    misrepresentation          by     the

complainants, directed the appellant to execute and register the

Deed     of    Conveyance        after    receiving      payment     of     the    balance

consideration. Of course, the District Forum did not discuss the

matter in necessary details but, in substance, found it justified

to issue the directions in terms of the case of the complainants.
5.        In appeal, however, the State Commission agreed with the

submissions of the present appellant with reference to the fact

that the complainant of Complaint Case No. 111 of 2013 had shown

the     sale    consideration        as    Rs.7,00,000/-        in    the     Government

Department as also in the Bank while seeking loan. In relation to

Complaint Case No. 112 of 2013, the State Commission observed that

there were two agreements of even date without any explanation and

it    indicated      a    foul   play.    On    these   considerations,       the       State

Commission dismissed both the complaint cases.
6.        The National Commission, on the other hand, meticulously

examined       the       material    on    record       and   disagreed       with        the

observations of the State Commission.
6.1.      The    National Commission            took note     of the      stand of        the

parties and found that in Complaint Case No. 111 of 2013, the

present appellant had not been able to produce the alleged second

agreement. The National Commission further observed that though in

Complaint Case No. 112 of 2013, two agreements for Rs. 7,00,000/-

each were filed but, both the agreements were of the same date and

the first one carried many corrections with ink whereas in the

second    agreement,        those    corrections        had   been   typed        out.    The
3
National Commission, inter alia, observed as under: -
“14.   This clearly goes on to show that OP-1 is
        considering the mistake in signing the two agreements
        whereas the complainant is not accepting the signing
        of the two agreements. The complainants are accepting
        only one agreement for Rs.9 lakhs in CC No.111/2013
        and for Rs.7 lakhs in CC No.112/2013. It is also to
        be considered that there are no document available on
        the case file to show that the OP-1 demanded further
        amount   from   the   complainants   nor   made   any
        communication for refund of the amount as mentioned
        in the written statement of OP-1. In the first
        Complaint Case No.111/2013, respondent/OP-1 has not
        been able to produce the second agreement which could
        have been a direct evidence to support the claim of
        the respondent. Though in the second case i.e., CC
        No. 112/2013 two agreements have been filed for Rs.7
        lakhs each, both the agreements have same date,
        however, with different numbers of Rs.10/- stamp
        papers. The First Agreement has many corrections
        which have been done with the ink, however in the
        second agreement those corrections have been typed
        out. Therefore, this possibility cannot be ruled out
        that the second agreement was typed out because there
        were many corrections in the first agreement. Then
        obviously the second stamp paper of Rs.10/- was
        used.”

6.2.     Further, with reference to
Section 54
of the Transfer of

Property Act, 1882 and the material placed on record, the National

Commission observed that there could not have been two agreements

for sale between the same parties relating to the same property

and    hence,   while   accepting    the   case   of   the   complainants   and

disapproving     the    approach    of   the   State   Commission,   held   as

follows: -
“16.   From the above definition, it is clear that
        sale is to take place as per the terms and conditions
        given in the agreement. As the Contract of Sale dated
        21.06.2010     for      Rs.9     lakhs      in     CC
        No. 111/2013 is already on record, then as per this
        definition of contract of sale, it should have been
        mentioned in this contract that there would be some
        other agreement for Rs.7 lakhs. However, there is
        nothing mentioned in this contract, therefore it is
        difficult to believe that there would be any other
4
agreement for sale of the same property. In fact, the
        implication of this section is that there would be
        only one Contract of sale for one property between
        the same parties. Similarly, same argument applies in
        the second complaint case i.e. CC No.112/2013 as
        well.
17. From the above discussion it is brought out that
        legally there cannot be two agreements to sell
        between the same parties. As complainants are
        accepting only one agreement which is also duly
        signed by the OP and is in respect of the total
        property i.e. for the full flat, the assertion of the
        opposite party that there were two agreements of sale
        in both these complaints is not sustainable. However,
        when the direct evidence can be made available, the
        circumstantial evidence cannot be relied upon in
        derogation to the direct evidence. This is true at
        least in CC No.111/2013 where the agreement is
        available for Rs.9 lakhs. However, in respect of
        other Complaint No.112/2013 the two sale agreements
        are available for Rs.7 lakhs each, but as they are
        identical with same date, it cannot be believed that
        they are two agreements only on the basis of two
        different number of the stamp papers of Rs.10/-. The
        possibility is that the second one is the fair typed
        copy of the first one which may had correction with
        ink.
18. The State Commission has mainly relied upon the
        order of the State Government of West Bengal giving
        possession to the complainants to apply and obtain
        loan from the bank and the sanction letter of bank
        loan where the costs of the flats have been shown to
        be only Rs.7 lakhs. These are only circumstantial and
        incidental evidence which cannot take precedence over
        the direct evidence and the legal position.”

6.3      The National Commission, therefore, set aside the order of

the State Commission and restored the order of the District Forum

with modifications that the appellant was held entitled to receive

the amount of sale consideration from the complainants, as per the

order of the District Forum, with interest at the rate of 10% per

annum   from   the   date   of   filing   of   the   complaint   till   actual

payment. The National Commission directed as under: -
“19. Based on the above explanation, I find that the
        order of the State Commission dated 27.3.2015 is not
        based on the correct application of facts and law and
5
therefore it cannot be sustained.    Accordingly, the
        Revision Petition Nos. 1468/2015 and 1469 of 2015 are
        allowed and the order of the State Commission dated
        27.3.2015 in F.A. Nos. 135/2014 and 136/2014 are set
        aside.    The order of the District Forum dated
        24.12.2013 in CC Nos111/2013 and 112/2013 is upheld
        with modification that OPs will be entitled to
        receive the remaining amounts from the complainants
        as per the order of the District Forum with interest
        @ 10% p.a. from the date of filing of the complaint
        till actual payment.”
7.        The appellant sought review of the order so passed by the

National Commission but the review applications were rejected by

the order dated 27.09.2018 for being devoid of substance and the

order impugned not disclosing any error apparent on the face of

the record.
8.        Seeking to question the orders aforesaid, in relation to

Complaint Case No. 111 of 2013, the learned senior counsel for the

appellant has referred to
Section 24A
of the Consumer Protection

Act, 1986 (‘the Act of 1986’) and has submitted that the complaint

could have been filed only within two years from the date of

accrual    of     cause   of   action.     While        referring    to    the    terms   of

agreement, learned counsel for the appellant would submit that as

per Clause 3 thereof, the Deed of Conveyance was to be registered

within    90     days   from   the   date       of   execution      of    the    agreement.

According to the learned counsel, the Deed of Conveyance having

not been executed within 90 days of the date of agreement i.e.,

within 90 days from 21.06.2010, the complaint could have been

filed within two years commencing from the end of those 90 days

i.e.,     from     21.11.2010;       and       hence,     the   complaint        filed    on

21.03.2013 was clearly barred by limitation.
8.1.      The learned counsel would submit with reference to the
6
decision of this Court in the case of
State Bank of India v. B.S.

Agriculture Industries (I
): (2009) 5 SCC 121 that the question of

limitation       goes      to     the       root    of     the    matter     and   deserves

consideration even if not raised before the three fora. Learned

counsel would further submit that the relief as prayed in the

complaint was essentially of the nature of specific performance of

an agreement for sale; and for seeking such a relief, the personal

bars in terms of
Section 16
of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 would

apply and thereby, it was incumbent for the complainant to aver

and prove that he was always ready and willing to perform his part

of     the    contract.         This    having      not    been     done,    the   National

Commission       has      been     in       error    in     granting     relief       to   the

complainant.        In    the    third      limb    of    submissions,      learned    senior

counsel       has    referred          to    the    questionnaire        served       on   the

complainants        and    has    particularly           referred   to     question    No.   4

therein, whereby the complainant No. 1 was asked if he would be

ready to call for the records from his office as well as from the

concerned Bank and the answer thereto was in the affirmative.

Learned counsel would submit that such a record, having material

bearing on the case, having not been called, adverse inference per
Section 114
of the Evidence Act ought to have been drawn. Learned

counsel for the appellant has lastly and in the alternative has

submitted that in any case, interest ought to have been awarded to

the appellant from the date when the amount was due and not only

from the date of complaint and, therefore, that part of the order

impugned deserves to be modified.
8.2.         In relation to Complaint Case No. 112 of 2013, apart from
7
the above, the learned senior counsel has particularly referred to

the    observations         and    findings      of    the    State    Commission          on   the

question of existence of two agreements and has submitted that it

had been a bona fide defence raised by the appellant and when the

existence       of    two    separate        documents        disclosing          two     separate

agreements       remains          indisputable,        bona     fide        defence       of    the

appellant ought to have been accepted, as rightly done so by the

State Commission.
9.        Per        contra,        learned       counsel        for        the         contesting

respondents(complainants)              has    duly         supported    the       judgment      and

order passed by the National Commission and has submitted that the

suggestions about existence of two agreements in each of these

cases remain entirely baseless and have rightly been rejected by

the National Commission.
9.1.      The learned counsel has also referred to the averments by

the    complainants         about     serving         of    notice     on     09.11.2012        for

executing the Deed of Conveyance and has submitted that the cause

of    action    accrued      to     the   complainants         when     the    deed       was   not

executed despite notice and, therefore, the complaints in question

could not have been considered barred by limitation.                              This was the

reason, according to the learned counsel, that such a plea of

limitation      was    not     even    raised     before       the     three      fora     by   the

appellant.
9.2.      The learned counsel would further submit that there would

arise no question of drawing any adverse inference in this matter

because the complainants-respondents had not withheld any evidence

in their power or possession. Learned counsel would submit that
8
answer to a vague question in the interrogatories cannot result in

an adverse inference against the complainant when the proposition

of existence of two agreements itself remains baseless and has

been    rejected        by   the    District         Forum      as    also    by     the    National

Commission.
10.         Having      given       thoughtful            consideration         to     the        rival

submissions and having examined the material placed on record with

reference     to     the     law    applicable,           we    are   satisfied        that       these

appeals     remain      totally      bereft         of    substance      and       deserve    to     be

dismissed; and the appellant, for having dragged the matters with

pretentious propositions, deserves to be saddled with costs.
11.         The suggestion on behalf of the appellant about existence

of    two   agreements         is   required         to    be   rejected       in     relation      to

Complaint Case No. 111 of 2013 altogether for want of any such

second      agreement        on     record.         The     sale      price     shown        by     the

complainant        in    the      Bank    for       the    purpose     of     loan     or    in     the

Government      department          does     not         lead   to     any     inference          about

existence of any other agreement.
11.1.       Moreover, when we look at the agreement between the parties

disclosing      total        sale        consideration          of    Rs.      9,00,000/-,          the

material terms are found in the following form and expression: -
“3. That the consideration price shall be payable by
        the Purchasers to the Vendor as consideration of the
        said complete flat be Rs.9,00,000/- (Rupees Nine
        lacs) only and the mode of such payment is to be as
        follows:-
a) At the time of booking/agreement Rs.50,000/-
        (Rupees Fifty thousand) only.
b) At the time of Rs.6,50,000/- (Rupees Six Lakh
        fifty thousand) only will be payable by the
        Purchasers to the Vendor at the time of Registration
9
i.e. within 90 (Ninety) days from the date                  of
        execution of this agreement.
c) Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupees two lacs) only will                be
        payable within 60 months (sic) from the date                of
        registration of the conveyance.”

11.2.    Obviously, the third component of the sale consideration of

Rs. 2,00,000/- was payable only after registration of the Deed of

Conveyance. Hence, while applying for loan, the complainant could

have only stated the consideration payable for registration of the

sale consideration until then. In any case, the difference in sale

consideration, as stated before the Bank vis-à-vis that stated in

agreement does not lead to even a remote inference that there were

two separate agreements.
12.      As regards Complaint Case No. 112 of 2013, though there are

shown to be existing two documents of the same date but, they do

not appear to be separate agreements for different properties or

for different parts of the same property or for segregating the

total amount of sale consideration. They could only be read as one

being a copy or draft of the other. In any case, it would be

rather preposterous to assume that because of the alleged two

documents   of   the   same   date,   the   sale    consideration    would   be

arrived at by adding up the consideration amount stated therein.
The State Commission seems to have approached the entire case from

an altogether wrong angle and has acted illegally in accepting the

baseless propositions of the appellant. Thus, we are satisfied

that the National Commission has rightly disapproved the orders so

passed by the State Commission. 13.           The    other   submissions     as

made for the first time before this Court also do not make out any

case for interference.
10
13.1.    There is no, and there cannot be any, quarrel with the

proposition stated in the case of
State Bank of India
(supra) that

if the complaint is barred by time and yet the Consumer Forum

decides the same on merits, it would be a case of illegality on

the part of the Forum. However, the question is as to whether the

bar of limitation was at all operating in relation to the present

complainants? In our view, the answer is in the negative.

13.2.    So far the question of limitation is concerned,
Section 24A
of the Act of 1986 reads as under: -
“24A. Limitation period.-(1) The District Forum, the
        State Commission or the National Commission shall not
        admit a complaint unless it is filed within two years
        from the date on which the cause of action has
        arisen.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
        (1), a complaint may be entertained after the period
        specified in sub-section (1), if the complainant
        satisfies the District Forum, the State Commission or
        the National Commission, as the case may be, that he
        had sufficient cause for not filing the complaint
        within such period:
Provided that no such complaint shall be entertained
        unless the National Commission, the State Commission
        or the District Forum, as the case may be, records
        its reasons for condoning such delay.”

13.3.    This Court, in the case of
V.N. Shrikhande v. Anita Sena

Fernandes
:(2011) 1 SCC 53 has pointed out that the term ‘cause of

action’ has not been defined in the Act of 1986 and the same has

to be interpreted keeping in view the context in which it has been

used in Section 24A(1) and the object of the legislation. In that

case, relating to the question of medical negligence, this Court

held    that     no   strait-jacket        formula   could        be     applied   for

determining as to when the cause of action had accrued to the

consumer   and    each   case   has   to    be   decided     on    its    own   facts.
11
Applying the principles with necessary modulations in relation to

the subject-matter before us, in the case of the dispute relating

to the agreement for sale, where the appellant is standing in the

capacity   of   a    seller      qua    the    complainants      who    stand   in   the

capacity of consumer, the term “consumer dispute” shall have to be

understood in terms of the definition provided by
Section 2(e)
of

Act of 1986 that reads as under: -
“2(e)“consumer dispute” means a dispute where the
        person against whom a complaint has been made, denies
        or   disputes  the   allegations  contained  in   the
        complaint;”

13.4.    In the case at hand, relating to Complaint Case No. 111 of

2013, the relevant facts had been pleaded by the complainant in

the following terms: -
“11. That thereafter the Complainant made several
        representations to the Opposite Party and asked her
        to perform her duties and obligations as stipulated
        in the said Agreement however the Opposite Parties
        always gave assurance that the flat will be completed
        by shortly but neither the same was completed nor the
        Deed of Conveyance in respect of the said flat was
        executed in his favour and the Complainant had also
        sent a Registered Letter with A/D dated 9th November,
        2012 requesting the Opposite Party to execute the
        Deed of Conveyance in respect of the flat in their
        favour.”

13.5.    In the matters relating to the sale of immovable property

where   the   appellant         had    received   a    substantial      part    of   sale

consideration       and    had        failed     to    perform    her     duties     and

obligations,    even      for    the    relief    of   specific   performance,       the

period of limitation would have begun, if the complainants were to

file a suit for specific performance of contract, only from the

period of expiry of notice dated 09.11.2012, when they would have

had the notice that the performance was being refused. In any
12
case, so far the consumer dispute is concerned, when the appellant

failed to execute the Deed of Conveyance despite receiving notice

from the complainant, it could safely be taken that the cause of

action accrued for the purpose of the complaint only after the

expiry of period of notice dated 09.11.2012. Thus, the complaints

as filed on 21.03.2013 had been well within limitation.
14.       As regards other submissions about the proof of readiness

and    willingness     for   performing      the    part   of    contract      by    the

complainants, the averments taken by the parties and totality of

the facts and circumstances of the case leave nothing to doubt

that nothing substantial was to be performed on the part of the

complainants. Rather, the essential part of performance was only

the    burden   of    the    appellant      which   the    appellant        failed    to

discharge. Noteworthy it is that as against the agreements in

question,     the    appellant   had     received    major      part   of    the     sale

consideration inasmuch as in Complaint Case No. 111 of 2013, the

appellant had received a sum of Rs. 5,79,000/- as against the sale

consideration of Rs. 9,00,000/-; whereas in Complaint Case No. 112

of    2013,   the    appellant   had   received     a   sum     of   Rs.    4,92,000/-
against the sale consideration of Rs. 7,00,000/-. The payments

made to the appellant included substantial amount of loan taken by

the respective complainants. It has been pointed out that after

obtaining such loan, the complainants had been regularly making

payment of EMIs to the lender institutions. There does not appear

any personal bar operating against the complainants even in terms

of the
Specific Relief Act, 1963
.
15.       The submission as regards drawing adverse inference remains
13
totally baseless because it has not been shown if the complainants

withheld   any    material      evidence         that    was    in    their      power    or

possession. The vague question put in the questionnaire to the

effect as to whether the complainant would call for the record

from his office and Bank and its answer in the affirmative, do not

lead to any adverse inference because, the record in question is

not shown to be in power or possession of the complainant. Rather,

we have reservations, if such a question was at all permissible by

way of a questionnaire on the principles of
Order XI of the Code

of Civil Procedure
, 1908. Be that as it may, no case of drawing

any adverse inference is made out.
16.     The   other     submission      in       the     alternative       for    allowing

interest starting from 90 days from the date of agreement is also

of no substance. Contrary to this suggestion, when we notice that

the   appellant       had    received        a     substantial        part        of     sale

consideration    in   both   the   cases         and    had    yet   not    executed     the

requisite deed and had not carried out performance of other parts

of the contract due on her part, even the interest as allowed by

the National Commission appears to be excessive. Having said so,

we would leave the matter at that because the complainants have

not questioned that part of the order of the National Commission

allowing interest to the appellant at the rate of 10% per annum

from the date of filing of complaint.
17.     Therefore,      these    appeals         are    required     to    be    dismissed.

However, we have taken note of the fact that these appeals were

entertained on 26.08.2019 and 23.09.2019 with interim relief in

favour of the appellant. This has only delayed the execution of
14
the Deed of Conveyance in favour of the respondents. For this

unnecessary litigation and delay, the appellant deserves to be

saddled with costs.
18.    Therefore,     these   appeals   are   dismissed   with   costs

quantified at Rs. 50,000/- (Rupees Fifty Thousand) each.
19.    All pending applications also stand disposed of.
....................J.
                                               (DINESH MAHESHWARI) 1



                                               ....................J.
                                               (ANIRUDDHA BOSE)     1

New Delhi;
March 23, 2022.
15