[Cites
33
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Rajasthan vs Ashok Khetoliya And Anr. on 10 March, 2022
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Hemant Gupta
REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1814 OF 2022
                             (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 28102 OF 2015)


         STATE OF RAJASTHAN                                             .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS

         ASHOK KHETOLIYA & ANR                                        .....RESPONDENT(S)



                                             JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.              The present appeal is directed against an order passed by the High

                         Court of Judicature of Rajasthan dated 28.4.2015 whereby a notifica-

                         tion dated 12.8.2014 declaring Gram Panchayat Roopbas, District

                         Bharatpur as Municipal Board was set aside. The High Court found that

                         no public notification as contemplated under
Article 243Q(2)
of the

                         Constitution of India has been produced specifying Gram Panchayat

                         Roopbas as a “transitional area” and thus, it cannot be declared as a

                         Municipal Board.
Signature Not Verified
2.
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
The Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992
introduced
Date: 2022.03.10
16:48:56 IST
Reason:
Part IXA in the Constitution which came into force on 20.4.1993. The
1
Statement of Objects and Reasons as was published in the Gazette on

16.09.1991 when the Bill was introduced is as under:
“In many States local bodies have become weak and ineffective
     on account of a variety of reasons, including the failure to hold
     regular elections, prolonged supersessions and inadequate
     devolution of powers and functions. As a result, Urban Local
     Bodies are not able to perform effectively as vibrant democratic
     units of self-government.
2. Having regard to these inadequacies, it is considered
     necessary that provisions relating to Urban Local Bodies are
     incorporated in the Constitution particularly for-
(i) putting on a firmer footing the relationship between the State
     Government and the Urban Local Bodies with respect to-
(a) the functions and taxation powers; and
(b) arrangements for revenue sharing;
(ii) Ensuring regular conduct of elections;
(iii) ensuring timely elections in the case of supersession; and
(iv) providing adequate representation for the weaker sections
     like Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women.
3. Accordingly, it is proposed to add a new part relating to the
     Urban Local Bodies in the Constitution to provide for-
(a) constitution of three types of Municipalities:
(i) Nagar Panchayats for areas in transition from a rural area to
     urban area;
(ii) Municipal Councils for smaller urban areas;
(iii) Municipal Corporations for larger urban areas. The broad
     criteria for specifying the said areas is being provided in the
     proposed article 243-0;
(b) composition of Municipalities, which will be decided by the
2
Legislature of a State, having the following features:
(i) persons to be chosen by direct election;
(ii) representation of Chairpersons of Committees, if any, at ward
or other levels in the Municipalities;
(iii) representation of persons having special knowledge or
experience of Municipal Administration in Municipalities (without
voting rights);
(c) election of Chairpersons of a Municipality in the manner
specified in the State law;
(d) constitution of Committees at ward level or other level or
levels within the territorial area of a Municipality as may be
provided in the State law;
(e) reservation of seats in every Municipality-
(i) for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in proportion to
their population of which not less than one-third shall be for
women;
(ii) for women which shall not less than one-third of the total
number of seats;
(iii) in favour of backward class of citizens if so provided by the
Legislature of the State; (iv) for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and women in the office of Chairpersons as may be
specified in the State law;
(f) fixed tenure of 5 years for the Municipality and re-election
within six months of end of tenure. If a Municipality is dissolved
before expiration of its duration, elections to be held within a
period of six months of its dissolution;
(g) devolution by the State Legislature of powers and
responsibilities upon the Municipalities with respect to
preparation of plans for economic development and social
justice, and for the implementation of development schemes as
may be required to enable them to function as institutions of
self-government;
3
(h) levy of taxes and duties by Municipalities, assigning of such
           taxes and duties to Municipalities by State Governments and for
           making grants-in-aid by the State to the Municipalities as may be
           provided in the State law;
(i)         xx                  xx                 xx”
3.
Article 243ZF
of the Constitution mandated that any provision of any

     law relating to Municipalities in force in a State immediately before the

     commencement of the
Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act,

     1992
, which is inconsistent with the provisions of Part IXA shall

     continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent

     Legislature or any other competent authority or until the expiration of

     one year from such commencement whichever is earlier.
Article 243ZF
reads thus:
“243-ZF.    Continuance of existing laws and Municpalities. -
           Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of any law
           relating to Municipalities in force in a State immediately before
           the commencement of the
Constitution (Seventy-fourth
           Amendment) Act, 1992
, which is inconsistent with the provisions
           of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or
           repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent
           authority or until the expiration of one year from such
           commencement, whichever is earlier:
Provided that all the Municipalities existing immediately
           before such commencement shall continue till the expiration of
           their duration, unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to
           that effect by the Legislative Assembly of that State or, in the
           case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House of
           the Legislature of that State.”
4.   Therefore,
Article 243ZF
of the Constitution is in the context of
4
mandating the State Legislature to amend the State laws to be in

        conformity with Part IXA of the Constitution. The objects and reasons

        of introducing Part IXA in the Constitution were that local bodies had

        become weak and ineffective on account of variety of reasons such as

        failure     to    hold    regular   elections,   prolonged   supersessions   and

        inadequate devolution of powers and functions.                 The Urban Local

        Bodies were also not able to perform effectively as vibrant democratic

        units of self-government.           Therefore, when Part IXA was introduced,

        Parliament was aware that the competent legislature to legislate on

        the subject of the Urban Local Bodies was the State legislature but Part

        IXA of the Constitution had given constitutional status to the

        Municipalities. The States were put under constitutional obligation to

        adopt Municipalities as per systems enshrined in the Constitution.
5.      Entry 5 of the Seventh Schedule List II reads thus:
“5. Local government, that is to say, the constitution and powers
                 of municipal corporations, improvement trusts, district boards,
                 mining settlement authorities and other local authorities for the
                 purpose of local self-government or village administration.”
6.      In view of such mandate and its legislative authority, the State of

        Rajasthan had enacted the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 20091.
Section 2
Clauses (xxxix) and (lxv) of the
Municipalities Act
read as under:
“(xxxix) “municipal area” means the territorial area of a Municipality
                as notified by the State Government from time to time;
xx                xx                 xx


1    For short, the “
Municipalities Act
”
5
(lxv) “a transitional area”, “a smaller urban area” or “a larger urban
           area” means an area specified under
Article 243Q
of the Constitution
           of India;”
7.
Article 243Q
of the Constitution and
Section 5
of the Municipalities Act

     are reproduced hereunder:
Constitution of India                   Rajasthan         Municipalities     Act,
2009
243Q. Constitution of Municipalities. Section 5 of the Municipalities Act
     —(1) There shall be constituted in
5. Establishment and incorporation of
     every State,—
                                             Municipality. –
(a) a Nagar Panchayat (by whatever      (1) In every transitional area, there
     name called) for a transitional area,   shall be established a Municipal Board
     that is to say, an area in transition   and every such Municipal Board shall
     from a rural area to an urban area;     be a body corporate by the name of
                                             the Municipal Board of the place by
(b) a Municipal Council for a smaller
                                             reference to which the Municipality is
     urban area; and
                                             known    and      shall   have   perpetual
(c) a Municipal Corporation for a
                                             succession and a common seal and
     larger urban area,
                                             may sue or be sued in its corporate
     in accordance with the provisions of    name.
this Part:
(2) In every smaller urban area, there
        Provided that a Municipality un- shall be established a               Municipal
     der this clause may not be consti- Council and every such                Municipal
     tuted in such urban area or part        Council shall be a body corporate by
     thereof as the Governor may, hav- the name of the Municipal Council of
     ing regard to the size of the area the city by reference to which the
     and the municipal services being Municipality is known and shall have
     provided or proposed to be pro- perpetual succession and a common
     vided by an industrial establish- seal and may sue and be sued in its
     ment in that area and such other corporate name.
factors as he may deem fit, by pub-
lic notification, specify to be an in- (3) In every larger urban area, there
6
dustrial township.                        shall      be   established         a    Municipal
                                          Corporation and every such Municipal
(2) In this article, “a transitional
                                          Corporation shall be a body corporate
area”, “a smaller urban area” or “a
                                          by      the     name     of       the    Municipal
larger urban area” means such area
                                          Corporation of the city by reference to
as the Governor may, having regard
                                          which the Municipality is known and
to the population of the area, the
                                          shall have perpetual succession and a
density of the population therein,
                                          common seal and may sue and be
the revenue generated for local ad-
sued in its corporate name:
ministration, the percentage of em-
ployment in non-agricultural activi- Provided that a Municipality under this
ties, the economic importance or          Section may not be constituted in
such other factors as he may deem         such urban area or part thereof as the
fit, specify by public notification for   Governor may, having regard to the
the purposes of this Part.                size of the area and the municipal
                                          services being provided or proposed
                                          to    be      provided    by       an    industrial
                                          establishment in that area and such
                                          other factors as he may deem fit, by
                                          notification, specify to be an industrial
                                          township:
Provided further that having regard to
                                          the cultural, historic, tourist or other
                                          like importance of an urban area, the
                                          State Government may, by
                                          notification in the Official Gazette,
                                          exclude         such     area           from   the
                                          Municipality and constitute, or without
                                          excluding such area from the
                                          Municipality constitute in addition to
                                          the      Municipality,        a    development
                                          authority to exercise such powers and
                                          discharge such functions in the
                                          said area as may be prescribed and
7
notwithstanding anything elsewhere
                                            in this Act, may, in relation to such
                                            area, delegate, by notification in
                                            the Official Gazette, such municipal
                                            powers, functions and duties to the
                                            said   authority   as   it   may     think
                                            appropriate for the proper, rapid and
                                            planned development of such area.
8.      We find that the High Court has misread the scope of Part IXA of the

        Constitution and
Article 243Q
of the Constitution contemplating that

        the transitional area has to be notified under such provision.            The

        scheme of the Constitutional Amendment is not to take away

        legislative competence of the State Legislatures to legislate on the

        subject of local Government but it is more to ensure that the three tiers

        of governance are strengthened as part of democratic set up.
9.      Dr. Manish Singhvi, learned senior counsel for the State has referred to

        the judgments of this Court reported as
Tulsipur Sugar Co. Ltd. v.

        The Notified Area Committee
,
Tulsipur2 and Sundarjas Kanyalal

        Bhatija & Ors. v. Collector, Thane, Maharashtra & Ors.3
to

        contend that the power to declare Municipal Board or a Municipality is

        a legislative function which is discharged by the State by issuing a

        notification on behalf of the Hon’ble Governor. The notification issued

        by the Hon’ble Governor is in fact a notification issued by the State


2    (1980) 2 SCC 295
3    (1989) 3 SCC 396
8
Government. The provisions of
Section 5
of the Municipalities Act are

         not inconsistent in any manner with
Article 243Q
of the Constitution

         and thus,
Section 5
of the Municipalities Act is a legal and valid

         provision and the notification has been issued in exercise of the powers

         conferred by the statute. The High Court has thus erred in law to quash

         the notification issued.
10.      On the other hand, Ms. Yadav, learned counsel for the respondents, did

         not dispute that the notification issued under
Section 5
of the

         Municipalities Act is a legislative function but she contended that firstly

         there has to be a notification under
Article 243Q
of the Constitution

         and    only      thereafter   the    Government      can   issue   a   notification

         constituting a Municipal Board under
Section 5
of the Municipalities

         Act.    She relies upon judgments of this Court reported as
Pune

         Municipal Corporation               & Anr.   v.    Promoters and        Builders

         Association & Anr.4
and MGR Industries Association & Anr. v.

         State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.5.
Reliance is also placed upon

         judgment of this Court reported as
Champa Lal v. State of

         Rajasthan & Ors.6
.
11.      This Court in Tulsipur Sugar Co. Ltd. held as under:
“7. We are concerned in the present case with the power of the
                State Government to make a declaration constituting a
                geographical area into a town area under
Section 3
of the Act
                which does not require the State Government to make such

4     (2004) 10 SCC 796
5     (2017) 3 SCC 494
6     (2018) 16 SCC 356
9
declaration after giving notice of its intention so to do to the
           members of the public and inviting their representations
           regarding such action. The power of the State Government to
           make a declaration under
Section 3
of the Act is legislative in
           character because the application of the rest of the provisions of
           the Act to the geographical area which is declared as a town
           area is dependent upon such declaration.
Section 3
of the Act is
           in the nature of a conditional legislation. Dealing with the nature
           of functions of a non-judicial authority, Prof. S.A. De Smith
           in Judicial Review of Administrative Action (3rd Edn.) observes at
           p. 163:
“However, the analytical classification of a function may
              be a conclusive factor in excluding the operation of the
              audi alteram partem rule. It is generally assumed that in
              English law the making of a subordinate legislative
              instrument need not be preceded by notice or hearing
              unless the parent Act so provides.”



                       xx                   xx                  xx
9. We are, therefore, of the view that the maxim “audi alteram
           partem” does not become applicable to the case by necessary
           implication.
xx                   xx                  xx
17. We are, therefore, of the view that a notification issued
           under
Section 3
of the Act which has the effect of making the Act
           applicable to a geographical area is in the nature of a conditional
           legislation and that it cannot be characterised as a piece of
           subordinate legislation. In view of the foregoing, we hold that the
           contention of the plaintiff that the declaration made by the State
           Government under
Section 3
of the Act declaring the area in
           which the sugar factory of the plaintiff is situated as a part of the
           Tulsipur town area is invalid is not tenable.”
12.   In Sundarjas Kanyalal Bhatija, a draft notification proposed the

      formation of a “Kalyan Corporation” by merging municipal areas of

      Kalyan, Ambarnath, Dombivali and Ulhasnagar. The State Government
10
issued   a   notification   excluding   Ulhasnagar   from    the   proposed

      corporation.    The High Court found that the decision to exclude

      Ulhasnagar was taken by the Government abruptly and in an irrational

      manner. This Court held as under:
“27. Reverting to the case, we find that the conclusion of the
           High Court as to the need to reconsider the proposal to form the
           Corporation has neither the attraction of logic nor the support of
           law. It must be noted that the function of the Government in
           establishing a Corporation under the Act is neither executive nor
           administrative. Counsel for the appellants was right in his
           submission that it is legislative process indeed. No judicial duty
           is laid on the Government in discharge of the statutory duties.
           The only question to be examined is whether the statutory
           provisions have been complied with. If they are complied with,
           then, the court could say no more. In the present case the
           Government did publish the proposal by a draft notification and
           also considered the representations received. It was only
           thereafter, a decision was taken to exclude Ulhasnagar for the
           time being. That decision became final when it was notified
           under
Section 3(2)
. The court cannot sit in judgment over such
           decision. It cannot lay down norms for the exercise of that power.
           It cannot substitute even “its juster will for theirs”.”
13.   In Champa Lal, this Court had struck down a notification issued by the

      Governor of the State of Rajasthan holding that in the absence of

      notification which meets the requirement of
Article 243Q(2)
, the entire

      exercise undertaken by the State of Rajasthan in upgrading the

      Napasar Village Gram Panchayat to be a Nagarpalika is inconsistent

      with the requirements provided thereof under the Constitution.
14.   We find that such judgment is not in tune with the scheme of the

      Constitution and is contrary to a three-Judge Bench judgment of this

      Court reported as
Parmar Samantsinh Umedsinh v. State of
11
Gujarat & Ors.7
wherein the vires of the
Gujarat Provincial Municipal

       Corporation Act, 1949
were subject matter of challenge on the ground

       that the State law has provided more than one representative from a

       single Ward and, thus, this provision is inconsistent with the provisions

       of
Article 243R
and
Article 243S
of the Constitution. This Court held as

       under:
“19. The power of competent Legislature, i.e., State Legislature
              in the light of enabling provisions provided in the Constitution
              with regard to framing of laws concerning Legislature cannot be
              whittled down by way of restrictive interpretation as contended
              by the appellants. The State Legislature in federal set up
              specially in the matter of local Government are to enable enough
              seats to adopt the reservation based on local body.
xxx            xxx                 xxx
35. The ratio which can be culled out from the above judgment is
             that power of the State to legislate within its legislative
             competence is plenary and the same cannot be curtailed in the
             absence of an express limitation placed on such power in the
             Constitution itself.
36.
Article 243ZF
provides that any law relating to municipalities
             in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992
, which is
             inconsistent with the provisions of Part IXA, shall not continue
             beyond expiration of one year from commencement of the
             constitutional amendment. Thus, Part IXA of the Constitution
             categorically contemplated that any law made by State
             Legislature, which is inconsistent with the provisions of Part IXA
             shall cease to operate on the expiration of one year or till
             amended or repealed by a competent Legislature, whichever is
             earlier. The Constitution provisions, thus, mandates that any law
             of the State, which is inconsistent, cannot continue. Thus, this
             limitation shall also govern any law made after enforcement of
             Constitution (Seventyfourth Amendment) Act. Thus, a law, which


7   2021 SCC OnLine SC 138
12
is inconsistent with Part IXA cannot be framed by the State
Legislature.
xxx                 xxx                 xxx
38. One of the meanings of expression “inconsistent” as
approved by this Court is mutually repugnant or contradictory.
Article 254
of the Constitution contains a heading “inconsistency
between laws made by the Parliament and the laws made by the
Legislature of the State” whereas under
Article 254(1)
and
Article 254(2)
the words used are repugnant. The Constitution
itself, thus, has used the words inconsistency and repugnancy
interchangeably. To find out as to whether a law made by State
Legislature is inconsistent with provisions of Part IXA of the
Constitution, the principles which have been
laid down by
this
Court to determine the repugnancy between the law made by
the Legislature of a State and law made by Parliament can be
profitably relied on. We, thus, need to notice the principles on
which the repugnancy of law made by State and law made by
the Parliament is found out.
xxx                 xxx                 xxx
50. Thus, the Legislature of a State may by law has to provide
all matters relating to or in connection with election to the
Municipalities, which includes filling of the seats in the
Municipality by person chosen by direct election.
Articles 243R
and
243ZA
does not give any indication as to whether from
territorial constituency, i.e., the Wards, whether only one
member has to be elected in the Municipality or it can be
multiple member constituency. The constitutional provisions of
Article 243R
, which provides for composition of Municipalities
and that of
Article 243ZA
does not give any indication to the
above. The provisions of Article 243ZG, which deals with bar to
interference by courts in electoral matters throws some light…

           xxx                 xxx                 xxx
59. We have analysed the provisions of
Article 243R
, 243S
and
have come to the definite conclusion that no limitation in
Article
243S
can be found of which contains any prohibition of having
more than one member for a Ward.
13
xxx               xxx                 xxx
63. We, in the present case, after analysing the relevant
                provisions of Part IXA of the Constitution has come to the
                conclusion that there is no prohibition or limitation in Part IXA of
                the Constitution prohibiting the State Legislature from making a
                law providing for election of more than one member from one
                territorial constituency, i.e., Ward.”
15.
In
State of U.P. & Ors. v. Pradhan Sangh Kshettra Samiti &

         Ors.8
, this Court was considering the
Constitution (Seventy-third

         Amendment) Act, 1992
.
Article 243C
in Part IX of the Constitution is

         similar to
Article 243Q
in Part IX-A of the Constitution. The High Court

         had struck down the definition of Village, Gram Sabha and Panchayat

         Area under the
U.P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947
as ultra vires the

         respective definitions given in Part IX of the Constitution. This Court

         held as under:
“3. On coming into force of the said Constitutional Amendment,
                the States were required by the Centre to take steps to organise
                village panchayats on the lines of the provisions of the said
                Constitutional Amendment by making law or amending the
                existing law suitably. ………….
xxx               xxx                 xxx
11. The panchayats are to be constituted at the village,
                intermediate and district levels and the “panchayat area” as
                defined by
Article 243(e)
means the territorial area of the
                panchayat whether at the village, intermediate or district levels.
What is necessary to remember further is that while as per
Article 243(c)
“intermediate level” is a level between the village
                and district levels, as specified by the Governor, the ‘district’ as
                per
Article 243(a)
means a district in a State the boundaries of
                which may be changed by the State Government. The district is

8     1995 Supp (2) SCC 305
14
not required to be specified by the Governor whereas village and
           intermediate levels have to be specified by him for the purposes
           of the said Part of the Constitution.
xxx                 xxx                 xxx
36. As regards the objection of the High Court that whereas
Article 243(g)
requires the Governor to specify the village, the
           Act gives this power to the State Government to do so, the High
           Court has failed to notice the provisions of the Constitution
           which equate the Governor with the State Government in
           exercise of his functions except where he is by or under the
           Constitution required to exercise the functions in his
           discretion…………..
xxx                 xxx                 xxx
44. It is for the Government to decide in what manner the
           panchayat areas and the constituencies in each panchayat area
           will be delimited. It is not for the court to dictate the manner in
           which the same would be done. So long as the panchayat areas
           and the constituencies are delimited in conformity with the
           constitutional provisions or without committing a breach thereof,
           the courts cannot interfere with the same. We may, in this
           connection, refer to a decision of this Court in
Hingir-Rampur
           Coal Co. Ltd. v. State of Orissa
[(1961) 2 SCR 537 : AIR 1961 SC
           459] . In this case, the petitioner-mineowners, had among
           others, challenged the method prescribed by the legislature for
           recovering the cess under the Orissa Mining Areas Development
           Fund Act, 1952 on the ground that it was unconstitutional. The
           majority of the Bench held that the method is a matter of
           convenience and, though relevant, has to be tested in the light
           of other relevant circumstances. It is not permissible to
           challenge the vires of a statute solely on the ground that the
           method adopted for the recovery of the impost can and
           generally is adopted in levying a duty of excise.”
16.   Since the local Government falls in entry 5 of List II of the Seventh

      Schedule, therefore, it is the State Legislature alone which is

      competent to legislate in respect of the municipalities with only one

      limitation that the provisions of the State Act cannot be inconsistent
15
with the mandate of the Scheme of Part IXA of the Constitution. The

      scheme of
Part IXA of the Municipalities Act
does not contemplate a

      separate notification under
Article 243Q
of the Constitution and

      thereafter under
Section 5
of the Municipalities Act. As
Section 5
of the

      Municipalities Act is not inconsistent with any provisions of
Article

      243Q
of   the   Constitution,   therefore,        two   notifications   are   not

      contemplated or warranted under the Scheme of Part IXA or the
Municipalities Act
as reproduced in the table above.
17.   The State Government is competent to divide the Municipalities in the

      State into classes according to their income or other factors like

      population or importance of the local area and other circumstances as

      provided under
Section 329
of the Municipalities Act.                 In terms of

      Section 329, a notification was issued on 30.4.2012 determining the

      category of the Municipal Corporation/Municipal Council/Municipal

      Board. The said notification reads as under:
“No. P .8 (Ga) ( ) Rule/Category/LSG/12/3825         Dated 30/4/12

                                       :- Notification:-
In connection with the partition of the category of municipalities
             and superseding all the notifications issued earlier in relation to
             the categorization of Municipal Councils by exercising the powers
             rendered in Section 329 read with Section 337 of Rajasthan
             Municipal Act, 2009 (Act No. 18 of year 2009), the State
             Government hem by determines the category of all the Municipal
             Corporation/Councils/Board which follows as under:-
(1) Greater Urbanized       area    -     Urbanized      area    of
             (Municipal Corporation)                   population of 5 lacs
             (2) Small urbanized         area    -     All urbanized area and all
16
(Municipal Council)                       district    headquarters
                                                      (except        Municipal
                                                      Corporation)     having
                                                      population of more than
                                                      1 lac and less than 5
                                                      lacs.
            (3)      Transitional       area -        Urbanized area of 1 lac
            (Municipality Board)                      population
But State Government would have right to convert any municipal
            council     into    any    category    keeping   in   view   its
            historical/religious/archaeological importance or in any special
            circumstances.
As per order of Governor
                                                                           Sd.
Deputy Government Secretary”
18.   Thereafter, the impugned notification dated 12.8.2014 was issued in

      exercise of the powers conferred on the State Government under
Section 3
read with
Section 329
of the Municipalities Act.            The said

      notification reads thus:
“No.F.10(ka)Est./Category( )/DLB/14/2591             Dated 12/8/14

                                      :- Notification:-
State Government by exercising its power U/S 3 read with
            Section 329 of Rajasthan Municipal Act 2009 (Act No.18 year
            2009) and Notification No.P.8(.G)()Rule/Category/LSG/12/3825-
4090 dated 30/4/12 hereby declares all the following Gram
            Panchayat areas into fourth class Municipal Councils with
            immediate effect.
S. No.   District       Name         of Newly constituted forth
                                    Gram            class Municipal Councils
                                    Panchayat
            1        Bharatpur      Roopbas          Municipal          Board
                                                     Roopbas
Existing Boundaries of the said Gram Panchyat (Barbar -in the
17
north, Gram Samahad in the south, Bhidyani and Rudh Roopwas
            in the east and Dorda in the west) would remain the local
            boundaries of newly constituted Municipal Board.
As per order of Governor
                                                                     Sd.
Government Deputy Secretary”
19.   The above notifications would show that the State Government had

      exercised powers to establish Municipality in terms of
Section 5
of the

      Municipalities Act. Such notifications cannot be said to be illegal or

      arbitrary in any manner and were rightly issued in exercise of the

      statutory powers conferred on the State by the Legislature.
20.   The argument of Ms. Yadav is that the notification is arbitrary and

      unreasonable, therefore, the High Court has rightly struck down the

      notification.   Reliance is placed on the judgment reported as Pune

      Municipal Corporation to support such contention. In the said case,

      the notification amending the Development Control Rules sanctioned

      by the State Government under
Section 37
of the Maharashtra

      Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966 was the subject matter of

      challenge. The High Court had struck down the notification amending

      the Development Control Rules.     It was held that the Development

      Control Rules were legislative function, therefore,
Section 36
has to be

      viewed as repository of legislative powers for effecting amendments to

      Development Control Rules. It was observed that such Rules can be

      challenged on the ground of it being arbitrary or unreasonable. We do

      not find that
the said judgment
in any way support the arguments
18
raised by the learned counsel.
21.   In MGR Industries Association, the appellant was claiming to be

      part of the industrial township so as to be exempt from the jurisdiction

      of Zila Panchayat.         This Court examined that there has to be a

      notification under
Section 12-A
of the U.P. Industrial Area Development

      Act, 1976 before it is excluded from Panchayat area. Therefore, two

      notifications were required, one to constitute an industrial township

      under Section 12-A of the 1976 Act and then exclusion of Panchayat

      area under the Uttar Pradesh Kshettra Panchayats and Zila Panchayats

      Adhiniyam, 1961. The said judgment is again not helpful for the

      arguments raised.
22.   In fact, the High Court has struck down the notification only for the

      reason that the notification under
Article 243Q(2)
was not published.

      Such reasoning is not tenable.
23.   Thus,   the   order   of    the   High   Court    is   clearly    erroneous       and

      unsustainable in law.       The same is set aside and the writ petition is

      dismissed. Consequently, the appeal is allowed.
.............................................J.
                                                                    (HEMANT GUPTA)



                                               .............................................J.
                                                         (V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN)
NEW DELHI;
MARCH 10, 2022.
19