[Cites
26
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Municipal Committee Barwala ... vs Jai Narayan And Company on 29 March, 2022
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Hemant Gupta
REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2222 OF 2022
                               (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 16530 OF 2018)


          THE MUNICIPAL COMMITTEE, BARWALA,
          DISTRICT HISAR, HARYANA THROUGH ITS
          SECRETARY/PRESIDENT                                               .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                             VERSUS

          JAI NARAYAN AND COMPANY & ANR.                               .....RESPONDENT(S)




                                                     JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.             The Municipal Committee, Barwala1 is in appeal against the judgment

                         dated 1.5.2018, whereby its second appeal was dismissed arising out

                         of a suit for mandatory injunction to execute a sale deed in respect of

                         land measuring 55 kanals 5 marlas sought by the respondent-plaintiff.
2.             The respondent-plaintiff claimed title and possession on the basis of an

                         open auction conducted by the Sub-Divisional Officer, Hisar on
Signature Not Verified
23.3.1999 @ Rs.2,32,000/- per acre after sanction was granted for
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2022.03.29
16:27:42 IST
auction of the land in question on 25.10.1995.          The total sale
Reason:
consideration comes out to be Rs.15,76,150/- which was deposited
          1           For short, the “Municipal Committee”
1
with the Municipal Committee. The plaintiff thus claimed that he is a

     bonafide purchaser and is in possession as owner of the suit land. He

     deposited the remaining consideration after adjusting an amount of

     Rs.4,10,000/-   which   was   already   deposited    with   the   Municipal

     Committee.
3.   The plaintiff asserts that the Municipal Committee had passed a

     resolution on 1.5.2002 to get the sale deed executed and registered.

     Since the sale deed was not executed, the plaintiff had allegedly

     served a registered notice dated 14.8.2006 which was made the cause

     of action to file the civil suit for mandatory injunction on 13.6.2011.
4.   In the written statement filed by the Municipal Committee, it has been

     admitted that the property was put to auction after obtaining

     permission from the Deputy Commissioner. However, the possession

     of the plaintiff was said to be illegal possession. It was pleaded that

     the Municipal Committee is unable to execute the sale deed without

     proper sanction of the competent authority i.e., Government of

     Haryana.
5.   The learned trial court decreed the suit vide judgment and decree

     dated 9.3.2016 after giving findings on the following issues framed in

     view of the pleadings of the parties:
“1. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to a decree for mandatory
           injunction as prayed for?
2. Whether the suit is not maintainable due to non-joinder of
           necessary parties?
2
3. Whether the plaintiff has not come to the Court with clean
           hand and suppressed the material facts?
4. Whether the plaintiff has no locus standi to file the present
           suit?
5. Relief.”
6.   Aggrieved against the judgment and decree of the trial court, the

     Municipal Committee filed the first appeal which was dismissed on

     5.9.2016. The second appeal was also dismissed vide impugned

     judgment dated 1.5.2018.
7.   Before this Court, learned counsel for the appellant argued that the

     auction conducted in which the plaintiff was the highest bidder was not

     approved by the State Government. The Ex.P/34 is a communication

     addressed by the Deputy Commissioner to the Director Local Bodies to

     seek approval of the property put to auction. However, there was no

     approval by the State Government of the auction once conducted in

     favor of the plaintiff. It was contended that till such time the auction is

     confirmed, mere fact that the plaintiff was the highest bidder would not

     confer any equitable and legal right to him.          It is only after the

     confirmation of sale and the letter accepting the bid is issued, the

     plaintiff could claim any enforceable right. It was thus contended that

     the plaintiff is in unauthorized and illegal possession of the property. It

     was contended that the approval of sale of the property by public

     auction itself does not amount to confirmation of the auction,
3
therefore, in the absence of confirmation of sale by the State

        Government, the plaintiff would not get any right over the property. It

        was also argued that the plaintiff in his counter affidavit before this

        Court relied upon Section 5 read with
Section 10(2)(e)
of the Haryana

        Municipal Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 1974 2 read with Rule 2(4) of

        the Haryana Municipalities Management of Municipal Properties and

        State Properties Rules, 19763, though the 1974 Act has been declared

        unconstitutional by the Full Bench of Punjab & Haryana High Court in
Rajender Parshad & Ors. v. State of Haryana & Ors.4
. Even the

        First Appellate Court and Second Appellate Court have referred to the

        1974 Act while dismissing the appeals filed by the Municipal

        Committee.
8.      When the appeal came up for hearing before this Court on 14.3.2022,

        attention of the counsel for the plaintiff was drawn to the Full Bench

        judgment of Punjab & Haryana High Court in Rajender Parshad

        declaring the 1974 Act as illegal.     Therefore, vesting of land to

        shamilat deh on the strength of the aforesaid statute itself was not

        tenable. However, Mr. Sanchar Anand, learned counsel for the plaintiff

        submitted that it is not the case that the property vested with the

        Municipality on the strength of the 1974 Act. It was argued that the

        property was put to auction after previous approval of the Deputy

        Commissioner and later vide Ex.P/34, the sale stands confirmed.
2    For short, the “1974 Act”
3    For short, the “1976 Rules”
4    AIR 1980 P&H 37
4
Therefore, once the plaintiff has been found to be the highest bidder

      and sale has been confirmed by the Deputy Commissioner, the plaintiff

      has been rightly granted decree for mandatory injunction.
9.    We have heard learned counsel for the parties and find that the decree

      passed by the three courts below, to say the least, is a perverse

      reading of the provisions of law as well as the factual position. Rule 2 of

      the 1976 Rules has to be referred to appreciate the present dispute. It

      reads as thus:
“2.  Procedure for alienation. – (1) A municipal committee
            proposing to alienate permanently or for a term exceeding ten
            years any land or other immovable property of which it is the
            owner shall apply to the Deputy Commissioner for sanction.
(2) An application under sub-rule (1) shall be accompanied by a
            plan of the proposed property to be alienated together with a
            statement in Form A appended to these rules.
(3) The Deputy Commissioner shall record an order on the
            application, -
(i) sanctioning it (subject to such conditions, if any, as he thinks
            fit); or
(ii) refusing to sanction it; provided that no sale by auction shall
            be valid, until it has been confirmed by the Deputy
            Commissioner.
(4) When the Deputy Commissioner has accorded sanction to a
            sale by auction, the Form A aforesaid shall in due course be re-
submitted to him with the details regarding the auction shown in
            Form B. The Deputy Commissioner shall thereon either confirm
            the sale or refuse to confirm it. If the Deputy Commissioner
            refuses to confirm the sale, the same shall be void.”
10.   The 1976 Rules contemplates two acts to be completed by the Deputy
5
Commissioner, one of which is approval of conduct of sale which was

      granted on 25.10.1995. Thus, there is compliance as far as clause (i) of

      Rule 2(3) of the 1976 Rules is concerned. The other important provision

      is sub-rule (ii) of Rule 2(3) of the 1976 Rules which contemplates that

      no sale by auction shall be valid until it has been confirmed by the

      Deputy Commissioner. The communication dated 10.1.2007 (Ex P-34)

      referred to by the plaintiff is not the communication by the Deputy

      Commissioner to the Municipality or to the plaintiff that the sale stands

      confirmed. In fact, it is an inter-departmental communication with no

      endorsement of the copy of the said communication to the plaintiff.

      Thus, the reliance of the plaintiff on the communication dated

      10.1.2007 (Ex.P/34) is not helpful to the argument raised by him as it is

      the inter-departmental communication from the Deputy Commissioner

      to the Director, Urban Local Body Department to seek approval but in

      the absence of any approval granted, no right would accrue.             The

      communication is inter alia to the following effect:
“3. Hence while confirming sale of Municipal Committee land
            measuring 54 Kanal & 7 Marla comprised in Khasra No. 517 and
            518, conducted on 23.03.1999 by open auction/bid to the
            maximum successful bidder of this land @ Rs.2,32,000/- (Rupees
            Two Lacs Thirty Two Thousand) per acre, which has been
            accepted by Sub Divisional Office and Head Municipal
            Committee Barwala, you are requested to please issue Ex-post
            facto approval so that the sale deed of the land in the name of
            the purchaser M/s Jai Narain & Company may be got done by the
            Municipal Corporation Barwala.”
11.   Therefore, no concluded contract ever came into force. Reference may
6
be made to the judgment of this Court reported as
Haryana Urban

       Development         Authority      &    Ors.     v.   Orchid     Infrastructure

       Developers Private Limited5
, wherein this Court held as under:
“13. Firstly, we examine the question whether there being no
              concluded contract in the absence of acceptance of bid and
              issuance of allotment letter, the suit could be said to be
              maintainable for the declaratory relief and mandatory injunction
              sought by the plaintiff. The plaintiff has prayed for a declaration
              that rejection of the bid was illegal. Merely by that, plaintiff could
              not have become entitled for consequential mandatory
              injunction for issuance of formal letter of allotment. Court while
              exercising judicial review could not have accepted the bid. The
              bid had never been accepted by concerned authorities. It was
              not a case of cancellation of bid after being accepted. Thus even
              assuming as per plaintiff's case that the Administrator was not
              equipped with the power and the Chief Administrator had the
              power to accept or refuse the bid, there had been no decision by
              the Chief Administrator. Thus, merely by declaration that
              rejection of the bid by the Administrator was illegal, the plaintiff
              could not have become entitled to consequential relief of
              issuance of allotment letter. Thus the suit, in the form it was
              filed, was not maintainable for relief sought in view of the fact
              that there was no concluded contract in the absence of allotment
              letter being issued to the plaintiff, which was a sine qua non for
              filing the civil suit.
14. It is a settled law that the highest bidder has no vested right
              to have the auction concluded in his favour. The Government or
              its authority could validly retain power to accept or reject the
              highest bid in the interest of public revenue. We are of the
              considered opinion that there was no right acquired and no
              vested right accrued in favour of the plaintiff merely because his
              bid amount was highest and had deposited 10% of the bid
              amount. As per
Regulation 6(2)
of the Regulations of 1978,
              allotment letter has to be issued on acceptance of the bid by the
              Chief Administrator and within 30 days thereof, the successful
              bidder has to deposit another 15% of the bid amount. In the
              instant case allotment letter has never been issued to the
              petitioner as per
Regulation 6(2)
in view of non-acceptance of
              the bid. Thus there was no concluded contract....”

5   (2017) 4 SCC 243
7
12.
In
State of Punjab & Ors. v. Mehar Din6
this Court observed that

         State or authority which can be held to be State within the meaning of
Article 12
of the Constitution is not bound to accept the highest tender

         of bid. It was held as under:
“18. This Court has examined right of the highest bidder at
                public auctions in umpteen number of cases and it was
                repeatedly pointed out that the State or authority which can be
                held to be State within the meaning of
Article 12
of the
                Constitution, is not bound to accept the highest tender of bid.
                The acceptance of the highest bid or highest bidder is always
                subject to conditions of holding public auction and the right of
                the highest bidder is always provisional to be examined in the
                context in different conditions in which the auction has been
                held. In the present case, no right had accrued to the respondent
                even on the basis of statutory provisions as being contemplated
                under Rule 8(1)(h) of Chapter III of the Scheme of Rules, 1976
                and in terms of the conditions of auction notice notified for
                public auction.”
13.      This   Court     has   also   considered    that   the    inter-departmental

         communication and/or the notings on the file are not the decisions of

         the State. It has been held by the Constitution Bench in a judgment

         reported as
Bachhittar Singh v. State of Punjab7
that merely

         writing something on the file does not amount to an order. It was held

         as under:
“10. The business of State is a complicated one and has
                necessarily to be conducted through the agency of a large
                number of officials and authorities. The Constitution, therefore,
                requires and so did the Rules of Business framed by the
                Rajpramukh of PEPSU provide, that the action must be taken by
                the authority concerned in the name of the Rajpramukh. It is not
6     2022 SCC OnLine SC 250
7       AIR 1963 SC 395
8
till this formality is observed that the action can be regarded as
                 that of the State or here, by the Rajpramukh. ................. Indeed,
                 it is possible that after expressing one opinion about a particular
                 matter at a particular stage a Minister or the Council of Ministers
                 may express quite a different opinion, one which may be
                 completely opposed to the earlier opinion. Which of them can be
                 regarded as the “order” of the State Government? Therefore, to
                 make the opinion amount to a decision of the Government it
                 must be communicated to the person concerned.
In this
                 connection we may quote the following from the judgment of
                 this Court in the
State of Punjab v. Sodhi Sukhdev Singh
(AIR
                 1961 SC 493 at page 512] :
xxx                xxx                       xxx
11. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the remarks or the
                 order of the Revenue Minister, PEPSU are of no avail to the
                 appellant.”
14.      Furthermore, this Court in a judgment reported as Union of India v.
Avtar Singh8 held that letter does not records the decision of the

         Central Government under
Section 33
of the Displaced Persons

         (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act 1954, so as to be a decision by

         the Central Government. It was observed as under:
“19. .…..Therefore the High Court was clearly in error in treating
                 the letter of Shri Dube dated May 31, 1963 as a decision of the
                 Central Government in exercise of the power conferred by
                 Section 33. There was no reason for decision nor any occasion
                 for the Central Government to exercise power under Section 33
                 and therefore, it is not possible to agree with the High Court that
                 the letter records the decision of the Central Government under
                 Section 33. If the letter of Shri Dube is not a decision of the
                 Central Government under
Section 33
of the Act, as a necessary
                 corollary, the impugned decision must be treated as one
                 rendered for the first time in exercise of the revisional power
                 under Section 33 and therefore, it cannot be said to be one
                 without jurisdiction. In this view of the matter, the appeal will
                 have to be allowed.”


8     (1984) 3 SCC 589
9
15.
In a judgment reported as
State of Orissa and Others v. Mesco

       Steels Limited and Another9
, this Court held that the High Court

       was in error in proceeding on an assumption that a final decision had

       been taken and in quashing what was no more than an inter-

       departmental communication constituting at best a step in the process

       of taking a final decision by the Government. It was held as under:
“20. On the contrary, the issue of the show cause notice setting
              out the reasons that impelled the Government to claim
              resumption of a part of the proposed lease area from the
              respondent-company clearly suggested that the entire process
              leading up to the issue of the show cause notice was tentative
              and no final decision on the subject had been taken at any level.
              It is only after the Government provisionally decided to resume
              the area in part or full that a show cause notice could have been
              issued. To put the matter beyond any pale of controversy, Mr.
              Lalit made an unequivocal statement at the bar on behalf of the
              State Government that no final decision regarding resumption of
              any part of the lease area has been taken by the State
              Government so far and all that had transpired till date must
              necessarily be taken as provisional. Such being the case the
              High Court was in error in proceeding on an assumption that a
              final decision had been taken and in quashing what was no more
              than an inter-departmental communication constituting at best a
              step in the process of taking a final decision by the Government.
              The writ petition in that view was pre-mature and ought to have
              been disposed of as such. Our answer to question No. 1 is
              accordingly in the affirmative.”
16.    This Court in a judgment reported as
State of Uttaranchal v. Sunil

       Kumar Vaish10
held that a noting recorded in the file is merely a

       noting simpliciter and nothing more. It merely represents expression of

       opinion by the particular individual. By no stretch of imagination, such

9 (2013) 4 SCC 340
10 (2011) 8 SCC 670
10
noting can be treated as a decision of the Government. It was held as

      under:
“24. A noting recorded in the file is merely a noting simpliciter
            and nothing more. It merely represents expression of opinion by
            the particular individual. By no stretch of imagination, such
            noting can be treated as a decision of the Government. Even if
            the competent authority records its opinion in the file on the
            merits of the matter under consideration, the same cannot be
            termed as a decision of the Government unless it is sanctified
            and acted upon by issuing an order in accordance with
Articles
            77(1)
and
(2)
or
Articles 166(1)
and
(2).
The noting in the file or
            even a decision gets culminated into an order affecting right of
            the parties only when it is expressed in the name of the
            President or the Governor, as the case may be, and
            authenticated in the manner provided in
Article 77(2)
or
Article
            166(2).
A noting or even a decision recorded in the file can
            always be reviewed/reversed/overruled or overturned and the
            court cannot take cognizance of the earlier noting or decision for
            exercise of the power of judicial review. (See
State of Punjab v.
            Sodhi Sukhdev Singh
AIR 1961 SC 493, Bachhittar Singh v. State
            of Punjab
AIR 1963 SC 395, State of Bihar v. Kripalu Shankar
(
1987) 3 SCC 34, Rajasthan Housing Board v. Shri Kishan
(
1993)
            2 SCC 84, Sethi Auto Service Station v. DDA
(
2009) 1 SCC 180
            and Shanti Sports Club v. Union of India
(2009) 15 SCC 705).”
17.   Thus, the letter seeking approval of the State Government by the

      Deputy Commissioner is not the approval granted by him, which could

      be enforced by the plaintiff in the court of law.
18.   The suit was not maintainable for the reason that there was no vested

      right with the plaintiff to claim such a decree merely on the basis of a

      participation in the public auction. Secondly, even if the plaintiff had

      any right on the basis of an auction, he could at best sue for specific

      performance of the so-called agreement. In Orchid, the plaintiff had

      sought   decree    of   declaration   and   of   consequential     mandatory
11
injunction. This Court held that such suit was not maintainable as no

      concluded contract came into existence by merely submitting the

      highest bid. In these circumstances, suit for mandatory injunction was

      not maintainable.
19.   It is to be noted that though the plaintiff had served a notice on

      14.9.2006, but still the suit was filed in the year 2011 in respect of the

      auction conducted in the year 1999. The suit for mandatory injunction

      was filed on or after 13.6.2011, i.e., more than         12 years after the

      auction was conducted on 23.3.1999. Therefore, even the suit for

      specific performance was barred by limitation as such suit, even if

      maintainable, could be filed within three years of the auction being

      conducted in terms of
Article 54
of the
Schedule to the Limitation Act,

      1963
. The suit for injunction was filed beyond the period of limitation

      and was not properly constituted. The courts have not examined such

      aspect as was expected to examine legally.
20.   Section 61 of the 1973 Act deals with vesting of the property with the

      Municipal Committee and how the property can be utilized. Sections

      61 and 62 read thus:
“61. Property vested in committee.—(1) Subject to any special
            reservation made or to any special conditions imposed by the
            State Government, all property of the nature hereinafter in this
            section specified and situated within the municipality, shall vest
            in and be under the control of the committee, and with all other
            property which has already vested or may here after vest in the
            committee, shall be held and applied by it for the purposes of
            this Act, that is to say,—
12
(a) all public town-walls, gates, markets, stalls, slaughter houses,
manure and night-soil depots and public buildings of every
description which have been constructed or are maintained out
of the municipal fund;
(b) all public streams, springs and works for the supply, storage
and distribution of water for public purposes, and all bridges,
buildings, engines, materials and things connected therewith or
appertaining thereto, and also any adjacent land, not being
private property appertaining, to any public tank or well;
(c) all public sewers and drains, and all sewers, drains, culverts
and water-courses in or under any public street or constructed
by or for the committee alongside any public Street, and all
works, materials and things appertaining thereto;
(d) all dust, dirt, dung, ashes, refuse, animal matter or filth or
rubbish of any kind or dead bodies of animals collected by the
committee from the streets, houses, privies, sewers, cesspools
or elsewhere or deposited in places fixed by the committee
under section 152;
(e) all public lamps, lamp-posts, and apparatus connected
therewith or appertaining thereto;
(f) all land or other property transferred to the committee by the
State Government or acquired by gift, purchase or otherwise for
local public purposes;
(g) all public streets, not being land owned by the State
Government, and the payments, stones and other materials
thereof, and also trees growing on, and erections, materials,
implements, and things provided for, such streets;
(h) Shamlat Deh.
(2) Where any immovable property is transferred otherwise than
by the sale by the State Government to a committee for public
purposes, it shall be deemed to be a condition of such transfer,
unless specially provided to the contrary, that should the
property be at any resumed by the State Government the
compensation payable therefor shall, notwithstanding anything
to the contrary in the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
, in no case
exceed the amount, if any, paid to the State Government for the
transfer together with the cost or the present value, whichever
13
shall be less of any buildings erected or other works executed on
            the land by the committee.
62. Inventory and map of municipal property.—(1) The
            committee shall maintain an inventory and a map of, all
            immovable property of which the committee is proprietor, or
            which vests in it or which it holds in trust for the State
            Government.
(2) The copies of such inventory and map shall be deposited in
            the office of the Deputy Commissioner and such other officer or
            authority as the State Government may direct and all changes,
            made therein shall forth with be communicated to the Deputy
            Commissioner or other officer or authority.”
21.   Clause 61(1)(h) of the 1973 Act is the subject matter of challenge in

      another appeal before this Court whereas clauses (a) to (g) except

      clause (f) deal with the public utility services. The clause (f) deals with,

      “the land or other property transferred to the Committee by the State

      Government or acquired by gift, purchase or otherwise can be utilised

      only for local public purposes.”
22.   In terms of Section 62 of the 1973 Act, the Municipal Committee is

      required to maintain an inventory and map of all immovable property

      of which the Committee is the proprietor or which vests in it or which it

      holds in trust for the State Government. In the absence of nature of

      land as to whether it is a land owned by the Municipality and is not

      vested with the Municipality in terms of
Section 61
of the Act, no

      direction by the courts could have been granted. It has not come on

      record as to whether such land was vesting with the Municipal

      Committee or that it was not mentioned in the list of inventories of the
14
properties of Municipal Committee. We find that Municipal Committee

      was remiss in defending its property as a custodian of public property.
23.   Section 245 of the 1973 Act falling in Chapter XII (Control) empowers

      the Deputy Commissioner or any other officer not below the rank of

      Assistant Commissioner by a general or special order to carry out the

      functions assigned therein. The Deputy Commissioner has a power to

      suspend any resolution or order of Committee under Section 246. Any

      action taken by the Deputy Commissioner under Sections 246, 247 or

      248 of the 1973 Act is to be reported to the Commissioner.
24.   Section 250 of the 1973 Act confers power with the State Government

      to issue directions for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The said

      provision reads thus:
“250. Power of State Government to give directions.—The State
            Government may issue directions to any committee for carrying
            out the purposes of this Act and in particular with regard to—
(a) various uses to which any land within a municipal are may be
            put;
(b) repayment of debts and discharging of obligations;
(c) collection of taxes;
(d) observance of rules and bye-laws;
(e) adoption of development measures and measures for
            promotion of public safety, health, convenience and welfare;
(f) sanitation and cleanliness;
(g) establishment and maintenance of fire-brigade.”
15
25.   It is in pursuance of the powers conferred on the State Government, a

      message was conveyed on 12.9.1994 on behalf of the Director, Local

      Bodies, Haryana to all the Deputy Commissioners of the State of

      Haryana that no municipal property will be sold without the prior

      approval of the Government.       The learned trial court has discarded

      such communication for the reason that such communication has not

      been proved as per the provisions of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
. It

      may be stated that the State or the Deputy Commissioner was not

      impleaded as a party to the civil suit filed. In fact, the objection raised

      was that the State has not been impleaded as a party.                Such

      communication has been produced by the Municipal Committee when

      the Committee examined Shri Mahavir Singh, Secretary as DW-1 and

      Shri Sandeep Kumar, Building Inspector as DW-2. Such communication

      has come on record from the official source which would carry

      presumption of correctness under
Section 114
of the Indian Evidence

      Act, 1872 that the official acts have been regularly performed.         The

      original record was not necessarily required to be proved by

      summoning the Government officials as such document was produced

      by the officials of the Municipal Committee from the official record.
26.   Thus, since direction issued by the State Government is in terms of

      Section 250 of the 1973 Act, the Deputy Commissioner was bound to

      seek approval of the State Government. The binding nature of such

      instructions is evident from the fact that the Deputy Commissioner has
16
sought approval from the State Government when a communication to

      this effect was addressed on 10.1.2007.
27.   In view of the above, we find that the plaintiff has been granted decree

      for mandatory injunction not only beyond the period of limitation but in

      contravention of the statute and the rules framed thereunder.
28.   Consequently, the appeal is allowed. The judgment and decree passed

      by the courts below are set aside. The plaintiff is in possession, which

      is found to be illegal and without the authority of law. The Municipality

      shall take possession of land forthwith and furnish compliance report

      within three months. The amount of Rs.15,76,150/- shall stand

      forfeited towards the damages for the illegal occupation of the land for

      more than 20 years since the date of auction in contravention of law.
.............................................J.
                                                               (HEMANT GUPTA)



                                          .............................................J.
                                                    (V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN)

NEW DELHI;
MARCH 29, 2022.
17