[Cites
7
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Desh Deepak Kumar Vihangam@ Deepak ... vs The State Of Bihar on 8 March, 2022
Author:
Sanjiv Khanna
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
,
Sanjiv Khanna
REPORTABLE



                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S).       673 OF 2011


                      DESH DEEPAK KUMAR VIHANGAM@ DEEPAK KUMAR          APPELLANT(S)


                                                           VERSUS


                      THE STATE OF BIHAR                               RESPONDENT(S)


                                                    WITH


                                CRIMINAL APPEAL   NO(S). 674-675 OF 2011


                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL    NO(S). 683 OF 2011


                               CRIMINAL APPEAL    NO(S). 1714-1715 OF 2011



                                           J U D G M E N T
Impugned judgment dated 20th May 2010 passed by the High

                      Court of Judicature at Patna dismissed the appeals preferred

                      by Desh Deepak Kumar Vihangam @ Deepak Kumar, Bimlesh Kumar

                      Singh, Madan Prasad Thathera, Kanhaiya Lal, Ramjee Prajapati

                      and Abhay Kumar @ Pappu, who have been convicted under
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Sections 364A
and
120B
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (‘Penal
JAGDISH KUMAR
Date: 2022.03.16
16:27:11 IST
Reason:
Code’, in short). The aforesaid 6 convicts were sentenced

                      to undergo Imprisonment for Life. Desh Deepak Kumar Vihangam
Crl.A. No. 673 OF 2011 etc.                                        Page 1 of 15
was ordered to pay a fine of Rs. 7,00,000 (Rupees Seven lakh

     Only), while the rest of the convicts were ordered to pay a

     fine of Rs. 1,00,000 (Rupees One Lakh Only) each.
2.   The impugned judgment by the High Court however acquits

     Santosh who was convicted by the trial court. The State has

     not   preferred   any     appeal    challenging    the   acquittal   of

     Santosh. The impugned judgment has also convicted Pradeep

     Kumar Shrivastava, who had preferred a petition for special

     leave to appeal, which was dismissed on 22nd October 2010.

     Another co-convict, Upendra Kumar Singh, whose conviction

     was upheld by the High Court, has expired, and hence, his

     appeal has abated.
3.   The case relates to the kidnapping for ransom of Dr. Shashi

     Kumar Sinha (PW-3), abducted along with his driver Salauddin

     (PW-5) on 7TH February 2006 while travelling in a car from

     his residence at Station Road, Dehri, to his clinic at

     Tilouthu Village. Kiran Sinha (PW-2), the wife of Dr. Shashi

     Kumar Sinha and Dr. Amitabh Sinha (PW-1), son of Dr. Shashi

     Kumar Sinha, have deposed that calls for ransom were made.

     Initially, an amount of Rs. 1,00,00,000/- (Rupees One Crore

     Only)   was   demanded,    but     thereafter,    the   kidnappers   had

     agreed to release the captives on payment of Rs. 12,00,000/-

     (Rupees Twelve Lakhs Only). Dr. Amitabh Sinha (PW-1) had

     deposed that he had paid a ransom of Rs. 12,00,000/- (Rupees
Crl.A. No. 673 OF 2011 etc.                                        Page 2 of 15
Twelve Lakhs Only) to Deepak Kumar at Ranchi on 24th February

   2006. At that time, Dr. Amitabh Sinha (PW-1) did not know

   the name and identity of Deepak Kumar. He came to know about

   his identity when Deepak Kumar was arrested at Patna by the

   I.O. Yogesh Chandra (PW-8) and Inspector Krishna Kumar Singh

   @ K.K. Singh (PW-4). Dr. Amitabh Sinha (PW-1) had visited

   Patna on 9th March 2006 as the kidnappers had demanded a

   further sum of Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees Five Lakh Only) as

   ransom. Deepak Kumar and Kanhaiya Lal were arrested at Patna

   on 10th March 2006. Inspector K.K. Singh (PW-4) and I.O.

   Yogesh Chandra (PW-8) have deposed that Deepak Kumar had

   then made a disclosure statement whereupon the police along

   with Deepak Kumar and Kanhaiya Lal had proceeded to Village

   Bar, District Aurangabad, Bihar. Dr. Shashi Kumar Sinha (PW-
3) and Salauddin (PW-5) were rescued in the intervening

   night of 10th and 11th March from the house of Upendra Kumar

   Sinha situated at Village Bar. Bimlesh Kumar Singh, Madan

   Prasad Thathera, Pradip Kumar Shrivastav and Upendra Kumar

   Sinha were present at the house and were involved in the

   kidnapping of Dr. Shashi Kumar Sinha (PW-3) and Salauddin

   (PW-5). They were arrested. Dr. Shashi Kumar Sinha (PW-3)

   and Salauddin (PW-5), the victims, identified Deepak Kumar,

   Bimlesh Kumar, Madan Prasad Thathera, Pradeep Kumar and

   Upendra Kumar in the court. On the basis of the disclosure

   statement made by Deepak Kumar, Rs. 6,00,000/- (Rupees Six

   Lakhs Only) were recovered from his tenanted premises at
Crl.A. No. 673 OF 2011 etc.                             Page 3 of 15
Patna.   Some   of   the   currency   notes   recovered   bore   the

     signatures of Dr. Amitabh Sinha (PW-1).
4.   In view of the aforesaid facts, and the appreciation of

     evidence, we hold that the conviction of Bimlesh Kumar, Madan

     Prasad Thathera and Deepak Kumar is correct. We are in

     agreement with the findings and conclusions of the trial

     court and the High Court in this regard.
5.   We will now be adverting to the case of Kanhaiya Lal. Dr.

     Amitabh Sinha (PW-1) has deposed that on 9th March 2006 he

     received a phone call from the kidnapper who asked him to

     come to Patna with Rs. 5,00,000/- (Rupees Five Lakh Only).

     He was told to reach Gaighat with the money after taking the

     route from Hanuman Mandir road to Gandhi Maidan via Frazer

     Road and to proceed towards Engineering Mod, and from the

     said Mod to reach Gaighat. He thereupon had contacted the

     police who made arrangements to track down the culprits and

     apprehend them. He reached Patna on 9th March 2006 and spent

     the night at Arya Samaj Hotel. On 10th March 2006 at 6.30

     A.M. he received a call from the kidnappers and was asked

     to reach Gaighat with the money on a rickshaw as per the

     route specified. He hired a cycle rickshaw and followed the

     route as per the instructions of the kidnappers. On the way

     he crossed the gate of Patna Medical College and reached the

     Engineering College at about 8.00 A.M. From there, he reached
Crl.A. No. 673 OF 2011 etc.                                    Page 4 of 15
Gaighat at about 8.30-8.45 A.M.
6.   After 3 to 4 hours Dr. Amitabh Sinha (PW-1) received a phone

     call from Inspector K.K. Singh (PW-4) who asked the former

     to reach Kotwali Police Station. On reaching the police

     station, Dr. Amitabh Sinha (PW-1) identified Deepak Kumar,

     as     the   person    who    had    collected    ransom    money    of   Rs.

     12,00,000/- (Rupees Twelve Lakh Only) from him at Ranchi on

     24th    February      2006.   Dr.     Amitabh    Sinha    (PW-1)    did   not

     recognise Kanhaiya Lal, who was also present as he had been

     detained by the police.
7.   Inspector K.K. Singh who has deposed as PW-4, has referred

     to his conversation with Dr. Amitabh Sinha (PW-1) in which

     Dr. Amitabh Sinha (PW-1) stated that he had been asked to

     pay ransom money of Rs. 5,00,000/- (Rupees Five Lakh Only)

     at Patna in the morning of 10th March 2006. Accordingly, on

     the directions of the Superintendent of Police, a special

     task force was formed, and he was assigned the duty to lead

     the raiding party. Inspector K.K. Singh (PW-4) knew the route

     which Dr. Amitabh Sinha (PW-1) was required to follow. At

     about    6.00-6.30      A.M.,       Inspector   K.K.     Singh   (PW-4)   was

     informed by Dr. Amitabh Sinha (PW-1) that the culprits had

     asked him to take a rickshaw and was required to travel

     around Mahavir Mandir Station. This information was shared

     by Inspector K.K. Singh (PW-4) with other police officers,
Crl.A. No. 673 OF 2011 etc.                                             Page 5 of 15
including    I.O.   Yogesh     Chandra   (PW-8).   The   Police    Team

     decided to follow Dr. Amitabh Sinha (PW-1) in civil dress.

     As planned, they followed the rickshaw in which Dr. Amitabh

     Sinha (PW-1) was sitting. Dr. Amitabh Sinha (PW-1) crossed

     Frazer Road via Gandhi Maidan and reached Ashok Rajpath. At

     that time, the police team noticed that one black Yamaha

     motorcycle was following the said rickshaw. The driver of

     the motorcycle was not wearing a helmet, whereas the pillion

     rider was wearing a helmet. They kept a watch on this

     motorcycle and thereupon stopped the motorcycle near the

     Patna   Medical     College.    Kanhaiya    Lal    was   driving   the

     motorcycle, and           Deepak Kumar was the pillion rider.

     Thereupon, both of them were taken to Peer Vihar Police

     Station. However, the police team continued to follow Dr.

     Amitabh Sinha (PW-1) as he moved forward towards Gaighat.

     No one came to collect the money in the entire route. Upon

     interrogation of Deepak Kumar, they came to know of the

     location where Dr. Shashi Kumar Sinha (PW-3), after the

     kidnapping, had been detained. The same night the police

     team proceeded to Village Bar, District Aurangabad, Patna,

     as noted above, had rescued Dr. Shashi Kumar Sinha (PW-3)

     and Salaudin [PW-5].
8.   I.O. Yogesh Chandra (PW-8) similarly deposed that he was a

     member of the team which was following Dr. Amitabh Sinha

     (PW-1), who was sitting on the cycle rickshaw and had
Crl.A. No. 673 OF 2011 etc.                                      Page 6 of 15
thereupon detained Kanhaiya Lal and Deepak Kumar near Patna

      Medical College.
9.    From the aforesaid depositions of Inspector K.K. Singh (PW-
4) and I.O. Yogesh Chandra (PW-8), we accept that Kanhaiya

      Lal along with Deepak Kumar, were detained when they were

      travelling on the motorcycle at or around Patna Medical

      College at about 8 A.M. on 10th March 2006.
10.   Noticeably, Kanhaiya Lal, in his statement under
Section 313
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (‘Criminal Code’,

      for short) was candid to accept that he had picked up Deepak

      Kumar from the bus stand as he had been called there to take

      him to the Patna Medical College. He had stated that he was

      in the business of running coaching classes and had nothing

      to do with the incident.
11.   On the question of the involvement of Kanhaiya Lal in the

      episode     of   kidnapping    and    whether    his    conviction    is

      justified under
Section 120B
of the Penal Code, we would

      like to refer to the cross-examinations of Inspector K. K.

      Singh [PW-4] and the I.O. Yogesh Chandra. (PW-8). K.K Singh

      (PW-4) in the cross-examination had accepted that :-
“36. Kanhiya lal never gave any statement regarding
                this case. I cannot say that whether he was involved
                in this case or not. I do not investigate mobile phone
                of Kanhiya Lal. IO sir might took it only he can tell.”

           Inspector     K.    K.   Singh   [PW-4]    while   agreeing     that
Crl.A. No. 673 OF 2011 etc.                                        Page 7 of 15
Kanhaiya Lal was brought to Village Bar, but thereafter

      accepted that “Kanhaiya Lal never spoke regarding the whole

      incident”. Inspector K. K. Singh [PW-4] also agreed that

      Kanhaiya Lal had not given any statement “regarding either

      len-den   (money   transaction)     or   abduction”   during   his

      interrogation. Kanhaiya Lal had told them that he had been

      asked by Deepak Kumar to take him to Patna Medical College

      on his motorcycle.       Kanhaiya Lal did not point out anything

      regarding abduction of Dr. Shashi Kumar Sinha (PW-3) and had

      no criminal history prior to the said date.
12.   Relevant portions of the cross-examination of I.O. Yogesh

      Chandra (PW-8) reads as under;
“42. Whether there is any hand of Kanhaiya Lal Gupta
             in this case or not I have not inquired from anyone.
             The mobile No. of Mr. Kanhaiya Lal is 9334315014. From
             Kanhaiya Lal’s mobile nothing more has been called then
             calling motor cycle for going and bringing the motor
             cycle is there and nothing else. It has been confirmed
             from the printout.
43. In making Kanhaiya Lal as accused there was a talk
             with SP Sahib. It was an Oral talk and in the diary I
             have not noted down. Written report which has been
             submitted in PS Madanpur has not been written the facts
             that Kanhaiya Lal Gupta was brought in the village of
             War. In my front K.K. Singh had not said in his
             statement that Kanhaiya Lal Gupta was also brought to
             the village-War. Desh Deepak has not pointed out that
             Kanhaiya Lal had knowledge about this incident. He only
             pointed out regarding asking for motor cycle and what
             was the motto, was not pointed out. In Para 142 of the
             case diary accused Desh Deepak has not pointed any
             thing about Kanhaiya Lal. Kanhaiya Lal had pointed out
             only the facts that he has been caught with Desh Deepak,
             that is why charge sheet has been submitted against him
             on the basis of suspicion. It is circumstantial
             evidence.”
13.   Dr. Amitabh Sinha (PW-1), in his cross-examination, had
Crl.A. No. 673 OF 2011 etc.                                   Page 8 of 15
testified that he did not see the police team apprehending

          Deepak       Kumar   and   Kanhaiya   Lal      when    travelling     on   the

          motorcycle near the Patna Medical College. Dr. Amitabh Sinha

          (PW-1) did not recognize Kanhaiya Lal. As per the prosecution

          case, Kanhaiya Lal is a resident of Patna. It is also not

          the case of the prosecution that Kanhaiya Lal was involved

          in the act of kidnapping, which had taken place on 7th

          February 2006 at Tilouthu Village, District Dehri-On-Sone,

          Bihar.       Kanhaiya   Lal   was   not   in   touch    with   any    of   the

          kidnappers including Deepak Kumar, from 7th February 2006

          until the morning of 10th March 2006.
14.       At this stage it is imperative to discuss the settled

          position of law with regard to the ingredients and the

          standard of proof to be achieved by the prosecution for

          conviction under
section 120-B
of the Penal Code.
In
Mohd.

          Khalid v. State of West Bengal1
this Court had elucidated

          the elements of criminal conspiracy which are reproduced as

          under:
“The elements of a criminal conspiracy have been
                       stated to be:
(a) an object to be accomplished,
(b) a plan or scheme embodying means to accomplish
                       that object,
(c) an agreement or understanding between two or
                       more of the accused persons whereby, they become
                       definitely   committed   to  cooperate   for   the
                       accomplishment of the object by the means embodied
                       in the agreement, or by any effectual means, and
d) in the jurisdiction where the statute required
                       an overt act. The essence of a criminal conspiracy
1
(2002) 7 SCC 334
Crl.A. No. 673 OF 2011 etc.                                                Page 9 of 15
is the unlawful combination and ordinarily the
                 offence is complete when the combination is
                 framed.”


              Elaborating upon the standard of proof the prosecution has

        to meet in establishing criminal conspiracy, this Court in
State

        of Kerala v. P. Sugathan & Another2
held as under;
“We are aware of the fact that direct independent
                 evidence of criminal conspiracy is generally not
                 available and its existence is a matter of inference.
                 The inferences are normally deduced from acts of
                 parties in pursuance of purpose in common between the
                 conspirators. This Court in V.C. Shukla v. State (Delhi
                 Admn.) (1980) 2 SCC 665 held that to prove criminal
                 conspiracy   there   must   be   evidence   direct   or
                 circumstantial to show that there was an agreement
                 between two or more persons to commit an offence. There
                 must be a meeting of minds resulting in ultimate
                 decision taken by the conspirators regarding the
                 commission of an offence and where the factum of
                 conspiracy is sought to be inferred from circumstances,
                 the prosecution has to show that the circumstances
                 giving rise to a conclusive or irresistible inference
                 of an agreement between the two or more persons to
                 commit an offence. As in all other criminal offences,
                 the prosecution has to discharge its onus of proving
                 the case against the accused beyond reasonable doubt.
                 The circumstances in a case, when taken together on
                 their face value, should indicate the meeting of the
                 minds between the conspirators for the intended object
                 of committing an illegal act or an act which is not
                 illegal, by illegal means. A few bits here and a few
                 bits there on which the prosecution relies cannot be
                 held to be adequate for connecting the accused with the
                 commission of the crime of criminal conspiracy. It has
                 to be shown that all means adopted and illegal acts
                 done were in furtherance of the object of conspiracy
                 hatched.
The circumstances relied for the purposes of
                 drawing an inference should be prior in time than the
                 actual commission of the offence in furtherance of the
                 alleged conspiracy.”


              This     Court   in
Central   Bureau   of   Investigation,

        Hyderabad v. K. Narayana Rao3
held;
2
(2000) 8 SCC 203
3
(2012) 9 SCC 512
Crl.A. No. 673 OF 2011 etc.                                      Page 10 of 15
“The ingredients of the offence of criminal conspiracy
             are that there should be an agreement between the
             persons who are alleged to conspire and the said
             agreement should be for doing of an illegal act or for
             doing, by illegal means, an act which by itself may not
             be illegal. In other words, the essence of criminal
             conspiracy is an agreement to do an illegal act and
             such an agreement can be proved either by direct
             evidence or by circumstantial evidence or by both and
             in a matter of common experience that direct evidence
             to prove conspiracy is rarely available. Accordingly,
             the circumstances proved before and after the
             occurrence have to be considered to decide about the
             complicity of the accused. Even if some acts are proved
             to have been committed, it must be clear that they were
             so committed in pursuance of an agreement made between
             the accused persons who were parties to the alleged
             conspiracy. Inferences from such proved circumstances
             regarding the guilt may be drawn only when such
             circumstances are incapable of any other reasonable
             explanation. In other words, an offence of conspiracy
             cannot be deemed to have been established on mere
             suspicion and surmises or inference which are not
             supported by cogent and acceptable evidence.”
15.   When we reflect on the evidence on record in the light of

      aforementioned dictum, it is apparent that Inspector K.K.

      Singh (PW-4) and the I.O. Yogesh Chandra (PW-8) who had

      detained Kanhaiya Lal with Deepak Kumar, have themselves

      expressed doubt on involvement of Kanhaiya Lal in the crime

      in question. While we do not doubt that Kanhaiya Lal was

      taken into custody while he was driving the motorcycle with

      Deepak Kumar on the pillion behind him, the version given

      by Kanhaiya Lal, in his statement under
Section 313
of the

      Criminal Code, that he had picked up Deepak Kumar from the

      bus stand as he had been called there to take him to Patna

      Medical College gets corroboration from the police team
Crl.A. No. 673 OF 2011 etc.                                 Page 11 of 15
itself.    Therefore,   we   cannot   draw   conclusive   and

      irresistible inference of an agreement or that Kanhaiya Lal

      had gone to the bus stand and had picked up Deepak Kumar in

      pursuance of a plan or scheme to accomplish an objective or

      even with the knowledge that Deepak Kumar was following the

      rickshaw because he had to collect ransom. It is palpable

      that Inspector K.K. Singh (PW-4) and the I.O. Yogesh Chandra

      (PW-8) have somewhat corroborated Kanhaiya Lal’s version

      that he was to drop Deepak Kumar at Patna Medical Collage.

      Dr. Amitabh Sinha (PW-1) while on the rickshaw had gone past

      Patna Medical Collage and was not over taken or stopped by

      Kanhaiya Lal.
16. In the aforesaid background, the settled position of law, factual

      matrix and the depositions made by I.O. Yogesh Chandra (PW-8)

      and Inspector K.K. Singh (PW-4)], we are inclined to give the

      benefit of doubt to Kanhaiya Lal.
17.   As far as Ramjee Prajapati and his son Abhay Kumar are

      concerned, it is an accepted position that Ramjee Prajapati

      was a compounder who also had a medical store outside the

      clinic of Dr. Shashi Kumar Sinha (PW-3) at Tilouthu. Their

      involvement is pleaded on the following assertaions (i)

      Ramjee Prajapeeti had contacted the family of Dr. Shashi

      Kumar Sinha (PW-3) when Dr. Shashi Kumar Sinha (PW-3) had

      not reached the clinic and had raised suspicion that he may
Crl.A. No. 673 OF 2011 etc.                              Page 12 of 15
have been kidnapped; (ii) Ramjee Prajapati and Abhay Kumar,

     through their landline and mobile phones, had contacted and

     spoke to telephone/mobile number 9431028412, which was the

     telephone/mobile number of Dr. Shashi Kumar Sinha (PW-3);

     and (iii) Dr. Shashi Kumar Sinha (PW-3), has deposed that

     he heard the kidnappers take different names like Lalji

     Mishra, Bindeshwary Choudhary, Taiyab Ansari, Kalicharan

     etc., and also, Ramjee Prajapati and Abhay Kumar for money.

     He had also stated that the accused had told him that Santosh

     (who has been acquitted by the High Court) and Abhay Kumar

     had committed the occurrence.
We do not think that the aforesaid assertions when

     analyzed would meet and satisfy the standard of proof to

     connect Ramjee Prajapati and Abhay Kumar with the kidnapping

     of Dr. Shashi Kumar Sinha (PW-3). First two assertions are

     neutral and can well be read as evidence that shows Ramjee

     Prajapati and Abhay Kumar’s concern for Dr. Shashi Kumar

     Sinha (PW-3). Once they had got in touch with the kidnappers

     on the telephone, the kidnappers knew their names. The third

     factum therefore is somewhat debatable. It is not the case

     of the prosecution that Ramjee Prajapati and Abhay Kumar

     were known or in touch with the kidnappers on or before 7th

     February 2006. There is not even an iota of evidence that

     any   of   the   kidnappers   were   known   beforehand   to   Ramjee

     Prajapati and Abhay Kumar. The calls were made to the

     mobile/telephone number of Dr. Shashi Kumar Sinha (PW-3)
Crl.A. No. 673 OF 2011 etc.                                    Page 13 of 15
which Ramjee Prajapati obviously had. Telephone calls were

      not made to the kidnappers on their personal telephone

      numbers. Both of them were arrested on suspicion on 6 March,

      2006. It is not the case of the police that Ramjee Prajapati

      and Abhay Kumar gave any lead or information with regard to

      the ‘other’ kidnappers. The family of Dr. Shashi Kumar Sinha

      (PW-3) had received ransom calls even after the arrest of

      Ramjee Prajapati and Abhay Kumar. It is only after Deepak

      Kumar was arrested that the location where Dr. Shashi Kumar

      Sinha   (PW-3)    after    the    abduction   had    been   kept   was

      ascertained. Therefore, Ramjee Prajapati and Abhay Kumar are

      also entitled to the benefit of doubt.
18.   Accordingly,     we     dismiss   the   appeals     and   affirm   the

      convictions and sentences of Desh Deepak Kumar Vihangam @

      Deepak Kumar, Bimlesh Kumar Singh and Madan Prasad Thathera.

      The appeals preferred by Kanhaiya Lal, Ramjee Prajapati and

      Abhay Kumar @ Pappu are allowed, and their convictions under
Section 364A
and
120B
of the Penal Code are set aside. Bail

      bonds of Kanhaiya Lal, Ramjee Prajapati and Abhay Kumar stand

      cancelled. Deepak Kumar, who is enlarged on bail, shall

      surrender to the concerned authorities within 10 days from

      today to serve the sentence of Imprisonment for life and pay

      the fine of Rs. 7,00,000/- (Rupees Seven Lakh Only) with

      stipulations for recovery. If he does not surrender, the

      police would take immediate steps to detain and arrest him

      as per law.
Crl.A. No. 673 OF 2011 etc.                                       Page 14 of 15
19.    All pending applications stand disposed of.
……………………………………………..J.
                                                   [SANJIV KHANNA]



                                             ……………………………………………..J.
                                                [ BELA M. TRIVEDI]

      NEW DELHI;
8TH MARCH, 2022.
Crl.A. No. 673 OF 2011 etc.                             Page 15 of 15