[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Olx India B.V. vs The State Of Haryana on 8 March, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1




                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.378 OF 2022
                                        (Arising out of S.L.P. (Crl.) No.328 of 2022)


                          OLX INDIA B.V.                                          …Appellant


                                                            VERSUS


                          STATE OF HARYANA & ORS.                                 …Respondents



                                                          ORDER
1.    Leave granted.
2.    This appeal challenges the order dated 13.12.2021 passed by the High

                          Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in CRM-M No.14453 of 2021

                          (O&M) titled as
“Pintu v. State of Haryana & Others”
.
3.    While dealing with the petition seeking issuance of directions to

                          respondents Nos.2 to 4, namely, the Commissioner of Police, Gurugram,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by Dr.
Mukesh Nasa
Date: 2022.03.10
Assistant Commissioner of Police, DLF Gurugram, and Station House Officer,
19:51:41 IST
Reason:
Police Station DLF, District Gurugram respectively, the High Court made
2
certain tentative observations against the OLX Group and directed that notice be

issued to the newly added respondents Nos.5 to 8.
4.    By way of an interim direction, the High Court further directed as under:
“It is further directed that all the advertisements on OLX platform be
      deleted and be re-listed only after attaching an open PDF file along with
      each advertisement, containing the following: -
(a)    At least 02 ID proofs of the person, who is proposing to sell a
             property (moveable or immoveable) or asking any professional
             service.
(b)    Two mobile numbers with a screen shot/photocopy of message
             sent by the server, who issued the SIM verifying name of owner
             as per their record.
(c)    Details of the property to be sold whether moveable or
             immoveable and a document of title like Registration Certificate
             or insurance paper for vehicles or sale deed etc. for property.
(d)    In aforesaid five Districts, in case the proposed seller is residing
             in a village or in the area of Municipal Corporation/Municipal
             Council, a certificate of Member of the Panchayat or Municipal
             Councillor certifying that the proposed seller is not involved in
             any such or similar criminal case and is a genuine owner of
             property.
(e)    Only by putting this information in PDF file, the advertisements
             will be accepted by OLX or any other such agency and will be
             floated for the general public. Learned State counsel is directed to
             file the affidavit before the next date of hearing.”
5.    Subsequently, by order dated 10.02.2022, respondents Nos.6 and 7 were

dropped from the array of parties and the correct name of respondent No.5 was

substituted as OLX India B.V., i.e. the appellant herein.
3
6.    Being aggrieved by the directions issued by the High Court, the instant

appeal has been preferred.
7.    At the interim stage, this Court by its order dated 10.01.2022 had stayed

the effect and operation of the order passed by the High Court to the extent it

had issued directions against the appellant.
8.    We have heard Mr. Sidharth Luthra, learned Senior Advocate for the

appellant, and Mr. Nikhil Goel, learned Additional Advocate General for the

State. The original petitioner before the High Court though served has chosen

not to enter appearance.
9.    It is submitted by Mr. Luthra that all that the appellant does is to make

available the services of an internet platform through which prospective vendors

of goods and merchandise can issue appropriate advertisements soliciting

responses from the intending purchasers and that as an internet platform or an

intermediary, the appellant is not liable to guarantee the quality of the goods or

merchandise which is put up for sale nor is it possible for the appellant to certify

about the genuineness and correctness of the deal sought to be entered into. It is,

therefore, submitted that the High Court ought not to have issued notice and

issued interim directions.
4
10.   Since the matter is pending consideration before the High Court, we do

not enter into and deal with the submissions advanced by the appellant but leave

the appellant to agitate all these issues before the High Court.
11.   Insofar as the afore-quoted interim directions passed by the High Court,

in our view, there was no occasion for the High Court to pass these directions;

and more particularly, without hearing the appellant. We, therefore, quash the

directions quoted hereinabove.
12.   The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated above.
………………………………………………….J.
                               (UDAY UMESH LALIT)



                               ………………………………………………….J.
                               (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)



                               ………………………………………………….J.
                               (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)

New Delhi;
March 08, 2022.