[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
C. Manjamma vs The Divisional Manager on 29 March, 2022
Author:
Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench:
Aniruddha Bose
,
Dinesh Maheshwari
1

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2568 OF 2022
                               (arising out of SLP(c) No. 4010 of 2019)


             C. MANJAMMA & ANR.                                             ………Appellant(s)

                                                         VERSUS

             THE DIVISIONAL MANAGER                                         ………Respondent(s)
             THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE CO.LTD.

                                                    JUDGMENT
DINESH MAHESHWARI,J.
Leave granted.
The challenge herein is to the judgment and order dated

             15.11.2018              passed   by   the     High     Court   of    Karnataka    at

             Bengaluru           in    Miscellaneous        First    Appeal      No.   10293   of

             2012(WC), whereby the High Court has reversed the judgment

             and award dated 19.06.2012 passed in WC-DVGWCA No.76 of

             2010 on the file of the Labour Officer and Commissioner for

             Workmen’s Compensation, Davanagere(‘the Commissioner’).
By   the    judgment     and    award     dated     19.06.2012,      the

             Commissioner had awarded compensation in the sum of Rs.

             4,15,960/-(Rupees four lakh fifteen thousand nine hundred

             sixty) together with interest @ 12% per annum to the wife

             and mother of the deceased workman, said to be employed as

             a driver on the auto-rickshaw belonging to the respondent
Signature Not Verified
DEEPAK SINGH No. 2. The workman allegedly died while on duty due to
Digitally signed by
Date: 2022.04.04
19:36:04 IST
Reason:
cardiac arrest.
Shorn of unnecessary details, the relevant aspects of
2
the present case are that the Commissioner, while dealing

with the claim made by the present appellants, framed the

following issues for consideration:-
“1. Whether the petitioners have proved
       that, the deceased died due to driving strain
       on 07.04.2010 while working as driver in the
       autorickshaw bearing No.KA-17-A--6365 owned
       by the first respondent?
2. Whether the petitioners prove that, they
       are the dependants of the deceased?
3. Whether the petitioners have proved the
       monthly salary received by the deceased while
       working as driver in the auto rickshaw
       bearing No.KA-17-A-6365 owned by the first
       respondent and the age of the deceased?
4. What compensation are the petitioners
       entitled for and from whom?
5. What order?”

  The Commissioner returned the finding on issue No. 1,

after examination of the material placed on record in the

following manner: -
“…On examining the documents viz. Ex-P1 FIR,
       Ex-P2-Inquest mahazar, Ex-P3-Spot mahazar,
       Ex-P4-statement of the 1st respondent, Ex-P5-
       post mortem report, Ex-P8- Charge-sheet, Ex-
       P9- FSL report post mortem reports produced
       and got marked during examination of his
       sworn evidence, the second petitioner, it is
       considered that, the said documents are
       corroborative to the factors in the petition
       and sworn affidavit of the petitioners, it is
       confirmed that, the deceased died due to the
       driving strain on 07.04.2010 while working as
       driver in the auto rickshaw bearing No. KA-
       17-A-6365 owned by the first respondent and
       decide accordingly.”


  In issue No. 2, the Commissioner held that the claimants

were dependents of the deceased; and in issue No. 3, held

that the deceased was 30 years of age and was receiving

monthly wages of Rs.4,000/- and daily allowance of Rs.50/-
3
from   the    employer.         While       quantifying        compensation        and

deciding     liability       in      issue        No.    4,    the     Commissioner

assessed     the   amount       of    compensation            at    Rs.   4,15,960/-

(Rupees four lakh fifteen thousand nine hundred sixty) with

reference    to the       monthly wages             of the         deceased at     Rs.

4,000/-     (Rupees      four     thousand).            The   Commissioner        also

examined in detail the submissions made on behalf of the

respondent-insurer and the affidavit filed on its behalf

and ultimately recorded his conclusion on the liability of

the insurer and the entitlement of the claimants in the

following words: -
“…Auto rickshaw baring No. KA-17-A-6365 owned
          by the first respondent is insured with the
          second respondent and the said insurance
          policy is marked as Ex-R2-1 and the insurance
          policy was valid as on the date of accident
          and the driver of the vehicle is covered
          under the said insurance policy and on
          examining thoroughly and considering the
          factors addressed during arguments of the
          learned counsel for both the parties with
          regard to payment of compensation due to the
          first and second petitioner under law towards
          the death of the deceased, it is decided
          that, the second respondent is liable to pay
          compensation of Rs. 4,15,960-00 to the first
          and second petitioners under statute with
          regard to the death of the deceased.”

  In the insurer’s appeal against the judgment and award

aforesaid,    the     High      Court       took    note      of    the   facts    and

circumstances       of    the        case     and       the    findings     of     the

Commissioner and then, with reference to the decision of

this Court in
Shakuntala Chandrakant Shreshti vs Prabhakar

Maruti Garvali & Anr.
: (2007) 11 SCC 668, particularly

paragraph 38 to 42 thereof, found the judgment and award
4
made by the Commissioner unsustainable for the following

reasons: -
“21. As noticed hereinabove, there is no oral
         evidence with regard to admission of the
         workman into the hospital. Further, the cause
         of death is not forthcoming in the records.
Therefore,   in   my  considered   view,  the
         conclusion    arrived   at   by    the   W.C.
         Commissioner that there exists a nexus
         between the cause of death and the occupation
         of workman is not supported by any evidence
         and therefore, the W.C. Commissioner does not
         get jurisdiction to award compensation.”

     Assailing the judgment and order so passed by the High

Court, learned counsel for the appellant has strenuously

argued that in this case, the fundamental facts stand duly

established    by    evidence    produced          on     record    that   the

deceased was 30 years of age; he was engaged as a driver on

the auto-rickshaw; and he expired while on duty because of

cardiac arrest, which he suffered due to the strain and

stress of his job. Learned counsel would submit that on the

basis of relevant material, the Commissioner had recorded

cogent   findings    of   fact       and       there    had   not   been   any

perversity in such findings so as to call for interference

by the High Court. Learned counsel would further submit

that the decision in the case of
Shakuntala Chandrakant

Shreshti
(supra)      is   clearly      distinguishable           because   the

deceased therein was engaged on the job of a cleaner on the

vehicle and this Court consciously took note of the fact

that nature of his duty, being of helper, was not such that

it   would   cause   stress     or    strain.          Learned   counsel   has

further drawn our attention to the observations made in
5
paragraph 38 of
the said decision
and has submitted that in

the present case, the basic and foundational facts have

been established by the claimants that it had been a case

of death during the course of employment and having been

caused due to the reasons attributable to the employment.

Learned counsel has also submitted that there was no such

substantial question of law involved in the matter so as to

call for interference by the High Court.
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent-insurer

has duly supported the judgment and order passed by the

High Court and has emphasised on the contentions that the

appellants have failed to establish that the death occurred

due to employment or due to reasons attributable to the

employment. Learned counsel would rely upon the decision in
Shakuntala Chandrakant Shreshti
(supra). According to the

learned counsel, since the claimants failed to prove the

basic   jurisdictional       facts,     the    High   Court       has    rightly

interfered in the matter.
Having      given    anxious         consideration         to    the        rival

submissions    and    having      examined     the    material      placed       on

record with reference to the law applicable, we are clearly

of the view that the impugned judgment and order cannot be

sustained    as   there     was   no    substantial     question         of     law

involved in the matter for which, the High Court could have

interfered    with    the     judgment        and    award    made       by     the

Commissioner.
As noticed above, the Commissioner had returned the
6
basic    findings      of   fact     with   reference      to     the    material

placed on record. It is noticed that the claimants i.e.,

the wife and mother of the deceased, had indeed placed on

record the FIR, inquest mahazar, spot mahazar, charge-sheet

and     post    mortem      report     along      with     FSL    report.      The

Commissioner, with reference to the said evidence as also

after    analysing       the   rebuttal         evidence      adduced    by    the

respondent-insurer, recorded the findings which cannot be

said to be perverse or suffering from any such manifest

illegality so as to give rise to a ‘substantial question of

law’ for consideration of the High Court.
Even in paragraph 42 of the decision in
Shakuntala

Chandrakant Shreshti
(supra), this Court has made it clear

that a question of law would arise when the same is not

dependent on examination of evidence and which may not

require any fresh investigation of fact. A question of law

would arise, of course, when the finding is perverse or

when    no     legal   evidence       is    adduced      to      establish     the

jurisdictional facts. The observations made by the High

Court in the present case in paragraph 21 appear to be

rather of assumptive nature than of specific conclusion on

perversity.      In    other   words,       the   view     as    taken    by   the

Commissioner was the one based on the material placed on

record, which basically established that the deceased was

indeed employed as a driver on the vehicle; he was 30 years

of age; and he died while on duty and his demise due to

cardiac arrest was attributable to his job of driver. There
7
had not been shown any other background aspect or any other

clinching feature because of which death of the workman, a

30-year-old person, could be attributed to any other cause.

That being the position, the view taken by the Commissioner

had been a possible view of the matter in the given set of

facts and circumstances; and there was no reason for the

High Court to interfere with the same, particularly when

the case did not involve any substantial question of law

within the meaning of
Section 30
of Employees Compensation

Act, 1933.
For what have been discussed and observed hereinabove,

this appeal succeeds and is allowed. The impugned judgment

and order dated 15.11.2018 passed by the High Court of

Karnataka at Bengaluru in MFA No. 10293 of 2012(WC) is set

aside and the judgment and award of the Labour Officer and

Commissioner for Workmen’s Compensation, Davanagere dated

19.06.2012 stands restored. No costs.
……………………………………………J.
                                        (DINESH MAHESHWARI)



                                        ……………………………………………J.
                                        (ANIRUDDHA BOSE)


New Delhi;
March 29, 2022.