[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Laxmikant vs The State Of Maharashtra on 23 March, 2022
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Hemant Gupta
REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1965 OF 2022
                             (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 16033 OF 2021)


         LAXMIKANT & ORS.                                               .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

         STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ORS.                                  .....RESPONDENT(S)


                                                JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.              The challenge in the present appeal is to an order dated 6.8.2021

                         passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Bench at

                         Aurangabad, holding that the reservation of land in the Development

                         Plan stands lapsed as no declaration under
Section 126
of the

                         Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966 1 was published.

                         However, the Planning Authority was given one year time to acquire

                         the land once reserved relying upon the judgment of this Court

                         reported as
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai & Ors. v.

                         Hiraman Sitaram Deorukhar & Ors.2
.
Signature Not Verified
2.
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
A final Development Plan was published under
Section 31(6)
of the Act
Date: 2022.03.23
16:53:27 IST
Reason:
1         For short, the ‘Act’
         2         (2019) 14 SCC 411
1
on 2.1.2002 which came into force on 18.2.2002 in respect of land

     including the land owned by the appellants such as Latur Reservation

     Site bearing No. 217 for playground.    The appellants purchased the

     land bearing Plot Nos. 1, 2, 9 & 10 admeasuring 1394.05 square

     meters out of Survey No. 73, admeasuring 6500 square meters on

     21.11.2002. Though the Development Plan was finalized, but the same

     was never implemented nor any action was taken for acquisition of the

     land under the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
. After expiry of ten years,

     the appellants issued notice on 16.8.2016 under
Section 127
of the Act

     so as to purchase the reserved land within one year of the date of the

     notice.   Such notice was acknowledged by the respondent Municipal

     Corporation on 20/22.8.2016 to submit measuring plan showing

     reservation thereon including the area owned by the appellants.
3.   It was thereafter that the appellants filed a writ petition before the

     High Court for a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to treat

     the land of the appellants bearing Survey No. 73 as released from the

     Development Plan of Latur Municipal Corporation and that reservation

     of Site No. 217 for playground be declared to have lapsed to the extent

     of the land owned by the appellants and that the land is available for

     the residential use of the appellants. In the counter affidavit filed by

     the Municipal Corporation, it was inter alia submitted that the proposal

     was submitted to respondent No. 2 i.e., the Collector, Latur to take

     effective steps for acquiring the land bearing Survey No. 73 as the land
2
was reserved for playground.      The proposal was returned by the

        Competent Authority but no effective decision has been taken over the

        said proposal.
4.      Thus, it was beyond dispute that the land once included in the

        Development Plan under
Section 31(6)
of the Act was not acquired

        within the period of ten years and within additional period of one year

        after purchase notice was submitted by the appellants on 16.8.2016

        and, in fact, not till the writ petition was decided by the High Court.

        The Municipal Corporation is not aggrieved against the declaration

        granted by the High Court of the fact that the reservation of the land

        stands lapsed. It is only the land owner who has come in appeal before

        this Court against the restriction of one year put by the High Court

        giving additional time to respondents to acquire the land.
5.      This Court in Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai was

        examining the reservation of land for a garden in a Development Plan

        in the year 1966 but the same was not acquired even after purchase

        notice was served by the land owner.       However, relying upon the

        judgment of this Court reported as
Bangalore Medical Trust v. B.S.

        Muddappa & Ors.3
and some other judgments, it was held that the

        land reserved for public park cannot be permitted to be converted for

        other public purposes.
6.      We have heard learned counsel for the parties and find that the liberty

        given by the High Court to acquire the land within an additional period
3    (1991) 4 SCC 54
3
of one year is not contemplated by the statute.           This Court in

     Bangalore Medical Trust, a Public Interest Litigation, interfered with

     the decision of the Bangalore Development Authority to convert the

     land reserved for public parks for the purposes of construction of a

     hospital.   It was in these circumstances that this Court intervened,

     indicting the land reserved for public parks to be used for other

     purposes.
7.   This Court in Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai held that

     the authorities have been given a duty to act as a c estui que trust

     (beneficiary of the trust) with respect to public park and had thus

     directed to acquire land under the
Right to Fair Compensation and

     Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act,

     2013
within a period of six months. Such direction was given under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India keeping in view the facts of the

     case.    Such direction and period for acquisition of land is not a law

     declared by this Court which is to be treated as binding precedent for

     this Court and the subordinate courts subordinate in terms of
Article

     141
read with
Article 144
of the Constitution. Therefore, once the Act

     does not contemplate any further period for acquisition, the Court

     cannot grant additional period for acquisition of land.   The land was

     reserved for a public purpose way back in 2002. By such reservation,

     the land owner could not use the land for any other purpose for ten

     years.    After the expiry of ten years, the land owner had served a
4
notice calling upon the respondents to acquire the land but still the

     land was not acquired. The land owner cannot be deprived of the use

     of the land for years together. Once an embargo has been put on a

     land owner not to use the land in a particular manner, the said

     restriction cannot be kept open-ended for indefinite period.                  The

     Statute has provided a period of ten years to acquire the land under
Section 126
of the Act.    Additional one year is granted to the land

     owner to serve a notice for acquisition prior to the amendment by
Maharashtra Act
No. 42 of 2015. Such time line is sacrosanct and has

     to be adhered to by the State or by the Authorities under the State.
8.   The State or its functionaries cannot be directed to acquire the land as

     the acquisition is on its satisfaction that the land is required for a

     public purpose. If the State was inactive for long number of years, the

     Courts would not issue direction for acquisition of land, which is

     exercise of power of the State to invoke its rights of eminent domain.
9.   In view thereof, the direction to acquire land within a period of one

     year is in fact contravening the time line fixed under the Statute.

     Consequently, the direction to acquire the land within one year is set

     aside. The appeal is allowed.
.............................................J.
                                                              (HEMANT GUPTA)

                                         .............................................J.
                                                   (V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN)

NEW DELHI;
MARCH 23, 2022.
5