[Cites
4
, Cited by
10
]
Supreme Court of India
Vishal Ashwin Patel vs Assistant Commissioner Of Income Tax ... on 28 March, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2200 OF 2022

         Vishal Ashwin Patel                                     ..Appellant (S)

                                              Versus

         Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax                   ..Respondent (S)
         Circle 25(3) & Ors.

                                               With

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2201 OF 2022

                                               With

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2202 OF 2022

                                               With

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2203 OF 2022


                                         JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         orders passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
in Writ Petitions Nos. 3209/2019, 3150/2019, 3208/2019
Natarajan
Date: 2022.03.28
16:51:33 IST
Reason:
and 3137/2019, by which the Division Bench of the High
1
Court has dismissed the said writ petitions in which the

     appellants herein – original writ petitioners challenged the

     reopening of the assessment/re­assessment proceedings,

     the original writ petitioners have preferred the present

     appeals.
2.   We have heard Shri Devendra Jain, learned counsel

     appearing on behalf of the respective appellants and Shri

     Balbir Singh, learned ASG appearing on behalf of the

     Revenue. We have gone through the respective orders

     passed by the High Court dismissing the writ petitions.

     Having gone through the orders passed by the High Court

     dismissing the writ petitions, it can be seen that the said

     orders are cryptic, non­speaking and non­reasoned orders.

     The order dated 11.01.2022 reads as under: ­

        “1. We are not inclined to entertain this petition. At the same
        time, the Assessing Officer who will be different from the
        officer who had pass the order dated 10th October, 2019
        rejecting the objections filed by petitioner for re­opening
        under
Section 148
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (the Act)
        shall permit petitioner to file further documents and case
        laws if adviced and also grant a personal hearing before
        passing the assessment order. The assessment order to be
        passed within 12 weeks from the date this order is uploaded.
        Petitioner shall be given atleast seven days advance notice
        about the date and time of the personal hearing.
2. The Assessing Officer shall deal with all the submissions
        made by petitioner including those raised in his objections to
2
the re­opening and pass detailed order in accordance with
          law. “

          From the writ petitions produced on record, it appears

      that the reopening of the assessment under
Section 148
of

      the Income Tax Act has been challenged on a number of

      grounds. None of the grounds raised in the writ petitions

      has been dealt with and/or considered by the High Court

      on merits. There is no discussion at all on any of the

      grounds raised in the writ petitions. The Division Bench of

      the High Court has dismissed the writ petitions in a most

      casual manner which is unsustainable. Except stating that

      ‘we are not inclined to entertain writ petition’, nothing

      further has been stated by the High Court giving reasons

      for the disinclination to entertain the writ petitions.


2.1   The manner in which the High Court has dealt with and

      disposed of the writ petitions without passing any

      reasoned order is not appreciated by this Court. When a

      number of issues/grounds were raised in the writ

      petitions, it was the duty cast upon the court to deal with

      the same and thereafter, to pass a reasoned order. When

      the Constitution confers on the High Courts the power to
3
give relief it becomes the duty of the Courts to give such

      relief in appropriate cases and the Courts would be failing

      to perform their duty if relief is refused without adequate

      reasons.
2.2   The High Court in exercise of powers under
Article 226
of

      the   Constitution    of   India   was    required     to   have

      independently    considered     whether    the   question     of

      reopening of the assessment could be raised in a writ

      petition and if so, whether it was justified or not.


2.3   While emphasising the necessity to pass a reasoned order,

      in the case of
Central Board of Trustees Vs. Indore

      Composite Private Limited
, (2018) 8 SCC 443, it is

      observed and held by this Court that the courts need to

      pass a reasoned order in every case which must contain

      the narration of the bare facts of the case of the parties to

      the lis, the issues arising in the case, the submissions

      urged by the parties, the legal principles applicable to the

      issues involved and the reasons in support of the findings

      on all the issues arising in the case and urged by the

      learned counsel for the parties in support of its conclusion.
4
It is further observed in
the said decision
that an order

      bereft of reasoning causes prejudice to the parties because

      it deprives them to know the reasons as to why one party

      has won and other has lost.
2.4   In the recent decision in the case of
Union Public Service

      Commission Vs. Bibhu Prasad Sarangi and Ors.
, (2021)

      4 SCC 516, while emphasising the reasons to be given by

      the High Court while exercising powers under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, it is observed and held by this

      Court that the reasons constitute the soul of judicial

      decision and how Judges communicate in their judgment

      is a defining characteristic of judicial process since quality

      of justice brings legitimacy to the judiciary. It is further

      observed that though statistics of disposal of cases is

      important of higher value is the intrinsic content of

      judgment. It is further observed that in exercise of powers

      under
Article 226
the courts require to independently

      consider the issues involved.
5
3.   Applying the law laid by this Court in the aforesaid

     decisions to the facts of the case on hand and the manner

     in which the High Court has disposed of the writ petitions,

     in the interest of sobriety, we may only note that the

     orders are bereft of reasoning as diverse grounds were

     urged/raised by the parties which ought to have been

     examined by the High Court in the first place and a clear

     finding was required to be recorded upon analysing the

     relevant documents.
4.   Since we cannot countenance the manner in which the

     orders have been passed by the High Court which has

     compelled us to remand the matter to the High Court for

     deciding the writ petitions afresh on merits, we do so in

     light of the aforesaid observations.
5.   In light of the foregoing discussion, we allow the present

     appeals and set aside the impugned orders passed by the

     High Court and remand the matters to the Division Bench

     of the High Court for deciding the writ petitions afresh in

     accordance with law, keeping in view our observations
6
made supra. We, however, make it clear that we have

      refrained from making any observation on merits of the

      controversy, having formed an opinion to remand the

      cases to the High Court only for the reasons mentioned

      above. The High Court would, therefore, decide the writ

      petitions, bearing in mind our observations made above,

      strictly in accordance with law.
With the above directions, the present appeals are

    accordingly allowed and the impugned orders are set aside.

    The matters are remanded to the High Court as aforesaid.

    No costs.
…………………………………J.
                                     (M. R. SHAH)


                                     …………………………………J.
                                     (B.V. NAGARATHNA)
New Delhi,
March 28th 2022.
7