[Cites
8
, Cited by
13
]
Supreme Court of India
Kalyaneshwari vs U.O.I. & Ors on 12 May, 2011
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2011 SC 123, 2012 (12) SCC 599, (2011) 74 ALL CRI C 579, (2011) 6 SCALE 220, (2011) 3 REC CRI R 77, (2011) 104 ALL IND CAS 209 (SC), 1996 (11) SCC 353, (1996) 4 CURCC 305, (1996) 4 SCJ 49, (1997) 1 LJR 145, (1997) 1 RENTLR 475, (1997) 2 MAD LW 645, (1997) 4 ICC 471, (2011) 104 ALLINDCAS 209
Author:
Swatanter Kumar
Bench:
S.H. Kapadia
,
K.S. Panicker Radhakrishnan
,
Swatanter Kumar
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                         CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


    SUO MOTU CONTEMPT IN WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 260 OF 2004




Kalyaneshwari                                                           ...Petitioner


                                     Versus


Union of India & Ors.                                                 ...Respondents


                               J U D G M E N T
Swatanter Kumar, J.
In   our   detailed   order   dated   21st  January,   2011,   besides 


disposing of the Writ Petition No. 260 of 2004 with the directions as 


contained   in   paragraph   16   of   that   order,   we   noticed   the 


contemptuous behaviour of the petitioner NGO and its officials and 


had issued  show-cause notice to  the petitioner Kalyaneshwari   and 


its   Secretary   Shri   B.K.   Sharma,   in   his   personal   capacity,   which 


reads as under:
"Keeping in view the conduct of the petitioner, 

            particularly,   B.K.   Sharma,   we   hereby   issue 

            notice to him as well as the petitioner to show 

            cause why proceedings under the
Contempt of 

            Courts Act, 1971
be not initiated against them 

            and/or in addition/alternative, why exemplary 

            cost   be  not  imposed  upon  them.     Further,   we 

            also   call   upon   the   petitioner   to   show   cause 

            why   the   Registrar,   Government   of   NCT,   Delhi
2
be not directed to take action against them in 

            accordance with law."
In response to this show-cause notice, Shri B.K. Sharma had 


filed   a   response   affidavit   dated   22nd  March,   2011   on   behalf   of 


Kalyaneshwari  as  well  as  himself.     This is   a  very   short  affidavit  of 


seven   paragraphs   in   which   the   petitioner   has   rendered   his 


unconditional   apology   and   prayed   before   this   Court   not   to   initiate 


proceedings   under   the
Contempt   of   Courts   Act,   1971
.   He   further 


prayed to discharge the notice of contempt and drop proceedings for 


imposition of  cost and revocation of license and registration of  the 


NGO Kalayneshwari.  Relevant portion of the said affidavit reads as 


under:
"2.   THAT   deponent   herein   tenders   his 

            unconditional   apology   to   this   Hon'ble   Court 

            with   folded   hands   concerning   all   actions   in 

            respect   of   which   this   Hon'ble   Court   has   been 

            pleased to issue Show Cause Notice as to why 

            proceedings under the
Contempt of Courts Act, 

            1971
be   not   initiated   against   the   Petitioner 

            and the deponent herein and further as to why 

            exemplary   costs   be   not   imposed   upon   them 

            and their license be not cancelled/revoked.
3.   THAT   deponent   herein   unconditionally 

            withdraws   each   and   every   averment   and 

            allegation made by the Petitioner in respect of 

            the   Judgment   of   the   Hon'ble   high   Court   of 

            Gujarat   dated   9.12.2004   passed   in   Special 

            Civil   Application   Nos.   14460,   14813   and
3
14819 of 2004 titled
B.K.  Sharma v.  Union of 

             India and others
reported in AIR 2005 Gujarat 

             Page   203.     Petitioner   further   withdraws   all 

             such   pleadings   made   in   this   regard   in   the 

             affidavit   filed   by   the   petitioner   through 

             deponent   in   response   to   the   order   dated 

             13.8.2010 passed by the Hon'ble Court as well 

             as all the consequent proceedings."
There   is   no   doubt   that   at   the   very   initial   stage,   the 


respondents have tendered apology and prayed for dropping of the 


contempt proceedings.  We are not quite certain as to the bona fide 


and intent of the respondents in tendering such an apology.   For a 


Court to accept the apology in a contempt action, it is required that 


such   apology  should   be  bona  fide  and  in   actual   repentance   of  the 


conduct   which   invited   initiation   of   contempt   proceedings. 


Furthermore,   the   conduct   should   be   such   which   can   be   ignored 


without   compromising   the   dignity   of   the   Court.     `Contempt'   is 


disorderly   conduct   of   a   contemner   causing   serious   damage   to   the 


institution   of   justice   administration.   Such   conduct,   with   reference 


to   its   adverse   effects   and   consequences,   can   be   discernibly 


classified   into   two   categories:   one   which   has   a   transient   effect   on 


the   system   and/or   the   person   concerned   and   is   likely   to   wither 


away   by   the   passage   of   time   while   the   other   causes   permanent 


damage to the institution and administration of justice.   The latter
4
conduct would normally be unforgivable.
Institutional  tolerance  which the  judiciary  possesses, keeping 


in   mind   the   larger   interest   of   the   public   and   administration   of 


justice,   should   not   be   misunderstood   as   weakness   of   the   system. 


Maintaining the magnanimity of law is the linchpin to the wheels of 


justice.     Therefore,   in   certain   cases,   it   would   be   inevitable   for   the 


Court to take recourse to rigours of the statute.
It   is   the   seriousness   of   the   irresponsible   acts   of   the 


contemners   and   the   degree   of   harm   caused   to   the   institution   and 


administration   of   justice   which   would   decisively   determine   the 


course which the Court should adopt, i.e. either drop the contempt 


proceedings   or   continue   proceedings   against   the   contemner   in 


accordance with law.
The apology tendered even at the outset of proceedings has 


to be  bona fide, should demonstrate repentance and sincere regret 


on   the   part   of   the   contemner   lest   the   administration   of   justice   is 


permitted   to   be   crudely   hampered   with   immunity   by   the   persons 


involved in the process of litigation or otherwise.  An apology which 


lacks bona fides and is intended to truncate the process of law with 


the   ulterior   motive   of   escaping   the   likely   consequences   of   such
5
flagrant   violation   of   the   orders   of   the   Court   and   disrespect   to   the 


administration  of  justice  cannot  be  accepted.
In  the  case  of
Prem  


Surana  v.   Additional   Munsif   and   Judicial   Magistrate
[(2002)   6   SCC 


722] this Court sternly reprimanded a contemner who had slapped 


the   Presiding   Officer   in   open   court  and   held   that   "the   slap   on   the 


face of the judicial officer is in fact a slap on the face of the justice 


delivery system in the country and as such question of acceptance 


of any apology or an undertaking does not and cannot arise, neither 


can there be any question of any leniency as regards the sentence."
The   rule   of   law   has   to   be   maintained   whatever   be   the 


consequences.   The `welfare of people' is the supreme law and this 


enunciates   adequately   the   ideal   of   `law'.     This   could   only   be 


achieved when justice is administered lawfully, judiciously, without 


any fear and without being hampered or throttled by unscrupulous 


elements.   The   administration   of   justice   is   dependent   upon 


obedience   or   execution   of   the   orders   of   the   Court.                  The 


contemptuous act which interfered with administration of justice on 


one hand and impinge upon the dignity of institution of justice on 


the other, bringing down its respect in the eye of the commoner, are 


acts which may not fall in the category of cases where the Court can
6
accept   the   apology   of   the   contemner   even   if   it   is   tendered   at   the 


threshold of the proceedings.
The Black's Law Dictionary (8th  edn., 1999) defines `Contempt' 


as,   "Conduct   that   defies   the   authority   or   dignity   of   a   Court   or 


legislature."     It   also   adds   that   "Because   such   conduct   interferes 


with the administration of justice, it is punishable."
This special jurisdiction has to be unquestionably invoked 


when   the   offending   acts   are   intentional   by   the   contemner   at   the 


cost   of   eroding   the   system   of   administration   of   justice   which 


practice is  necessarily  required  to be deprecated at the very initial 


stage.
In   the   case   of
Aligarh   Municipal   Board  v.   Ekka   Tonga  


Mazdoor   Union
[(1970)   3   SCC   98],   this   Court   said   that   it   is   the 


seriousness   of   the   irresponsible   acts   of   the   contemners   and   the 


degree of harm caused to the administration of justice which would 


decisively   determine   whether   the   matter   should   be   tried   as   a 


criminal contempt or not.
In   the   case   of  M.Y.   Shareef  v.   The   Hon'ble   Judges   of   the  


High Court of Nagpur  [AIR 1955 SC 19], this Court while explaining
7
the requirements of genuine apology held as under:
"45.....With regard to apology in proceedings for 

            contempt   of   court,   it   is   well-settled   that   an 

            apology is not a weapon of defense to purge the 

            guilty   of   their   offence;   nor   is   it   intended   to 

            operate   as   a   universal,   panacea,   but   it   is 

            intended to be evidence of real contriteness."
Similar observations were made by this Court in the case of
L.D. Jaikwal  v. State of U.P.
[(1984) 3 SCC 405], wherein this Court 


held as under:
"6.   We   do   not   think   that   merely   because   the 
            appellant   has   tendered   his   apology   we   should 
            set   aside   the   sentence   and   allow   him   to   go 
            unpunished.   Otherwise,   all   that   a   person 
            wanting   to   intimidate   a   Judge   by   making   the 
            grossest  imputations  against  him has  to do,  is 
            to   go   ahead   and   scandalize   him,   and   later   on 
            tender a formal empty apology which costs him 
            practically   nothing. If  such an  apology  were to 
            be accepted, as a rule, and not as an exception, 
            we would in fact be virtually issuing a "licence"
to   scandalize   courts   and   commit   contempt   of 
            court with impunity......"
Making   of   scandalous   allegations   against   the   judicial 


system   always   needs   to   be   discouraged.   Moreover,   invoking   the 


extraordinary   jurisdiction   of   the   constitutional   Courts   allegedly   in 


the name of public interest and using it as a platform for lowering 


the dignity of the institution of justice is an act which besides being 


contemptuous also is undesirable.  This Court, in the case of
M.B.
8
Sanghi Advocate  v. High
Court of Punjab & Haryana  [(1991) 3 SCC 


600], has cautioned against the growing tendency of maligning the 


reputation   of   judicial   officers   by   disgruntled   elements   who   fail   to 


secure   desired   orders.   While   observing   that   it   was   high   time   that 


such   tendency  is   to   be   nipped   in   the   bud,   this   Court   said,   "such 


causes   raise   larger   issues   touching   the   independence   of   not   only 


the   concerned   Judge,   but   the   entire   institution...     It   is   high   time 


that we realize that the much cherished judicial independence has 


to be protected  not only  from the executive or the legislature, but 


also from those who are an integral part of the system."
We have referred to the above judgments of this Court with an 


intention to indicate the callous attitude of the contemners despite 


the directions of this Court in paragraph 16 of its order dated 21st 


January,   2011.     Such   contemptuous   actions   of   the   contemners 


have increased with passage of time rather than being reduced.
In   the   present   case,   Shri   B.K.   Sharma   has   certainly   abused 


the   process   of   law   by   filing   petitions,   under   the   guise   of   public 


interest, against one business rival at the behest of another.   The 


writ petition filed by him before this Court was obviously filed with 


the   intent   of   creating   impediments   in   the   establishment   and
9
operation of industrial units dealing with the mining, manufacture 


and production of Asbestos and its products which are carrying out 


their operations in accordance with law and without infringing the 


rights of any person.
This   Court   in   the   case   of
Consumer   Education   and   Research  


Center  v.  Union   of   India
[(1995)   3   SCC   42],   had   pronounced   a 


detailed   judgment   giving   directions   in   relation   to   various   matters 


pertaining   to   operation   of   units   engaged   in   manufacture   and 


production   of   asbestos   and   its   products.   This   resulted   in 


presentation   of   a   Bill   in   this   regard   by   the   Central   Government 


before   the  Rajya  Sabha.     Despite   the   detailed   directions   already 


given in the above judgment of this Court and introduction of a Bill 


before   the   Parliament,   Shri   B.K.   Sharma   persisted   in   filing 


petitions after petitions praying for complete ban on manufacture, 


import and use of asbestos to secure unlawful closure of asbestos 


industry for the purpose of settling business rivalry.
Sh.   B.K.   Sharma   had   filed   a   writ   petition   before   the   Gujarat 


High Court titled as
B.K. Sharma  v. Union of India
,  [AIR 2005 Guj 


203] in which every attempt was made to prevent respondent No.5
in   that  case
,   M/s.   Sopai  Ltd.,   from   completing   construction   of  its
10
asbestos production unit and proceeding further with any activity. 


In   fact,   it   was   prayed   that   construction   raised   by   them   be 


demolished   which   was   declined   by   the   Gujarat   High   Court.   The 


Gujarat High Court also declined to accept the prayer for closure of 


that   asbestos   manufacturing   unit   and   held   in   specific   terms   that 


the petition had been filed at the behest of rival industrial groups 


and lacks bona fide.
Shri B.K. Sharma, disregarding the fact that this judgment of 


the   Gujarat   High   Court   had   attained   finality   on   whole   factual 


matrix,   filed   Writ   Petition   No.   260   of   2004   before   this   Court   and 


tried   to   brush   aside   the   judgment   of   the   Gujarat   High   Court 


stating, "Gujarat High Court had failed to apply its mind".  Besides 


making   such   irresponsible   statement   against   the   judgment   of   a 


constitutional Court, Shri B.K. Sharma miserably failed to explain 


and   clarify   as   to   why   the   present   petition   was   filed   in   face   of   the 


judgment   of   this   court   in   the   case   of
Consumer   Education   and  


Research Centre
(supra).
Shri   B.K.   Sharma   even   went   to   the   extent   of   filing   incorrect 


affidavits before this Court and the Court was compelled to pass an 


order on 27th August, 2010 directing him to explain his conduct in
11
reference   to   the   observations   made   by   the   Gujarat   High   Court   in
the said judgment
.
It was argued before the Court, by several of the respondents, 


on different occasions that the whole purpose of filing the present 


writ   petition   was   to   secure   a   ban   on   mining   and   manufacture   of 


asbestos which  would inevitably  result in increase  in the  demand 


of cast and ductile iron products as they are a suitable substitute 


for   asbestos.   It   was,   thus,   argued   that   the   petition   before   the 


Gujarat   High   Court   as   well   as   this   petition   has   been   filed   at   the 


behest   of   the   industrial   group   engaged   in   production   of   cast   and 


ductile iron products.
It   is   a   settled   principle   of   law   that   contempt   is   a   matter 


primarily between the Court and the contemner.   The Court has to 


take   into   consideration   the   behaviour   of   the   contemner,   attendant 


circumstances   and  its  impact   upon  the   justice  delivery system.     If 


the   conduct   of   the   contemner   is   such   that   it   hampers   the   justice 


delivery   system   as   well   lowers   the   dignity   of   the   Courts,   then   the 


Courts   are   expected   to   take   somewhat   stringent   view   to   prevent 


further institutional damage and to protect the faith of the public in 


the justice delivery system.   In the case of  Advocate-General, State
12
of   Bihar  v.   M/s.   Madhya   Pradesh   Khair   Industries  [(1980)   3   SCC 


311],  this   Court   took   the   view   that   abuse   of   the   process   of   court, 


calculated to hamper the due course of judicial proceedings or the 


orderly   administration   of  justice,   is   contempt   of   court.     Where  the 


conduct   is   reprehensible   as   to   warrant   condemnation,   then   the 


Court   essentially   should   take   such   contempt   proceedings   to   their 


logical end.  There cannot be mercy shown by the Court at the cost 


of injury to the institution of justice system.
The   respondent-contemners,   in   their   reply-affidavit,   have 


hardly   disputed   the   observations   made   by   this   Court   in   the   show 


cause   notice   issued   to   them.     They   have   only   attempted   to   tender 


an   unconditional   apology   for   their   various   acts   and   omissions 


which certainly were prejudicial to the administration of justice and 


have   even   adversely   affected   the   rights   of   the   other   parties   in   the 


disguise of a petition filed in public interest.   The contemners have 


abused the process of law by instituting various petitions under the 


garb   of   `Public   Interest   Litigation'   and   have   succeeded,   at   least 


partially,   in  damaging  the  asbestos  industry  in  the   country.    They 


even   withheld   the   facts   from   the   Court   which   were   within   their 


personal  knowledge.    The  examination   of  the   factual  matrix   of  the 


present   case   and   conduct   of   the   respondent-contemners,
13
particularly the reply filed by them, places it beyond ambiguity that 


they have committed the following acts and omissions intentionally, 


which   have   undermined   the   dignity   of   this   Court   and   the   justice 


delivery system:
(a) The   contemners   have   abused   the   process   of   law   to   the   extent 


   that it impinged upon the dignity of the justice delivery system as 


   well as prejudicially affected the rights of other private parties.
(b) The   contemners   have   withheld   material   facts   from   the   Court 


   which were in their personal knowledge.  While withholding such 


   material facts, they have also persisted upon filing petitions after 


   petitions   in   the   name   of   public   interest   with   somewhat   similar 


   reliefs.
(c) The   contemner,   B.K.   Sharma,   has   made   irresponsible   remarks 


   and   statements   against   the   Gujarat   High   Court   without   any 


   justifiable cause in law.
The  public  interest  litigation   [Writ  Petition  (C)  No.  260  of 2004]
(d)


   instituted   by   the   contemner   lacks  bona   fide  and,   in   fact,   was 


   instituted   at   the   behest   of   a   rival   industrial   group   which   was 


   interested in banning of the activity of mining and manufacturing 


   of   asbestos   and   its   products   by   obtaining   certain   orders   and
14
directions from this Court.   A definite attempt was made by the 


   contemners   to   secure   a   ban   on   these   activities   with   ultimate 


   intention   of   increasing   the   demand   of   cast   and   ductile   iron 


   products   as   it   has   come   on   record   that   they   are   some   of   the 


   suitable substitutes for asbestos.  Thus, it was litigation initiated 


   with ulterior motive of causing industrial imbalance and financial 


   loss to the industry of asbestos through the process of court.
(e) The contemner has also filed petitions and affidavits either with 


   incorrect facts or  with  facts  which  even to  the knowledge  of the 


   contemner were not true.
Despite   this,   the   Court   has   to   keep   in   mind   that   there   is   a 


duty upon the courts to eliminate the cause of such litigation.  The 


maxim Justitia est duplex, viz., severe puniens, et vere praevenniens  


by   its   very   virtue   imposes   dual   obligation   upon   the   Courts   of 


considering   various   facets   of   severe   punishment   on   the   one   hand 


and   really   and   efficiently   preventing   crime   on   the   other,   with   the 


ultimate   object   of   maintaining   the   dignity   of   law.     In   other   words, 


the   Court   has   to   balance   the   quantum   of   punishment   keeping   in 


view   the   seriousness   of   the   offence   committed   by   the   contemners. 


Repeated   contemptuous   behaviour   of   the   contemners   before   the
15
Gujarat   High   Court   as   well   as   this   Court   certainly   needs   to   be 


deprecated and punished in accordance with law.   Even if we were 


to   take   somewhat   liberal   view,   still   it   is   the   duty   of   this   Court   to 


ensure   that   such   unscrupulous   and   undesirable   public   interest 


litigation   be not  instituted  in the  Courts  of law  so  as  to  waste  the 


valuable   time   of   the   Courts   as   well   as   preserve   the   faith   of   the 


public in the justice delivery system.
The   contemners   when   asked   to   address   the   quantum   of 


sentence, again tendered an apology but none of the contemptuous 


behaviour   spelled   out   in   our   order   dated   21st  January,   2011   was 


denied by the contemners at any stage of the proceedings or even in 


their reply affidavit to the show cause notice.
Having given our due consideration to all the relevant factors 


and behaviour of the contemners, we have no hesitation in holding 


that the contemners are liable to be punished for their offensive and 


contemptuous  behaviour which  has undermined  the  dignity  of the 


Courts   of   law   and   justice   administration   system   as   well   as 


prejudicially   affected   the   rights   of   third   parties   who,   in   fact,   were 


not even impleaded as parties in the public interest petitions.  They 


have squandered the valuable time of this Court which could have
16
been devoted more fruitfully in dealing with the pending cases and 


matters of greater urgency and importance.
In these circumstances, we direct as follows:
(1) We order and award sentence of simple  imprisonment till  rising 


    of this Court to the contemner, Shri B.K. Sharma.


(2) We   also   impose   a   sentence   of   fine   of   Rs.2,000/-   on   the 


    contemners, to be paid within one week from today.   In default, 


    he shall undergo simple imprisonment for a period of one week.


(3) Lastly,  we impose  a  cost  of  Rs.1,00,000/-  upon the  contemners 


    to be paid to the S.C. Legal Services Committee.


(4) We   also   hereby   direct   the   Registrar   of   Societies,   Government   of 


    NCT   of   Delhi   to   take   action   against   the   contemner-society, 


    namely   Kalyaneshwari,   in   accordance   with   law   and   submit   its 


    action-taken   report,   interim   or   final,   to   this   Court   within   six 


    weeks from today.
...................................
......CJI.
[S.H. Kapadia]




                                                        ...........................................J. 

                                                                           [K.S.   Panicker 

Radhakrishnan]
17
...........................................J.

                             [Swatanter Kumar]


New Delhi

May 12 ,  2011.