[Cites
9
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Ram Chandra Prasad Singh vs Sharad Yadav on 19 March, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 2847, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 399
Author:
Ashok Bhushan
Bench:
R. Banumathi
,
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.S. Bopanna
REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.2004 of 2020
                          (arising out of SLP (C) No. 25425 of 2018)


          RAM CHANDRA PRASAD SINGH                          ...APPELLANT(S)

                                               VERSUS

          SHARAD YADAV                                      ...RESPONDENT(S)



                                         J U D G M E N T
ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
This   appeal   has     been   filed   against   the

          Interlocutory Order dated 11.09.2018 passed by the

          Delhi High Court in C.M. Application No. 27159 of 2018

          filed by the appellant in Writ Petition No. 11102 of

          2017.             By the said application, the appellant sought

          permission to submit additional documents and place

          material on record which has been rejected by the High

          Court.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2020.03.20
15:04:57 IST
Reason:
2.             Brief facts of the case giving rise to this appeal

          are: -
1
2.1 The respondent No.1 was elected as Member of

   Parliament (Rajya Sabha) from Bihar on a Janata

   Dal (United) [JD(U)] ticket for a term beginning

   from 08.07.2016 for a period of six years. The

   appellant, a Member of Parliament (Rajya Sabha)

   and leader of JD(U) in Rajya Sabha filed a

   petition before the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on

   02.09.2017       under
Article          102(2)
read      with

   paragraph    6    of      the      Tenth     Schedule    of      the

   Constitution        of     India           praying     that     the

   respondent     No.1,       Member      of     Rajya     Sabha     be

   disqualified under the Tenth Schedule of the

   Constitution of India and his seat be declared

   vacant in Rajya Sabha.                The appellant in his

   petition has averred that respondent No.1, who

   was elected to the Rajya Sabha on the ticket of

   Janata Dal (United) from the State of Bihar had

   by his repeated conduct, public/press statements

   against the JD(U) and its leadership and openly

   aligning     with        the       rival     political       party,

   Rashtriya    Janata       Dal       (RJD),    has     voluntarily

   given   up    his        membership,          thus,     acquiring
2
disqualification under the Tenth Schedule to the

    Constitution.
2.2 The Chairman, Rajya Sabha got a copy of the

    petition filed by the appellant forwarded to the

    respondent, who was requested to furnish his

    comments thereon.       The respondent after seeking

    extension   of   time    filed   his   comments.   The

    Chairman, Rajya Sabha after following the due

    procedure and after giving opportunity of oral

    hearing to the respondent No.1 passed an order

    on 04.12.2017 disqualifying the respondent as a

    member of the House in terms of paragraph 2(1)(a)

    of the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution.
2.3 Against the order dated 04.12.2017 passed by the

    Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, respondent filed a

    Writ Petition No. 11102 of 2017 in Delhi High

    Court.
2.4 In paragraphs 27 and 28, the Chairman, Rajya

    Sabha has observed: -
“27. After taking into account the
        facts of the case, the comments of
3
the respondent and the petitioner,
       the respondent’s oral submission
       during the personal hearing on the
       8th of November, 2017 and the
       observations of the Committee of
       Privileges of the Eighth Lok Sabha
       and Hon’ble Supreme court’s Judgment
       in the 1994
Ravi Naik Vs. Union of
       India
case and observations in
       similar anti-defection cases, it is
       crystal clear that by his conduct,
       actions     and     speeches,     the
       respondent, Shri Sharad Yadav, has
       voluntarily given up his membership
       of the political party, Janata Dal
       (United) by which he was set up as a
       candidate for election to the Rajya
       Sabha from the State of Bihar in 2016
       and elected as such member.
28.   I, therefore, hold that the
       Respondent Shri Sharad Yadav has
       incurred disqualification for being
       a Member of the House in terms of
       paragraph 2(1)(a) of the Tenth
       Schedule to the Constitution of
       India. He has thus ceased to be a
       Member of the Rajya Sabha with
       immediate effect.     I decide and
       declare accordingly.”


2.5 The appellant, who was respondent in the writ

    petition filed C.M. Application No. 27159 of 2018

    dated 07.07.2018 praying for seeking permission

    to place additional documents Annexure 1 and

    Annexure 2 filed alongwith the application to be
4
taken on record.
2.6 An affidavit in reply to the above application

    was filed by the petitioner.       In his affidavit,

    the writ petitioner denied averments made in the

    application.    In paragraph 2 of the affidavit,

    following was stated: -
“2.   That I have gone through the
          contents of the application filed by
          the    respondent    No.1    seeking
          permission   to   place   additional
          material on record to demonstrate
          some purported post disqualification
          conduct of the petitioner. I wish
          to deny each and every averment made
          therein and the contents of the said
          application may be deemed to be
          specifically traversed and denied by
          me unless expressly admitted by me
          hereinafter.”


2.7 In the affidavit, the petitioner has denied that

    he has formed any new political party.         He had

    further    averred   that    he   has   been   wrongly

    disqualified.    It was pleaded that High Court is

    not concerned with the subsequent event which do

    not form subject matter of the writ petition.
The    application   filed   by   the   appellant   was

    opposed by the writ petitioner.         The High Court
5
vide    its   impugned      judgment         dated      11.09.2018

         dismissed the application.                  After noticing the

         averments     made     in       the    application        of    the

         appellant     and    the    reply      given       by    the   writ

         petitioner,     High     Court        gave    its    reason      for

         rejecting the application in paragraph 4, which

         is to the following effect:-
“4.    The scope of the present
               petition is limited to examining the
               legality and the validity of the
               order dated 04.12.2017 passed by the
               Chairperson,      Rajya       Sabha,
               disqualifying the petitioner from
               being a member of the Rajya Sabha.
               Any event subsequent to the passing
               of the said order, cannot be a
               consideration for this Court to test
               the legality of the said order.”


     2.8 The    appellant     aggrieved         by    the    above      order

         rejecting the application has come up in this

         appeal.
3.     We have heard Shri Ranjit Kumar, learned senior

counsel and Shri Gopal Singh, learned counsel for the

appellant. Shri Kapil Sibal, learned senior counsel has

appeared for the respondent.
6
4.     Shri Ranjit Kumar, learned senior counsel submits

that    the    subsequent      conduct     and    actions       of     the

respondent reaffirms the findings of the Chairman that

the respondent has voluntarily given up his membership

of JD(U) from which political party he was elected to

Rajya Sabha.         It is submitted that on the basis of

subsequent conducts and actions of the respondent, the

appellant cannot go to Chairman, Rajya Sabha seeking

disqualification of the respondent, hence, subsequent

conducts and actions can be looked into in the writ

petition      and    the    High   Court    erred       in     rejecting

application     of    the    appellant      bringing         subsequent/

additional evidence on record.              It is submitted that

respondent himself has relied on subsequent events in

his pleadings.       It is submitted that the respondent has

subsequently contested the Lok Sabha Election from the

political     party    Rashtriya       Janata    Dal    (RJD),       which

clearly    proves     that    he   had     voluntarily         given    up

membership     of    JD(U)   and   had     joined      RJD.      Seeking

disqualification of respondent is a continuous cause

of action. Shri Ranjit Kumar has also relied on
Section

8
of the Evidence Act and submits that both previous
7
and subsequent conducts are relevant.
5.   Shri Kapil Sibal, learned senior counsel appearing

for the respondent refuting the submissions of the

learned counsel for the appellant contends that High

Court has rightly rejected the application praying for

taking   on     record   additional           evidence     regarding

subsequent     events.        He   submits     that   under    Tenth

Schedule, disqualification is incurred on the day when

member has voluntarily given up his membership of

political     party   from    which      he   was   elected.     The

respondent having been disqualified; he is not a member

of JD(U) as on date.         The disqualification incurred by

member under paragraph 2(1)(a) of Tenth Schedule even

though   determined      by        the    Speaker     or    Chairman

subsequently, the said adjudication relates to previous

date when member voluntarily gives up his membership.
Shri Sibal submits that subsequent conducts and events,

which has taken place after the order of the Chairman

are neither germane nor relevant for disqualification,

which has been pronounced by Hon’ble Chairman.                    He

submits that it is the appellant, who has obtained

adjournment of the hearing of the writ petition.
8
6.   We have considered the submissions of the learned

counsel for the parties and have perused the record.

The points which arise for consideration in this appeal

lie in a very narrow compass.
7.   Whether C.M.P. No. 27159 of 2018 filed by the

appellant has been erroneously rejected by the High

Court is the question to be answered. The writ petition

filed by the respondent, which is pending in the High

Court is the writ petition challenging the order of

Hon’ble Chairman (Rajya Sabha) dated 04.12.2019 holding

that respondent has incurred disqualification for being

member of House in terms of paragraph 2(1)(a) of the

Tenth Schedule of the Constitution.     The grounds on

which petition was filed by the appellant on 02.09.2017

for disqualifying the respondent have been noticed in

the order of the Hon’ble Chairman (Rajya Sabha) to the

following effect: -
“In his petition, the petitioner averred
     that the respondent, Shri Sharad Yadav, who
     was elected to the Rajya Sabha on the ticket
     of Janata Dal (United) from the State of
     Bihar on the 8th of July, 2016, had by his
     repeated conduct, public/press statements
     against the JD(U) and its leadership and
     openly aligning with a rival political
9
party,   namely,    the   Rashtriya    Janata
     Dal(RJD), proved that he has voluntarily
     given up the membership of the party, thus
     becoming subject to disqualification under
     the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution.
     The main contention of the petitioner is
     that the respondent instead of adhering to
     the unanimous decision taken on the 26th of
     July, 2017 by the JD(U) and its President,
     Shri Nitish Kumar to withdraw from the
     Mahagathbandhan     and     the     coalition
     Government formed in Bihar in 2015, started
     anti-party     activities      by    publicly
     denouncing the party’s decision.           He
     campaigned with RJD leaders and workers
     between the 10th and the 12th of August, 2017
     in different districts of Bihar and
     attended the public rally called by the
     rival political party, i.e., RJD, in Patna
     on the 27th of August, 2017 despite written
     directive from Shri K.C. Tyagi, Secretary-
     General of the party advising him not to
     attend the rally and also conveying to him
     that his participation in the rally would
     be   construed    not   only    against   the
     principles of high morality but also as
     voluntarily giving up the membership of the
     JD(U).      The   petitioner    had   annexed
     newspaper clippings, media reports and
     videos as proof of the allegations.”
8.   Paragraph 2(1) of the Tenth Schedule is to the

following effect: -
“2.    Disqualification  on    ground   of
     defection. — (1) Subject to the provisions
     of paragraphs 4 and 5, a member of a House
     belonging to any political party shall be
     disqualified for being a member of the
     House—
(a)    if he has voluntarily given up his
10
membership of such political party;
or

      Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-
      paragraph, —
(a)    an elected member of a House shall
             be deemed to belong to the political
             party, if any, by which he was set
             up as a candidate for election as
             such member;”
9.    The disqualification is incurred by member of the

House as soon as he has voluntarily given up his

membership of such political party.       This Court in
Ravi

S. Naik Vs. Union of India and Others
, 1994 Supp (2)

SCC   641   had   occasion   to    consider   the   expression

“voluntarily given up his membership”.          Referring to

paragraph 2(1)(a), this Court laid down following: -
“11…………………………………………. The said paragraph
      provides for disqualification of a member
      of a House belonging to a political party
      “if he has voluntarily given up his
      membership of such political party”. The
      words “voluntarily given up his membership”
      are not synonymous with “resignation” and
      have a wider connotation. A person may
      voluntarily give up his membership of a
      political party even though he has not
      tendered   his    resignation    from   the
      membership of that party. Even in the
      absence of a formal resignation from
      membership an inference can be drawn from
      the conduct of a member that he has
      voluntarily given up his membership of the
      political party to which he belongs.”
11
10.   A Constitution Bench of this Court in
Rajendra

Singh Rana and Others Vs. Swami Prasad Maurya and

Others
, (2007) 4 SCC 270 had occasion to consider

paragraph (2) of Tenth Schedule of the Constitution.

In
the above case
, the Constitution Bench held that

decision by the Speaker taken at a subsequent point of

time cannot and does not postpone his incurring of

disqualification by the act of the legislature.      In

paragraph 34, this court held: -
“34.   As   we   see    it,   the   act   of
      disqualification    occurs   on   a   member
voluntarily giving up his membership of a
      political party or at the point of defiance
      of the whip issued to him. Therefore, the
      act that constitutes disqualification in
      terms of para 2 of the Tenth Schedule is
      the act of giving up or defiance of the
      whip. The fact that a decision in that
      regard may be taken in the case of voluntary
      giving up, by the Speaker at a subsequent
      point of time cannot and does not postpone
      the incurring of disqualification by the
      act of the legislator………………………………………………………
      …………………………………………………………………………………………………………..
      The fact that in terms of para 6 a decision
      on the question has to be taken by the
      Speaker or the Chairman, cannot lead to a
      conclusion that the question has to be
      determined only with reference to the date
      of the decision of the Speaker. An
      interpretation of that nature would leave
      the disqualification to an indeterminate
      point of time and to the whims of the
      decision-making authority. The same would
      defeat the very object of enacting the law.
12
Such an interpretation should be avoided to
      the extent possible. We are, therefore, of
      the view that the contention that (sic it
      is) only on a decision of the Speaker that
      the disqualification is incurred, cannot be
      accepted. This would mean that what the
      learned Chief Justice has called the
      snowballing effect, will also have to be
      ignored and the question will have to be
      decided with reference to the date on which
      the membership of the legislature party is
      alleged to have been voluntarily given up.”
11. A recent Three Judge Bench judgment of this Court

in   Shrimanth   Balasaheb   Patil   Vs.   Hon’ble   Speaker

Karnataka Legislative Assembly and Others, (2019) 15

Scale 533 had occasion to consider paragraph 2 of the

Tenth Schedule of the Constitution of India.         In
the

above case
, this Court noticed the objects and reasons

of the
Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985
.

This Court categorically held that decision of the

Speaker that a member is disqualified relates back to

the date of the disqualifying action complained of.      In

paragraphs 54 and 55, this court laid down following:-
“54.
In addition to the above, the decision
      of   the   Speaker   that   a   member   is
      disqualified, relates back to the date of
      the disqualifying action complained of. The
      power of the Speaker to decide upon a
      disqualification petition was dealt by a
      Constitution Bench of this Court in
Rajendra Singh Rana v. Swami Prasad Maurya
,
      (2007) 4 SCC 270. This Court, reading the
13
provisions of paragraphs 2 and 6 of the
Tenth Schedule, has clearly held that the
Speaker has to decide the question of
disqualification with reference to the date
it was incurred. The Court held that:
34. As we see it, the act of
   disqualification     occurs    on   a
   member voluntarily giving up his
   membership of a political party or
   at the point of defiance of the
   whip issued to him. Therefore, the
   act         that         constitutes
   disqualification in terms of para
   2 of the Tenth Schedule is the act
   of giving up or defiance of the
   whip. The fact that a decision in
   that regard may be taken in the
   case of voluntary giving up, by the
   Speaker at a subsequent point of
   time cannot and does not postpone
   the incurring of disqualification
   by the act of the legislator.
Similarly, the fact that the party
   could condone the defiance of a
   whip within 15 days or that the
   Speaker takes the decision only
   thereafter in those cases, cannot
   also     pitch     the    time     of
   disqualification as anything other
   than the point at which the whip
   is   defied.   Therefore     in   the
   background of the object sought to
   be achieved by the Fifty-second
   Amendment of the Constitution and
   on a true understanding of para 2
   of   the   Tenth    Schedule,    with
   reference to the other paragraphs
   of   the    Tenth    Schedule,    the
   position that emerges is that the
   Speaker has to decide the question
   of disqualification with reference
   to the date on which the member
   voluntarily      gives     up     his
14
membership or defies the whip. It
           is really a decision ex post
           facto...”
                         (emphasis supplied)
55. As such, there is no doubt that the
        disqualification relates to the date when
        such     act     of    defection    takes
        place…………………………………………….”
12. The decision taken by the Speaker, thus, has to be

on the basis of conduct or actions taken by member,

which     may   amount       to   voluntarily    giving    up   his

membership.      The facts and sequence of the events on

the   basis     of   which    Hon’ble    Chairman   came   to   the

conclusion that a person has incurred disqualification

under paragraph 2(1)(a) of the Tenth Schedule are all

facts, which had occurred prior to adjudication by the

Hon’ble Chairman.        In the facts of the present case,

the Chairman of Rajya Sabha has passed the order on

04.12.2019 on the claim of the appellant praying for

disqualification as noticed above.              The foundation of

order of the Chairman are the facts and events, which

took place after 26.07.2017.            The petition having been

filed by the appellant on 02.09.2017, petition has to

be treated to be founded on facts and events, which
15
took place on or before 02.09.2017.
13. Now, reverting to the C.M. Application No. 27159

of 2018, we need to note as to what was the additional

evidence, which was sought to be brought on record of

the writ petition. Paragraph 4 and 5 of the application

contains the details of Annexure 1 and Annexure 2,

which is sought to be brought on record, which is as

follows: -
“4. That it is respectfully submitted that
     during the pendency of the above matter,
     the petitioner has formed/launched a new
     political party called the “Loktantrik
     Janata Dal” on 18.05.2018 at the Talkatora
     Stadium.    Photographs, video clippings,
     posters and banners are proof of this
     formation and his active role therein.
     Photocopies   of  the  pictures  of   the
     petitioner are annexed hereto as Annexure
     1 collectively. Video recording of the
     speeches by the petitioner in the said
     event as also some more photographs have
     been extracted in a CD which is annexed
     hereto as Annexure-2.
5. That the annexures are the true copies
     of their respective originals.”
14. Paragraph 4 and the Annexures 1 and 2 referred

therein clearly indicate that what was sought to be

taken on record was an event which took place on
16
18.05.2018 in which event a new political party called

the Loktantrik Janata Dal was formed/launched.                      The

application which was filed by the appellant seeking

disqualification     of    the      respondent      was    filed    on

02.09.2017 in which application, the foundation of

disqualification of respondent was already laid down.

The order passed by the Chairman is based on a petition

dated 02.09.2017 as well as the material and evidence,

which   was   brought     on   record      before   the    Chairman.

Additional evidence, which is sought to be brought on

record of the writ petition was not the basis for

seeking disqualification of the respondent, hence, we

do not find any error in the order of the High Court

rejecting the C.M. Application No. 27159 of 2018.

While upholding the order of the High court rejecting

the C.M. Application No. 27159 of 2018, we, however,

make few observations.
15. An event or a conduct of a person even though

subsequent    to   passing     of     an   order    of    Speaker    or

Chairman ordinarily may not be relevant for determining

the validity of the order of the Speaker or Chairman

but in a case where subsequent event or conduct of
17
member is relevant with respect to state of affairs as

pertaining    to   the   time   when      member   has    incurred

disqualification, that subsequent events can be taken

into consideration by the High Court in exercise of its

jurisdiction under
Article 226.
Justice Hidayatullah,

(as he then was) speaking for this Court in
Mohd. Ikram

Hussain Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
, AIR 1964

SC 1625 has made a very pertinent observation with

regard to acceptance of evidence.           It observed that if

the Court requires an evidence that can always be

received.    In paragraph 19, following was laid down: -
“(19)   ………………………All procedure is always
     open to a Court which is not expressly
     prohibited and no rule of this Court has
     laid down that evidence shall not be
     received,    if    the   Court   requires
     it…………………………….”
16. The     observations   made      by   the   High     Court   in

paragraph 4, i.e., “any event subsequent to the passing

of the said order cannot be a consideration for this

Court to test the legality of the said order” may be

generally correct but there can be exception if the

above statement is treated as statement of law.
18
17.   In a writ petition under
Article 226
subsequent

events can be taken note of for varied purposes.    We

are reminded of the weighty observation of Justice V.R.

Krishna Iyer in
Pasupuleti Venkateswarlu Vs. The Motor

& General Traders
, (1975) 1 SCC 770, where following

was observed: -
“4. ………………………………………………. It is basic to our
      processual jurisprudence that the right to
      relief must be judged to exist as on the
      date   a   suitor   institutes  the   legal
      proceeding. Equally clear is the principle
      that procedure is the handmaid and not the
      mistress of the judicial process. If a
      fact, arising after the lis has come to
      court and has a fundamental impact on the
      right to relief or the manner of moulding
      it, is brought diligently to the notice of
      the tribunal, it cannot blink at it or be
      blind to events which stultify or render
      inept the decretal remedy. Equity justifies
      bending the rules of procedure, where no
      specific provision or fairplay is violated,
      with a view to promote substantial justice
      — subject, of course, to the absence of
      other    disentitling   factors   or   just
      circumstances. Nor can we contemplate any
      limitation on this power to take note of
      updated facts to confine it to the trial
      court. If the litigation pends, the power
      exists, absent other special circumstances
      repelling resort to that course in law or
      justice. Rulings on this point are legion,
      even as situations for applications of this
      equitable rule are myriad. We affirm the
      proposition that for making the right or
      remedy claimed by the party just and
      meaningful as also legally and factually in
      accord with the current realities, the
19
Court can, and in many cases must, take
     cautious   cognisance    of   events   and
     developments subsequent to the institution
     of the proceeding provided the rules of
     fairness to both sides are scrupulously
     obeyed…………………………………….”
18. The observations made in paragraph 4 as quoted

above need not to be read as laying down a law that in

any case subsequent event cannot be considered for

testing the legality of the order impugned or for

moulding   the    relief   in        a     writ   petition   under
Article 226.
19. In view of the foregoing conclusions, we uphold

the order of the High Court subject to observations as

made above. The writ petition before the High Court

being held up due to pendency of this appeal, we request

the High Court to dispose of the writ petition at an

early date.
20. The appeal is dismissed subject to the observation

as made above.
......................J.
                                            ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )


                                         ......................J.
                                            (   M.R. SHAH   )
New Delhi,
March 19, 2020.
20