[Cites
2
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Ramesh Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 3 March, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 286
Author:
Indu Malhotra
Bench:
Uday Umesh Lalit
,
Indu Malhotra
,
Hemant Gupta
REPORTABLE


                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1918 OF 2020
                                 [Arising out of SLP (C) No.15795/2018]

                  Ramesh Singh                                          …Appellant


                                                  Versus


                  The State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.                     …Respondent




                                               JUDGMENT
INDU MALHOTRA, J.
Leave granted.
1.   The appellant was posted as Zila Basic Shiksha
                              Adhikari, District Basti in January 2003. The appellant
                              was the In-charge District Basic Education Officer
                              Gorakhpur, when he issued appointment letters to 400
                              candidates holding B.Ed. degrees to the post of
                              Assistant Teachers in Basic Schools (Primary Schools)
                              in District Gorakhpur, and 121 candidates in District
                              Basti during April to June 2003.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MUKESH KUMAR
2.   The State vide Office Order dated 24.07.2003 placed the
Date: 2020.03.03
appellant   under    suspension,    and    directed    a
13:04:54 IST
Reason:
disciplinary/departmental enquiry to be conducted
1
under the Uttar Pradesh Civil Service (Discipline and
     Appeal) Rules, 1999. The State appointed the Joint
     Director, Basic Education as the Enquiry Officer.
The Charge Sheet was filed on 21.08.2003 wherein it
     was     alleged     that   the     appointments     of   Assistant
     Teachers made by the appellant were irregular, as they
     were in violation of Rules 16 and 19(3) of the U.P. Basic
     Education      (Teachers)        Service   Rules,   1981   (“1981
     Rules”).
3.   The appellant submitted his reply to the charge sheet
     on 09.11.2003 denying the charges levelled against
     him. It was contended that the appointments were
     made by him in compliance with earlier orders passed
     by     the   High    Court,      and   directions   from    senior
     functionaries.
4.   The enquiry officer found the appellant guilty of the
     charges levelled against him in the charge sheet. The
     Report of the Enquiry Officer was forwarded to the
     Disciplinary Authority on 19.06.2004.
5.   The appellant challenged the order of suspension by
     way of W.P. (C) 52287/2005, wherein the High Court
     vide interim Order dated 28.07.2005 granted stay of the
     order of suspension.
6.   During the pendency of the Writ Petition, the Deputy
     Secretary, Basic Education Department vide Order
     dated 10.01.2006 proposed punishment of removal
     from service.
The appellant challenged the Order dated 10.01.2006
     by filing W.P. (C) No. 14083/2006, wherein vide interim
2
order dated 08.03.2006, the High Court directed stay of
     the aforesaid Order of proposed punishment.
7.   On the basis of the enquiry report, the Government
     decided to award major punishment of removal from
     service under the provisions of the U.P. Civil Service
     (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1999, and referred the
     matter to the Uttar Pradesh Public Service Commission
     vide Government Order dated 17.10.2005. The U.P.
     Public Service Commission approved the punishment of
     service to the appellant vide letter dated 21.12.2006.
     The order of removal from service was passed by the
     Governor dated 21.04.2008.
8.   The appellant challenged the Order of Removal in W.P.
     (C) No. 28842/2008, wherein the High Court vide
     interim order dated 20.06.2008 directed that the
     operation, implementation and execution of the order of
     dismissed dated 21.04.2008 shall remain stayed.
       Subsequent     to   the    interim    order,   the   State
     Government     withdrew      the      proposed   order    of
     punishment on 19.05.2010.
As a consequence, the High Court dismissed the Writ
     Petition on 25.05.2010 with the observation that the
     disciplinary   proceedings      may     be   concluded    in
     accordance with law, preferably within a period of 6
     months. The appellant was directed to co-operate with
     the disciplinary proceedings.
9.   The disciplinary authority issued a second show cause
     notice along-with the enquiry report.
        The appellant inter alia submitted that conditional
     appointments had been made against fixed pay scale
3
pursuant to the orders of the court, and pressure from
      the government. All appointments made were declared
      void ab initio. The enquiry was conducted without
      affording any opportunity of hearing and adducing
      evidence through production of witnesses.
10.   The disciplinary authority granted a personal hearing to
      the appellant.
The disciplinary authority found all the charges
      proved against the appellant, and passed an order of
      removal from service on 27.06.2017.
11.   The appellant challenged the order dated 27.06.2017 by
      way of Writ A. No. 31098/2017 before the Allahabad
      High Court.
The High Court vide the impugned judgment and
      order dated 10.05.2018 partly allowed the Writ Petition.
        The High Court held that the enquiry officer had not
      recorded any finding as to whether the appellant was
      given a notice intimating the date, time and place of
      holding the oral enquiry. The appellant had expressly
      taken the plea that the enquiry officer had not afforded
      any opportunity of hearing. The disciplinary authority
      while passing the order of punishment overlooked the
      mandatory requirement of holding a valid enquiry by
      complying with the principles of natural justice.
        In these circumstances, the High Court felt that it
      would not be appropriate to consider the contention of
      the appellant that the appointments were made in
      compliance with the order passed by High Court and
      pursuant to the directions of the higher authorities,
4
since it would require appreciation of the evidence on
record.
The High Court, however, rejected the contention that
the enquiry officer was biased, as there was no material
on record to reveal any element of bias on part of the
enquiry officer.
The Court rejected the contention of the appellant for
parity with the case of K.C. Bharati who had been
awarded a lesser punishment of withholding one
increment for one year, and a censure entry in his
service record.
The High Court concluded that since the enquiry was
held in violation of the principles of natural justice, the
order of dismissal from service dated 27.06.2017 was
liable to be quashed. The matter was remitted to the
disciplinary authority to hold the enquiry afresh from
the stage of charge sheet. It was further directed that
the appellant shall be treated under suspension, during
the pendency of the enquiry and shall be paid
subsistence allowance as per the Rules.
   The Court deprecated the casual and callous manner
in which the disciplinary authorities had acted in
conducting     an   enquiry   into   grave   allegations   of
corruption of such a magnitude where hundreds of
appointments were made by the appellant, without
following the due process of law. A direction was issued
to the disciplinary authority to appoint an enquiry
officer with the approval of the Chief Minister, who
should be apprised of the outcome of the disciplinary
proceedings.
5
12.    Aggrieved by the said judgment, the appellant filed the
        present Special Leave Petition before this Court. This
        Court vide Order 09.07.2018 issued notice on whether
        the appellant should be continued on suspension, and
        whether the disciplinary authority should report the
        matter to the Chief Minister.
Pursuant to the impugned judgment, the State
        granted sanction vide Office Memo dated 11.10.2018 to
        re-conduct the enquiry from the stage of the charge
        sheet.
By a further order dated 31.10.2018, this Court
        ordered stay of the operation of the Office Memo dated
        11.10.2018.
13.    We have heard learned counsel for the parties, and
        perused the record.
The issue which arises for our consideration is
        whether     the    appointment   letters   issued   to   521
        candidates who were B.Ed. degree holders for the post
        of Assistant Teachers, was conducted de hors the
        mandatory procedure prescribed by the Rules.
14.    The counsel for the appellant submitted that the
        continued suspension of the appellant was not justified,
        and that his client had made the appointments
        pursuant to an earlier order of the High Court, and also
        instructions from higher authorities.
14.1.   Reliance was placed on a letter dated 10.04.2003
        addressed     by    the   Secretary,    Basic   Education,
        Government of U.P. to all the Divisional Assistant
        Directors of Education (Basic) U.P, wherein it was
        directed that orders passed by the High Court in
6
connection with appointment of teachers be complied
        by the District Basic Education Officers.
14.2.   It   was    further   submitted         that    vide     letter   dated
        18.4.2003, the appellant had requested the Director
        Basic      Education,    U.P.      to     issue        directives   for
        appointment of candidates to the post of Assistant
        Teachers     in   schools,       who     held     qualifications     of
        B.Ed./L.T./B.P.Ed./C.P.Ed.
14.3.   By a further letter dated 21.04.2003, the appellant
        informed the Secretary, Basic Education, Govt. of U.P.
        that there were posts of Teachers lying vacant in
        District Gorakhpur, and there was no provision for
        appointment of candidates holding qualifications of
        B.Ed./L.T./ B.PEd./C.P.Ed. to the post of Assistant
        Teachers.
14.4.   The appellant subsequently issued a notification dated
        25.04.2003 stating that a decision was taken to issue
        appointment orders to candidates with B.Ed./L.T.
        pursuant to discussions with the Chief Minister, and
        the Minister for Basic Education, Secretary, Basic
        Education, Govt. of U.P. held on 23.04.2003. It is also
        mentioned that he was given directions that if the
        appointments          were       not      made           immediately,
        departmental proceedings would be initiated against
        him.
14.5.   Accordingly, the appellant made appointments to 521
        posts of Assistant Teachers in Basic Schools during the
        period May to June 2003.
7
14.6.   It was further submitted that the appellant sought the
        advice of the Chief Standing Counsel for the State of
        U.P.
               The Chief Standing Counsel vide letter dated
        01.05.2003 stated that the Government Order dated
        10.04.2003 was general in nature. The appellant was
        advised to take a decision with the consent of the
        Government since such cases may affect the State in
        similar cases.
14.7.   The    appellant    addressed         another        letter   dated
        06.05.2003 to the Secretary, Basic Education Council
        seeking instructions on whether the appointment of
        candidates       holding         higher      qualifications       of
        B.Ed./L.T./B.PEd./C.P.Ed.            could      be        made    in
        accordance with the High Court orders/directives.
14.8.   The Secretary Basic Education                vide Order       dated
        28.05.2003 directed all Divisional Assistant Director
        (Basic Education) to make appointments of candidates
        to the post of Teachers only in those cases in which
        final/interim orders had been passed by High Court by
        02.06.2003.
14.9.   The appellant placed reliance on an earlier judgment of
        the division bench of the Allahabad High Court in
        Special Appeal No. 21(SB)/1993. The High Court took
        note of an earlier judgement in
Firoz Alam Khan v. State
        of U.P. & Ors.
1986 UP LBC 674 wherein it was directed
        that if sufficient number of B.T.C. trained candidates
        were   not    available    for    appointment        as    Assistant
        Teachers in the Basic Schools, the candidates who
8
qualified for appointment as stated in the advertisement
              could be appointed.
The High Court
in that case
had referred to the
              judgement of this Court in
Mohd. Riazul Usman Ghani
              and Ors. v. District & Sessions Judge, Nagpur
1, wherein
              it was held as under:
“21. A criterion which has the effect of denying a
                  candidate his right to be considered for the post on the
                  principle that he is having higher qualification than
                  prescribed cannot be rational. We have not been able to
                  appreciate as to why those candidates who possessed
                  qualifications equivalent to SCC Examination could not also
                  be considered. We are saying this on the facts of the case
                  in hand and should not be understood as laying down a
                  rule of universal application.”
                                                        [emphasis supplied]
15.     We have perused the Uttar Pradesh Basic Education
              (Teachers) Service Rules, 1981, which lays down the
              procedure for appointment of Assistant Teachers in
              basic schools in U.P.
                  Sub-rule (1)(b) of Rule 2 defines the “competent
              authority” as under:
“(b) ‘Appointing Authority’ in relation to teachers
                       referred to in Rule 3 means the District Basic Education
                       Officer”

                  Rule 8 prescribes the academic qualifications for the
              post of Assistant Teachers as:
“8. Academic qualifications. - (1) The Essential
                       qualifications of candidates for appointment to a post
                       referred to in clause (a) of Rule 5 shall be shown below
                       against each :
Post           Academic Qualifications
                       …

                       (ii)   Assistant            A Bachelor’s Degree from a

1   (2000) 2 SCC 606
9
Master     and        University established by law
            Assistant             in    India   or   a     Degree
            Mistress     of       recognized        by         the
            Junior    Basic       Government as equivalent
            Schools               thereto together with the
                                  training          qualification
                                  consisting    of    a      Basic
                                  Teacher’s Certificate, Vishshit
                                  Basic Teacher’s Certificate
                                  (B.T.C), Hindustani teacher’s
                                  Certificate, Junior Teacher’s
                                  Certificate,   Certificate    of
                                  teaching or any other Training
                                  Course recognized by the
                                  Government as equivalent
                                  thereto.
Rule 16 provides for constitution of the Selection
Committee for making appointments to any post under
these Rules :
“16. Constitution of Selection Committee – For selection
        of candidates for appointment to any post under
        these Rules, there shall be constituted a Selection
        Committee comprising –
a) Principal, District Institute   – Chairman
           of Education and Training
b) District   Basic   Education    – Member -Secretary
           Officer
c) Principal, Government Girl’s    – Member
           Intermediate College at the
           District Head-quarters
d) District         Non-Formal     – Member
           Education Officer
e)
f) One Specialist in Hindu,        – Member
           Urdu or other languages, as
           the      case   may      be,
           nominated      by    District
           Magistrate
                                                     …”
10
Rule 19(3) provides that no appointment shall be
      made except upon the recommendation of the Selection
      Committee.
“19. Appointment. –
              …
              (3) No appointment shall be made except with the
              recommendation of the Selection Committee, and in
              the case of direct recruitment except on production of
              residence certificate issued by the Tahsildar.”
                                            [emphasis supplied]
16.   A perusal of the aforesaid Rules reveals that the
      appellant as the District Basic Education Officer, being
      the appointing authority was empowered to make
      appointments only on the basis of recommendations of
      the Selection Committee as contemplated by Rules 16
      and 19(3) as set out hereinabove.
It is the case of the Respondent-State that the
      appellant made the appointments without complying
      with the 1981 Rules. Serious allegations of corruption
      have been raised against the appellant by the state,
      which would require determination in a full-fledged
      enquiry by the disciplinary authority. It is pertinent to
      note that all these appointments were declared to be
      void ab initio by the State, as mentioned in the
      appellant’s reply dated 04.12.2012 to the second show
      cause notice.
The plea of the appellant that the appointments were
      made in compliance with an earlier order passed by the
      High   Court,   and   under    the   directions   of   senior
      functionaries, would require to be considered in the
      enquiry.
11
17.   We uphold the impugned judgment passed by the High
      Court in remitting the matter to the disciplinary
      authority, which would be conducted from the stage of
      the   charge   sheet.     The   disciplinary    authority   will
      conduct the enquiry in accordance with the principles
      of natural justice, after giving a full opportunity of
      hearing to the appellant, who will be allowed to produce
      both oral and documentary evidence. No unnecessary
      adjournments will be granted to the parties.
         The   appellant      will   continue    to   remain   under
      suspension during the period of enquiry. The enquiry is
      directed to be completed within a period of 4 months.
         We modify the impugned judgement to the extent
      that the enquiry officer be appointed by the Chief
      Secretary.
Let a copy of this order be despatched to the Chief
      Secretary.
It is clarified that there is no expression of any
      opinion on the merits of the case.
The Civil Appeal is dismissed.
Pending Applications, if any, are accordingly disposed of.
      Ordered accordingly.
………..…………….J.
                                                (S. ABDUL NAZEER)



                                                 .…………………….J.
                                                 (INDU MALHOTRA)
New Delhi;
March 3, 2020.
12