[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Goa vs Narayan V. Gaonkar . on 4 March, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 2881, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 337
Author:
Ashok Bhushan
Bench:
Navin Sinha
,
Ashok Bhushan
1


                                                                     REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO.1866 OF 2020
                          (arising out of SLP (C) No. 19683 of 2012)


         STATE OF GOA                                         ...APPELLANT(S)

                                             VERSUS

         NARAYAN V. GAONKAR & ORS.                            ...RESPONDENT(S)



                                         J U D G M E N T
ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
This appeal has been filed by the State of Goa

         questioning judgment of High Court of Bombay at Goa

         dated 30.06.2011 dismissing the First Appeal No. 115

         of 2001 filed by the appellant.                      The First Appeal

         No.115 of 2001 was filed by State of Goa through the

         Secretary,             Forest   Department;    the    Collector   South

         Sub-Division, Margao, Goa; the Director of Survey &

         Settlement             Officer,    Panaji,    Goa     and   the   Chief
Signature Not Verified
Secretary, Panaji, Goa challenging the judgment and
Digitally signed by
MEENAKSHI KOHLI
Date: 2020.03.04
16:36:56 IST
Reason:
order             of the   learned Civil     Judge dated    23.04.2001
2
dismissing the Civil Suit No. 64 of 1995 filed by the

plaintiffs-respondents 1 to 9 as well as the counter

claim filed by defendants- appellant.
2.   The brief facts of the case necessary to be noted

for deciding this appeal are:
2.1 Special Civil Suit No. 64 of 1995 was filed

         by
Shri Narayan V. Gaonkar
,
Shri Shivram V.

         Gaonkar       and   Shri       Rama   S.F.   Dessai
in   the

         Court    of    Civil       Judge,     Senior   Division     at

         Quepem praying for following: -
“In        the        aforesaid
              circumstances, it is prayed to
              your honour, to direct the survey
              authorities to delete the name of
              “Forest   Department”    from   the
              survey   entry   No.11/1   of   the
              village Sulcorna from “Name of
              the Occupant” column of survey
              Form No.I & XIV and to declare
              the plaintiffs as the exclusive
              owners of the property bearing
              survey No.11/1 known as “CONDA
              MALL” or “BINDANGAL” or “BINDAN
              MOLL” or “CARIA MOLL” of Village
              Sulcorna of Taluka Quepem.”

     2.2 In      the     Suit,          the     Secretary,     Forest

         Department, Government of Goa; the Collector

         South Sub-Division, Margao, Goa; the Director
3
of    Survey     &    Settlement           Officer,       Survey     of

    Land     Records,         Panaji,         Goa     and    the      Chief

    Secretary,       Government           of    Goa,        Panaji,     Goa

    were defendant Nos. 1 to 4.                     A common written

    statement-cum-counter claim was filed by all

    the    defendants          refuting        the     claim       of   the

    plaintiffs.           The         defendants           claimed      that

    entire suit property under Survey No.11/1 of

    village        Sulcorna              of         Quepem         Taluka,

    admeasuring an area of 23,04,500 sq. mtrs. is

    in     possession         and     belongs         to    the      Forest

    Department and as such the name of the Forest

    Department       has          been    rightly          recorded       in

    occupant’s column in said Survey No.11/1 and

    the plaintiffs nor any person have any right

    over the suit property.
2.3 The plaintiffs claim that they are owners in

    possession       of       a    landed      property        known     as

    CONDA     MOLL       or       BINDIGAL       or    BINDAN        MOLL,

    situated       at     Sulcorna            Village        in      Quepem

    Taluka,     Goa       was         disputed.              Defendant’s
4
pleaded that entire plantation existing there

   are   planted      and        enjoyed     by    the        Forest

   Department.         It        was     pleaded    that        suit

   property is a forest property of the Forest

   Department vide Notification published in the

   Official    Gazette          “Repartieao        de        Femente”

   dated 11.01.1951.
2.4 In the counter claim, it was pleaded that

   plaintiffs have been wrongly recorded as co-
occupants     in    survey           No.11/1    of         Village

   Sulcorna,     Taluka         Quepem,    which        is     owned,

   enjoyed and in possession of the defendant

   No.1 - Forest Department for the last many

   years and reference to the Notification dated

   11.01.1951 was made.                In the counter claim,

   following prayers were made by the defendants

   in paragraph 17:-
“17.   In the circumstances, the
         Defendants pray:
(a) That by a decree in the
             nature   of  direction,  the
             survey authority be directed
             to delete the names of the
             plaintiffs      from     the
5
occupant’s column in respect
             of survey No.11/1, Sulcorna
             Village of Quepem Taluka.
(b) For any other reliefs in the
            circumstances of the case may
            require.”


2.5 Written statement to the counter claim was

    also filed by the plaintiffs claiming that

    they are in exclusive possession of Survey

    No.11/1 and the name of the Forest Department

    has been wrongly recorded as co-occupants.
2.6 The learned Civil Judge framed two issues to

    the following effect:-
1)   Whether the plaintiffs prove
            that   they   are   owners   in
            possession of the suit property
            as described in paragraph 1 of
            the plaint?
2)   Whether the defendants prove
            that the plaintiffs name have
            been wrongly recorded as co-
occupant   in    the   property
            surveyed   under   No.11/1   of
            Village Sulcorna and as such
            their names may be deleted from
            the occupant’s column of Survey
            No.11/1?
6
2.7 While answering Issue No.1, Civil Judge held

    that   plaintiffs       have      failed     to    prove     that

    they   are     owners        of    the      suit     property,

    however, Civil Judge upheld the plaintiffs’

    possession.        Issue No.2 was answered against

    the defendant.          A First Appeal was filed by

    the defendants in the High Court praying that

    judgment     of    the       learned       Civil     Judge     be

    quashed    and    set    aside      to     the    extent     that

    learned    Civil    Judge         held    that     respondents

    (plaintiffs)       were      in     possession        and     the

    judgment insofar as it dismissed the counter

    claim of the appellants, it was prayed that

    the High Court may delete the name of the

    respondents in occupant column in Form Nos.I

    &   XIV    and     also       hold        that     respondents

    (plaintiffs)      are     not     in     possession    of     the

    suit land.
2.8 No appeal was filed by the plaintiffs against

    the judgment of the learned Civil Judge.                      The

    High   Court      dismissed         the     appeal     of     the
7
appellants while observing that trial court

         has rightly rejected the plaintiffs’ prayer

         for title and also dismissed the defendants-

         appellants counter claim that they are owners

         of   the    property.       The   High    Court,   thus,

         affirmed the judgment of the learned Civil

         Judge.      Aggrieved with the judgment of the

         High Court, this appeal has been filed by the

         State of Goa.
3.   This Court on 05.07.2012 passed following order:-
“Issue notice on the application for
      condonation of delay as well as on the
      special leave petition.
However, the petitioner is directed to
     produce the relevant records to show that
     the property in question is a forest
     land.”
4.   In pursuance of the order of this Court dated

05.07.2012, the appellants filed an affidavit dated

17.08.2012 bringing on record Form Nos. I & XIV dated

13.07.2012.    The      Notification       dated     11.01.1951

published in the Government Gazette was also brought

on record.    A Mining Lease granted by Government of

Panaji, Goa dated 09.03.1998 has also been brought on
8
record where Mining Lease of an area of 51 hectares

in Survey No.2 of Village Quepem and Survey No.11 of

Village Sulcorna was granted by State of Goa.
5.     An    I.A.      No.   187381    of     2019      was   filed    by   the

appellant        seeking       permission          to    file     additional

documents, i.e., Annexures 1 to 5 to the application.

This    Court       by   order   dated        10.12.2019        allowed     the

application and permitted the respondents to file a

reply       to   the     application        and    the    documents.         On

10.12.2019,         following         order       was    passed       by    this

Court:-
“We find sufficient                grounds         to take
        additional     documents                 on            record.
        Application is allowed.
Let the counsel for the respondents
        file a reply to the application and the
        documents, which have brought on the
        record, within four weeks.
Let records of the Trial Court be also
        summoned. Registry to take appropriate
        steps.
List on 28.01.2020.”
6.     By the above order, the record of the trial court

was also summoned, which was duly received by this

Court and was perused by the Court.                       In pursuance of
9
the order dated 10.12.2019, counter reply affidavit

in reply to the application have been filed by the

respondents dated 10.01.2020.
7. We have heard Ms. Madhavi Divan, learned ASG for

the   appellant and           Shri Carlos            A. Fereira,         learned

counsel for the respondents.
8.    Learned counsel for the appellants in support of

the     appeal    submits          that       the    trial       court    having

rejected the claim of the plaintiffs of ownership and

the   plaintiffs        having       not        filed     any     appeal,       the

findings       that    they     are       not       the   owner     of    Survey

No.11/1 has become final and no right or title can be

claimed     with       regard       to         Survey     No.11/1        by    the

plaintiffs.            It     is     submitted            that     by    Gazette

Notification          dated     11.01.1951              published        in     the

Government Gazette by the then Government of Goa the

description of the National Forests in District Goa

was published wherein in Village Sulcorna forest was

declared and published.                       It is submitted that the

additional affidavit which have been brought on the

record clearly indicate that according to the Goa,

Daman    and     Diu   Land        Revenue       Code,      1968    and       Rules

framed    therein,          when      land       survey      was    made       with
10
regard to Survey No.11 of area 230.54 hectares, name

of Forest Department only was recorded.                         A complaint

was submitted by Vishnu Shivram Gaonkar, one of the

plaintiffs      to    the        Mamlatdar      complaining         that    land

from Survey No.11 are recorded in the adjacent area

in the name of the Forest Department.                         It was claimed

that land does not belong to the Forest Department

but belongs to the applicant.                         Request was made to

conduct a survey again and hand over applicant’s land

to    them.    On    the    complaint        filed      by    the    plaintiff
Vishnu Shivram Gaonkar, Dispute
Case No.3, Sulcorna

was    registered          and    notice        was    issued       to    Vishnu

Shivram       Gaonkar      to     appear     on    20.10.1975        on    which

date, he appeared before the Mamladatar and withdrew

his application dated 07.08.1975.
It is submitted

that   despite the          withdrawal of             the application          by

Vishnu Shivram Gaonkar in Form III, name of Vishnu

Shivram Gaonkar, Shri Narayan Vishnu Gaonkar and Shri

Rama    S.F.    Dessai       were       added     alongwith      the      Forest

Department       referring         to    Dispute       Case    No.3.      It   is

submitted that when the complaint was withdrawn by

the plaintiff, there was no occasion of their names
11
to be added alongwith the Forest Department in the

Survey No.11/1, hence their name was wrongly entered

which deserves to be expunged.           It is submitted that

it was the Forest Department, who was in possession

of the Survey No.11/1.        The State has granted Mining

Lease    on the    Survey No.11/1,       which clearly   proves

that it was the State of Goa, which was in possession

of Survey No.11/1 and there was no possession of the

plaintiffs.
9.    Learned     counsel   appearing     for   the   defendants

refuting the submission of the appellants contends

that the names of plaintiffs’ ancestors were recorded

in matriz document No.4, which clearly proves that it

was the plaintiffs’ forefathers, who were owners of

the     suit    property.     It    is   submitted    that   the

complaint was filed by one of the plaintiffs dated

07.08.1975, which was the complaint with regard to

adjoining land of the plaintiffs and not with regard

to suit land.         He submits that withdrawal of the

complaint shall have no adverse effect on the right

of the plaintiffs. He further submits that insofar as

lease granted by the State of Goa is concerned, it is
12
the State, which has right to grant the lease, even

if the land is owned by a tenure holder.                       He submits

that grant of mining lease by the State has no effect

on the rights of the plaintiffs.                  He has relied on a

judgment of the Bombay High Court dated 10.12.2013 in

Writ Petition No. 158 of 2005 –
Smt. Maria Teresa

Philomena D’Rocha Pegado Vs. State of Goa and Others
.
10. We have considered the submissions of the learned

counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
We have also gone through the original record of the

trial court received in pursuance of the directions

of this Court’s order dated 10.12.2019.
11. The    suit       filed    by   the       plaintiffs   for    seeking

direction to delete the name of “Forest Department”

from the survey entry No.11/1 of the village Sulcorna

and to declare the plaintiffs as the exclusive owner

of the property bearing survey No.11/1 having been

dismissed by the trial court and no appeal having

been     filed    by    the     plaintiffs         against
the    said

judgment
the     rejection         of     the    claim     of    the

plaintiff’s          ownership of survey No.11/1 has become

final.    In     the    suit    filed     by     the   plaintiffs      the
13
appellant      had     filed     the    counter-claim   which     was

rejected by the trial court against which appeal was

filed by the appellant which has been dismissed by

the High Court against which judgment the appellant

has come up in this appeal.
12. The only question to be answered in this appeal

is   as   to    whether    the    counter-claim     filed    by   the

appellant      had rightly       been rejected     by the    courts

below. For answering the above question, we need to

notice the sequence of the events and the evidence on

record filed before the courts below as well as the

additional evidence filed by the appellant in this

Court.
13. The plaintiffs’ case before the trial court was

that the names of the plaintiffs’ ancestors i.e. Essu

Gauncar,       Horry    Gauncar,        Mocunda   Gauncar,   Gonoba

Gauncer, Siva Gauncar, all of Sulcorna were recorded

in the Matriz document.
14. The Rules were framed, namely, the Goa, Daman and

Diu (Record of Rights and Register of Cultivators)

Rules, 1969. Public notice in Form II was issued with

regard to village Sulcorna in which survey No.11/1

was recorded in the name of “Forest Department” only.
14
In the additional documents notice published in Form

II   has   been   brought   on        record   as   Annexure-1      to

I.A.No.    187381   of   2019.        Notice   in     Form   II    was

published as per Rule 5. Rule 5 of the Rules, 1969 is

as follows:
“5. Issue of notice. - (1) When the Record
     of Rights is to be introduced in any
     village for the first time, the Talathi
     shall issue a public notice in Form II
     calling upon all persons who have any
     interest in the lands in the village to
     furnish to him either in writing or orally
     information on all or any of the following
     points within one month from the date of
     the public notice:
(i)   Survey number and sub-division
               number, if any, of the land(or
               where the lands are not surveyed,
               the name of the field and its
               boundaries) in which he has any
               interest   as  holder,  occupant,
               owner,      tenant,     landlord,
               mortgage, Government lessee or in
               any other manner.
(ii)   The nature          of   interest    in    the
                  land.
(iii) The tenure on          which the land is
                 held, that is         to say whether the
                 land is held          as owner, occupant
                 class I or            II or Government
                 lessee.
(iv)   The encumbrance or charge, if
                  any, on the land and the name of
                  the holder of such encumbrance or
                  charge.
15
(2) The aforesaid notice shall be published
          in the village by beat of drum and by
          affixing copies thereof in a conspicuous
          place in the village and where there is
          a village panchayat in the office of the
          village panchayat.”
15. When     the    notice   was        published      in   Form   II

mentioning    the    name    of        the   ‘Forest    Department’

against survey No.11/1, Vishu Shivram Gaonkar one of

the   plaintiffs    filed    an        application     to   Mamlatdar

stating following:
“Sub: Application regarding the incorrect
             land survey.”


      This is to inform you that the Records of
      Right are surveyed in our village Sulkarna.
      I have seen the maps prepared by the
      Cadastral Survey. The maps are not correct
      i.e. our land is excluded from the map.


      The land adjacent to some of our land is
      recorded in the name of Forest Department.
      But   the  land   from   our  survey   No.11
      Kanyamal, Survey No.16 Charbhat, Survey
      No.21 Mutfond, 22/1, 22/2 Patondem these
      Bimbad, Survey No.43, Chanode, Survey No.44
      Chanode, all from these lands are recorded
      in the adjacent map and that land is
      recorded in the name of Forest Department.


      But land owned by us is existing in that
      land and the documents regarding the place
      (land) are in the name of my father
16
Shivaram Vishnu Gaunkar and Narayan Vishnu
        Gaonkar. We state that the land does not
        belong to the Forest Department but belongs
        to us. Kindly conduct a survey again and
        hand over our land to us.
Regards,
        Yours faithfully,


        Vishnu Shivaram Gaonkar”
16. On the basis of the application filed by Vishnu

Shivaram Gaonkar a notice was issued in Form VI to

Vishnu Shivaram Gaonkar who had raised the dispute

asking him to present on 20.10.1975 in reference to

his application. The said Form VI i.e. notice dated

01.10.1975 has been brought on record as Annexure-5

to   I.A.No.187381        of    2019.    Vishnu     Shivaram       Gaonkar

appeared before the Revenue Authority on 20.10.1975

and stated that he wished to withdraw his application

dated      07.08.1975          addressed       to      Mamlatdar      for

correction of records of rights. This is further to

be   noted   that    on    the    application         filed   by   Vishnu

Shivaram     Gaonkar.     Dispute       Case    No.3,    Sulcorna      was

registered. Rule 6 of Rules, 1969 provides a detailed

procedure    for preparation            of Index       of Lands     which

contains     the    entire      procedure      from    preparation     of
17
draft   of   the   Index   of        Lands   in   Form   III   and

subsequent procedure including individual notice in

Form VI to those who have raised objections. Rule 6

for ready reference is extracted below:
“6. Preparation of Index of Lands.— (1)
     The Talathi shall on the basis of the
     information received under Section 96 and
     97 or such information as he may collect by
     making local inquiry prepare a draft of the
     Index of land in the village in Form III.
(2) The draft of the Index of Lands
     prepared under sub-rule (1) shall, after
     being checked by the Revenue Inspector or a
     Survey Officer not below the rank of a
     Revenue Inspector, be published by issuing
     a notice in Form IV and publishing the
     notice in the manner provided in sub-rule
     (2) of rule 5. The notice shall call upon
     all persons having interest in the lands in
     the village to inspect the draft, which
     shall be kept open for inspection for a
     period of thirty days on the dates and
     times and at a place (which shall be
     convenient   to   the   villagers)   to   be
     specified in such notice and to submit to
     him in writing within one month from the
     last date for inspection specified in the
     said notice * [or within such date the
     Government by Notification at any time
     before the promulgation may specify] their
     objections, if any, to any of the entries
     in the draft. The notice shall also mention
     the date (such date being not earlier than
     one month from the expiry of the period
     specified for submission of objections) on
     which the entries in the draft will be read
     aloud in public and the objections received
     within the prescribed period shall be
     inquired into decided by a Survey Officer
     or as the case may be, a Revenue Officer
     not below the rank of an Awal Karkun and
18
call upon the persons having interest in
lands to be present at the aforesaid
occasion.
(3) If from the objection received by
the Talathi under sub-rule (2), he finds
that disputes exist relating to entries in
respect of certain lands, he shall enter
such disputes in a register of disputed
cases, which shall be maintained for each
village in Form V. He shall simultaneously
give individual notice in Form VI to each
person who appears to him to be interested
in the disputed entry, informing him of the
dispute and calling upon him to be present
on the date the dispute is to be heard and
decided.
(4) On the date specified in the
notice issued under sub-rule (2), the
Revenue or Survey Officer concerned shall
at the appointed place and time read aloud
in the presence of the persons assembled,
the draft of the Index of Lands for the
village. He shall then inform them of the
lands in respect of which disputes have
been raised and ask them whether they admit
the entries in respect of the remaining
lands. If they admit such entries the
officer shall make a remark to that effect
in the remarks column of the draft. If in
respect of any entry any error is pointed
out and is admitted by all concerned, the
entry shall be corrected and a remark made
to that effect in the remarks column. If a
dispute is raised in respect of any entry
it shall be entered in the register of
disputed cases.
(5) Thereafter the officer concerned
shall, after verifying whether the Talathi
has given individual notices under sub-rule
(3), proceed to decide the disputed cases
entered in the register of disputed cases
19
and record therein his decision in respect
        of each dispute. The decision shall be
        announced to the persons assembled.

            (6) The entries in the draft of the
        Index of Lands shall be corrected in red
        ink by the Talathi in the light of the
        decisions given under sub-rule (5).”
17. We have noticed above that as per Rule 5 in Form

II notice was issued inviting all persons who have

any interest in the lands in the village to furnish

to him either in writing or orally information and

objection. In the present case after draft of the

Index of Lands prepared under Rule 6 objection was

filed by Vishnu Shivram Gaonkar as noted above on

which individual notice was also issued to him in

Form    VI     asking    him       to    appear      on    20.10.1975.     On

20.10.1975 proceeding sheet of Court of Aval Karkun

for    record of        rights indicates             that on      20.10.1975

applicant      Vishnu     Shivram         Gaonkar     made    a     statement

which     is     brought       on        record       at     page     17   of

I.A.No.187381       of    2019          which   is    to    the     following

effect:
“BEFORE AVAL KARKUN

             I shall speak the truth and say*** *****

                 Name          :        Vishnu Shivram Gaonkar
20
Age      :      21 yrs – bachelor
                 Profession:     Agriculturist
                 Resident :      Sulcorna

          ** state that I wish to withdraw                            my
       application   dated  7-8-75   addressed                        to
       Mamlatdar for record of rights.
Sd/-
Vishnu Shivram Gaonkar

       Pirla
       20/10/75
                                 Before me
                                     Sd/-“
18. The record of proceeding sheet dated 20.10.1975

indicates       that   after    recording             the    statement       of

Vishnu Shivram Gaonkar the case was closed. The above

proceedings      indicate      that        the    objection         filed    by

Vishnu Shivram Gaonkar was withdrawn and hence there

was   no   decision     taken   in        Dispute      Case        No.3.   Even

after withdrawal of the claim by the plaintiff, the

names of plaintiffs, Vishnu Shivram Gaonkar, Narayan

Vishnu Gaonkar and Rama S.F. Dessai were added by

correcting the Form III in red ink as required by

sub-Rule(6) of Rule 6. The entry of names of the

above persons along with Forest Department was stated

to    be   as   per    D.C.3    as        is   clear        from    Form    III

Annexure-2      brought   on    record           by   the     appellant.      A
21
coloured print of above Annexure-2 has been placed

before us by learned ASG which is taken on record,

which    indicates      that   in    Form       III    the    addition     of

names of three persons was by red ink.                        When Vishnu

Shivram Gaonkar had withdrawn his claim for deletion

of name of Forest Department, we fail to comprehend

that as to how despite that withdrawal which is duly

recorded in the proceedings their names can be added

along with Forest Department against survey No.11/1.
Thus, the recording of names of the plaintiffs in

survey    No.11/1    along     with       the    name    of    the    Forest

Department    was    illegal        and    not    as    per    Rule    6   of

Rules, 1969. When there was no decision in favour of

the   plaintiffs,       applicant         on    the     objection      dated

07.08.1975,      there was       no question           of adding       their

names in Index of Lands against survey No.11/1. The

addition    of    the    names      of    the     plaintiffs         against

survey    No.11/1    was   completely           without       jurisdiction

and the said entry cannot be allowed to be continued.
19. That in the suit filed by the plaintiffs being

Special Civil Suit No.64 of 1995, there is no mention

of entire proceedings regarding correction of records
22
undertaken in 1975. The plaintiffs in the suit did

not disclose the aforesaid facts which were relevant

for determining the issues in consideration in the

suit.    Plaintiffs        thus    have    completely       failed     to

justify the continuance of their names against survey

No.11/1.
20. From       the   additional      evidence      brought      on    the

record by the State, it is clear that in the record

which    was    published     of    the     Village     Sulcarna      for

survey     No.11,     it    was    the     name   of    only     Forest

Department which was mentioned on survey No.11 area

230.45.00 hectares and the addition of the name of

Vishnu     Shivaram    Gaonkar       and    two    others      were    in

pursuance of Dispute Case No.3. The Goa, Daman and

Diu     Land    Revenue      Code,        1968    was    enacted       to

consolidate and amend the Law relating to Land and

Land Revenue in the Union of territory of Goa, Daman

and Diu as then existed. Section 14 of the Code, 1968

which is relevant for the present case is as follows:
“14. Title of Government to lands, etc.
     — (1) All lands, public roads, lanes and
     paths and bridges, ditches, dikes and
     fences on or beside the same, the bed of
     the sea and of harbours and creeks below
     the high water mark, and of rivers,
23
streams, nallas, lakes and tanks, and all
canals and water courses, and all standing
and flowing water and all rights in or over
the same or appertaining thereto, which are
not the property of any person, are and are
hereby declared to be the property of the
Government subject to right of way, and all
other   rights,   public   and  individual,
legally subsisting.
Explanation:— In this section, "high
water-mark" means the highest point reached
by ordinary spring tides at any season of
the year.
(2) Unless it is otherwise expressly
provided in any law for the time being in
force or in the terms of a grant made by
the   Government,  the   right   to  mines,
minerals and mineral products shall vest in
the 8 Government and it shall have all the
powers necessary for the proper enjoyment
of such rights.
(3) Where any property or any right in
or over any property is claimed by or on
behalf of the Government or by any person
as against the Government and the claim is
disputed, such dispute shall, after due
notice has been given and after holding a
formal inquiry, be decided by the Collector
or   11[an   officer   authorised  by   the
Government in this behalf.
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order
made under sub-section (3) or in appeal or
revision there from may institute a civil
suit to contest the order within a period
of one year from the date of such order,
and the decision of the civil court shall
be binding on the parties.
(5) Any suit instituted in any civil
court after the expiration of one year from
24
the date of any order passed under sub-
section (3) or, if appeal or revision
        application has been made against such
        order within the period of limitation, then
        from the date of any order passed by the
        appellate or revisional authority, shall be
        dismissed (though limitation has not been
        set up as a defence) if the suit is brought
        to set aside such order or if the relief
        claimed is inconsistent with such order,
        provided that the plaintiff has had due
        notice of such order.
(6) Any person shall be deemed to have
        had due notice of an inquiry or order under
        this section if notice thereof has been
        given in accordance with rules made in this
        behalf by the Government.”
21.   The respondents had filed reply to I.a.No.187381

of 2019 and the additional documents which have been

filed along with IA, the objection has been taken

with regard to said documents being filed after long

delay.    With   regard   to   the   documents   filed   by   the

State    along with   IA following      averments have        been

made in paragraphs 3.1 to 7:
“3.1    I respectfully state at the outset
        that these documents are public records and
        in public domain and consequently it was
        not     difficult     for      the     State
        Government/Forest Department to have had
        knowledge and/or access to these documents.
4. I say that the entire proceedings in the
        Trial Court and the High Court have been
        defended for the State by the Forest
        Department and surely the Forest Department
25
knew of these documents and cannot feign
        ignorance at this belated stage.
5. I say that the affidavit does not even
        reveal   why  these  documents   were  not
        available with the Department and why were
        not produced in the proceedings, specially
        considering that the Civil Suit in the
        Civil Court, Quepem, South Goa, Goa was
        filed way back in 1995 – almost quarter of
        a century.
6. Without prejudice to what is stated
        hereinabove, I say that the copy of the
        undated   Application  of   Vishnu Shivram
        Gaonkar (referred as Application dated
        07.08.1975) when perused would show that
        the claim in this application makes one
        plea- that the maps are not correct since
        land of Vishnu Shivaram Gaonkar has been
        excluded from the map and recorded in the
        adjacent map “and that land is recorded in
        the name of Forest Department”.
7. I therefore respectfully submit that the
        application of 1975 has no bearing with the
        suit property which is subject matter of
        the SLP and is totally irrelevant for
        consideration in facts and circumstances of
        the present case.”
22. The       respondents     themselves        claim    that     the

documents which have been filed are public records

and in public domain, only objection raised by the

respondents     is   that   it   was    not    difficult    for   the

State    to   have   had    knowledge    and    access     to   these

documents. The veracity of the documents has not been

disputed.
26
23. We      have      already       noticed        our     order          dated

10.12.2019     where      these      additional          documents         have

already     been       accepted       with        direction          to     the

respondents to file a reply to the application. The

respondents      do     not    dispute      of    having     raised         the

objection      after      Revenue        records      were      published

mentioning     “Forest        Department”        against     the      survey

No.11/1,       when      the       plaintiffs-respondents                  have

withdrawn      their     application         on     20.10.1975,            they

cannot    be   allowed        to   object    the    Entry       of    Forest

Department regarding survey No.11/1 as published in

Form II.
24. The matriz document which is claimed to be the

basis of rights by the plaintiffs-respondents is not

the   document     of    title.      The    Bombay       High    Court       in

Fabrica da Igreja de N.s. de
Milagres vs. Union of

India and others
, (1995) 1 Bom CR 588 dealing with

matriz document laid down following in paragraph 14:
“14………It is a settled position that a
      matriz document is neither an instrument of
      title nor a source of possession and that
      the organisation of the “matriz predial” is
      a mere administrative exercise aimed at
      collecting tax revenues from the land. As
      such no legal evidentiary value can be
27
attributed also to the said registration
        for the purpose of establishing ownership
        title or presuming possession on the land.”
25. More so, the plaintiffs ought to have agitated

for their claim with regard to survey No.11/1 and

ought        not    to    have       withdrawn      application       dated

07.08.1975          before     the     Revenue       Official.       It    is

relevant to notice that in the suit which was filed

by   the      plaintiffs       any    mention      of    the   proceedings

regarding          records     of     rights       of    survey     No.11/1

undertaken         earlier     were     not      referred      to   and   the

mention of proceedings under Revenue Code, 1968 and

Rules, 1969 is conspicuously absent. The trial court

having       dismissed       the     suit   of     the   plaintiffs       for

declaring them owner of survey No.11/1, we do not

find any justification for continuance of the names

of     the    plaintiffs       in     survey       No.11/1     of   Village

Sulcorna.
26. The State in its written statement has claimed

that    Sulcorna         has   declared       as    forest     by   Gazette

Notification dated 11.01.1951 which Gazette was filed

as Annexure AA-3 filed on the record which mentions

Forests Sulcorna and the name of Village Sulcorna,
28
the Court below had not placed reliance on the said

Gazette only for the reason that the Gazette does not

mention any survey number. Survey No.11 was situate

in the Forest area is further proved by the documents

brought on the record by the appellant i.e. Mining

Lease which was granted w.e.f 22.11.1987 for survey

No.2 of Village Curpem and survey No.11 of Village

Sulcorna. The conditions of the Lease Deed indicate

that    survey   numbers   on    which   Lease   was   granted

situate in the Forest area, the relevant condition

No.4 of the Lease is as follows:
“To enter upon reserved forests.
4. Notwithstanding anything in this
       Schedule contained the lessee/lessees shall
       not enter upon any reserve forests included
       in the said lands without previous sanction
       in writing of the District Forest Officer
       nor fell cut a use any timber or trees
       without obtaining the sanction in writing
       of that Officer nor otherwise than in
       accordance with such conditions as the
       State Government may prescribe.”
27. In the Chapter of General Provisions, Clause 15

requires   “Lease status    of forest     land will    remain

unchanged”.
28. The suit filed by the plaintiffs was to delete

the name of Forest Department from survey No.11 which
29
suit having been dismissed the name of the Forest

Department continues with regard to survey o.11/1.

Even though Gazette dated 11.01.1951 does not mention

survey    No.11    but    Forest        was    declared    in   Village

Sulcorna and Survey No.11 is forest land is proved by

other evidence. We are satisfied that the counter-

claim filed by the State deserved to be allowed and

the name of the plaintiffs-respondents from survey

No.11/1 deserved to be struck off.
29. Learned counsel for the respondents relying on

the judgment of the Bombay High Court at Goa in Writ

Petition No.158 of 2005 (
Smt. Maria Teresa Philomena

D’Rocha   Pegado    vs.    State        of    Goa   and   others
),   has

submitted that Portuguese Colonial Mining Law was in

force prior to Goa becoming Union Territory and the

State was owner of proprietorship of all deposits of

minor minerals etc. which was so noted
in
the above

case
by the Bombay High Court. Learned counsel for

the respondents has referred paragraphs 14 and 31 of

the judgment which are to the following effect:
“14.    It would be relevant to refer to
Article 2
of Decree dated 20.09.1906 which
     was a Portuguese Colonial Mining Law in
30
force during    the     erstwhile      regime,    which
     reads thus:
“The   proprietorship   of   deposits   of
          metals    and   metalliferous    minerals,
          including bismuth, arsenic, antimony,
          sulphur, graphite, combustible minerals
          with the exception of peat, bituminous
          substances and mineral oils, precious
          stones, alkalis, phosphates, mica and
          amianthus belongs to the State; such
          beds cannot be prospected or worked
          without    licence  and    concession   by
          Government in the terms of the present
          Decree.”

     A perusal of
Article 2
of the aforesaid
     decree would reveal that all metals and
     metal-liferous minerals belong to the State
     and such beds cannot be prospected or
     worked without licence and concession by
     the Government.
31.     We are, therefore, of the considered
     view that in view of the provisions of sub-
section (2) of Section 14 and Section 36 of
     the Land Revenue Code, read with the
     provisions of
Article 2
of Decree dated
     20.09.1906 which was a Portuguese Colonial
     Mining Law, the right in the minor minerals
     vests solely in the State Government and
     the   State   Government  has   all   powers
     necessary for the purpose   of enjoyment of
     such rights. We find that this position is
     fortified by the provisions of Section 24A
     of the said Act, which is applicable to all
     minerals, including minor minerals.”
30. The   above   judgment      of    the   Bombay    High    Court

reiterated   that   it     is   the     State   which    is     the
31
proprietor of all minerals beneath the land.                     There

can be no dispute to the above proposition. For the

purpose of this case what was relied by the appellant

was that Mining Lease granted for survey No.11, Lease

conditions clearly mention the area as forest area

with the requirement to maintain the status of land

as the forest land. The grant of Lease by the State

is not disputed by the plaintiffs-respondents also.

We, thus, are of the considered opinion that the name

of the Forest Department recorded in survey No.11,

deletion of which has been refused and the name of

plaintiffs-respondents in the record in the manner

and circumstances in which it came on the records of

rights        does     not     establish    any   claim     of     the

plaintiffs-respondents and defendant has clearly made

out     the     case     for     allowing     counter-claim.       The

additional evidence brought on record by the State

before this Court which has been accepted on record

fully support the counter-claim of the defendant. We,

thus,    are    of     the   view   that    counter-claim   of    the

defendant-appellant deserves to be allowed and the
32
judgment of courts below is to be modified to the

above extent.
31. In view of the foregoing discussion, the appeal

of the appellant is allowed, the counter-claim filed

by the defendants in Suit No.64 of 1995 is allowed.

The name of plaintiffs-respondents be deleted from

the   occupant’s   column   in    survey   No.11/1   Sulcorna

Village of Quepem Taluka, District Goa. Parties shall

bear their own costs.
......................J.
                                     ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )


                                  ......................J.
                                      ( NAVIN SINHA )
New Delhi,
March 04, 2020.