[Cites
0
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Sajan Sethi vs Rajan Sethi on 2 March, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1470, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 302
Author:
R.Subhash Reddy
Bench:
R. Subhash Reddy
,
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
C.A.@SLP(C)Nos.13376-77/2019
                                                      1

                                                                           REPORTABLE


                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1899-1900 OF 2020
                              (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) Nos. 13376-77 of 2019)


                         Sajan Sethi                                       ....Appellant


                                                            vs


                         Rajan Sethi                                   ....Respondent




                                                J U D G M E N T
R.SUBHASH REDDY,J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   These civil appeals are filed by the defendant in

                         the Suit, aggrieved by the judgment and decree dated

                         18.02.2019    passed    by   the   High   Court    of   Delhi   in

                         R.F.A.No.641 of 2018, arising out of a partition suit

                         with respect to the property bearing No.D-1090, New
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Friends Colony, New Delhi, constructed in a plot area
GULSHAN KUMAR
ARORA
Date: 2020.03.02
17:12:13 IST
Reason:
of 292 sq. yards.        The review petition filed by the

                         appellant also ended in dismissal, as such, these are
C.A.@SLP(C)Nos.13376-77/2019
2
the two appeals, one against the judgment and decree

       dated        18.02.2019         and   other    appeal      against    an   order

       dismissing              the    review       petition    vide      order    dated

       15.04.2019.             The     house   property       bearing       No.D-1090,

       situated in New Friends Colony, New Delhi, constructed

       in a plot area of 292 sq.yards, was originally owned by

       the father of the parties, late Sh.S.L.Sethi. On his

       demise, the suit property was devolved upon his wife

       Smt.Krishna Sethi, who is the mother of the parties

       herein, pursuant to a Will executed by their father.

       Subsequently, the mother also passed away by executing

       a     Will       dated        27.01.2005.      As    per    the    Will    dated

       27.01.2005, the ground floor portion is bequeathed to

       the respondent-plaintiff, the first-floor portion was

       bequeathed to the appellant-defendant and the second-

       floor portion was to be divided equally between the

       parties, with the front-half portion to the share of

       appellant-defendant and the back-half portion to the

       share of respondent-plaintiff.                      The relevant portion of

       the Will executed by the mother, reads as under:-
“a) House No.D-1090, New Friends Colony, New
                    Delhi shall devolve upon my both sons Shri
                    Rajan Sethi & Shri Sajan Sethi in the
                    following manner:
- Ground Floor shall fall to the exclusive
                    share of my elder son Sh. Rajan Sethi, first
                    floor shall fall to the exclusive share of
C.A.@SLP(C)Nos.13376-77/2019
3
my son Sh. Sajan Sethi. Top floor shall be
                    divided by my children in equal share. The
                    front half portion shall go to the exclusive
                    share of my son Sh.Sajan Sethi and half back
                    portion shall go to the exclusive share of
                    my elder son Sh. Rajan Sethi. The booster
                    pump/motor installed at ground floor shall
                    be used by both the children without any
                    interference/obstruction by any of them in
                    any manner what so ever. My both sons shall
                    not sell their share in the property to an
                    outsider without concurrence of each other
                    and shall first offer to the other before
                    taking any step in that regard.”
3.       The respondent-plaintiff i.e. Sh.Rajan Sethi filed

       a     suit       in      CIS   No.11193        of    2016    on   the    file    of

       Additional District Judge, South-East, Saket Courts,

       New Delhi,               for partition and permanent injunction of

       the second floor and the terrace rights.                            As per the

       preliminary decree passed by the Trial Court share of

       the respondent-plaintiff and defendant was decided in

       the      ratio          of   50%   each.       Though,      the   suit   was    for

       partition of the second floor and terrace rights, it is

       the appellant-defendant, who in the written statement,

       raised a dispute in respect of common areas in the

       ground floor also.                  The appellant-defendant, however,

       has not filed any counter claim in the suit.                             In view

       of     the      claim        set   up   by     the   appellant-defendant         in

       respect of the common areas, the following issues were

       framed in the suit for trial:
C.A.@SLP(C)Nos.13376-77/2019
4
“i) Whether the second floor and the
                    terrace above of property No.D-1090, New
                    Friends Colony, New Delhi was partitioned
                    and if not, whether the Plaintiff is
                    entitled to partition of the same by metes
                    and bounds? OPP
ii) Whether the common areas in the suit
                    property are liable to be partitioned in
                    terms of paragraph no.14 of the written
                    statement? OPD
iii) Relief”
4.       The Trial Court by considering the pleadings and

       evidence on record, has negatived the claim of the

       appellant-defendant for the common areas, as claimed in

       para 14 of the written statement.                        On the claim of the

       respondent-plaintiff for partition of second floor and

       terrace           rights,     by    accepting            objections       of     the

       respondent-plaintiff               to       the     Report    of     the       Court

       Commissioner,           the   Trial         Court   held     that   the    second

       floor and the terrace rights cannot be partitioned by

       metes and bounds and, thus, final decree of partition

       was passed, granting equal share of 50% each in the

       second floor and the terrace rights. The Trial Court

       also ordered to put up the said property for sale by

       auction,          and   distribute          the   sale    proceeds    in       equal

       share.
C.A.@SLP(C)Nos.13376-77/2019
5
5.       Aggrieved         by     the        judgment     and       decree        dated

       20.04.2018              passed    in     CIS     No.11193          of    2016,     the

       appellant-defendant                   has      filed      first          appeal      in

       R.F.A.No.641 of 2018 before the High Court of Delhi at

       New      Delhi.          The     Regular      First     Appeal      filed    by    the

       appellant-defendant                is   disposed        of    by    the     impugned

       judgment by the High Court of Delhi, by setting aside

       the      judgment         of    the    Trial    Court,       to    the    extent    of

       directions for sale of second floor and terrace rights

       and issued further directions in respect of the common

       areas.         The directions issued by the High Court read as

       under:-
“(i) The appellant/defendant will not have
                     a right to use the small driveway on the
                     ground-floor of the property.
(ii) The appellant/defendant will however
                     have easementary right to use the water
                     pipes   and  booster   pump  at  the   rear
                     courtyard, which are the water pipes and
                     booster pump, and which feed the first-
floor and second-floor of the suit property
                     falling to the share of the appellant-
                     defendant.
(iii) The respondent/plaintiff will use a
                     part of the landing of the staircase on the
                     second-floor which adjoins the back portion
                     of the second-floor of the suit property so
                     that a door can be constructed on this
                     second-floor landing which opens directly
                     to the back portion of the second-floor of
                     the suit property falling to the share of
                     the respondent-plaintiff.
C.A.@SLP(C)Nos.13376-77/2019
6
15. The appeal is accordingly disposed of
                     in terms of the aforesaid directions,
                     leaving the parties to bear their own
                     costs.”
6.       We     have     heard     Sri     Vikas       Singh,          learned    senior

       counsel appearing for the appellant-defendant and Sri

       P.S. Patwalia, learned senior counsel appearing for the

       respondent-plaintiff.
7.       Mainly,        it    is    contended          by        Sri    Vikas     Singh,

       learned          senior      counsel       for       the    appellant-defendant,

       that the Trial Court and the First Appellate Court

       committed an error in deciding the rights of parties in

       respect of the common areas in the ground floor, when

       the suit itself was filed, confined to the partition of

       second         floor      and      terrace       rights.               It   is   further

       contended that in any event, as the entire property is

       divided between the respondent-plaintiff and appellant-

       defendant in equal share, the appellant-defendant is

       also entitled for 50% of the common areas in the ground

       floor.
8.       On     the     other      hand,       Sri    P.S.       Patwalia,       learned

       senior         counsel       appearing           for       the     respondent,       has

       submitted that it was the appellant-defendant, who in

       the written statement had raised a dispute in respect

       of common areas, as such the Trial Court has framed the
C.A.@SLP(C)Nos.13376-77/2019
7
issue on the common areas and decided the same.                                It is

       submitted that in view of the limited rights granted

       for maintenance of the booster pump/motor installed in

       the ground floor, no other right is conferred on the

       appellant-defendant in the common areas in the ground

       floor.          It is further submitted that having regard to

       pleadings and evidence on record, the Trial Court as

       well as the Appellate Court, have rightly decided the

       claim        of     the       appellant-defendant          in    respect      of   the

       common areas also and there are no grounds to interfere

       with the same.
9.       It is true that the suit filed by the respondent
-plaintiff              is     only    for        partition      and     permanent

       injunction with regard to second floor portion of the

       house and the terrace rights, but it is the appellant-

       defendant who has raised the dispute with regard to

       common areas in the suit property in terms of paragraph

       14 of the written statement.                          The parties are claiming

       rights         to       the    property         pursuant    to    a    Will    dated

       27.01.2005.             As     per    the       recitals   of    the    Will,      the

       respondent-plaintiff                  and       the   appellant-defendant          are

       entitled to the property in question as indicated in

       the Will and relevant portion of the same is already

       extracted above.
C.A.@SLP(C)Nos.13376-77/2019
8
10. The Trial Court, had to frame an issue in view of

       the claim made by the appellant-defendant in respect of

       the common areas also.                  The High Court has found that

       normally a driveway on the ground floor of the property

       would be a common area. But in the peculiar facts of

       the present case, the suit property also has a side

       lane       from         which   there   is   a    direct   entrance     to   the

       staircase, which takes the appellant-defendant to his

       first-floor portion.                In that view of the matter, it is

       found        that        the    appellant-defendant        cannot    claim   any

       right to use the driveway from front side.                          It is clear

       from the record that the suit property is situated on a

       corner plot and on one side there is a main road of the

       colony and on another side of the property, there is a

       side lane, and such side lane itself abuts a park.                           The

       side lane also is not a thoroughfare and on both sides

       of the lane there are gates regulated by the colony

       residents. However, the High Court has also taken care

       to ensure that the appellant-defendant has necessary

       access to the pipes and booster pump/motor in the rear

       courtyard.               Having raised the dispute of the common

       areas, when such claim is considered by framing an

       issue, which we find in accordance with the pleadings

       and       evidence         on    record,     it   is   not    open     for   the
C.A.@SLP(C)Nos.13376-77/2019
9
appellant-defendant to plead that directions issued in

       the impugned judgment, are beyond the scope of the

       suit.
11.        Having invited findings by raising a dispute of

       the common areas, the appellant-defendant cannot plead

       that the Trial Court as well as the Appellate court

       have exceeded scope of the suit, in issuing directions

       for       the      common        areas.       From   the    material       and    the

       evidence placed on record, we find that the judgment

       and      final          decree    for     partition,       as    ordered    by    the

       Appellate Court and directions issued with regard to

       common areas are in accordance with evidence on record

       and we do not find any merit in these appeals so as to

       interfere with the same.
12. For          the      aforesaid       reasons,     we       do   not   find   any

       merit in these appeals and they are to be dismissed.

       Before we order to do so, we deem it appropriate to

       extract the following two paragraphs of the Will dated

       27.01.2005, executed by their mother late Smt. Krishna

       Sethi:-
“As life is uncertain and in order to avoid
                     any differences or dispute by and between
                     my legal heirs, I feel it proper and
                     expedient to put on record my last wishes
                     so that there is no discord or enmity or
                     differences amongst my children/legal heirs
C.A.@SLP(C)Nos.13376-77/2019
10
for the division of assets which I may
                     leave behind after my demise.      I am at
                     present suffering from certain incurable
                     disease and have recently been hospitalised
                     and I may require further hospitalisation
                     and I am now aged about 74 years and
                     although I am in my full senses and
                     understand right and wrong.”


                       “Last but not the least I bestow my all
                     blessing, love affection to my all children
                     and their families and as them of the same
                     from my and my late husband when we are in
                     the heavens and continue to pray for their
                     well being and shall desire that my all
                     children with their family should always
                     remain united and live the way as I and my
                     husband have lived. My greeting for the
                     family,   brothers  and   sisters  and  the
                     children – God may help all.”
13. These appeals are accordingly dismissed, with no

       order as to costs.
..........................J.
                                           (MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR)




                                           ..........................J.
                                           (R. SUBHASH REDDY)


       NEW DELHI;
March 02, 2020