[Cites
35
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Hdfc Bank Ltd. vs Union Of India on 30 September, 2022
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
B.R. Gavai
REPORTABLE

           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
      CIVIL ORIGINAL/ APPELLATE JURISDICTION
    I.A. No.68597 of 2021 AND I.A. No. 51632 of 2022
                          IN &
         WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.1159 OF 2019

HDFC BANK LTD. & ORS.                  ...PETITIONER (S)

                        VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                ...RESPONDENT (S)

                       WITH
               I.A. No.54521 of 2022
                        IN &
        WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.683 OF 2021

       WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1469 OF 2019

        WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.690 OF 2021

        WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.709 OF 2021

        WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.768 OF 2021

        WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.765 OF 2021

  SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.14343 OF 2022


                        ORDER
1
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.   For the reasons stated in I.A. No.68597 of 2021 in Writ

Petition (Civil) No.1159 of 2019 for Impleadment, the same is

allowed.
2.   This batch of writ petitions has been filed by various

Banks including private banks, inter alia, challenging the

action of the respondent­Reserve Bank of India (hereinafter

referred to as “RBI”) in directing disclosure of confidential and

sensitive information pertaining to their affairs, their employees

and their customers under the
Right to Information Act, 2005
(hereinafter referred to as “the
RTI Act
”), which, in their

submission, is otherwise exempt under
Section 8
thereof.
3.   We are treating Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1159 of 2019 as

the lead matter.
4.   Interlocutory Applications being I.A. No. 51632 of 2022 in

Writ Petition (Civil) No.1159 of 2019 and I.A. No.54521 of 2022

in Writ Petition (Civil) No.683 of 2021 have been filed by the
2
applicant­Girish Mittal, thereby seeking dismissal of the

present writ petitions.
5.    It is the contention of the applicant that the present writ

petitions, in effect, are challenging the final judgment and order

dated 16th December 2015, passed by this Court in the case of
Reserve Bank of India vs. Jayantilal N. Mistry
1 and hence

the same is not maintainable and is liable to be dismissed.
6.    We have heard Mr. Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the applicant­Girish Mittal and Mr.

Rakesh Dwivedi, Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, Mr. Dushyant Dave, Mr.

Jaideep Gupta, and Mr. K.V. Viswanathan, learned Senior

Counsels and Mr. Divyanshu Sahay, learned counsel appearing

on behalf of the writ petitioners/Banks.
7.    Mr. Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel, submitted that

the issue which is sought to be raised in the present writ

petitions has already been put to rest by a judgment of this

court in the case of
Jayantilal N. Mistry
(supra).
It is further


1 (2016) 3 SCC 525
3
submitted that this Court, in the case of
Girish Mittal vs.

Parvati V. Sundaram
and another2, while holding that the

RBI has committed contempt of this Court by exempting

disclosure of material that was directed to be given by this

Court, has also held that the RBI was duty bound to furnish all

information relating to inspection reports and other materials.
8.    Mr. Prashant Bhushan relies on the judgment of a Nine­

Judge Bench of this Court in the case of
Naresh Shridhar

Mirajkar and others vs. State of Maharashtra and Anr.
3 in

support of his proposition that a judicial decision cannot be

corrected by this Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India.
He also relied on the

judgment of a Seven­Judge Bench of this Court in the case of
A.R. Antulay vs. R.S. Nayak
and another4 to contend that

the judicial proceedings in this Court are not subject to the writ

jurisdiction thereof.
2 (2019) 20 SCC 747 = Contempt Petition (C) No. 928 of 2016 in Transfer Case (C) No.
95 of 2015, decided on 26th April 2019
3 (1966) 3 SCR 744
4 (1988) 2 SCC 602
4
9.      Mr. Prashant Bhushan further submitted that this Court

in the case of
Anil Kumar Barat vs. Secretary, Indian Tea

Association
and others5 has also held that the validity of an

order passed by this Court itself cannot be subject to writ

jurisdiction of this Court.
10. Mr. Bhushan also relied on the judgments of a Three­

Judge Bench of this Court in the cases of
Khoday Distilleries

Ltd. and another vs. Registrar General
, Supreme Court of
India6, Mohd. Aslam vs. Union of India and others
7 and
Union of India and others vs. Major S.P. Sharma
and

others8 and the judgment of a Five­Judge Bench of this Court

in the case of
Rupa Ashok Hurra vs. Ashok Hurra
and

another9 to buttress his submissions.
11. Mr. Bhushan further submitted that in the case of
Jayantilal                   N.   Mistry
(supra),   several   Miscellaneous


5   (2001)   5   SCC   42
6   (1996)   3   SCC   114
7   (1996)   2   SCC   749
8   (2014)   6   SCC   351
9   (2002)   4   SCC   388
5
Applications were filed on behalf of the Banks for impleadment.
As such, the judgment delivered in the case of
Jayantilal N.

Mistry
(supra) is after consideration of rival submissions,

which now cannot be reopened.
He further submitted that this

Court by order dated 28th April 2021, passed in M.A. No.2342 of

2019 in Transferred Case (Civil) No.91 of 2015 and other

connected matters has specifically rejected the prayer filed by

the Banks (writ petitioners herein) for recall of the judgment

dated 16th December 2015 passed by this Court in the case of
Jayantilal N. Mistry
(supra), and as such, the present writ

petitions are liable to be dismissed.
12. Per contra, the learned Senior Counsels appearing on

behalf of the writ petitioners/Banks submit that though M.A.

No.2342 of 2019 in Transferred Case (Civil) No.91 of 2015 and

other connected matters were rejected by this Court by order

dated 28th April 2021, this Court clarified that the dismissal of

those applications shall not prevent the applicant­Banks

therein to pursue other remedies available to them in law. It is
6
thus submitted that the said order would not come in the way

of the present petitioners in filing the present petitions.
13. It is submitted that
Section 11
of the RTI Act provides that

when any information relating to third party has been sought, a

written notice is required to be given to such third party of the

request, by the Central Public Information Officer or State

Public Information Officer, as the case may be, and the

submissions by such third party are required to be taken into

consideration while taking a decision about the disclosure of

the information. Reliance in this respect has been placed on the

judgment of this Court in the case of
Chief Information

Commissioner vs. High
Court of Gujarat and another 10.
It

is submitted that this Court in the case of
Jayantilal N.

Mistry
(supra) has not taken into consideration this aspect of

the matter.
14. It     is    further   submitted   on   behalf   of   the   writ

petitioners/Banks that the right to privacy has been said to be


10 (2020) 4 SCC 702
7
as implicit fundamental right by a Five­Judge Constitution

Bench of this Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates­

on­Record
Association and another vs. Union of India11
.
It

is submitted that the said view is also reiterated by a Nine­

Judge Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of
K.S.

Puttaswamy and another vs Union of India
and others12,

which has explicitly and categorically recognised the right to

privacy as a fundamental right.
15. Mr. Rakesh Dwivedi, learned Senior Counsel, relied on the

judgment of this Court in the case of
A.R. Antulay
(supra) in

support of the proposition that no man should suffer because

of the mistake of the Court.          He submits that the rules of

procedure are the handmaidens of justice and not the mistress

of justice.    He relies on the maxim “ex debito justitiae”.
He

further relies on the judgment of this Court in the case of
Sanjay      Singh    and   another     vs.   U.P.   Public   Service
11 (2016) 5 SCC 1
12 (2017) 10 SCC 1
8
Commission, Allahabad and another13 in support of the

submission that the petition would be tenable.
16. Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior Counsel, submitted

that the petitioners herein are private banks and not a public

authority as defined under the
RTI Act
.       He relies on the

judgment of this Court in the case of
Thalappalam Service

Cooperative Bank Limited and others vs. State of Kerala
and others14 in that regard.        He submitted that RBI’s

Inspection Reports in respect of the inspection carried out

under
Section 35
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 are so

confidential that they cannot even be provided to the Directors

individually. He relies on the communication issued by the RBI

to all the Banks dated 14th March 1998 in this regard.
17. Mr. Rohatgi further submitted that an earlier policy as

notified by the RBI on 30th June 1992 was in tune with the

provisions of
Section 8
of the RTI Act, the provisions of the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
(hereinafter referred to as “the

13 (2007) 3 SCC 720
14 (2013) 16 SCC 82
9
RBI Act
”) and the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949
. However, in

view of the judgment of this Court in the case of
Girish Mittal
(supra), the RBI has modified the policy into a one­line policy,

providing therein that the disclosure of information was to be in

accordance with the judgment and order of this Court in
Girish Mittal
(supra).
Mr. Rohatgi, learned Senior Counsel

relied on the judgment of this Court in the case of
Bihar

Public Service Commission vs. Saiyed Hussain Abbas Rizwi
and another15 in support of his submission that the Court will

have to strike a balance between public interest and private

interest.
He also relies on the judgment of this Court in the

case    of
Girish   Ramchandra    Deshpande      vs.   Central

Information Commissioner
and others16 to contend that

personal information cannot be directed to be disclosed unless

outweighing public interest demands it to be done.
18. Mr. K.V. Viswanathan, learned Senior Counsel submits

that HDFC Bank, Kotak Bank and Bandhan Bank were not

15 (2012) 13 SCC 61
16 (2013) 1 SCC 212
10
parties in the case of
Jayantilal N. Mistry
(supra).            He

submits that sub­Section (5) of
Section 35
of the Banking

Regulation Act, 1949 provides a specific procedure as to in

what manner the inspection report would be published.           He

submits that when a special Act provides a particular manner

for disclosure of an information, it will have an overriding effect

over the
RTI Act
.
The learned Senior Counsel submits that the

said provisions were not noticed in the case of
Jayantilal N.

Mistry
(supra).
19. Mr. Jaideep Gupta, learned Senior Counsel submitted that

this Court in the case of
Jayantilal N. Mistry
(supra) has not

taken   into   consideration   the   provisions   of   the
Credit

Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005
.
20. Mr. Dushyant Dave, learned Senior Counsel, submitted

that
Section 45NB
of the RBI Act emphasizes on the

confidentiality of certain information with regard to non­

banking companies. He submits that sub­section (4) of
Section

45NB
of the RBI Act, which is a non­obstante clause, provides
11
that, notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the

time being in force, no court or tribunal or other authority shall

compel the Bank to produce or to give inspection of any

statement or other material obtained by the Bank under any

provisions of this Chapter. He submits that this provision has

not been noticed in the case of
Jayantilal N. Mistry
(supra).
21. It is submitted on behalf of all the writ petitioners/Banks

that what is under challenge is the action of the RBI compelling

the petitioners to disclose certain information which itself is

exempted under the provisions of the
RBI Act
. It is submitted

that various other special enactments specifically prohibit such

information to be disclosed. It is submitted that since the RBI’s

directions are issued in pursuance to the judgments of this

Court in the cases of
Jayantilal N. Mistry
(supra) and
Girish

Mittal
(supra), the petitioners cannot approach the High Court

and the only remedy that is available to the petitioners is by

way of the present writ petitions.
It is submitted by learned

Senior   Counsels     appearing     on   behalf   of   the    writ
12
petitioners/Banks that this Court in
Jayantilal N. Mistry
(supra) does not notice the judgment of this Court in the case

of Supreme Court Advocates­on­Record
Association and

another
(supra).
The judgment of this Court in the case of

Supreme    Court    Advocates­on­Record
Association   and

another
(supra) was rendered on 16th October 2015, whereas

the judgment of this Court in the case of
Jayantilal N. Mistry
(supra) was rendered on 16th December 2015.
It is further

submitted that, in view of the judgment of the Constitution

Bench consisting of Nine Hon’ble Judges in the case of
K.S.

Puttaswamy and another
(supra) clearly recognizing the right

to privacy as a fundamental right, the law
laid down by
this

Court in the case of
Jayantilal N. Mistry
(supra) to the

contrary is no more a good law and, therefore, requires

reconsideration by a larger Bench.
22. In the case of Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar and others

(supra), a Nine­Judge Constitution Bench of this Court was

considering as to whether an order passed by the High Court
13
on original side in the proceedings before it could be challenged

under Article 32 of the Constitution for enforcement of

fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a), (d) and
(g) of the Constitution of India. It will be relevant to refer to the

following observations of this Court in the said case:
“The basis of Mr Setalvad's argument is that
        the impugned order is not an order inter­
        partes, as it affects the fundamental rights of
        the strangers to the litigation, and that the
        said order is without jurisdiction. We have
        already held that the impugned order
        cannot be said to affect the fundamental
        rights of the petitioners and that though
        it is not inter­partes in the sense that it
        affects strangers to the proceedings, it
        has been passed by the High Court in
        relation to a matter pending before it for
        its adjudication and as such, like other
        judicial orders passed by the High Court
        in proceedings pending before it, the
        correctness of the impugned order can be
        challenged only by appeal and not by
        writ proceedings. We have also held that
        the High Court has inherent jurisdiction to
        pass such an order.
But apart from this aspect of the matter,
        we think it would be inappropriate to allow
        the petitioners to raise the question about
        the jurisdiction of the High Court to pass the
        impugned order in proceedings under
Article
14
32
which seek for the issue of a writ of
         certiorari to correct the said order. If
         questions about the jurisdiction of superior
         courts of plenary jurisdiction to pass orders
         like the impugned order are allowed to be
         canvassed in writ proceedings under
Article
         32
, logically, it would be difficult to make a
         valid distinction between the orders passed
         by the High Courts inter­partes, and those
         which are not inter­partes in the sense that
         they bind strangers to the proceedings.
Therefore, in our opinion, having regard to
         the fact that the impugned order has been
         passed by a superior court of record in the
         exercise of its inherent powers, the question
         about the existence of the said jurisdiction as
         well as the validity or propriety of the order
         cannot be raised in writ proceedings taken
         out by the petitioners for the issue of a writ
         of certiorari under Article 32.”
                                    [emphasis supplied]
23. It could thus be seen that the Nine­Judge Bench of this

Court,    speaking    through      P.B.    Gajendragadkar,       CJ.,

categorically held that the impugned orders could not affect the

fundamental rights of the petitioners. It has further been held

that since the order was passed in the proceedings pending

before the High Court, the correctness of the impugned order

could    be   challenged   only   by   appeal   and   not   by   writ

proceedings. It has been further held that, having regard to the
15
fact that the order had been passed by a superior court of

record in the exercise of its inherent powers, the question about

the existence of the said jurisdiction as well as the validity or

propriety of the order could not be raised in writ proceedings

taken out by the petitioners for the issue of a writ of certiorari

under
Article 32.
This Court further observed thus:
“We are, therefore, satisfied that so far as
        the jurisdiction of this Court to issue writs
        of certiorari is concerned, it is impossible to
        accept the argument of the petitioners that
        judicial orders passed by High Courts in or
        in relation to proceedings pending before
        them, are amenable to be corrected by
        exercise of the said jurisdiction. We have
        no doubt that it would be unreasonable
        to attempt to rationalise the assumption
        of jurisdiction by this Court under
Article 32
to correct such judicial orders
        on the fanciful hypothesis that High
        Courts may pass extravagant orders in
        or in relation to matters pending before
        them and that a remedy by way of a
        writ of certiorari should, therefore, be
        sought for and be deemed to be included
        within the scope of
Article 32.
The words
        used in
Article 32
are no doubt wide; but
        having regard to the considerations which
        we have set out in the course of this
        judgment, we are satisfied that the
        impugned order cannot be brought within
16
the scope of this Court's jurisdiction to
       issue a writ of certiorari under
Article 32;
to
       hold otherwise would be repugnant to the
       well­recognised limitations within which the
       jurisdiction to issue writs of certiorari can
       be exercised and inconsistent with the
       uniform trend of this Court's decisions in
       relation to the said point.”
                                   [emphasis supplied]
24. It could thus be seen that this Court held that it would be

unreasonable to hold that this Court, under
Article 32
, could

correct the judicial orders on the fanciful hypothesis that High

Courts may pass extravagant orders in or in relation to matters

pending before them and therefore this Court can correct the

same by issuance of a writ of certiorari under
Article 32.
This

Court held that though the words used in
Article 32
are wide,

the order impugned before it could not be brought within the

scope of this Court’s jurisdiction to issue a writ of certiorari

under
Article 32.
25.
Insofar as the judgment of this Court in the case of
Khoday Distilleries Ltd. and another
(supra), on which Mr.

Prashant Bhushan placed reliance, is concerned, this Court in
17
the said case was considering therein a challenge to the

correctness of the decision on merits after the appeal as well as

review petition were dismissed.
26.
In the case of
Mohd. Aslam
(supra), this Court held that
Article 32
of the Constitution was not available to assail the

correctness of a decision on merits or to claim reconsideration.
It, however, considered the contention raised on behalf of the

petitioners that the judgment in the case of
Manohar Joshi vs.

Nitin Bhaurao Patil
and another17 was in conflict with the

Constitution Bench judgement of this Court in the case of
S.R.

Bommai and others vs. Union of India and others
18. This

Court after considering the submissions found that the opinion

so expressed was misplaced.
27.
Insofar as the judgment of this Court in the case of
Major

S.P. Sharma and others
(supra) is concerned, in the said

case, the first round of litigation arising out of termination of

respondent­employee had reached finality upto this Court.

17 (1996) 1 SCC 169
18 (1994) 3 SCC 1
18
However, the same was sought to be reopened by filing another

writ petition before the High Court. In this background, this

Court observed thus:
“90. Violation     of     fundamental     rights
        guaranteed under the Constitution have to be
        protected, but at the same time, it is the duty
        of the court to ensure that the decisions
        rendered by the court are not overturned
        frequently, that too, when challenged
        collaterally as that was directly affecting the
        basic     structure    of    the    Constitution
        incorporating the power of judicial review of
        this Court. There is no doubt that this Court
        has an extensive power to correct an error or
        to review its decision but that cannot be done
        at the cost of doctrine of finality. An issue of
        law can be overruled later on, but a question
        of fact or, as in the present case, the dispute
        with regard to the termination of services
        cannot be reopened once it has been finally
        sealed in proceedings inter se between the
        parties up to this Court way back in 1980.”
28. It could thus be seen that this court has held that when a

question of fact has reached finality inter se between the

parties, it cannot be reopened in a collateral proceeding.
However, it has been observed that an issue of law can be

overruled later on.
19
29. Mr. Prashant Bhushan strongly relied on the judgment of

this Court in the case of
Rupa Ashok Hurra
(supra).
It will be

relevant to refer to the following observations of this Court in

the judgment of Quadri, J.
“41. At one time adherence to the principle
          of stare decisis was so rigidly followed in the
          courts     governed     by      the    English
          jurisprudence that departing from an earlier
          precedent was considered heresy. With the
          declaration of the practice statement by the
          House of Lords, the highest court in England
          was enabled to depart from a previous
          decision when it appeared right to do so.
The next step forward by the highest
          court to do justice was to review its
          judgment inter        partes to        correct
          injustice. So far as this Court is
          concerned, we have already pointed out
          above that it has been conferred the
          power to review its own judgments under
Article 137
of the Constitution. The role
          of the judiciary to merely interpret and
          declare the law was the concept of a
          bygone age. It is no more open to debate
          as it is fairly settled that the courts can
          so mould and lay down the law
          formulating principles and guidelines as
          to adapt and adjust to the changing
          conditions of the society, the ultimate
          objective being to dispense justice. In the
          recent years there is a discernible shift
20
in the approach of the final courts in
favour of rendering justice on the facts
presented     before      them,    without
abrogating but bypassing the principle of
finality of the judgment.
In
Union of
India v. Raghubir Singh
[(1989) 2 SCC 754]
Pathak, C.J. speaking for the Constitution
Bench aptly observed: (SCC pp. 766­67, para
10)

    “10. But like all principles evolved by
    man for the regulation of the social
    order, the doctrine of binding
    precedent is circumscribed in its
    governance by perceptible limitations,
    limitations arising by reference to the
    need for readjustment in a changing
    society, a readjustment of legal
    norms demanded by a changed social
    context. This need for adapting the
    law to new urges in society brings
    home the truth of the Holmesian
    aphorism that ‘the life of the law has
    not been logic it has been experience’
    (Oliver    Wendell     Holmes     : The
    Common Law, p. 5), and again when
    he declared in another study (Oliver
    Wendell Holmes : Common Carriers
    and the Common Law, (1943) 9 Curr
    LT 387, 388) that ‘the law is forever
    adopting new principles from life at
    one end’, and ‘sloughing off’ old ones
    at    the   other.    Explaining    the
    conceptual import of what Holmes
    had said, Julius Stone elaborated
    that it is by the introduction of new
    extra­legal propositions emerging
21
from experience to serve as premises,
     or   by   experience­guided choice
     between competing legal propositions,
     rather than by the operation of logic
     upon existing legal propositions, that
     the growth of law tends to be
     determined (Julius Stone : Legal
     Systems & Lawyers Reasoning, pp.
58­59).”
42. The concern of this Court for
rendering justice in a cause is not less
important than the principle of finality
of its judgment. We are faced with
competing      principles   —    ensuring
certainty and finality of a judgment of
the Court of last resort and dispensing
justice    on    reconsideration    of    a
judgment on the ground that it is
vitiated being in violation of the
principles of natural justice or giving
scope for apprehension of bias due to a
Judge who participated in the decision­
making process not disclosing his links
with a party to the case, or on account
of abuse of the process of the court.
Such a judgment, far from ensuring
finality, will always remain under the
cloud of uncertainty. Almighty alone is the
dispenser of absolute justice — a concept
which is not disputed but by a few. We
are of the view that though Judges of
the highest court do their best, subject
of course to the limitation of human
fallibility, yet situations may arise, in
the rarest of the rare cases, which
22
would require reconsideration of a
          final judgment to set right miscarriage
          of justice complained of. In such case
          it would not only be proper but also
          obligatory both legally and morally to
          rectify the error. After giving our anxious
          consideration to the question, we are
          persuaded to hold that the duty to do
          justice in these rarest of rare cases shall
          have to prevail over the policy of certainty
          of judgment as though it is essentially in
          the public interest that a final judgment of
          the final court in the country should not
          be open to challenge, yet there may be
          circumstances, as mentioned above,
          wherein declining to reconsider the
          judgment would be oppressive to judicial
          conscience and would cause perpetuation
          of irremediable injustice.
xxx       xxx        xxx
49. The upshot of the discussion in our
          view is that this Court, to prevent abuse of
          its process and to cure a gross miscarriage
          of justice, may reconsider its judgments in
          exercise of its inherent power.”
                                   [emphasis supplied]
30. This Court in the aforesaid case held that the concern of

this Court for rendering justice in a cause is not less important

than the principle of finality of its judgment. The Court has to

balance ensuring certainty and finality of a judgment of the
23
Court of last resort on one hand and dispensing justice on

reconsideration of a judgment on the valid grounds on the

other hand.    This Court has observed that though Judges of

the highest court do their best, yet situations may arise, in the

rarest of the rare cases, which would require reconsideration of

a final judgment to set right miscarriage of justice complained

of.   It has been held that in such a case it would not only be

proper but also obligatory both legally and morally to rectify the

error.   This
Court further held
that to prevent abuse of its

process and to cure a gross miscarriage of justice, the Court

may reconsider its judgments in exercise of its inherent power.
31. This Court in the case of
A.R. Antulay
(supra), speaking

through Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. observed thus:
“82. Lord    Cairns    in Rodger v. Comptoir
           D'escompte De Paris [(1869­71) LR 3 PC 465,
           475 : 17 ER 120] observed thus:
“Now, Their Lordships are of
                opinion, that one of the first and
                highest duties of all courts is to
                take care that the act of the court
                does no injury to any of the suitors,
                and when the expression ‘the act of
24
the court’ is used, it does not mean
     merely the act of the primary court,
     or of any intermediate court of
     appeal, but the act of the court as a
     whole, from the lowest court which
     entertains jurisdiction over the
     matter up to the highest court
     which finally disposes of the case.
     It is the duty of the aggregate of
     those Tribunals, if I may use the
     expression, to take care that no act
     of the court in the course of the
     whole of the proceedings does an
     injury to the suitors in the court.
83. This passage was quoted in the Gujarat
High Court by D.A. Desai, J., speaking for
the Gujarat High Court in
Soni Vrajlal v. Soni
Jadavji
[AIR 1972 Guj 148 : (1972) 13 Guj
LR 555] as mentioned before.
It appears that
in giving directions on 16­2­1984, this Court
acted per incuriam inasmuch it did not bear
in mind consciously the consequences and
the provisions of
Sections 6
and
7
of the
1952 Act and the binding nature of the
larger Bench decision in Anwar Ali Sarkar
case [AIR 1952 SC 75 : 1952 SCR 284 : 1952
Cri LJ 510] which was not adverted to by
this Court. The basic fundamentals of the
administration of justice are simple. No man
should suffer because of the mistake of the
court. No man should suffer a wrong by
technical procedure of irregularities. Rules or
procedures are the handmaids of justice and
not the mistress of the justice. Ex debito
justitiae, we must do justice to him. If a man
has been wronged so long as it lies within
the human machinery of administration of
25
justice that wrong must be remedied. This is
          a peculiar fact of this case which requires
          emphasis.”
32. It could thus be seen that the principle of ex debito

justitiae has been emphasized. This Court held that no man

should suffer because of the mistake of the court. No man

should suffer a wrong by technical procedure of irregularities. It

has been held that the rules of procedure are the handmaidens

of justice and not the mistress of justice. It has further been

held that if a man has been wronged, so long as the wrong lies

within the human machinery of administration of justice, that

wrong must be remedied.
33. Ranganath Misra, J., in his concurrent opinion, observed

thus:
“102.      This being the apex court, no
          litigant has any opportunity of approaching
          any higher forum to question its decisions.
          Lord Buckmaster in Montreal Street Railway
          Co. v. Normadin [1917 AC 170] (sic) stated:
All rules of court are nothing but
                provisions intended to secure proper
                administration   of  justice. It  is,
26
therefore, essential that they should be
     made to serve and be subordinate to
     that purpose.
This          Court         in
State       of
Gujarat v. Ramprakash P. Puri
[(1969) 3 SCC
156 : 1970 SCC (Cri) 29 : (1970) 2 SCR 875]
reiterated the position by saying [SCC p. 159
: SCC (Cri) p. 31, para 8]



     Procedure has been described to be a
     handmaid and not a mistress of law,
     intended to subserve and facilitate the
     cause of justice and not to govern or
     obstruct it. Like all rules of procedure,
     this rule demands a construction which
     would promote this cause

Once judicial satisfaction is reached that the
direction was not open to be made and it is
accepted as a mistake of the court, it is not
only appropriate but also the duty of the
court to rectify the mistake by exercising
inherent powers. Judicial opinion heavily
leans in favour of this view that a mistake of
the court can be corrected by the court itself
without any fetters.
This is on the principle
as     indicated     in    (Alexander) Rodger
case [(1969­71) LR 3 PC 465 : 17 ER 120] . I
am of the view that in the present situation,
the court's inherent powers can be exercised
to remedy the mistake. Mahajan., J.
speaking     for  a    Four    Judge    Bench
27
in
Keshardeo     Chamria v. Radha Kissen
Chamria
[1953 SCR 136 : AIR 1953 SC 23]
at Page 153 stated:
The judge had jurisdiction to correct his
     own error without entering into a
     discussion of the grounds taken by the
     decree­holder or the objections raised
     by the judgment­debtors.
103. The Privy Council in
Debi Bakhsh
Singh v. Habib Shah [ILR
(1913) 35 All 331]
pointed out that an abuse of the process of
the court may be committed by the court or
by a party. Where a court employed a
procedure in doing something which it never
intended to do and there is an abuse of the
process of the court it can be corrected. Lord
Shaw spoke for the Law Lords thus:
Quite apart from Section 151, any court
     might have rightly considered itself to
     possess an inherent power to rectify the
     mistake which had been inadvertently
     made.
It was pointed out by the Privy Council
in The Bolivar [AIR 1916 PC 85] that:
Where substantial injustice would
     otherwise result, the Court has, in
     Their Lordships' opinion, an inherent
     power to set aside its own judgments of
     condemnation so as to let in bona fide
     claims by parties...
Indian authorities are in abundance to
support the view that injustice done should
be corrected by applying the principle actus
28
curia neminem gravabit — an act of the court
          should prejudice no one.
104. To err is human, is the oft­quoted
          saying. Courts including the apex one are no
          exception. To own up the mistake when
          judicial satisfaction is reached does not
          militatte against its status or authority.
Perhaps it would enhance both.”
34. It has been held that this being the apex court, no litigant

has any opportunity of approaching any higher forum to

question its decisions.   It has further been held that once a

judicial satisfaction is reached that the direction was not open

to be made and it is accepted as a mistake of the court, it is not

only appropriate but also the duty of the court to rectify the

mistake by exercising its inherent powers. It has been held

that, to err is human, and the Courts including the Apex Court

are no exception.
35. This Court in the case of
Sanjay Singh and another
(supra) has observed thus:
“10.   The contention of the Commission also
        overlooks the fundamental difference between
        challenge to the final order forming part of the
        judgment and challenge to the ratio decidendi
        of the judgment. Broadly speaking, every
29
judgment of superior courts has three
segments, namely, (i) the facts and the point at
issue; (ii) the reasons for the decision; and (iii)
the final order containing the decision. The
reasons for the decision or the ratio decidendi
is not the final order containing the decision.
In fact, in a judgment of this Court, though the
ratio decidendi may point to a particular result,
the decision (final order relating to relief) may
be different and not a natural consequence of
the ratio decidendi of the judgment. This may
happen either on account of any subsequent
event or the need to mould the relief to do
complete justice in the matter. It is the ratio
decidendi of a judgment and not the final order
in the judgment, which forms a precedent. The
term “judgment” and “decision” are used,
rather loosely, to refer to
the entire judgment
or the final order or the ratio decidendi of a
judgment. Rupa Ashok Hurra [(2002) 4 SCC
388] is of course, an authority for the
proposition that a petition under
Article 32
would not be maintainable to challenge or set
aside or quash the final order contained in a
judgment of this Court. It does not lay down
a proposition that the ratio decidendi of
any earlier decision cannot be examined or
differed in another case. Where violation of
a fundamental right of a citizen is alleged
in a petition under
Article 32
, it cannot be
dismissed, as not maintainable, merely
because it seeks to distinguish or
challenge the ratio decidendi of an earlier
judgment, except where it is between the
same parties and in respect of the same
cause of action. Where a legal issue raised in
a petition under
Article 32
is covered by a
30
decision of this Court, the Court may dismiss
        the petition following the ratio decidendi of the
        earlier decision. Such dismissal is not on the
        ground of “maintainability” but on the ground
        that the issue raised is not tenable, in view of
        the law
laid down in
the earlier decision. But if
        the Court is satisfied that the issue raised
        in the later petition requires consideration
        and in that context the earlier decision
        requires re­examination, the Court can
        certainly proceed to examine the matter (or
        refer the matter to a larger Bench, if the
        earlier decision is not of a smaller Bench).
        When the issue is re­examined and a view is
        taken different from the one taken earlier, a
        new ratio is laid down. When the ratio
        decidendi of the earlier decision undergoes
        such change, the final order of the earlier
        decision as applicable to the parties to the
        earlier decision, is in no way altered or
        disturbed. Therefore, the contention that a writ
        petition under
Article 32
is barred or not
        maintainable with reference to an issue which
        is the subject­matter of an earlier decision, is
        rejected.”
                                   [emphasis supplied]
36. After referring to the judgment of this Court in the case of
Rupa Ashok Hurra
(supra), this Court has held that it does

not lay down a proposition that the ratio decidendi of an earlier

decision cannot be examined or differed with in another case.
31
It has been held that if the Court is satisfied that the issue

raised in the later petition requires consideration and in that

context, the earlier decision requires re­examination, the Court

can certainly proceed to examine the matter or refer the matter

to a larger Bench, if the earlier decision is not of a smaller

Bench.     This   Court,    therefore,   specifically   rejected   the

contention that a writ petition under
Article 32
of the

Constitution was barred or not maintainable with reference to

an issue which was the subject matter of an earlier decision.
37.
In     the    present      case,     admittedly,      the      writ

petitioners/Banks were not parties in the case of
Jayantilal N.

Mistry
(supra).
Though the Miscellaneous Applications filed by

HDFC Bank and others for recall of the judgment and order in

the case of
Jayantilal N. Mistry
(supra) were rejected by this

Court vide order dated 28 th April 2021, this Court in the said

order specifically observed thus:
“The dismissal of these applications shall not
          prevent the applicants to pursue other
          remedies available to them in law.”
32
38. It is thus clear that this Court did not foreclose the right

of the petitioners/Banks to pursue other remedies available to

them in law.
39.
In view of the judgment of this Court in the case of
Jayantilal N. Mistry
(supra), the RBI is entitled to issue

directions to the petitioners/Banks to disclose information even

with regard to the individual customers of the Bank. In effect,

it may adversely affect the individuals’ fundamental right to

privacy.
40. A Nine­Judge Constitution Bench of this Court in the case

of
K.S. Puttaswamy and another
(supra) has held that the

right to privacy is a fundamental right. No doubt that the right

to information is also a fundamental right. In case of such a

conflict, the Court is required to achieve a sense of balance.
41. A perusal of the judgments of this Court cited supra

would reveal that it has been held that though the concept of

finality of judgment has to be preserved, at the same time, the
33
principle of ex debito justitiae cannot be given a go­bye. If the

Court finds that the earlier judgment does not lay down a

correct position of law, it is always permissible for this Court to

reconsider the same and if necessary, to refer it to a larger

Bench.
42. Without expressing any final opinion, prima facie, we find

that the judgment of this Court in the case of
Jayantilal N.

Mistry
(supra) did not take into consideration the aspect of

balancing the right to information and the right to privacy. The

petitioners have challenged the action of the respondent­RBI,

vide which the RBI issued directions to the petitioners/Banks

to disclose certain information, which according to the

petitioners is not only contrary to the provisions as contained

in the RTI Act, the RBI Act and the Banking Regulation Act,

1949, but also adversely affects the right to privacy of such

Banks and their consumers.
The RBI has issued such

directions in view of the decision of this Court in the case of
Jayantilal N. Mistry
(supra) and
Girish Mittal
(supra). As
34
such, the petitioners would have no other remedy than to

approach this Court.
As observed by Ranganath Misra, J. in

the case of
A.R. Antulay
(supra) that, this being the Apex

Court, no litigant has any opportunity of approaching any

higher forum to question its decision.         The only remedy

available to the petitioners would be to approach this Court by

way of writ petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India

for protection of the fundamental rights of their customers, who

are citizens of India.
43. We, therefore, hold that the preliminary objection as

raised is not sustainable.   The same is rejected. I.A. No.51632

of 2022 in Writ Petition (Civil) No.1159 of 2019 and I.A.

No.54521 of 2022 in Writ Petition (Civil) No.683 of 2021 are

accordingly dismissed.
…….........................J.
                                                   [B.R. GAVAI]


                                         …….........................J.
                                            [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 30, 2022.
35