[Cites
2
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Anil Kumar Modi vs Tarsem Kumar Gupta on 14 September, 2022
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
B.R. Gavai
1



                                                                      NON-REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4736-4737 OF 2011


                 ANIL KUMAR MODI & ORS.                       Appellant(s)

                                                VERSUS

                 TARSEM KUMAR GUPTA                           Respondent(s)



                                               JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI,J.
1.   These appeals challenge the judgment and order

                      passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at

                      Chandigarh    dated   26.08.2009    affirming   the   order

                      passed by the Additional District Judge, Sangrur

                      dated 28.10.2006 whereby the Additional District

                      Judge had allowed the appeal of the respondent-

                      plaintiff and decreed the suit.
2.   This is a third round of litigation between the
Signature Not Verifiedparties.
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2022.09.22
15:11:48 IST
Reason:
2
3.     In the first round, the respondent-plaintiff

had    filed     a     suit     for       injunction      against       the

Municipal        Committee       as       well     as     the       present

appellants-defendants            for       removing       the       latrine

blocks in the 10 feet passage between the houses of

the two parties. The said suit was dismissed holding

that, though the respondent-plaintiff had a right

to the said passage in view of sale deed dated

11.10.1954, he had no right to construct the toilet

and was directed to remove the latrine as there also

exists      an    easementary             right    of     the       present

appellants-defendants            to       open     the    windows       and

ventilators       in    the     said      passage.       In    an     appeal

carried     against        the    same       by     the       respondent-

plaintiff, the First Appellate Court held that the

respondent-plaintiff did not have exclusive right

for the said passage. It affirmed the order passed

by    the   trial      Judge.    Further,         the    Second       Appeal

carried     by       the   respondent-plaintiff                 was    also

dismissed.
3
4.     In the second round, the respondent-plaintiff

filed a suit against the appellants-defendants as

they were attempting to raise a construction and

open a door in the disputed passage.
5.     During the pendency of the second suit, the

third suit, i.e., the present suit came to be filed

on     01.06.2000   seeking   an    order    of   injunction

restraining the present appellants-defendants from

removing the bricks raised by the respondent at

points A, B, C, D in the site plan.          The appellants-

defendants also filed a counter claim praying for

decree for removal of the bricks from that passage.
6.     During the pendency of the third suit, in view

of the statement made by the appellants-defendants

that, they will not open the door/gate and they will

only    open   windows   in   the   common    passage,   the

respondent-plaintiff withdrew the second suit.
7.     The Trial Court vide order dated 30.10.2004

dismissed the third suit and decreed the counter

claim of the appellants-defendants.            Appeals were

filed by the respondent-plaintiff against the said
4
decree.
8.    The First Appellate Court reversed the judgment

and order of the Trial Court and decreed the suit

of    the   respondent-plaintiff   and   dismissed   the

counter claim.
9.    In the Second Appeals preferred by the present

appellants-defendants, the High Court affirmed the

order of the First Appellate Court and dismissed the

said Second Appeals.     Being aggrieved thereby, the

present appeals are filed.
10.   Shri Ankit Goel, learned counsel appearing on

behalf of the appellants-defendants submits that the

First Appellate Court as well as High Court have

grossly erred in interfering with the judgment and

decree passed by the Trial Court. He submits that,

in the first round, there was a clear finding of the

First Appellate Court that the passage was a common

passage.
11.   He further submitted that the said finding was

affirmed by the High Court in the Second Appeal and
5
as such, it operates as res judicata. It is also

        submitted that in view of the said finding it was

        not correct for the First Appellate Court and the

        High Court to have taken a view contrary to the

        finding of the Appellate Court in the first round.

        He relies on the judgments of this Court in the

        cases of
R. Unnikrishnan & Anr. Vs. V.K. Mahanudevan

        and Ors.1
and
K. Arumuga Velaiah Vs. P.R. Ramasamy

        & Anr.2
in that regard.
12.       Shri Gagan Gupta, learned counsel appearing for

        the respondent-plaintiff, on the contrary, submits

        that the First Appellate Court as well as the High

        Court on the perusal of the sale deed had rightly

        come to a conclusion that the respondent-plaintiff

        was entitled to exclusive possession of the said

        passage and the only right that was available to the

        present appellants-defendants was of opening windows

        and ventilators in the said passage. He, therefore,

        submits that no interference is warranted in the

        present appeals.
1
(2014) 4 SCC 434
2
(2022) 3 SCC 757
6
13.     We have perused all the judgments in the first

round as well as the third round.
14.     In the first round, the only question that fell

for consideration before the High Court was as to

whether the respondent-plaintiff was entitled to

construct the latrine in the passage.                       The finding

of the Trial Court was that, though the respondent-

plaintiff was entitled to possession thereof, he

could    not     construct     latrine         in    as   much    as    it

adversely        affected     the    easement         rights     of    the

appellants-defendants.
15.     The Appellate Court, therefore, in the first

round, ought to have restricted its findings to the

said    issue.         The    question      as       to   whether      the

appellants-defendants           were      also      entitled     to    any

right       in   the   said    passage         did    not    fall      for

consideration in the said proceedings. In that view

of    the    matter,    there       was   no     occasion      for     the

Appellate Court in the first round to have made any

observation with regard thereto.
16.     In the present suit, the question as to whether
7
the respondent-plaintiff was entitled to exclusive

possession           of     the     said       passage         fell     for

consideration.            The Trial Court dismissed the suit.

The First Appellate Court, on the basis of the

interpretation of the sale deed, came to a finding

that     the    respondent-plaintiff                 was    entitled     to

exclusive possession of the said passage and the

right of the appellants-defendants was limited only

to opening of windows and ventilators in the said

passage.       The    High    Court       in       Second   Appeals      has

affirmed the said findings of the First Appellate

Court.
17.    Though,        Mr.    Ankit       Goel,       learned      counsel,

strenuously argued, relying on certain judgments of

this     Court,       that    the    findings          in    an    earlier

proceeding        could      operate          as     res    judicata      in

subsequent       proceedings,            in    our    view,       the   said

judgments would not be applicable in the facts of

the present case.
18.    The issue in the first suit was limited only

as to whether the respondent-plaintiff has a right
8
to construct the latrine in the passage. The issue

as    to   whether   the   respondent-plaintiff   was

exclusively entitled to possession thereof did not

fall for consideration in the earlier round, whereas

in the third round, the said issue directly fell for

consideration.
19.   In that view of the matter, we do not find any

reason to interfere with the concurrent orders of

the First Appellate Court and the High Court.
20.   The appeals are dismissed in the above terms.

Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. No

order as to costs.
….........................J
                                  (B.R. GAVAI)



                           ...........................J
                                 (C.T. RAVIKUMAR)

New Delhi
September 14, 2022