[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Jyoti Nagar Welfare Association vs Amir Chand (Dead) on 6 September, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
B.V. Nagarathna
2022 INSC 1320


         ITEM NO.1501                 COURT NO.8                  SECTION IV
         (For Judgment)

                          S U P R E M E C O U R T O F     I N D I A
                                  RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

                             Civil Appeal   No(s).   5826/2022


         JYOTI NAGAR WELFARE ASSOCIATION                         Appellant(s)

                                            VERSUS

         AMIR CHAND (DEAD) & ANR.                                Respondent(s)

         ([ HEARD BY : HON'BLE M.R. SHAH AND HON'BLE B.V. NAGARATHNA, JJ. ]
          IA No. 70517/2018 - I/A FOR BRINGING ON RECORD LRS OF THE DECEASED
         RES. NO. 1)


         WITH

         C.A. No. 5827/2022 (IV)


         CONMT.PET.(C) No. 660/2017 In SLP(C) No. 12934/2016 (IV-B)
         ( and IA No.68266/2017-I A U/S 340)

         Date : 06-09-2022 These matters were called on for pronouncement of
         judgment today.


         For Appellant(s)     Mr. Sachin Jain, Adv.
                              Ms. Anubha Agrawal, AOR
                              Mr. Mukul Kumar, AOR

                              Mr. Rajiv Ranjan Dwivedi, AOR

         For Respondent(s)    Mr. Sachin Jain, Adv.
                              Mr. Rajiv Ranjan Dwivedi, AOR
                              Ms. Anubha Agrawal, AOR
                              Mr. Mukul Kumar, AOR
    Hon’ble      Mr.    Justice     M.R.    Shah    pronounced   the     Reportable

Judgment        of    the   Bench   comprising      His   Lordship     and   Hon’ble

Mrs. Justice B.V. Nagarathna.


    The Civil Appeals are allowed and the Contempt Petition is

disposed   of    in    terms   of   the    Signed   Reportable   Judgment     placed

below.




    Pending application(s), if any, are disposed of.




(VIJAY KUMAR)                                               (NISHA TRIPATHI)
COURT MASTER (SH)                                          ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
                                                           REPORTABLE
                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5826 OF 2022

Jyoti Nagar Welfare Association                   ...Appellant(s)

                                  Versus

Amir Chand (Dead) through LRs & Anr.       …Respondent(s)
                              With
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5827 OF 2022
                              With
             CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO. 660/2017
               IN CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5826 OF 2022

                         JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.    Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with impugned judgment and

      order dated 06.01.2016 passed by the High Court of Punjab and

      Haryana at Chandigarh in Regular Second Appeal No. 115 of

      1994 (O&M), by which, the High Court has disposed of the said

      appeal by observing that the suit land in question under

      possession of the original       plaintiff be also    acquired in

      accordance with law and compensation be paid to the original

      plaintiff in accordance with law, Jyoti Nagar Welfare Association

      and Municipality, Thanesar have preferred the present appeals.
2.    The facts leading to the present appeals in a nutshell are as

      under: ­

2.1   That after following the due procedure as required under the

      provisions of the
Haryana Municipal Act, 1973
(hereinafter

      referred to as the Act, 1973) the State of Haryana sanctioned

      Town Planning Scheme No. 5 (unbuilt area) on 29.10.1975.

      Under the said Scheme, the suit land in question was reserved

      for public park. That respondent No. 1 herein – original plaintiff

      instituted the present suit being Civil Suit No. 29/1987 for

      permanent    injunction   only   with   respect   to   the   land

      admeasuring 5 kanals and 12 marlas which was reserved for

      public park, contending, inter­alia, that though the Scheme was

      sanctioned in the year 1975, the same has not been used for a

      public park even after a period of five years and that the

      plaintiff continued to remain in possession. Therefore, the

      aforesaid suit was filed only to protect the possession and for

      permanent injunction. The said suit was filed on 26.12.1986. It

      was averred in the plaint that respondent No. 2 – Administrator,

      Municipality, Thanesar threatened to take possession and

      thereby disturb the possession of the plaintiff a week prior to

      the filing of the suit. It was submitted by the defendant in the

      written statement that as per Town Planning Scheme No. 5, the
land has been reserved for a park and therefore, the Municipal

Committee, Thanesar is the owner and in possession of the land

in dispute as the same is reserved for a park. Therefore, the

possession of the plaintiff to the extent of 5 kanals was denied.

Both the parties led their evidence. On behalf of the defendant

one Sher Singh, officer of the Municipal Committee came to be

examined      as   DW­1.    Before     the    learned     Trial    Court   a

communication dated 13.12.1983 addressed by the plaintiff to

the Administrator was brought on record as exhibit D5 (the

same shall be discussed hereinbelow). The learned Trial Court

decreed the suit in favour of the plaintiff and granted

permanent      injunction   observing        that   the   plaintiff   is   in

possession of the suit land. The First Appellate Court allowed

the appeal and quashed and set aside the judgment and decree

passed   by    the   learned   Trial    Court       granting      permanent

injunction and consequently, dismissed the suit. In second

appeal, by the impugned judgment and order the High Court

has disposed of the appeal by observing that respondent No. 1 –

original plaintiff is in possession and even if the scheme is

implemented, the same may be acquired in accordance with law

and to pay the compensation to the plaintiff. The High Court

has disposed of the second appeal in terms of the above.
2.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

      and order passed by the High Court, Jyoti Nagar Welfare

      Association as well as the Municipality, Thanesar, through its

      Administrator have preferred the present appeals.
3.    It is the case on behalf of the appellants herein that in fact

      Town Planning Scheme No. 5 (unbuilt area) was implemented

      within a period of five years i.e., in the year 1980 itself. It is the

      case on behalf of the appellants that as such the possession of

      the land reserved for public park to the extent of 5 kanals was

      already taken over by the Municipal Committee. It is the further

      case on behalf of the appellants that as such the original

      plaintiff admitted in his communication i.e., exhibit D5 that the

      possession of the land reserved for the park had been taken

      over. It is submitted that the only grievance raised by the

      plaintiff in communication dated 13.12.1983 was with respect

      to the mistake in calculation of the area and it was the case on

      behalf of the plaintiff that though the land shown as taken

      under open area is 25% under Town Planning Scheme but in

      fact, considering the calculation mistake the area is more, if

      calculated on percentage basis. Therefore, it is the case on

      behalf of the appellants that the plaintiff never disputed the

      taking over of the possession earlier and the only dispute was
      with respect to the mistake in calculation of the area on per

      centage basis.
4.    Relying upon the aforesaid communication, Shri Manoj Swarup,

      learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant in

      the appeal filed by the Jyoti Nagar Welfare Association and Ms.

      Anubha Agrawal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      appellant in the appeal filed by the Municipality, Thanesar,

      have vehemently submitted that both, learned Trial Court as

      well as the High Court have committed a grave error in holding

      that the plaintiff was in possession of the suit land, which was

      reserved for public park.
4.1   Learned   counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   the   respective

      appellants have further submitted that the suit was only for

      permanent injunction. No declaration was sought to declare the

      Scheme as lapsed on the ground that the land was not used for

      the purpose for which it was reserved within a period of five

      years. It is submitted that the entire case on behalf of the

      plaintiff was that the land in question reserved for public park

      was not used within a period of five years and the Scheme was

      not implemented despite five years having lapsed and therefore

      there shall be a deemed lapse. It is submitted that however

      neither such a declaration was sought nor the Scheme had
      been challenged. It is submitted that once the land in question

      reserved for public park was included in the sanctioned Town

      Planning Scheme, the land so reserved to the extent of 25% of

      the total holding shall vest in the Municipal Committee and the

      Municipal Committee becomes the absolute owner and in

      possession. It is contended that the fact that possession of the

      land reserved for public park was taken over was in fact

      admitted by the plaintiff by communication dated 13.12.1983

      and hence, the learned Trial Court erred in granting the relief of

      permanent injunction in favour of the plaintiff, and the same

      was rightly set aside by the First Appellate Court.

4.2   It is further submitted by learned counsel appearing on behalf

      of the respective appellants that as such the land in question is

      already put to use as a public park as the possession was

      already taken over, the plaintiff shall hence not be entitled for

      any decree for permanent injunction.
4.3   It is submitted that both, learned Trial Court as well as the

      High   Court   have    mis­interpreted   and/or       mis­read   the

      deposition of DW­5 – Sher Singh, Officer of the Municipal

      Committee. That if the deposition of Sher Singh is read it was

      the case on behalf of the Municipality that in the year 1985, the

      plaintiff again got possession of the land and thereafter the
     plaintiff installed wire poles on the side of the way. In that view

     of the matter, the learned Trial Court as well as the High Court

     are not justified in holding that the plaintiff was in possession

     and was entitled to permanent injunction.
5.   Shri Neeraj Kumar Jain, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

     behalf of the original plaintiff in respective appeals has candidly

     admitted that the suit was only for the relief of permanent

     injunction. He has candidly admitted that no declaration to

     declare that the Town Planning Scheme No. 5 had lapsed

     and/or deemed to have lapsed was sought and/or is sought. He

     has candidly admitted that the plaintiff is not praying and/or

     submitting that the Town Planning Scheme has lapsed.

     However, he has vehemently submitted that the plaintiff

     continued to be in possession of the suit land in question,

     therefore, the learned Trial Court rightly passed the decree for

     permanent injunction. That the findings recorded by the

     learned Trial Court and recorded by the High Court on

     possession is on appreciation of evidence, more particularly, the

     deposition of DW­5 – Sher Singh, officer of the Municipal

     Committee, who has specifically admitted the possession of the

     plaintiff. Therefore, it is requested to dismiss the present

     appeals.
6.   Shri Sachin Jain, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

     petitioner   in   Contempt   Petition   (C)   No.   660/2017   has

     vehemently submitted that despite the order of status quo

     granted by this Court the respondents – officers of the

     Municipality have constructed a road and/or made construction

     and therefore, the officers of the Municipality have rendered

     themselves liable for suitable action under the provisions of the
Contempt of Courts Act
. It is vehemently submitted by Shri

     Sachin Jain, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

     petitioner – applicant ­ original plaintiff in contempt petition

     that the learned Trial Court granted interim injunction during

     the pendency of the suit in favour of the applicant – original

     plaintiff. That therefore the possession of the petitioner was

     protected. It is submitted therefore that once the original

     plaintiff – applicant was found to be in possession and there

     was an order of status quo granted by this Court, the officers of

     the Municipality ought not to have put up any further

     construction.
7.   We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

     respective parties at length. We have gone through the

     averments made in the plaint and also the reliefs sought in the

     suit.
7.1   At the outset, it is required to be noted that the original plaintiff

      instituted the suit and sought the relief of permanent injunction

      only. It is an admitted position that neither the plaintiff

      challenged the Scheme nor sought a declaration that the Town

      Planning Scheme No. 5 (unbuilt area) had lapsed and/or

      deemed to have lapsed as the same was not implemented within

      a period of five years from the date of its sanction. Therefore,

      Shri Neeraj Kumar Jain, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

      behalf of the original plaintiff has also fairly conceded that the

      original plaintiff has never sought any declaration declaring the

      Town Planning Scheme No. 5 (unbuilt area) had lapsed and/or

      deemed to have lapsed in view of
Section 203(6)
of the Act,

      1973. He has also stated at the Bar that the plaintiff is not

      challenging the sanctioned Scheme nor is submitting that the

      Town Planning Scheme No. 5 had lapsed and/or deemed to

      have lapsed. However, it is the case on behalf of the original

      plaintiff that he remained in possession of the suit land and

      therefore, the plaintiff is entitled to the permanent injunction

      restraining the defendants – officers of the Municipality from

      disturbing his possession. Shri Neeraj Kumar Jain, learned

      Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the plaintiff has also

      relied upon the deposition of DW­1 – Sher Singh in support of
      the case on behalf of the plaintiff that the plaintiff was in

      possession since 1985 also.
7.2   However, the deposition of DW­1 – Sher Singh, officer of the

      Municipal Committee is required to be read as a whole. If the

      deposition of DW­1 is read as a whole, in the cross­

      examination, he specifically stated that the development work of

      the area has been completed. He has also stated in the cross­

      examination that the plaintiff has again got possession and now

      the plaintiff has installed wire poles on the side of the way.

      Therefore, it was the specific case on behalf of the Municipality

      that the plaintiff re­entered the suit land and again got the

      possession. It is to be noted that the same is borne out of the

      cross­examination of DW­1. At this stage, document i.e., exhibit

      D­5 dated 13.12.1983 addressed by the original plaintiff to the

      Administrator Municipality is required to be referred to. In the

      said communication, it was stated by original plaintiff that

      though the land shown as taken under open space etc. is 25%

      under T.P. Scheme, but in fact there is a calculation mistake

      and this area is more if calculated on percentage basis.

      Therefore, in fact there is a categorical admission on the part of

      the plaintiff that the possession at least to the extent of 25%

      under the Town Planning Scheme was taken over. The only
     dispute raised was with respect to the calculation mistake. The

     plaintiff is bound by such admission. Therefore, even from

     communication       dated    13.12.1983,   it   can   be    seen     that

     possession of the suit land reserved for public park under the

     sanctioned Town Planning Scheme was already taken over. The

     aforesaid is now required to be considered along with the

     statement of DW­1 that the plaintiff re­entered the plot/land

     and   again   got   the     possession   and    started    putting    up

     fencing/wire poles. Therefore, the learned Trial Court as well as

     the High Court have materially erred in passing the decree of

     permanent injunction restraining defendants from disturbing

     the possession of the plaintiff.
8.   At the cost of repetition, it is observed that the suit land in

     question is reserved for a public park under the Town Planning

     Scheme sanctioned under the provisions of the Act, 1973. No

     declaration is sought that the Scheme has lapsed under
Section

     203(6)
of the Act, 1973 and/or no declaration is sought as lapse

     and/or deemed to have lapsed under
Section 203(6)
of the Act,

     1973. Therefore, we refrain from making any observations that

     the   Town    Planning      Scheme   under      Section    203,    more

     particularly, under
Section 203(6)
of the Act, 1973 has lapsed

     and/or deemed to have lapsed. Therefore, the question, namely,
      whether on non­compliance of
Section 203(6)
of the Act, 1973,

      the Scheme shall lapse and/or deemed to have lapsed is kept

      open.
9.    In view of the above and once the suit land in question is

      reserved for a public park under the sanctioned Town Planning

      Scheme and as observed hereinabove, the possession of land in

      question was taken over and the same has been developed as a

      public park, as such the land vests in the Municipal Committee

      and therefore, the plaintiff shall not be entitled to the

      decree/relief of permanent injunction. In any case as observed

      hereinabove the possession of the suit land was already taken

      over for the public purpose for which the same was reserved

      under the Town Planning Scheme.          Both, the learned Trial

      Court as well as the High Court have committed a serious error

      in passing the decree of permanent injunction calling for

      interference in these appeals.
10.   Now so far as the contempt proceedings initiated by the plaintiff

      is concerned, at the outset it is required to be noted that the

      order of status quo is required to be considered with respect to

      the context in which it was passed. The dispute was with

      respect to the possession and even the learned Trial Court also

      granted   the   injunction   with   respect   to   the   possession.

      Therefore, the order of status quo granted by this Court is
      required to be considered with respect to the possession only.
Once as observed hereinabove, the possession of the suit land

      in question was already taken over and the suit land vested in

      Municipal Committee and thereafter, if any improvement has

      made and/or construction is put up on suit land, it cannot be

      said that the same can be said to be in violation of order of

      status quo. It is required to be noted that the land is used by

      the Municipality for a public purpose i.e., for a public park and

      the local people are using the same. Therefore, in the facts and

      circumstances   of    the   case   and    for   the     reasons   stated

      hereinabove    we    deem   it   proper   to    close    the   contempt

      proceedings.
11.   In view of the above discussion and for the reasons stated

      above, the present appeals succeed. The impugned judgment

      and order passed by the High Court in Regular Second Appeal

      No. 115/1994 is hereby quashed and set aside. The judgment

      and decree of permanent injunction granted by the learned Trial

      Court is also quashed and set aside. The judgment and order

      passed by the First Appellate Court is hereby restored.

      Consequently, the original suit filed by the original plaintiff

      stands dismissed. The contempt proceedings stand disposed of.

         All pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of. In the
     facts and circumstances of the case there shall be no order as

     to costs.
………………………………….J.
                                 [M.R. SHAH]


NEW DELHI;                       ………………………………….J.
SEPTEMBER 06, 2022               [B.V. NAGARATHNA]