[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Andhra Pradesh vs State Of Karnataka . on 28 September, 2022
Bench:
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                       ORIGINAL SUIT NO.5 OF 2003


     STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH                                         Plaintiff

                                                    VERSUS

     STATE OF KARNATAKA & ANR.                                        Defendants




                                               O R D E R
The instant Suit was filed in the year 2003 praying for

     following reliefs:
“1. grant injunction restraining Defendant No.1 State
                             of Karnataka from constructing the Paragodu
                             Project on the Chitravathi river in Pennar basin
                             and impounding water therein, till resolution of
                             the water disputes under the provisions of the
Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956
.
2.   grant injunction restraining Defendant No.1 State
                              of   Karnataka   from   constructing,  executing,
                              implementing, giving effect to or impounding
                              water, till resolution of the water disputes
                              under the provisions of the
Inter-State River
                              Water Disputes Act, 1956
, in the anicut across
                              Pennar river near Gowribidnur Village, Teeta
                              Project   in   Tumkur  District,   the  Tank   at
                              Pasalaparthi village of Bagepalli taluk, Kolar
                              District, the Nagarkare tank in Gowribidnur
                              village, the new tank near Muddalodu village in
                              Gowribidnur taluk, Karivenahalli tank in Pavagada
Signature Not Verified
taluk, several new Irrigation tanks in Papagni
Digitally signed by
BABITA PANDEY
Date: 2022.10.01
basin   around   Baddipalli   village  of   Kolar
                              District, the tank across Katnakallu Vanka near
13:51:33 IST
Reason:
M. Gollahalli Village in Gowribidnur taluk of
                              Kolar   District,   diversion   anicut  to   feed
                              Cholasettihalli tank near Cholasettihalli village
2
in Gowribidnur taluk of Kolar District, the new
           tank near Jalagondanahalli village in Kolar
           District and Nagalamadaka anicut in Tumkur
           district.
3.     direct Defendant No.2 Government of India to
           forthwith take action, in accordance with the
Inter State River Water Disputes Act, 1956
, for
           settlement/adjudication of disputes, between the
           Plaintiff State of Andhra Pradesh and Defendant
           No.1 State of Karnataka.
4.     pass such further decree or decrees or order or
           orders as this Hon’ble Court may deem fit and
           proper in the facts and circumstances of the
           case, and
5.     award costs of these proceedings in faovur of the
           plaintiff and against the defendant No.1.”


    The plaintiff State also prayed for interim relief as

follows:
“Pending hearing and final disposal of the Suit, the
    Defendant No.1 State of Karnataka be restrained by an
    order of ad-interim injunction of this Hon’ble Court
    form;
a.     constructing   the   Paragodu   Project on   the
           Chitravathi river in Pennar basin and impounding
           water therein, till resolution of the water
           disputes under the provisions of the
Inter-State
           River Water Disputes Act, 1956
.
b.     from   constructing,    executing,   implementing,
           giving effect to or impounding water, till
           resolution of the water disputes under the
           provisions   of  the
Inter-State  River   Water
           Disputes Act, 1956
, in the anicus across Pennar
           river near Gowribidnur Village, Teeta Project in
           Tumkur District, the Tank at Pasalaparthi village
           of Bagepalli taluk, Kolar District, on the
           Nagarkare tank in Gowribidnur village, the new
           tank near Muddalodu village in Gowribidnur taluk,
           Karivenahalli tank in Pavagada taluk, several new
           Irrigation   tanks   in    Papagni  basin   around
3
Baddipalli village of Kolar District, the tank
            across Katnakallu Vanka near M. Gollahalli
            Village in Gowribidnur taluk of Kolar District,
            diversion anicut to feed Cholasettihalli tank
            near Cholasettihalli village in Gowribidnur taluk
            of   Kolar   District,    the   new   tank   near
            Jalagondanahalli village in Kolar District and
            Nagalamadaka anicut in Tumkur district.”


    It is a matter of record that appropriate request for

constituting an Inter-State River Water Disputes Tribunal to

go into the issues has not yet been made by the plaintiff

State. However, the matter has been engaging attention of this

Court principally on the issue of the interim relief to be

granted in the matter.
At this length of time, when 19 years have elapsed, it

will be extremely difficult to consider the matter purely from

the prospective of grant or non-grant of interim relief.

    During the last 19 years, various developments, such as

augmentation of water from the concerned river for various

developmental activities including the need of the people in

the Basin, have taken place.           At this juncture, the matter

therefore    requires   to   be    considered    in    the    light   of   the

present day situation.
Having     considered    the   entirety     of    the   matter,   in   our

view, the proper course would be to relegate the plaintiff

State to take appropriate proceedings as are open to it in law

afresh,     including   approaching    the    Central        Government    for
4
constituting Inter-State River Water Disputes Tribunal or for

any other appropriate remedy.
We, therefore, dispose of this Suit giving liberty as

aforesaid to the plaintiff State.
At this stage, Mr. Mahfooz Ahsan Nazki, learned Advocate

appearing for the State brought to our notice that the parties

have exchanged pleadings and evidence was placed on record.

If said pleadings and the evidence are to be relied upon, the

plaintiff State may take appropriate steps in accordance with

law at any given stage.
The   Original   Suit   is    disposed   of   in   aforesaid   terms

leaving all questions of law open.
.....................…....CJI.
(UDAY UMESH LALIT)



                                 ............................J.
                                 (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)



                                 ............................J.
                                 (J.B. PARDIWALA)
New Delhi,
September 28, 2022