[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shri Chatrapati Shivaji Gaushala vs The State Of Maharashtra on 30 September, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Hima Kohli
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Crl.A.1719/2022


                                                                                        Reportable

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                        Criminal Appeal No 1719 of 2022
                                      (Arising out of SLP (Crl) No 412 of 2020)


          Shri Chatrapati Shivaji Gaushala                                        Appellant


                                                         Versus


          State of Maharashtra and Others                                         Respondents




                                                  JUDGMENT
1.             Leave granted.
2.             This appeal arises from a judgment and order dated 17 October 2019 of a

          Single Judge of the Aurangabad Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay.
3.             On 17 March 2019, a truck was intercepted and was found to be transporting

          eighteen heads of cattle – fifteen bullocks and three buffaloes. The eighth

          respondent was driving the truck and was unable to provide a satisfactory

          explanation about the relevant permits. The truck was taken to the police station and

          the cattle were seized. FIR No. 59 of 2019 was registered at Parbhani Rural Police

          Station on 17 March 2019 for offences punishable under Section 5A of the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2022.10.12
Maharashtra Animal Preservation (Amendment) Act
1995 1
14:50:00 IST
Reason:                                                                       and
Section 6
of the


          1 Amendment Act 1995 (brought into force on 4 March 2015)
1
Crl.A.1719/2022
Maharashtra Animal Preservation Act
1976 2,
Section 11(1)(d)
of the Prevention of

Cruelty to Animals Act 19603,
Section 117
of the Motor Vehicles Act 1988 and other

allied provisions.
4.     The second to eighth respondents claim to be owners of the seized cattle.

The appellant is a gaushala engaged in the welfare, preservation, and protection of

animals in Parbhani, Maharashtra. An application dated 20 March 2019 was filed

before the Judicial Magistrate First Class, Parbhani 4 by the second to eighth

respondents under
Sections 451
and
457
of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973

seeking interim custody of the cattle on the ground that they were the owners of the

cattle. Thereafter, the appellant also filed an application on 22 March 2019 for interim

custody of the cattle till the conclusion of the trial under the proviso to
Section 8(b)
of

the Maharashtra Act and Rules 3, 4, and 5 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals

(Care and Maintenance of Case Property Animals) Rules, 2017.
5.     By an order dated 1 April 2019, the JMFC allowed the application filed by the

appellant. The JMFC rejected the application by the private respondents, noting that

they did not have proper permits for carrying the cattle in the truck at the relevant

time. The JMFC observed that the cattle will be safe in the custody of the appellant.

In addition, the private respondents were directed to pay an amount of Rs. 100/- per

head of cattle per day towards maintenance and treatment of cattle to the appellant.
6.     The Additional Sessions Judge-3, Parbhani allowed the revision preferred by

the private respondents on 24 April 2019 and held that they were entitled to the

custody of the seized animals, subject to the execution of an indemnity bond for the


2 “
Maharashtra Act
”
3 “
PCA Act
”
4 “JMFC”
2
Crl.A.1719/2022
preservation of the cattle. The Sessions Judge noted that being the owners, the

private respondents had a preferential right to get interim custody of the seized

cattle. The Sessions Judge allowed the revision noting that the trial court failed to

take notice of
Section 457
of the CrPC,.
7.     The order of the Sessions Judge was questioned in a writ petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India by the appellant. The High Court by its

impugned judgment dated 17 October 2019 dismissed the petition. The High Court

upheld the order of the Sessions Judge granting custody to the private respondents

by relying on a decision of this Court in
Manager, Pinjrapole Deudar and Another

v. Chakram Moraji Nat and Others
5. The High Court noted that prima facie, the

material on the record indicated that the cattle were being subjected to cruel

conditions for transportation since as many as eighteen cattle were loaded into one

truck. In this context, the High Court held:
“16. Bearing in mind these principles, if one examines the matter in
                  hand, the only material before the Magistrate which would prima
                  facie show that the cattle was being treated cruelly is the fact that
                  as many as eighteen cattle i.e. fifteen bullocks and three buffaloes
                  were being transported in one vehicle. As has been pointed out by
                  the learned advocate for the petitioner, the Transport of Animals
                  Rules, 1978 framed pursuant to enabling provision contained in
                  section 38 of Prevention of cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 clearly lay
                  down various elaborate provisions laying down specification for
                  transportation of animals. Chapter IV lays down provisions in Rules
                  47 to 56 for transaction of cattle. Rule 56 lays down that when
                  cattle are to be transported by a goods vehicle the vehicle should
                  have a special type of tail board and padding around the sides, it
                  should provide anti sleeping material and no goods vehicle carry
                  more than six cattle. In the matter in hand, as many as eighteen
                  cattle were being transported in one vehicle and such
                  transportation was clearly violative of this rule and constitutes
                  cruelty.”
8.     Nonetheless, the High Court held that there was no material to indicate

that the cattle were physically harmed or that they were placed in danger or were

5 (1998) 6 SCC 520
3
Crl.A.1719/2022
being starved. The High Court noted that there was no apprehension that if they

were returned to their owners, the cattle would face similar cruelty since the

accused had prior criminal antecedents. Relying on the decision of this Court,

noted above, the High Court held that the Magistrate while dealing with an

application for interim custody of the animals ought to have regard to the

circumstances which have been spelt out in the judgment of this Court in
Manager, Pinjrapole Deudar and Another
(supra). The High
Court further held
that the decision of the JMFC to grant interim custody to the appellant on the

basis of the
Section 8(3)
of the Maharashtra Act without taking into consideration

the relevant circumstances was clearly perverse and arbitrary. Hence, on these

grounds, the order of the Sessions Court in revision was not interfered with by the

High Court in the exercise of the writ jurisdiction.
9.     We have heard Dr Manish Singhvi, senior counsel appearing on behalf of

the appellant and Mr Sachin Patil, counsel for the State of Maharashtra.
10.    Notice was issued to the private respondents. The office report indicates

that they are served, but have not entered appearance.
11.
The Maharashtra Act
received the assent of the President on 16 February

1977 and was published in the Maharashtra Government Gazette on 1 March

1977. The enactment was amended by an
Amending Act
of 1995, which received

the assent of the President nearly two decades thereafter on 26 February 2015

and was published in the Maharashtra Government Gazette on 4 March 2015.
4
Crl.A.1719/2022
12.
Section 8
of the Maharashtra Act contains provisions for entry, search,

seizure, and custody. The said provision is extracted below:
“Power of entry, search, seizure and custody.— (1) For the
                  purposes of this Act, the competent authority or any person
                  authorised in writing in that behalf by the competent authority
                  (hereinafter in this section referred to as “the authorised person”)
                  shall have power to enter and inspect any place where the
                  competent authority or the authorised person has reason to believe
                  that an offence under this Act has been, or is likely to be,
                  committed.
(2) Every person in occupation of any such place shall allow the
                  competent authority or authorised person such access to that
                  place as may be necessary for the aforesaid purpose and shall
                  answer to the best of his knowledge and belief any question put to
                  him by the competent authority or the authorised person.
                  (3) Any Police Officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector or any
                  person authorised in this behalf by the State Government, may,
                  with a view to securing compliance of the provisions of
Sections 5-
A, 5-B, 5-C or 5-D, for satisfying himself that the provisions of the
                  said sections have been complied with may,—
(a) enter, stop and search, or authorise any person to enter, stop
                  and search any vehicle used or intended to be used for the export
                  of cow, bull or bullock;
(b) seize or authorise the seizure of cow, bull or bullock in respect
                  of which he suspects that any provision of Sections 5-A, 5-B, 5-C
                  or 5-D has been, is being or is about to be contravened, along with
                  the vehicles in which such cow, bull or bullock are found and there
                  after take or authorise the taking of all measures necessary for
                  securing the production of such cow, bull or bullock and the
                  vehicles so seized, in a court and for their safe custody pending
                  such production:
Provided that pending trial, seized cow, bull or bullock shall be
                  handed over to the nearest Gosadan, Goshala, Panjrapole, Hinsa
                  Nivaran Sangh or such other Animal Welfare Organizations willing
                  to accept such custody and the accused shall be liable to pay for
                  their maintenance for the period they remain in custody with any of
                  the said institutions or organizations as per the orders of the court.
(4) The provisions of
Section 100
of the Code of Criminal
                  Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) relating to search and seizure shall,
                  so far as may be, apply to searches and seizures under this
                  section.
(emphasis supplied)
13.
Section 8(3)
empowers a police officer not below the rank of Sub-

Inspector or a duly authorized person to inter alia seize a cow, bull, or bullock in
5
Crl.A.1719/2022
respect of which he suspects that the provisions of Sections 5A, 5B, 5C, or 5D

are being or are about to be contravened. The provision also authorizes the

seizure of the vehicle in which the cattle are being transported.
Section 5A
of the

Maharashtra Act is in the following terms:
“5-A. Prohibition on transport and export of cow, bull or
                  bullock for slaughter.— (1) No person shall transport or offer for
                  transport or cause to be transported cow, bull or bullock from any
                  place within the State to any place outside the State for the
                  purpose of its slaughter in contravention of the provisions of this
                  Act or with the knowledge that it will be or is likely to be, so
                  slaughtered.
(2) No person shall export or cause to be exported outside the
                  State of Maharashtra cow, bull or bullock for the purpose of
                  slaughter either directly or through his agent or servant or any
                  other person acting on his behalf, in contravention of the provisions
                  of this Act or with the knowledge that it will be or is likely to be
                  slaughtered.”
14.    The proviso to
Section 8(3)
of the Maharashtra Act was inserted by the
Amending Act
of 1995. The proviso stipulates that pending trial, the seized cow,

bull or bullock shall be handed over to the nearest gosadan, goshala, pinjrapole,

hinsa nivaran sangh or such other animal welfare organizations willing to accept

such custody and the accused would be liable to pay for their maintenance for

the period when they remain in custody. The appellants have invoked the proviso

to
Section 8(3)
for claiming custody of the cattle.
15.    Though the High Court noticed the provisions of
Section 8(3)
as amended,

it has relied upon the decision of this Court in
Manager, Pinjrapole Deudar and

Another
(supra). Now that case relates to the power conferred by
Section 35
of

the PCA Act.
Section 35(2)
of the said enactment is in the following terms:
6
Crl.A.1719/2022
“35. Treatment and care of animals: ***

                  (2) The Magistrate before whom a prosecution for an offence
                  against this Act has been instituted may direct that the animal
                  concerned shall be treated and cared for in an infirmary, until it is fit
                  to perform its usual work or is otherwise fit for discharge, or that it
                  shall be sent to a pinjrapole, or, if the veterinary officer in charge of
                  the area in which the animal is found or such other veterinary
                  officer as may be authorised in this behalf by rules made under this
                  Act certifies that it is incurable or cannot be removed without
                  cruelty, that it shall be destroyed.”
16.    While interpreting the above provision, this Court in
Manager, Pinjrapole

Deudar and Another
(supra) noted that:
“8. *** Under sub-section (2), the Magistrate may order that:
(a) the animal shall be treated and cared for in an infirmary till
                  such time it is fit to perform its usual work or is otherwise fit for
                  discharge;
(b) the animal shall be sent to a pinjrapole; or
(c) the animal shall be destroyed if it is certified by a Veterinary
                  Officer, authorised under the Rules, to be incurable or if it is found
                  that it cannot be removed without cruelty.”
17.    It was in this backdrop that this Court in
Manager, Pinjrapole Deudar and

Another
(supra) held that the
Section 35(2)
vests in the JMFC a discretion to

give interim custody of the animals to a pinjrapole. This Court observed:
“10. Now adverting to the contention that under
Section 35(2)
, in
                  the event of the animal not being sent to an infirmary, the
                  Magistrate is bound to give the interim custody to a pinjrapole, we
                  find it difficult to accede to it. We have noted above the options
                  available to the Magistrate under
Section 35(2)
. That sub-section
                  vests in the Magistrate the discretion to give interim custody of the
                  animal to a pinjrapole. The material part of the sub-section (shorn
                  of other details) will read, the Magistrate may direct that the animal
                  concerned shall be sent to a pinjrapole. Sub-section (2) does not
                  say that the Magistrate shall send the animals to a pinjrapole. It is
                  thus evident that the expression “shall be sent” is a part of the
                  direction to be given by the Magistrate if in his discretion he
                  decides to give interim custody to a pinjrapole. It follows that under
Section 35(2)
of the Act, the Magistrate has discretion to hand over
                  interim custody of the animal to a pinjrapole but he is not bound to
                  hand over custody of the animal to a pinjrapole in the event of not
                  sending it to an infirmary. In a case where the owner is claiming
                  the custody of the animal, the pinjrapole has no preferential right.
7
Crl.A.1719/2022
In deciding whether the interim custody of the animal be given to
                  the owner who is facing prosecution, or to the pinjrapole, the
                  following factors will be relevant:
(1) the nature and gravity of the offence alleged against the
                  owner;
(2) whether it is the first offence alleged or he has been found
                  guilty of offences under the Act earlier;
(3) if the owner is facing the first prosecution under the Act, the
                  animal is not liable to be seized, so the owner will have a better
                  claim for the custody of the animal during the prosecution;
(4) the condition in which the animal was found at the time of
                  inspection and seizure;
(5) the possibility of the animal being again subjected to cruelty.
There cannot be any doubt that establishment of the pinjrapole is
                  with the laudable object of preventing unnecessary pain or
                  suffering to animals and providing protection to them and birds. But
                  it should also be seen:
(a) whether the pinjrapole is functioning as an independent
                  organization or under the scheme of the Board and is answerable
                  to the Board; and
(b) whether the pinjrapole has a good record of taking care of the
                  animals given under its custody.”
18.    The above observations of this Court interpret
Section 35(2)
of the PCA

Act. As the court noted, the said provision does not contain a mandate that the

Magistrate shall send the animal to a pinjrapole. Under that provision, the

Magistrate has a discretion to hand over interim custody of the animal to a

pinjrapole, but is not bound to do so.
19.    In the present case, the High Court upon evaluating the circumstances in

which the cattle were being transported arrived at a prima facie conclusion that

as many as eighteen cattle were being transported in one vehicle. The High

Court has also noted that this constituted cruelty as it violated Rule 56 of the

Transport of Animal Rules 1978 framed in accordance with the enabling
8
Crl.A.1719/2022
provisions of
Section 38
of the PCA Act. The amended provisions of the
Maharashtra Act
have received the assent of the President.
20.    The intention of the legislature in incorporating the proviso to
Section 8(3)
was to give effect to the object of the
Maharashtra Act
to preserve and protect

cows, bulls, and bullocks useful for milch, breeding, draught, or agricultural

purposes. The proviso to
Section 8(3)
of the Maharashtra Act provides for

handing over of the seized cow, bull, or bullock to the nearest gosadan, goshala,

pinjrapole, hinsa nivaran sangh or such other animal welfare organization willing

to accept such custody. In the present case, the appellant was willing and ready

to accept custody of the seized cattle. In light of the prima facie observation that

the private respondents were in violation of the Transport of Animal Rules 1978, it

was incumbent upon the High Court to ensure that the seized cattle would be

properly preserved and maintained until the conclusion of the trial proceedings.
21.    The appellant has shown its willingness to accept the interim custody of

the cattle. In view of the fact that private respondents were prima facie carrying

the cattle in cruel conditions without a valid permit, the JMFC rightly concluded

that the cattle would be safe in the custody of the appellant instead of the private

respondents. In view of the above findings, the ultimate direction which was

issued by the High Court was contrary to the proviso to
Section 8(3)
of the

Maharashtra Act and would have to be set aside, while restoring the order of the

JMFC. We order accordingly.
22.    The Court has been apprised of the fact that since the seizure of the cattle

in February 2019, two of the cattle have died, leaving sixteen cattle in the
9
Crl.A.1719/2022
balance, with the appellant. In such matters, it is necessary that the trial for

offences punishable under the
Maharashtra Act
must take place expeditiously

and that it should be concluded preferably within a period of six months. This

would ensure that the animals do not continue to remain in custody under the

provisions of the proviso to
Section 8(3)
of the Maharashtra Act for an indefinite

period. We issue a direction in those terms.
23.
In an order of a two-Judge Bench of this Court dated 25 January 2022 in
Jagatguru Sant Tukaram Goshala v. The State of Maharashtra and Another6
,

the Court noted a factual situation in which the cattle which were seized on 24

July 2012, continued to remain under custody for a decade and would have

broadly outlived their commercial utility. In the present case, as noted above, two

of the cattle have died. This leads to the conclusion that trials for offences

punishable under the
Maharashtra Act
must be concluded expeditiously. The

courts concerned shall take all necessary steps to conclude the trials within a

period of six months so as to bring finality.
24.    The appeal is allowed in the above terms. The impugned judgment and

order of the High Court dated 17 October 2019 is set-aside. The order of the

JMFC dated 1 April 2019 stands restored. However, the appellants have stated

before this Court that they will not insist on claiming any compensation for the

maintenance of the animals pending the trial. Since a substantial period has

already elapsed, the JMFC shall conclude the trial within three months.




6 Criminal Appeal No. 132 of 2022
10
Crl.A.1719/2022
25.    Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
.............…...….......………………........J.
                                        [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                        …....…........…………….……….…........J.
                                        [Hima Kohli]


        New Delhi;
September 30, 2022
        CKB
11