[Cites
12
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Chherturam @ Chainu vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 13 September, 2022
Author:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
Abhay S. Oka
,
Vikram Nath
REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1317 OF 2022


                         CHHERTURAM @ CHAINU                                        …Appellant


                                                          Versus


                         STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                                   …Respondent



                                                   JUDGMENT
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1.    We are faced with a case of patricide albeit both the father and the

                           son were drinking together.
2.    In the intervening night of 26th and 27th July, 2010, between 10.00

                           pm and 12.30 am, the effect of alcohol may have resulted in a quarrel

                           inter se the father and the son. The informer, Chamruram (PW-8), who is

                           a neighbour, on reaching their house found the appellant assaulting his
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
BALA PARVATHI
Date: 2022.09.13
father, Goienda, the deceased, with Nagar Wood. The deceased fell to
18:44:42 IST
Reason:
1
the ground and died. In the presence of the appellant’s brother, PW-4,

the appellant admitted that he killed his father. The FIR was lodged by

PW-8 in the Police Station Darima next morning and the appellant was

arrested on 28.07.2010. On his disclosure statement regarding a lungi as

well as Nagar Wood, the same were found at the courtyard of his house

and then sent to Forensic Science Laboratory, Raipur, for chemical

examination.
3.    It is necessary to set out the result of the autopsy, which opined

that the injuries on the dead body were caused by some hard and blunt

object between half to two hours of death. These injuries were stated to

be fatal to life and sufficient to cause death to the deceased. There were

eleven injuries found, as under:
“1. On the right side of the head of the deceased a torn wound was
      present from front to back in the parietal region to a depth of
      2.5x1/4xinch to the depth of the bone;
2. On the front of the head 2x1 / 4 inch size dark blue torn wound
      was there, on which swelling was present all around;
3. On the back left side of the head 4 inches rounded one contusion
      was present, inside which blood clot was present;
4. 3x2 inch size one contusion was present near left ear;
5. On the front and left side of the neck 6x4 inch part swelling and
2
blue colored contusions were present;
6. On the left cheek in the 4x4 inch part, there were contusions
      with swelling;
7. The sternum bone on the chest was broken and there was a
      blood clot beneath it and there was a blue colour contusion,
      present on the chest;
8. On the right chest, in 4x4 inch area, contusion was present due
      to which the second, third, fourth rib were broken and blood had
      accumulated beneath the broken rib;
9. On the left chest there was a 6x2 inch size contusion present and
      beneath it the first, second, third and fourth ribs were broken and
      blood clot had accumulated beneath the broken ribs;
10. On the back and left abdominal side, 3 contusions were
      present, which were of 3X2, 5X2 inches and 7X2 inches in size;
and
11. The left eye was red in color and swelling was present in it.”


      On an internal examination of the dead body, alcohol was found

present inside the deceased’s stomach. The cause of death was stated to

be haemorrhage shock caused by the fatal injuries to the vital organs and

death was homicidal in nature.
4.    On completion of investigation, a charge sheet was filed before the

Judicial Magistrate, 1st Class, Ambikapur, who committed the case to the
3
court of Sessions. Charges were framed under
Section 302
of the Indian

Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as ‘the
IPC
’) on 08.03.2011 and the

prosecution examined ten witnesses.
5.    The appellant pleaded innocence in his statement under
Section

313
of the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter referred to as ‘the
CrPC
’) but admitted that he and the deceased were residing together in

the same house.
6.    The learned Additional Sessions Judge vide the judgment dated

15.10.2012 convicted the appellant finding him guilty of causing a

homicidal death amounting to murder under
Sections 302
of the IPC and

sentenced to undergo RI for life with a fine of Rs.1,000/- and in default

to undergo additional RI for four months. It was opined that the case of

the prosecution was based on direct evidence, judicial confession, seizure

based on appellant’s statement and on circumstantial evidence that the

body of the deceased was found in the appellant’s house.
7.    On appeal being preferred before the High Court, the same was

dismissed by the impugned judgment dated 08.04.2015. The evidence

was analysed threadbare including the statement of neighbours, who
4
were prosecution witnesses stating that the appellant and the deceased

   were residing in the same house and on being informed about the death

   of the deceased, they went to the house and saw the dead body of the

   deceased.
8.    On the Special Leave Petition being preferred, notice was issued

   on 18.07.2022. The only aspect, on which notice was issued on

   18.07.2022, was on the plea of the learned counsel for the appellant that

   the present case would fall under
Section 304
Part-I of the
IPC
and not
Section 302
of the IPC. The appellant had already undergone actual

   sentence of twelve years by then.
9.    Arguments have been heard on the aforesaid aspect after grant of

   leave on 22.08.2022.
Submissions on behalf of the Appellant:
10.   Learned counsel for the appellant contended that both the appellant

   and the deceased were consuming liquor and started fighting under the

   influence of liquor. In this altercation, the appellant picked up a Nagar

   Wood and inflicted few injuries to his father, which resultantly caused

   death. There was no motivation and intention, which means that the
5
essential ingredients of
Section 300
of IPC were absent and the

      conviction under
Section 302
of IPC was erroneous. Moreover, alcohol

      was also found in the stomach of the deceased.
11.     It may be noticed that the learned counsel for the appellant sought

      to contend on the aspect of whether the conviction could be based on the

      last seen theory. However, that is not the aspect on which notice was

      issued.
Submissions on behalf of the Respondent:
12.     Learned counsel for the respondent sought to initially contend that

      in case of the homicide committed within the privacy of a house, there is

      burden on the inmates to offer a cogent explanation for the crime

      committed. The testimonies of witnesses established the crime. Once

      again, we have to say that that is not an aspect, which is required to be

      examined by us in view of the limited notice issued.
13.     On the issue of the nature of offence, learned counsel for the State

      relied upon the judgment in
Surain Singh v. State of Punjab
1 to make

      out a case under Exception 4 of
Section 300
of the IPC.
Section 300
1
(2017)
5
SCC 796
6
reads as under:
“300. Murder.—Except in the cases hereinafter excepted,
          culpable homicide is murder, if the act by which the death is
          caused is done with the intention of causing death, or—

          Secondly —If it is done with the intention of causing such
          bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the
          death of the person to whom the harm is caused, or—

          Thirdly —If it is done with the intention of causing bodily
          injury to any person and the bodily injury intended to be
          inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause
          death, or—

          Fourthly —If the person committing the act knows that it is so
          imminently dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause
          death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and
          commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of
          causing death or such injury as aforesaid.
xxxx                xxxx                xxxx                xxxx

          Exception 4.—Culpable homicide is not murder if it is
          committed without premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat
          of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the offender
          having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual
          manner.
Explanation.—It is immaterial in such cases which party offers
          the provocation or commits the first assault.”
14.   In order to make out a case under Exception 4 aforesaid, it was

pleaded that there were two essential ingredients: (i) the accused did not

act with premeditation, and (ii) the accused did not act in a cruel or brutal
7
manner taking advantage of the situation. Hence the nature of injuries is

      an important factor in determining whether the death was caused due to a

      sudden fight.
15.     Learned counsel referred to the judgment in
Manokaran v. State

      of T.N.2
, wherein this Court refused to entertain the case within

      Exception 4 of
Section 300
of the IPC due to the nature of injuries, which

      showed cruelty and brutality meted out to injure a person on the root of

      the neck.
16.     In applying the said principles to the facts of the present case, it is

      submitted that there were eleven injuries on the vital areas such as skull,

      chest and abdomen leading to breaking of sternum as well as second,

      third and fourth rib to demonstrate that the appellant acted with brutality.

      Hence, the present case cannot fall under the Fourth Exception to
Section

      300
of IPC.
17.     Learned counsel for the respondent also made a reference to
Section 86
of the IPC, which reads as under:
“86. Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge
                  committed by one who is intoxicated.—In cases where an act
2
(2010) 15 SCC 562
8
done is not an offence unless done with a particular knowledge
                  or intent, a person who does the act in a state of intoxication
                  shall be liable to be dealt with as if he had the same knowledge
                  as he would have had if he had not been intoxicated, unless the
                  thing which intoxicated him was administered to him without
                  his knowledge or against his will.”
18.     It was, thus, the submission made by the respondent that merely

      because the appellant and the deceased had consumed liquor together,

      full knowledge is liable to be attributed to the appellant and the defence

      of being under the influence of liquor is not something which was

      available to him.
19.     It was further contended that the benefit of
Section 300
Fourthly

      extends to act committed by an offender with the knowledge that the

      result of such acts will be death approximates a practical certainty/a very

      high degree of probability. The nature of injuries in the present case

      indicates that death was a practical certainty. Therefore, the conviction

      of the appellant was liable to be sustained under
Section 302
of the IPC.3


Conclusion:
20.     We have examined within the limited contours of the aforesaid

      facts and the principles of law enunciated. There is no doubt that the
3
A.P. v. Rayavarapu Punnayya
(1976) 4 SCC 382
9
parties were closely related, being the father and the son. There was no

prior dispute. Liquor got the better of the appellant. That, however, is no

defence in view of
Section 86
of the IPC.
21.   We have to thus turn to the fact that there was no prior intent but in

the sudden fight, injuries were inflicted. It is necessary to look to the

injuries in this behalf which had been enumerated hereinabove. There

were eleven injuries! It is not only the number of injuries but where and

in what manner they were inflicted, even if it is by a piece of Nagar

Wood and not by a dangerous weapon. There were multiple injuries on

the head – on the right side, on the front side, on the back left side, near

the left ear, on the front and left side of the neck and on the left cheek.

The sternum bone on the chest was broken and there was a blood clot

beneath it. On the right chest, 4X4 inch area contusion was present due to

which the second, third, fourth rib were broken and blood had

accumulated beneath the broken rib. Similarly on the left chest, there was

a 6X2 inches size contusion. The contusions were also present on the

back and left abdominal side. It is clearly a case of mercilessly beating on

all the vital parts of the body and reigning blows, albeit with a wood

piece, on head and on different parts of the head again and again.
With
10
these kinds of blows, there would be no possibility of the deceased

       surviving. Maybe it was under the influence of liquor, but the nature of

       blows was such that the endeavour was to end the life of the deceased,

       the father. It was certainly an act in a cruel and brutal manner taking

       advantage of the situation even if there was no pre-meditation. The

       factual scenario would, thus, fall within the ratio of
Manokaran4
case.
22.    Sympathy for the son in such a scenario would be misplaced. The

       victim was the father. The appellant must take the consequences of such

       merciless attack on his father. There is no cause made out for application

       of Exception 4 of
Section 300
.
23.    The only redeeming feature is that the appellant has already

       undergone 12 years of sentence and on completion of the sentence, as per

       remission policy, he would be liable to be considered for release. The

       only aspect which we are inclined to consider is to issue a direction to the

       State to consider the case of the appellant for remission, the moment he

       completes the mandatory sentence as per the policy for such

       consideration.
4
(supra)
11
24.   The appeal is accordingly disposed of in the aforesaid terms

  leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
………………………J.
                                                   [Sanjay Kishan Kaul]



                                          ............... ....……………………J.
                                          [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha]
New Delhi.
September 13, 2022.
12