[Cites
23
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Munikrishna @ Krishna vs State By Ulsoor Ps on 30 September, 2022
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
ITEM NO.1501                           COURT NO.6                      SECTION II-C

                              S U P R E M E C O U R T O F               I N D I A
2022 INSC 1322                        RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

                              Criminal Appeal       No(s).       1597-1600/2022

         MUNIKRISHNA @ KRISHNA ETC.                                            Appellant(s)

                                                        VERSUS

         STATE BY ULSOOR PS                                                    Respondent(s)

         (IA No. 115273/2020 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)

         Date : 30-09-2022 These matters were called on for pronouncement of
         Judgment today.

         For Appellant(s)            Mr. Lakshmeesh S. Kamath, AOR
                                     Mr. Kaustubh Shukla, Adv.
                                     Ms. Samriti Ahuja, Adv.
                                     Ms. Nancy Shamim, Adv.

         For Respondent(s)           Mr. V. N. Raghupathy, AOR


                 Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sudhanshu Dhulia pronounced the reportable

         Judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble The Chief Justice, Hon’ble

         Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat and His Lordship.

                 The     operative       portion        of   the    Judgment    is     reproduced

         hereunder :-

                       “17.   In   view    of     the    above,    these    appeals    are
                       allowed,    the    order    of    the     Sessions   Judge    dated
                       19.03.2003 and the High Court dated 31.08.2010 are
                       hereby set aside, the appellants shall be released
                       from jail, unless they are wanted in some other
                       crime.”

                 Pending interlocutory application(s), if any, is/are disposed

         of.


         (JAYANT KUMAR ARORA)                                               (RENU BALA GAMBHIR)
         ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                                              COURT MASTER

                       (Signed reportable Judgment is placed on the file)
                                                       REPORTABLE

            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
         CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.1597-1600 OF 2022
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) Nos.8792-8795 of
                            2022)


    MUNIKRISHNA @ KRISHNA ETC.              ……APPELLANT(S)

                               VERSUS

    STATE BY ULSOOR PS                      ………RESPONDENT


                            JUDGMENT
Sudhanshu Dhulia, J.
The   appellants    before   us   have   challenged   the

    judgment and order dated 31.8.2010 passed by the High

    Court of Karnataka in a Criminal Appeal which has upheld

    the order of conviction and sentence passed by the Trial

    Court against the appellants which convicted the appellants

    under Section 302 read with
Section 34
IPC, and has

    sentenced them for life imprisonment. We had heard Shri

    Lakshmeesh S. Kamath, learned counsel for the appellant

    and Shri Nikhil Goel, learned Additional Advocate General

    for the State at length on 24.08.2022 and granted leave in

    the case, which was then reserved for judgment.
2.   An FIR was lodged on 12.10.2000 at 1:15 PM mid night,

which was the intervening night between 11th October and

12th October, 2000 by the son-in-law of the deceased, S.

Ramakrishnan. As per the FIR, his father-in-law, who was

seventy-two years of age, and was living alone in house

No.19/1 Haudin Road, Ulsoor, was murdered by some

unknown persons. The deceased last spoke to his daughter

(wife of the informant), at about 6:30 PM that evening.

Informant then says that his wife and him left their house in

the evening that day (11.10.2000) to attend a dinner

engagement. They returned home at about 11:15 PM. On

their return they received a call from a cousin Dr. B. Anarth

Narayan, of the Indian Institute of Sciences. Dr. Narayan

informed him that he had received a telephone call at about

10.00 PM, from one Sundar who is a neighbour of his father-

in-law. Sundar had informed that the gates of the house of

his father-in-law were open and lights were also on, which

seemed unusual at that hour in the night. On this

information, the informant and his wife rushed to the house

of his father-in-law. He was apprehending that his father-in-

law may have collapsed, since he had a history of heart

disease. When they reached the house at around 11.30 PM,

they immediately had an impression as if something was
burning in the kitchen. This drew them to the kitchen, where

they found the dead body of S. Ramakrishnan. They also

noticed that the cupboards of the living room were open and

the purse of her father was missing where he normally kept

approximately Rs.3000/-. They immediately informed the

Police and the FIR was lodged and Criminal Case No.600 of

2000 was registered for the offence punishable under
Section 302
at Police Station, Ulsoor, Bengaluru and

investigation commenced.
3.   Meanwhile, Inquest had started at about 07:00 AM in

the morning of 12.10.2000, and it is completed at 09:30 AM

that day.    The inquest report states that a male person

about 72 years old by the name of        S. Ramakrishnan s/o

Subbaraya Ayyer, found dead at No. 19/1, Haudin Road,

Ulsoor, Bengaluru on the day of 12.10.2000.
Then it records: -
“The dead body is lying in blood pool in
            kitchen at Door No. 19/1, Haudin Road,
            Ulsoor, facing the sky. Head facing West
            and legs towards East. Eyes are open. A
            4” long bleeding injury is found in
            deceased’s neck; it is found to be cut with
            a sharp weapon. Both the hands are
            stretched on the body. Cut injury caused
            in neck is found to be caused by some
            antisocial elements. Deceased is wearing
1) A cross-belt, 2) White full arm banyan,
3) White underwear, 4) White dhothi. All
         clothes are full of blood.
The dead body is found in kitchen at door
         No. 19/1, Haudin Road, Ulsoor, the main
         door of the house is facing North, ‘kitchen
         door is to the West, on entering the
         kitchen, the dead body is lying on the
         floor facing the sky with head towards
         West and legs towards East. Not found in
         water. Not in well.
On 12-10-2000 at 9.30 AM, Sri. NS.
Ramachandrappa, Police Inspector of
         Ulsoor Police Station, in order to know the
         actual cause for deceased’s death, sent
         the dead body to Bowring Hospital Doctor
         through Sri. Giriyaiah PC-2539.
Sri. N.S. Ramachandra, P.I. has ordered PC
         2539 to handover the dead body to
         deceased’s     blood     relatives    after
         postmortem, to perform obsequies.
On 11-10-2000. Some culprits have
         murdered     the    diseased   Sri.   S.
         Rakakrishnan, 72 years in the kitchen of
         his residence in between 6.30 PM and
         11.30 PM and escaped from there by
         stealing around Rs.3000/- from the
         cupboard, by cutting his neck with some
         sharp weapon. However, we the Panchas
         opine that the dead body should be sent
         to postmortem to find out the actual
         cause of deceased’s death.”
4.   A post-mortem was conducted on 12.10.2000 between

10:30-11:30 AM. The post-mortem report indicates that

there were seven ante mortem injuries which are as follows:
“1. Horizontally placed Incised wound present
      over front of neck on the midline situated 8 cm
      below middle of Chin and 4 cm above level of
       suprasternal notch measuring 13 cm X 5 cm X
       cervical vertebrae deep, underneath muscles
       of front and sides of neck, Jugular veins on
       both sides, carotid arteries on both sides,
       trachea and oesophagus cut completely and
       the body of 5th Cervical Vertebrae cut
       superficially, blood extravasated around,
       margins are clean cut.
2. Obliquely placed incised wound over left
       side frontal region situated 1 cm above inner
       end of left eye brow measuring 4 cm X 1 cm X
       bone deep.
3. Incised wound over right side of neck
       situated 6 cm below right ear lobule measuring
       2.5 cm X 1 cm X muscle deep.
4. Incised wound present 1 cm below injury
       No.3 measuring 2 cm X 1 cm X muscle deep.
5. Superficial incised wound over left side of
       neck situated 4 cm below left ear lobule
       measuring 4cm X 0.5 cm X skin deep.
6. Superficial incised wound over front and
       upper part. of right side chest over right sterno
       clavicular joint measuring 4 cm X 0.5 cm X
       skin deep.
7. Superficial incised wound over front and
       upper part of left side chest, over left sterno
       clavicular joint 3 cm X 0.5 cm X skin deep.”
5.   Undoubtedly, it is a very heinous crime which has been

committed in the night of 11th October, 2000, where a

seventy-two-year-old man was done to death. In all

probability he died because of the main injury that is injury

No.1 which is a 13 cm x 5 cm deep incised wound on the
front neck cutting jugular veins on both sides. The death

would have been in a few minutes due to the excessive loss

of blood. The post-mortem was conducted by Dr. Nissar

Ahmad, who was the Assistant Professor in the Department

of Forensic Medicines Bowring Hospital, Bangalore Medical

College, Bangalore. He was later, examined in the trial as

PW-5. According to him, all the wearing apparels of the

deceased, like white lungi, white Katcha, white baniyan and

white sacred thread were all stained with blood, which were

all handed over to the police.     He had noticed the ante

mortem injuries, as already referred above. All the injuries

were fresh injuries. On opening the dead body, he found all

the internal organs intact but pale.   His opinion was that

death was due to shock and hemorrhage due to the ante

mortem injuries in the front neck. On being questioned by

the Court he replied that a person who sustains such

injuries in the front neck, can only survive for a few seconds

and death is immediate and the injured cannot raise his

voice.   This expert witness is referring to in particular to

injury No.1, referred above. In his post mortem report the

cause of death is given as :-
“Death was due to shock and
          hemorrhage as a result of injury over
          front of neck sustained.”
6.   Meanwhile the investigation had commenced in the

present   case.    The      present    appellants   were,    however

arrested by PW-15 who was the Police Inspector and

Investigation Officer in another case of dacoity and murder

which was registered at Police Station, Vijayanagar as Crime

No.674    of    1999     under
Sections     354
/
397
,      IPC.   This

Investigation     Officer    (PW-15)    received    information     on

31.01.2001 about the location of an accused called ‘Dodda

Hanuma’. Dodda Hanuma was also an accused in this case

and had faced trial and was convicted like the other

appellants (he is, however, not before this Court amongst

the present appellants). The information received was that

Dodda Hanuma had escaped from the Chittor Jail after

assaulting the staff of the jail. Following the lead, this Police

Inspector (PW-15) along with some Constables reached

Eachanoor village and caught the accused along with four

other persons at about 9.00 PM. All the five persons were

taken into custody and were brought to Vijayanagar Police

Station and were formally arrested on 01.02.2001. A

voluntary statement was then given by Dodda Hanuma

(Accused No. 2), and finally all the five accused confessed

that they had committed the dastardly murder of S.
Ramakrishnan on that fateful night of 11.10.2000. They also

volunteered to show the place where they had committed

the crime on the night of 11.10.2000 (i.e. House No. 19/1,

Haudin Road), and how they murdered the old aged person

and then decamped with the cash and jewelry. They led the

Police party to the said house that is House No. 19/1, Haudin

Road, showed the exact place where they had committed

murder and got away with the cash and jewelry. Meanwhile

a videography statement of the accused was also recorded.

The videography was done by one, Sadashiva (PW-16), on

08.02.2001.
7.     Consequent to the voluntary statement given by Doda

Hanuma, the police party was led to Raja Market, Nagaraj

Complex to Shop No. 167, i.e., Satyanarayana Jewellery

Mart    where   the   accused   Doda    Hanuma     identified

Janardhana Shetty (P.W.-17) of the said Jewelry Mart and

asked him to produce the jewels which he had sold to him.

These were the jewels pertaining to Kamakshipalya case

and Ulsoor case (present case). Janardhana Shetty, then

produced a golden ingot, a pair of golden ear rings having

red stones and also drops pertaining to the said pair of ear
rings. The Police seized the said property and prepared a

mahazar in the presence of the panchas which is Ex. P-14.
8.   Police after its investigation filed its chargesheet for

the offences under
Section 302
read with 34
IPC
, against all

the accused. The case was committed to the Sessions Court

and then assigned to the IVth Additional City Civil and

Sessions    Judge,   Mayohall,   Bangalore.   On   19.03.2003

charges were framed against the accused under
Section

302
/
396
, read with
Section 34
IPC. Ultimately the accused

were convicted by the Trial Court under
Section 302
read

with
Section 34
IPC. Out of the five accused, who faced the

trial and were convicted and their conviction sentence was

upheld by the High Court, we have only four          accused

before this court. They are as follows :-
1. Appellant No.1, Munikrishna @ Krishna (accused

           No.4)
2. Appellant No.2, Nallathimma (accused No.3)
3. Appellant No.3, Lakshmi (accused No.5)
4. Appellant No.4, Venkatesh @ Chandra (accused

           No.1)
9.    Undoubtedly, it is a case of homicide. The question is

whether the prosecution has been able to prove the case

against the present appellants, beyond reasonable doubt.

The prosecution in order to establish its case had examined

as many as 17 prosecution witnesses, apart from other

exhibits such as forensic and other material, seizure memo

of the discovery of weapon of crime and the gold ornament

from the jewelry shop, etc.
10.   PW-1 & PW-2 respectively are the son-in-law and

daughter of the deceased. They were the one who had first

discovered   the   dead   body   on   that   fateful   night   of

11.10.2000. PW-3 is the witness of the inquest reports, PW-4

is the witness for the seizure memo mahazar (Ex. P2). PW-5

is the Doctor who conducted the post-mortem, PW-6 is the

watchman, who was on the watch between 9.30 PM to 5.30

AM. PW-7 is the witness who accompanied the accused to

the place of incident. PW-8 is the constable who shifted the

dead body from the house of the deceased to the hospital

for post-mortem. PW-15 is the Inspector of Police Station,

Vijayanagar and the investigating officer, investigating

another crime who had arrested the present appellant on

01.02.2001, and PW-9 & PW-14 are the police personnel
who accompanied him when he had apprehended the

accused. PW-10 is the independent witness for the seizure

memo of knife (the weapon of crime), and the witness which

led to the discovery of the knife on the pointing out of

Accused No.1. Similarly, PW-11 is the witness to the seizure

memo of the golden ingot from the ‘Satyanarayana

Jewellery Mart’. PW-12 is the police Sub-Inspector of police

station, Ulsoor, who had received the telephonic message

about the crime, at about 11.45 PM on 11.10.2000, saw the

dead body and then took PW-1 with him to the police station

to lodge the FIR. PW-13 is the police inspector who took up

the investigation further and finally filed the chargesheet in

the case.     PW-16 is the videographer who had video

graphed     the statements of the     accused persons.

PW-17 is the propriety of the Satyanarayana Jewellery Mart.

PW-15 is the Police Inspector who had apprehended the

accused while he was investigating another crime. As we

can see there is no direct evidence in the case. There is no

forensic or scientific evidence which links any of the present

appellants to the crime.    The so-called discovery of the

weapon of crime and the discovery of stolen gold material is

also severely flawed. It is thus in sum and substance

entirely a case of circumstantial evidence.
11.   It is a case of circumstantial evidence and in a case of

circumstantial evidence, the entire chain of evidence must

be complete and the conclusions which is arrived after

examining the chain of evidence must point towards the

culpability of the accused and to no other conclusion. This,

however,    is    clearly    missing     from   the   case    of   the

prosecution. The entire case of the prosecution is based on

the   so-called     confessional        statements    or     voluntary

statements given by accused Nos. 1 to 5 (all the present

appellants) while they were in police custody. Statement

given by an accused to police under
Section 161
of CrPC is

not   admissible     as     evidence.    The    so-called    evidence

discovered under
section 27
of Indian Evidence Act, 1872,

i.e., the recovery of stolen items and the recovery of the

weapon are also very doubtful.
12.   In a case of circumstantial evidence, the Court has to

scrutinize each and every circumstantial possibility, which is

placed before it in the form of an evidence and the evidence

must point towards only one conclusion, which is the guilt

of the accused. In other words, a very heavy duty is cast

upon the prosecution to prove its case, beyond reasonable

doubt. As early as in 1952, this Court in its seminal
       judgment of Hanumant Govind Nargundkar & Anr. v.
State of Madhya Pradesh1 had laid down the parameters

       under which the case of circumstantial evidence is to be

       evaluated. It states: -
“… It is well to remember that in cases where the
                 evidence is of a circumstantial nature, the
                 circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt
                 is to be drawn should in the first instance be fully
                 established and all the facts so established
                 should be consistent only with the hypothesis of
                 the    guilt   of   the   accused.     Again,   the
                 circumstances should be of a conclusive nature
                 and tendency and they should be such as to
                 exclude every hypothesis but the one proposed
                 to be proved. In other words, there must be a
                 chain of evidence so far complete as not to leave
                 any reasonable ground for a conclusion
                 consistent with the innocence of the accused and
                 it must be such as to show that within all human
                 probability the act must have been done by the
                 accused…”


               Hanumant (supra) has been consistently followed by this

       Court.
To name a few, Tufail (Alias) Simmi v. State of Uttar

       Pradesh2 ,
Ram     Gopal v. State    of    Maharashtra3
and
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra4
.
In
Musheer Khan @ Badshah Khan & Anr. v. State of

       Madhya         Pradesh5
dated   28.01.2010,    this   Court   while

       discussing the nature of circumstantial evidence and the

       burden of proof of prosecution stated as under: -
1 AIR 1952 SC 343
2 (1969) 3 SCC 198
3 (1972) 4 SCC 625
4 (1984) 4 SCC 116
5 (2010) 2 SCC 748
“39. In a case of circumstantial evidence,
one must look for complete chain of
circumstances and not on snapped and
scattered links which do not make a
complete sequence. This Court finds that this
case is entirely based on circumstantial
evidence. While appreciating circumstantial
evidence, the Court must adopt a cautious
approach as circumstantial evidence is
“inferential evidence” and proof in such a
case is derivable by inference from
circumstances.
40. Chief Justice Fletcher Moulton once
observed that “proof does not mean rigid
mathematical formula” since “that is
impossible”. However, proof must mean such
evidence as would induce a reasonable man
to    come     to   a   definite   conclusion.
Circumstantial evidence, on the other hand,
has been compared by Lord Coleridge “like a
gossamer thread, light and as unsubstantial
as the air itself and may vanish with the
merest of touches”. The learned Judge also
observed that such evidence may be strong
in parts but it may also leave great gaps and
rents through which the accused may
escape. Therefore, certain rules have been
judicially evolved for appreciation of
circumstantial evidence.
41. To my mind, the first rule is that the facts
alleged as the basis of any legal inference
from circumstantial evidence must be clearly
proved beyond any reasonable doubt. If
conviction rests solely on circumstantial
evidence, it must create a network from
which there is no escape for the accused.
The facts evolving out of such circumstantial
evidence must be such as not to admit of
any inference except that of guilt of the
accused.         (See
Raghav          Prapanna
Tripathi v. State of U.P.
[AIR 1963 SC 74 :
(1963) 1 Cri LJ 70] )
42. The second principle is that all the links
in the chain of evidence must be proved
beyond reasonable doubt and they must
exclude the evidence of guilt of any other
person than the accused. (See
State of
U.P. v. Dr. Ravindra Prakash Mittal
[(1992) 3
SCC 300 : 1992 SCC (Cri) 642 : 1992 Cri LJ
3693] , SCC p. 309, para 20.)
43. While    appreciating      circumstantial
evidence, we must remember the principle
laid down in
Ashraf Ali v. King Emperor
[21
CWN 1152 : 43 IC 241] (IC at para 14) that
when in a criminal case there is conflict
between presumption of innocence and any
other presumption, the former must prevail.
44. The next principle is that in order to
justify the inference of guilt, the inculpatory
facts must be incompatible with the
innocence of the accused and are incapable
of explanation upon any other reasonable
hypothesis except his guilt.
45. When a murder charge is to be proved
solely on circumstantial evidence, as in this
case, presumption of innocence of the
accused must have a dominant role.
In
Nibaran Chandra Roy v. King Emperor
[11
CWN 1085] it was held that the fact that an
accused person was found with a gun in his
hand immediately after a gun was fired and a
man was killed on the spot from which the
gun was fired may be strong circumstantial
evidence against the accused, but it is an
error of law to hold that the burden of
proving innocence lies upon the accused
under such circumstances. It seems,
therefore, to follow that whatever force a
presumption arising under
Section 106
of the
Evidence Act may have in civil or in less
serious criminal cases, in a trial for murder it
is extremely weak in comparison with the
dominant presumption of innocence.
46. The same principles have been followed
        by the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Govinda Reddy v. State of Mysore
[AIR 1960
        SC 29 : 1960 Cri LJ 137] where the learned
        Judges quoted the principles
laid down in
Hanumant Govind Nargundkar v. State of
        M.P. [AIR 1952 SC 343 : 1953 Cri LJ 129] The
        ratio in Govind [AIR 1952 SC 343 : 1953 Cri LJ
        129] quoted in AIR para 5, p. 30 of the
        Report in Govinda Reddy [AIR 1960 SC 29 :
1960 Cri LJ 137] are:
“5. … ‘10. … in cases where the
            evidence is of a circumstantial nature,
            the circumstances [which lead to the
            conclusion of guilt should be in the
            first instance] fully established, and
            all the facts so established should be
            consistent only with the hypothesis of
            the guilt of the accused. Again, the
            circumstances should be of a
            conclusive nature and tendency and
            they should be such as to exclude
            every hypothesis but the one
            proposed to be proved. In other
            words, there must be a chain of
            evidence so far complete as not to
            leave any reasonable ground for a
            conclusion     consistent   with    the
            innocence of the accused and it must
            be [shown] that within all human
            probability the act must have been
            [committed] by the accused.’ [ As
            observed     in   Hanumant      Govind
            Nargundkar v. State of M.P., AIR 1952
            SC 343 at pp. 345-46, para 10.]
”

        The same principle has also been followed by
        this Court in
Mohan Lal Pangasa v. State of
        U.P.
[(1974) 4 SCC 607: 1974 SCC (Cri) 643:
        AIR 1974 SC 1144]”
13.   In the case at hand the entire case of the prosecution is
built upon the confessional/voluntary statements made by the

accused persons before the police and the recovery of the

alleged weapon of murder recovered at the pointing out of the

accused and the recovery of alleged stolen gold material from a

jewelry shop, again, on pointing out of the accused. Let us deal

with the first evidence. As per the police, all the accused were

arrested from a school building on 31.01.2001 and formally

arrested on 01.02.2001.    They confessed to as many as 24

crimes committed by them. Their confessions of how they

planned and executed the murders has been captured on a

video, which was also exhibited before the court.      The Court

has taken this evidence of voluntary statements made by the

accused and hence admitted it as evidence. This was done both

by the Sessions Court as well as the High Court. The learned

Sessions Judge records in his judgment dated 19.03.2003

records as under: -
“… The prosecution has played the
           audio in the open Court Hall in the
           presence of the accused persons and
           jam-packed Court Hall and on a mere
           perusal and hearing the video, it will be
           evident that the accused persons
           themselves had explained the entire
           incident the manner in which they have
           committed the offence alleged by the
           prosecution against them. The video
           statement of accused no. 5 makes it
           clear as to how the deceased was made
           to open the iron grill and as to how they
           had planned to murder the aged
                     innocent    Ramakrishnan    who   was
                     residing alone. The video statement of
                     the accused personal reveals the
                     intension of the accused person and
                     also the manner in which they have
                     made deceased Ramakrishnan to open
                     the iron grill and also the manner in
                     which the accused persons have
                     committed the offence in murdering the
                     aged man.”

               The Sessions Court then refers to a decision of Supreme

       Court, (Shri N. Sri Rama Reddy, Etc. v. Shri V.V. Giri6) and

       states that in view of this decision video tapes can also be used

       as corroborative evidence. This is what has been said: -
“When such being the case, it goes
                 without saying that the video recorded
                 statement of the accused persons can
                 also be made use as corroborative piece
                 of evidence. If really, the accused persons
                 after witnessing and hearing the video
                 cassettes suspected the bonafide or
                 genuineness of the video recorded
                 statement of the accused persons,
                 instead of taking contention that their
                 statements obtained by making them to
                 consume alcohol, they would have
                 requested the Court for subjecting the
                 video tape records for scientific scrutiny.
                 In view of the rulings of the Honourable
                 Supreme Court, even video tapes of the
                 voluntary statement of the accused
                 persons can be used as the corroborative
                 piece of evidence. Thus, on perusal of the
                 materials on record, it will be quite
                 manifest that the circumstances relied
                 upon by the prosecution will bring home
                 the guilt of the accused beyond all
                 reasonable doubt”

               Later the High Court while hearing the appeal of the

6 AIR 1971 SC 1162
accused gives a similar finding as follows : -
“It is not the case of the accused that
         they have not given voluntary statements
         before PW 15 as per Ext P 8,9,10, 11 &
12. However, it is their contention that
         they were made to drink liquor and under
         the influence of liquor, the statements
         have been taken as per Exs. P-8,9,10,11 &
         12 and the statements were not voluntary.
The material on record does not
         probablise the said version taken by the
         accused. In the absence of proof of the
         said fact, voluntary statements at Exs. P-
         8,9,10,11 & 12 given by accused Nos. 1 to
         5 is proved to be voluntary as there is no
         material on record which would probablise
         the defence taken by the accused that
         they were made to drink liquor and their
         statements were recorded in the influence
         of drinking and it was not voluntary”.
The High Court then affirms the finding of the Sessions

Court and the admissibility of the voluntary statement of the

accused and the videography placed before the Court and

states as under: -
“It is clear from the above said proved
          circumstances that the accused have
          committed murder of S Ramakrishnan
          aged 72 years by slitting his neck as he
          was living alone in the house. The only
          defence taken by the accused is that they
          have given voluntary statements under the
          influence of liquor which is not probabilised
          by the material on record and in view of
          statements of the accused pointing to the
          scene of offence wherein S Ramakrishnan
          was murdered and Ramakrishnan suffered
          homicidal death and recovery of M.O.1
          which according to P.W.5 would cause
          injury   found    on    the    body   of    S
          Ramakrishnan and also recovery of
          ornaments which they melted into ingot
                    from the shop of P.W.17 and the fact that
                    accused have shown the place where they
                    committed the scene of offence in
                    furtherance of the voluntary statements
                    have been conclusively proved by the
                    prosecution and such circumstances form a
                    complete link which would point out only to
                    the guilt of the accused and is wholly
                    inconsistent with their innocence.
The trial Court has appreciated oral and
                    documentary evidence on record in the
                    right perspective and on re-appreciation of
                    the entire material on record, we hold that
                    finding of guilt arrived at against the
                    accused Nos.1 to 5 – appellants herein for
                    having committed the offence punishable
                    under Sections 302 & r/w 34 of
IPC
is
                    justified and sentence imposed thereon
                    cannot also be said to be excessive so as
                    to call for interference in this appeal.”


             Both the Trial Court and the Appellate Court went

      completely          wrong   in   placing    reliance     on    the   voluntary

      statements of the accused and their videography statements.
Under
Article 20(3)7
of the Constitution of India, an accused

      cannot be compelled to be a witness against himself. Again,

      under
Section 258
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872; a

      confessional statement given by an accused before a Police

      officer is inadmissible as evidence.
7 20 (1) XXX XXX
            (2) XXX XXX
          (3) No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness
against himself.
8 25. Confession to police-officer not to be proved. –– No
confession made to a police-officer, shall be proved as against a
person accused of any offence.
The reference of the Supreme Court judgment by the trial

Court (
Shri N. Sri Rama Reddy v. Shri V.V. Giri
) is also

misplaced. That case only refers to the admissibility of a tape-

recorded conversation in an election petition which is tried

before a Court under the Civil Procedure Code (
Section 87
of

the Representation of People Act, 1951).       This Court, in the

above cited judgment was not dealing with a criminal case and

most certainly not on the admissibility of a statement given by

an accused to the Police under
Section 161
of Code of Criminal

Procedure. Indeed, the above judgment also ends with a note

of caution:
“30. We once again emphasize that this
              order relates only to the admissibility in
              evidence of the conversation recorded on
              tape and has not dealt with the weight to
              be attached to that evidence. It must also
              be pointed out that the question, whether
              the pamphlets, Exhibits P-18-B and P-37-
              A, have been circulated in the manner
              alleged by the petitioners and the further
              question whether they amount to exercise
              of undue influence are also matters which
              have not been considered in this order.
              The above are all aspects which will be
              dealt with in the judgment, while
              disposing of the election petitions.”

     Thus, the opinion of this Court regarding the admissibility

of a tape-recorded conversation, was in an entirely different

context.
As far as the recovery of gold ingot is concerned, PW-1,
i.e., the son-in-law and the complainant has said in his

evidence before the Court that he does not recognize the ingot

and it does not belong to his father-in-law. Therefore, the gold

which has been recovered has not been identified as the one

which was stolen from the house of the deceased.               The

recovery of knife is also doubtful. Firstly, Venkatesh who had

led the discovery had mentioned about the knife and its

disposal on 01.02.2001 when he was arrested. The recovery,

however was made on 15.05.2001 i.e., four and a half months

later. Why such a belated recovery was made has not been

explained. Secondly, the independent witness to this recovery

PW-10   Murugan,    had   also   turned   hostile   during   cross-
examination as he said that he does not recognize Venkatesh

(accused) on whose pointing out the alleged recovery was

made. So much for the recovery of the murder weapon.
14.   At this juncture, we may also add that some of the

accused who were before us were also facing another trial of

similar nature in which they were convicted on 17.09.2010 and

sentenced to death. Thereafter in Appeal their conviction was

upheld, but the sentence was converted to life imprisonment

by the High Court.    They finally came before this Court in

Appeal. The course of investigation and the appreciation of

evidence by the Trial Court and the Appellate Court had taken a
       similar course as they have in the present case. While hearing

       their Criminal Appeal (Nos. 1476-1477 of 2018) 9 this Court

       made certain observations, which are equally relevant for the

       present case as well. Regarding the investigation of the Police

       in the case, this is what was said by this Court:
“…19. We must observe that we have
                      repeatedly found a tendency on part of the
                      Prosecuting Agency in getting the entire
                      statement recorded rather than only that
                      part of the statement which leads to the
                      discovery of facts. In the process, a
                      confession of an accused which is
                      otherwise hit by the principles of
Evidence
                      Act
finds its place on record. Such kind of
                      statements may have a direct tendency to
                      influence and prejudice the mind of the
                      Court. This practice must immediately be
                      stopped. In the present case, the Trial
                      Court not only extracted the entire
                      statements but also relied upon them.
20. The other disturbing feature that we
                      have noticed is that voluntary statements
                      of the appellants were recorded on a DVD
                      which was played in Court and formed the
                      basis of the judgment of the Trial Court as
                      is noticeable from paragraph Nos.34 and
                      35 of its judgment. Such a statement is
                      again in the nature of a confession to a
                      Police Officer and is completely hit by the
                      principles of
Evidence Act
. If at all the
                      accused     were    desirous   of   making
                      confessions, the Investigating Machinery
                      could    have    facilitated recording   of
                      confession by producing them before a

9 2022 SCC OnLine SC 765
Magistrate for appropriate action in terms
of
Section 164
of the Code. Any departure
from that course is not acceptable and
cannot be recognized and taken on record
as evidence. The Trial Court erred in
exhibiting those DVD statement Exh.P-25
to 28. As a matter of fact, it went further in
relying upon them while concluding the
matter on the issue of conviction.
21. What has further aggravated the
situation is the fact that said statements
on DVD recorded by the Investigating
Agency were played and published in a
program named “Putta Mutta” by Udaya
TV. Allowing said DVD to go into the hands
of a private TV channel so that it could be
played and published in a program is
nothing but dereliction of duty and direct
interference in the administration of
Justice. All matters relating to the crime
and whether a particular thing happens to
be a conclusive piece of evidence must be
dealt with by a Court of Law and not
through a TV channel. If at all there was a
voluntary statement, the matter would be
dealt with by the Court of Law. The public
platform is not a place for such debate or
proof of what otherwise is the exclusive
domain and function of Courts of law. Any
such debate or discussion touching upon
matters which are in the domain of Courts
would amount to direct interference in
administration of Criminal Justice.
22. The last disturbing feature is the fact
that Chart Exh.P-29 was taken to be proof
of the activities of the gang to which the
appellants allegedly belonged. Apart from
exhibiting the chart, no details or
documents either       in   the    form   of
chargesheet or orders, depositions were
produced on record. If the Prosecution
wanted the Court to take note of the fact
that there were other matters in which
accused were involved, the concerned
Chargesheets should have been produced
on record along with sufficient details
including the judgments or orders of
conviction. A mere chart cannot be taken
as proof of the involvement of the accused
in other crimes either at the stage of
conviction or sentence. But that factor
seriously weighed with the Trial Court as is
obvious from paragraphs 15 to 18 of the
order    of   sentence.   In    fact,   such
involvement was taken to be one of the
reasons why the death sentence was
awarded by the Trial Court. Such a practice
can never be approved.
23. We must clarify that the approach at
certain stages including the stage of
considering the bail application may be
qualitatively different. At the stage of
consideration of bail, the primary concern
is to weigh in balance the liberty of an
accused and the possible prejudice that
may get visited upon the societal interest
in case he is released. It would therefore
be apt and proper to consider his
involvement in other crimes. But at the
stage of final assessment whether
conviction be recorded or not, the matter
must be considered purely on its merits
unless the very membership of a gang or a
group or an outfit itself can amount to an
offence or as an aggravated form of an
offence. Again, at the stage of sentencing,
his involvement in other crimes may be a
          relevant factor provided the concerned
          material in the form of concluded
          judgments in the other matters are
          brought on record in a manner known to
          law. The established involvement in other
          matters would then certainly be relevant
          while dealing with the question whether
          the concerned accused is required to be
          dealt with sternly or leniently.
24. We have gone through Chart Exh. P-29.
According to said chart, in so far as the
          present appellants are concerned, they
          were said to be involved in one more crime
          which has given rise to Special Leave
          Petition (Crl) Diary No.24079 of 2020 and
          was listed along with the instant appeal
          before us. That matter is still pending
          consideration before us. Therefore, what
          weighed with the Trial Court was the
          alleged involvement of the other members
          of the alleged gang in so many similar
          activities, in support of which there was no
          concrete      material,   other   than   the
          confessions of the appellants.”
15.   We must add that this Court in its order dated 19.04.2022

has allowed the above appeal and has set aside the order of

the Sessions Judge as well as of the High Court which had

placed its reliance almost completely on the statement made

by the accused before the Police under
Section 161
of CrPC.

This is exactly what has been done in the present case as well

and consequently this too must meet the same fate. Indeed, it

was also the case of the prosecution that the appellants belong
to a gang which commits crime of this nature and that the

modus operandi is by and large the same in all cases. It was

alleged that the appellants are involved in as many as 20-25

such cases. But what was given before the Court was a chart

giving description of offences, numbers and Sections under

which such offences had been allegedly committed. No

documents in the nature of chargesheet or any other proof was

submitted. Therefore, this factor cannot be taken into account.

This was also not taken into account by this Court in the above

order dated 19.04.2022, while allowing the Criminal Appeal No.

1476-1477 of 2018 as
referred above
.
16.   Ordinarily, this Court does not interfere with concurrent

findings of facts as they are in the present case. But, then in

the present case it has become necessary to interfere with the

findings for the reasons that both the High Court as well as the

Sessions Court have ignored the well-established principles of

criminal jurisprudences and have relied upon facts and

evidences which are clearly inadmissible in a court of law. The

crime indeed was ghastly, to say the least. Yet, linking the

crime to the present appellants is an exercise which was to be

undertaken in the court of law under established principles of

law. This   has   not   been   done.   This   Court   in
Sharad

Birdhichand Sarda
(supra) has cautioned thus: -
“179. We can fully understand that though
      the case superficially viewed bears an ugly
      look so as to prima facie shock the
      conscience of any court yet suspicion,
      however great it may be, cannot take the
      place of legal proof. A moral conviction
      however    strong     or   genuine   cannot
      amount to a legal conviction supportable in
      law.
180. It must be recalled that the well-
established rule of criminal justice is that
      “fouler the crime higher the proof”. In the
      instant case, the life and liberty of a subject
      was at stake. As the accused was given a
      capital sentence, a very careful, cautious
      and meticulous approach was necessary to
      be made.”
17.   In view of the above, these appeals are allowed, the order

of the Sessions Judge dated 19.03.2003 and the High Court

dated 31.08.2010 are hereby set aside, the appellants shall be

released from jail, unless they are wanted in some other crime.
………………………………CJI.
(UDAY UMESH LALIT)


                                        …………………………………J.
                                          (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)


                                        ...………………………………J.
                                            (SUDHANSHU DHULIA)

New Delhi;
September 30, 2022.