[Cites
9
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Yashoda (Alias Sodhan) vs Sukhwinder Singh. on 12 September, 2022
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
B.R. Gavai
REPORTABLE

            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8247 OF 2009


YASHODA (ALIAS SODHAN)                        ...APPELLANT(S)

                           VERSUS
SUKHWINDER SINGH AND OTHERS                  ...RESPONDENT(S)




                       JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.       The appeal challenges the judgment dated 28 th

January 2009 passed by the learned Single Judge of the

High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in Regular

Second Appeal No. 3205 of 2007 (O&M), thereby dismissing

the appeal filed by the present appellant.
2.       Brief facts giving rise to the present appeal are as

under:
1
As per Kartar Singh, the original plaintiff (since

deceased), the grandfather of respondent Nos.1 and 2, he

had entered into an agreement to sell the agricultural lands

on 10th January 1993. As per the said agreement, the sale

deed was to be executed before 15 th March 1994. According

to the plaintiff, a family settlement also took place between

him and the appellant­defendant in the month of November

1993. It is to be noted that the plaintiff initially filed a suit for

declaration against the appellant­defendant being Civil Suit

No. 141 of 1994 on 10th February 1994. The said suit was

filed on the basis of the said family settlement that took place

in the month of November 1993.              On the basis of the

application filed by the plaintiff, the said suit was dismissed

as withdrawn on 7th May 1994.
3.       The plaintiff filed the present suit on 2 nd June 1994

being Suit No. 536 of 1994 seeking specific performance on

the basis of alleged agreement to sell dated 10 th January

1993.    The appellant­defendant resisted the suit by filing

written statement on 29th October 1994.             In the written

statement, the appellant­defendant categorically denied the
2
existence and/or the execution of any agreement to sell. It

was specifically contended by the appellant­defendant that

the second suit was not maintainable in view of withdrawal

of the first suit. The plaintiff filed his Replication on 14 th

November 1994 contending that the first suit for declaration

was filed only to avoid payment of stamp duty and

registration charges.
4.      The learned Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division),

Sunam (hereinafter referred to as the “trial court”) vide

judgment and decree dated 6 th August 1997 dismissed the

suit for specific performance. Being aggrieved thereby, the

respondents, i.e., the legal representatives of the plaintiff

filed an appeal before the learned Additional District Judge,

Sangrur (hereinafter referred to as the “Appellate Court”).

The Appellate Court vide its judgment and decree dated 26 th

July 2007 allowed the appeal and decreed the suit of the

plaintiff for specific performance of agreement to sell dated

10th January 1993. Being aggrieved thereby, the appellant­

defendant preferred an appeal before the High Court.       The

High Court vide impugned judgment dated 28 th January
3
2009 dismissed the appeal. Hence, the appellant­defendant

has approached this Court.
5.        We have heard Shri Sidharth Luthra, learned Senior

Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant­defendant and

Shri Narender Hooda, learned Senior Counsel and Shri

Gagan Gupta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

respondents­plaintiffs.
6.        Shri Luthra, learned Senior Counsel submitted that

the trial court, finding that the plaintiff had suppressed the

fact with regard to filing of the earlier suit and further that

the plaintiff had resiled from the stand taken by him in the

earlier litigation and taken a contrary stand, had dismissed

the suit. He submitted that however, the learned Appellate

Court erroneously accepted the stand of the plaintiff in

Replication that the earlier suit was filed only in order to save

the stamp duty and registration charges and allowed the

appeal.
7.        Shri Luthra submitted that the perusal of the

evidence of the plaintiff would show that he had not stated

anything regarding the earlier suit in his evidence.          He
4
submitted that, the learned Appellate Court has failed to take

into consideration that all the witnesses were closely

associated with the plaintiff and therefore, their evidence was

not trustworthy.   He further submitted that the appellant­

defendant had specifically put up a case that she was a

parda­nasheen lady and that the plaintiff was her cousin and

she had blind faith on him.               He submitted that, taking

disadvantage of such a blind faith, the plaintiff had taken her

thumb impression on some paper and used it to create an

agreement to sell. He further submitted that, as a matter of

fact, an application for partition was also filed by the

appellant­defendant      on    4th       July   1994.    He   therefore

submitted that the appeal deserves to be allowed and the suit

deserves to be dismissed.
8.        Shri Luthra relied on various judgments of this

Court in support of the submission that, since the act of the

respondents­plaintiffs    of    suppression        of   material   facts

amounted to fraud, he was not entitled to a discretionary

relief.
5
9.        Shri Gupta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

the respondents­plaintiffs submitted that all the three courts

have concurrently found that the execution of the agreement

to sell dated 10th January 1993 was duly established.         He

submitted that the trial court as well as the Appellate Court

and the High Court have also found that the appellant­

defendant has failed to establish the fact that the agreement

to sell is a result of fraud or misrepresentation.       Having

decided these issues in favour of the respondents­plaintiffs,

the trial court had erred in non­suiting the respondents­

plaintiffs on a technical ground. Shri Gupta, relying on the

judgment of this Court in the case of
Arunima Baruah v.

Union of India and Others1
, submitted that, unless the

suppression of filing of an earlier suit is a material fact, such

non­disclosure would not be fatal to the case of the plaintiff.
Relying on the judgment of this Court in the case of
Harjas

Rai Makhija (Dead) Through Legal Representatives v.

Pushparani Jain and Another2
, he submitted that a mere

concealment or non­disclosure of relevant facts without


1 (2007) 6 SCC 120
2 (2017) 2 SCC 797
6
intent to deceive or a bald allegation of fraud without proof

and intent to deceive, would not render a decree obtained by

a party as fraudulent.        Shri Gupta submitted that in the

present case, the trial court itself has found that the plaintiff

had failed to establish fraud and as such, the Appellate

Court has rightly allowed the appeal. He also relies on the

judgment      of     this   Court   in   the   case   of   Svenska

Handelsbanken v. M/s Indian Charge Chrome and

Others3. Shri Gupta further relies on the judgment of this

Court in the case of Union of India v. M/s Chaturbhai M.

Patel and Co.4 in support of his submission that fraud has

to be proved beyond reasonable doubt.
10.       Shri Gupta further submitted that the earlier suit for

declaration was filed on the claim that the respondents­

plaintiffs were owner in possession of the suit property on

the basis of settlement deed, whereas the second suit was

filed on the basis of agreement to sell dated 10 th January

1993. He submitted that there is nothing on record to show



3 (1994) 1 SCC 502
4 (1976) 1 SCC 747
7
that the respondents­plaintiffs had any intention to defraud

the appellant­defendant.
11.     Shri Hooda, learned Senior Counsel submitted that

after the Replication was allowed by the trial court, it became

a part of the plaint. As such, the respondents­plaintiffs had

sufficiently proved as to the circumstances in which the

earlier suit was filed. He therefore submitted that the trial

court had erred in non­suiting the plaintiff on a trivial

ground. Shri Hooda further submitted that after holding that

the respondents­plaintiffs had proved the agreement to sell,

that the appellant­defendant had failed to prove that any

fraud was played on her and that the issue under Order II

Rule 2 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 (for short, ‘
CPC
’)

was also in favour of the respondents­plaintiffs, the trial

court had grossly erred in dismissing the suit. He submitted

that the said error has been rightly corrected by the

Appellate Court.
12.     It is not in dispute that the plaintiff had filed a suit

for declaration being Civil Suit No. 141 of 1994. It will be

relevant to refer to some of the averments in the said plaint:
8
1. “That previously the defendant was owner to the
         extent of 1/3rd share in land measuring 205
         Kanal 4 Marla mustatil & killa numbers as
         detailed in the heading of the plaint. Copy of
         Jamabandi is attached herewith.
2. That previously the defendant was also owner to
         the extent of 1/6 share in land measuring 139
         Kanal 2 Marla and land gair mumkin plot
         measuring 9 Kanal 2 Marla mustatil & kiolla
         numbers as detailed in the heading of the plaint.
         Copy of Jamabandi is attached herewith.
3. ………
4. That about three months ago and a family
         settlement took place between the plaintiff and
         defendant and the land in dispute fallen into the
         share of the plaintiff and the defendant had
         delivered the possession of the suit property to
         the plaintiff after visiting the spot. In this now the
         plaintiff is continuous in possession over
         disputed property as owner since last three
         month. The defendant has remained no concern.
5. That the defendant was requested to admit the
         claim of the plaintiff and to get corrected the
         name of the plaintiff in revenue record as owner
         but the defendant after dilly­dallying the matter
         had refused yesterday to do so from which cause
         of action accrued to the plaintiff against the
         defendant.”
13.      The said suit for declaration was filed on 10 th

February 1994.      It is to be noted that according to the

respondents­plaintiffs, the alleged agreement to sell was

executed on 10th January 1993. As such it is prior in point
9
of time to the date of filing of the suit for declaration i.e. 10 th

February 1994.      There is no mention with regard to the

alleged agreement to sell in the said plaint.
14.      The plaintiff filed an application on 7 th May 1994 for

withdrawal of the said suit for declaration. Vide order of the

same date, the trial court, after recording the statement of

the plaintiff that he did not want to proceed with the case,

dismissed the same as withdrawn.
15.      Within a period of one month, the plaintiff filed the

present suit for specific performance. It will be relevant to

refer to some of the averments in the plaint:
“2. That the defendant agreed to sell the above said
      suit land to the plaintiff for a consideration of Rs.
      6,50,000/­ and the defendant executed an
      agreement on dated 10.1.1994 at Patran in favour
      of the plaintiff and received a sum of Rs. 50,000/­
      from the plaintiff as earnest money and remaining
      amount was to be paid by the plaintiff to the
      defendant at the time of sale deed before the Sub­
      Registrar. The agreement was read over to the
      defendant who after admitting the same to be
      correct put her thumb impressions in the presence
      of Lal Singh Lamberdar, Amolak Singh s/o Jagroop
      Singh and Bhagwant Singh S/o Krishan Singh
      resident of Shadihari and witnesses also attested
      the said agreement in the presence of defendant.
      The plaintiff put his thumb impression in token of
      correctness of the above said agreement.
10
……….
15. That there is no litigation pending or decided
        between the parties with regard to the agreement in
        question.”
16.        It could thus clearly be seen that, the present suit

bases its claim only on the agreement to sell dated 10 th

January 1993. Leave aside there being any reference to the

earlier suit, the plaintiff baldly stated that there was no

litigation pending or decided between the parties with regard

to the agreement in question. No doubt that it is sought to

be argued by the learned counsel for the respondents­

plaintiffs that the statement in paragraph (15) of the plaint is

only with regard to the litigation with respect to the

agreement in question. It is stated that the said paragraph

does not mention litigation with regard to the land in

question and as such, there is no suppression of material

fact.
17.        After the suit for specific performance was filed, the

written statement was filed by the appellant­defendant on

29th October 1994. In the written statement, the appellant­

defendant has stated thus:
11
“3. That the plaintiff file the said suit no.141 dt.
10.2.1994 in the Court of P.C.S. Sub Judge First
      Class Sunam on 10.2.1994 which was dismiss on
      7.5.1994, but the plaintiff ending between the
      parties, on this ground only the suit of the plaintiff
      is liable to be dismissed. In case any agreement
      executed earlier between the parties, the plaintiff
      must mention about this in the suit, hence on this
      alone ground the suit is liable to be dismissed.
4) That the plaintiff on 10.2.1994 in regard to the
      land filed Suit for pre­emption Right against the
      defendant in which the plaintiff shown himself
      owner in possession of the land in question, the
      said suit was consigned to record on 7.5.1994. In
      the said suit the defendant did not mention
      anything in regard to the agreement DT 10.1.1994.
5) That the plaintiff did not come before the Hon'ble
      Court in clean hand and he has concealed the
      matter before the Hon'ble Court, hence the suit is
      liable to be dismissed.
6) That the plaintiff and Defendant are having close
      relations with each other. The plaintiff is uncle's son
      of Defendant. Defendant has no brother, hence he
      treated plaintiff as her real brother and believe upon
      him. Defendant is aged lady her eye sight is very
      week and villager lady, she has no legal knowledge.
      The plaintiff getting the wrongful gain of her believe
      with the intention to grab her share has taken the
      thumb impression on the writing by committing
      cheating and fraudulent means.”
18.      After the appellant­defendant took objection with

regard to the earlier suit being withdrawn, the plaintiff came

with the Replication application wherein, for the first time, he
12
came up with a story that the earlier suit was filed only to

save the stamp duty and registration fee and since the

appellant­defendant became dishonest later on, the plaintiff

withdrew the suit. It is thus clear that the Replication was

filed as an after­thought only to cure the lacuna as pointed

out in the written statement.            The trial court found that a

person cannot be permitted to assume inconsistent positions

in the court of law to play fast and loose and to blow hot and

cold. The trial court, relying on the judgment of the Punjab

and Haryana High Court in the case of
Jaspal Singh v.

Sardul Singh5
, held that a party cannot be permitted to

approbate and reprobate and resile from that position. The

trial court has also found that the explanation submitted by

the plaintiff with regard to the circumstances under which

the earlier suit was filed, speaks volumes of the dishonest

intention of the plaintiff. The trial court also found that the

plaintiff has made an attempt to defraud the State of its

revenue. The trial court found that the past litigation has a

direct bearing on the merits of the present controversy.           It

observed that the plaintiff was duty bound to plead the same

5 1994 (3) Recent Revenue Reports 106 (Punjab and Haryana)
13
in the plaint. The trial court found that under Order VII Rule

1 (j)
of the CPC
(as applicable in Punjab), the statement with

regard to earlier litigation has to be made in the plaint. It

will be relevant to refer to the said provision:
“ORDER VII
                             PLAINT
1. Particulars to be contained in plaint.
………….
(j) a statement to the effect that no suit between
         the same parties, or between the parties under
         whom they or any of them claim, litigating on the
         same grounds has been previously instituted or
         finally decided by a Court of competent
         jurisdiction or limited jurisdiction, and if so, with
         what results.”
19.       The trial court therefore, relying on the judgment of

this Court in the case of S.P. Chengalvaraya Naidu (Dead)

By LRs. v. Jagannath (Dead) By LRs. and Others 6,

dismissed the suit, though it had answered the other issues

in favour of the respondents­plaintiffs.
20.       This well­reasoned judgment of the trial court came

to be reversed by the Appellate Court.             Accepting the

6 (1994) 1 SCC 1
14
explanation of the respondents­plaintiffs in Replication that

the earlier suit was filed in order to save the registration fee

and the stamp duty, the Appellate Court held that the non­

disclosure of the plaintiff about earlier litigation in the plaint

but clarifying it later in the Replication, was not such a

crucial point on the basis of which he could be non­suited in

toto.
21.        Though the suit was dismissed by the trial court and

decreed by the Appellate Court, the High Court observed

thus:
“The learned trial Court came to the conclusion
        that the agreement to sell and the default on the
        part of the appellant has been established and
        therefore directed the agreement to be enforced by
        way of execution of the sale deed.
In appeal, the findings of the learned trial Court
        were affirmed.”
22.        It could thus be seen that there is total non­

application of mind by the High Court. The High Court did

not even care to refer to the grounds raised in the appeal

with regard to the effect of non­disclosure of filing and

withdrawal of the earlier suit. The High Court dismissed the
15
suit on the basis that it arises out of the concurrent findings

of fact and no question of law is involved.
23.        What would be the effect of suppression of earlier

proceedings has been considered by this Court in the case of

S.P. Chengalvaraya Naidu (supra).           The Court observed

thus:
“5. The High Court, in our view, fell into patent
        error. The short question before the High Court was
        whether in the facts and circumstances of this case,
        Jagannath obtained the preliminary decree by
        playing fraud on the court. The High Court,
        however, went haywire and made observations
        which are wholly perverse. We do not agree with the
        High Court that “there is no legal duty cast upon
        the plaintiff to come to court with a true case and
        prove it by true evidence”. The principle of “finality
        of litigation” cannot be pressed to the extent of such
        an absurdity that it becomes an engine of fraud in
        the hands of dishonest litigants. The courts of law
        are meant for imparting justice between the parties.
        One who comes to the court, must come with clean
        hands. We are constrained to say that more often
        than not, process of the court is being abused.
        Property­grabbers, tax­evaders, bank­loan­dodgers
        and other unscrupulous persons from all walks of
        life find the court­process a convenient lever to
        retain the illegal gains indefinitely. We have no
        hesitation to say that a person, who's case is based
        on falsehood, has no right to approach the court. He
        can be summarily thrown out at any stage of the
        litigation.
16
6. The facts of the present case leave no manner of
        doubt that Jagannath obtained the preliminary
        decree by playing fraud on the court. A fraud is an
        act of deliberate deception with the design of
        securing something by taking unfair advantage of
        another. It is a deception in order to gain by
        another's loss. It is a cheating intended to get an
        advantage. Jagannath was working as a clerk with
        Chunilal Sowcar. He purchased the property in the
        court auction on behalf of Chunilal Sowcar. He had,
        on his own volition, executed the registered release
        deed (Ex. B­15) in favour of Chunilal Sowcar
        regarding the property in dispute. He knew that the
        appellants had paid the total decretal amount to his
        master Chunilal Sowcar. Without disclosing all
        these facts, he filed the suit for the partition of the
        property on the ground that he had purchased the
        property on his own behalf and not on behalf of
        Chunilal Sowcar. Non­production and even non­
        mentioning of the release deed at the trial is
        tantamount to playing fraud on the court. We do
        not agree with the observations of the High Court
        that the appellants­defendants could have easily
        produced the certified registered copy of Ex. B­15
        and non­suited the plaintiff. A litigant, who
        approaches the court, is bound to produce all the
        documents executed by him which are relevant to
        the litigation. If he withholds a vital document in
        order to gain advantage on the other side then he
        would be guilty of playing fraud on the court as well
        as on the opposite party.”
24.        Again in the case of
A.V. Papayya Sastry and

Others v. Govt. of A.P. and Others7
, this Court observed

thus:
7 (2007) 4 SCC 221
17
“21. Now, it is well­settled principle of law that if
any judgment or order is obtained by fraud, it
cannot be said to be a judgment or order in law.
Before three centuries, Chief Justice Edward Coke
proclaimed:
“Fraud     avoids    all    judicial   acts,
     ecclesiastical or temporal.”
22. It is thus settled proposition of law that a
judgment, decree or order obtained by playing fraud
on the court, tribunal or authority is a nullity and
non est in the eye of the law. Such a judgment,
decree or order—by the first court or by the final
court—has to be treated as nullity by every court,
superior or inferior. It can be challenged in any
court, at any time, in appeal, revision, writ or even
in collateral proceedings.
23. In the leading case of Lazarus Estates
Ltd. v. Beasley [(1956) 1 All ER 341 : (1956) 1 QB
702 : (1956) 2 WLR 502 (CA)] Lord Denning
observed : (All ER p. 345 C)
     “No judgment of a court, no order of a
     Minister, can be allowed to stand if it has
     been obtained by fraud.”
24. In Duchess of Kingstone, Smith's Leading Cases,
13th Edn., p. 644, explaining the nature of fraud,
de Grey, C.J. stated that though a judgment would
be res judicata and not impeachable from within, it
might be impeachable from without. In other words,
though it is not permissible to show that the court
was “mistaken”, it might be shown that it was
“misled”. There is an essential distinction between
mistake and trickery. The clear implication of the
distinction is that an action to set aside a judgment
cannot be brought on the ground that it has been
decided wrongly, namely, that on the merits, the
decision was one which should not have been
18
rendered, but it can be set aside, if the court was
      imposed upon or tricked into giving the judgment.
25. It has been said : fraud and justice never dwell
      together (fraus et jus nunquam cohabitant); or fraud
      and deceit ought to benefit none (fraus et dolus
      nemini patrocinari debent).
26. Fraud may be defined as an act of deliberate
      deception with the design of securing some unfair or
      undeserved benefit by taking undue advantage of
      another. In fraud one gains at the loss of another.
      Even most solemn proceedings stand vitiated if they
      are actuated by fraud. Fraud is thus an extrinsic
      collateral act which vitiates all judicial acts, whether
      in rem or in personam. The principle of “finality of
      litigation” cannot be stretched to the extent of an
      absurdity that it can be utilised as an engine of
      oppression by dishonest and fraudulent litigants.”
25.      As   observed,   there    is    an   essential   distinction

between mistake and trickery.           In the present case, it is

sought to be argued on behalf of the respondents­plaintiffs

that the averment in paragraph (15) of the plaint was with

regard to a lis on the basis of the agreement. It is submitted

that the earlier suit was not based on the agreement and as

such, there was no suppression. We find the argument to be

unsustainable. We are of the view that such a statement was
19
made as a trickery so as to obtain the judgment by

misleading the court.
26.
In the case of
H.N. Jagannath and Others v. State

of Karnataka and Others8
, the land owners filed civil suits

one after other in respect of acquired lands. The said suits

were withdrawn without liberty to approach the court again.

Simultaneously,        land    owners      also   filed    writ   petitions

challenging the acquisition on different grounds. The same

were dismissed.       Thereafter, the land owners submitted an

application to the State Government for denotification of the

land.   Since it was not considered, one more writ petition

came to be filed in which a direction was issued for

consideration of the representation. The said representation

was rejected in the year 1992. The land owners filed another

writ petition questioning the rejection of its representation.

The same was also dismissed.               Thereafter, six more writ

petitions    were     filed   again    questioning        the   validity   of

acquisition proceedings and yet again, they were dismissed.

In an intra­court appeal, the Division Bench relegated the

parties to the civil court to work out their remedies.

8 (2018) 11 SCC 104
20
Criticizing the approach of the Division Bench, this Court

observed thus:
“14. It is not in dispute that the property in question
     along with other properties was acquired by the BDA in
     accordance with law by issuing notifications under
Sections 17(1)
and
19(1)
of the BDA Act as far back as
     in the year 1977 and in the year 1979. BDA has formed
     and allotted the sites. Most of the allottees have
     constructed houses and are residing peacefully.
     However, Respondent 4 still contends that possession
     has remained with it and therefore the acquisition
     needs to be set aside and that the land should be
     denotified. As detailed supra, Respondent 4 has already
     approached the civil court thrice and High Court on six
     occasions. Whenever the suits are withdrawn,
     Respondent 4 has not sought any liberty to approach
     the civil court once again. Thus, it was not open for
     Respondent 4 to approach the civil court repeatedly for
     the very same reliefs. Consistently, the civil court on
     three occasions has negatived the contention of the
     appellant.
15. Even when Respondent 4 approached the High
     Court of Karnataka by filing the writ petitions and writ
     appeals, it has failed. Futile attempts have been made
     by Respondent 4 only to see that the allottees are
     harassed and to keep the litigation pending. After the
     final notification, an award was passed and
     compensation was deposited. Possession was taken and
     the same was evidenced by the panchnama prepared as
     far back as on 23­9­1986. The notification under
Section 16(2)
of the Land Acquisition Act was issued on
     20­1­1987 disclosing the factum of taking possession of
     the land in question. Attempt made by Respondent 4 for
     getting the disputed land denotified has also failed as
     far back as on 15­1­1993, when the State Government
     had rejected the representation of Respondent 4 seeking
21
denotification. The writ petition filed by Respondent 4
challenging    such     order     of    dismissal   of   the
representation was also dismissed. Despite the same,
Respondent 4 is pursuing the matter by filing writ
petition after writ petition. It is a clear case of abuse of
process of law as well as the court.
16. We do not find any reason to interfere in the finding
of fact rendered by the learned Single Judge that
possession was taken by BDA on 23­9­1986. There is
nothing to be adjudicated further in respect of the title
or possession of the property. The title as well as the
possession of the property has vested with BDA for
about more than 30 years prior to this day and sites
were formed and allotted to various persons including
the appellant herein. In the light of such voluminous
records and having regard to the fact that Respondent 4
has been repeatedly making futile attempts by
approaching the courts of law by raising frivolous
contentions, the Division Bench ought not to have
granted liberty to Respondent 4 to approach the civil
court once again for the very same relief, for which it
has failed earlier. In view of this, the learned counsel for
the appellant is justified in contending that the Division
Bench has completely erred in reviving the dispute
which had long been given a legal quietus after a series
of litigations. The judgment of the Division Bench, if
allowed to stand, will unsettle the settled state of affairs
involving hundreds of allottees of sites who have
constructed the houses and are residing therein. The
impugned judgment of the Division Bench virtually sets
at naught a number of judgments rendered by the civil
court as well as the High Court in the very matter (and
was given without any reason much less a valid reason).
17. ……..
18. ……..
19. Having regard to the discussion made supra, in our
considered opinion, it is a clear case of contempt
22
committed by Respondent 4 by repeatedly approaching
      the courts of law for almost the same relief which was
      negatived by the courts for three decades. However, we
      decline to initiate contempt proceedings and to impose
      heavy costs, under the peculiar facts and circumstance
      of this case.”
27.      We find that the Appellate Court has grossly erred in

reversing the judgment and decree of the trial court which

had dismissed the suit taking into consideration the conduct

of the respondents­plaintiffs.
28.
Insofar as the reliance placed by Shri Gupta on the

judgment of this Court in the case of
Arunima Baruah
(supra) is concerned, the Court observed thus:
“12. It is trite law that so as to enable the court to
      refuse to exercise its discretionary jurisdiction
      suppression must be of material fact. What would
      be a material fact, suppression whereof would
      disentitle the appellant to obtain a discretionary
      relief, would depend upon the facts and
      circumstances of each case. Material fact would
      mean material for the purpose of determination of
      the lis, the logical corollary whereof would be that
      whether the same was material for grant or denial of
      the relief. If the fact suppressed is not material for
      determination of the lis between the parties, the
      court may not refuse to exercise its discretionary
      jurisdiction. It is also trite that a person invoking
      the discretionary jurisdiction of the court cannot be
      allowed to approach it with a pair of dirty hands.
      But even if the said dirt is removed and the hands
23
become clean, whether the relief would still be
      denied is the question.”
29.     It could thus be seen that this Court has held that

what would be a ‘material fact’ would depend upon the facts

and circumstances of each case. It has also been held that

‘material fact’ would mean material for the purpose of

determination of the lis. It has also been held that a person

invoking the discretionary jurisdiction of the court cannot be

allowed to approach it with a pair of dirty hands.      In the

present case, filing of the earlier suit and withdrawal thereof

without liberty to file another suit was a material fact.
Undisputedly,   the   respondents­plaintiffs   had   failed   to

approach the court with clean hands. As such, we find that
the said judgment
would be of no assistance to the case of

the respondents­plaintiffs.
30.
Insofar as the judgment in the case of
Harjas Rai

Makhija
(supra) is concerned, in the facts of the said case,

the Court held that though the appellant Makhija had an

opportunity to prove the allegation of fraud when he filed an

application under
Order XLI Rule 27 of the CPC
, he missed
24
that opportunity right up to this Court. He took a second

shot at alleging fraud and filed another suit.         However, he

failed in the trial court as well as the High Court as he could

not produce any evidence to prove that fraud was committed

by the respondent when she obtained the decree dated 4 th

October 1999.     As such
,
the said judgment
would not be

applicable to the facts of the present case.
31.      Insofar as the judgment in the case of                 M/s

Chaturbhai M. Patel and Co. (supra) is concerned, it was

the case of defendant that some amount of fraud had been

played on the defendant by the collusion of the plaintiff with

his father. This Court, concurring with the findings of the

High Court, found that the circumstances relied on by the

appellant were not at all conclusive to prove the case of

fraud.   The present case is a case of suppression of a

material fact with regard to filing and withdrawal of earlier

proceedings.    As such, the said judgment would not be

applicable to the facts of the present case.
32.      Similarly,   the   facts    in   the   case   of   Svenska

Handelsbanken (supra) were also totally different and as
25
such, reliance on the said judgment is also of no assistance

to the case of the respondents­plaintiffs in the present case.
33.       In that view of the matter, we find that the Appellate

Court has grossly erred in reversing the well­reasoned

judgment and decree of the trial court. As already observed

hereinabove, the judgment of the High Court is passed

without application of mind. The High Court has gone on a

premise that the trial court had decreed the suit and the

Appellate Court has dismissed the appeal. This is factually

erroneous.
34.       In the result, we pass the following order:
(i)     The appeal is allowed;

  (ii)    The judgment and decree dated 26th July 2007
passed by the Appellate Court in Civil Appeal No. 191

          of 2006 and the judgment passed by the High Court

          dated 28th January 2009 in R.S.A. No. 3205 of 2007

          (O&M) are quashed and set aside; and
(iii)   The judgment and decree dated 6 th August 1997

          passed by the trial court in Suit No. 536 of 1994
26
thereby dismissing the suit of the respondents­

       plaintiffs is upheld.
35.    Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of

in the above terms. No order as to costs.
…..….......................J.
                                                 [B.R. GAVAI]




                                       …….......................J.
                                        [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]

NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 12, 2022.
27