[Cites
2
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Nitu Kumar vs Gulveer on 16 September, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
M.R. Shah
NON­REPORTABLE


                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1547 OF 2022


          Nitu Kumar                                                …Appellant(s)
                                                Versus
          Gulveer & Anr.                                          …Respondent(s)




                                             JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 21.07.2022 passed by the High

                         Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Criminal Misc. Bail

                         Application No. 11120 of 2022, by which, the High Court

                         has directed to release respondent No. 1 – accused on bail

                         in connection with Case Crime No. 80 of 2021 for the

                         offence punishable under
Section 302
IPC of Police Station
Signature Not Verified
Rohata, District Meerut, the original complainant has
Digitally signed by
SNEHA
Date: 2022.09.16
15:18:41 IST
Reason:
preferred the present appeal.
1
2.    That on 19.06.2021, on the report of the informant – Nitu

      Kumar, an FIR being Case Crime No. 80/2021 under
Section 302
IPC of Police Station Rohata, District Meerut,

      came to be registered against accused Shekhar, Gulveer

      (respondent No. 1 herein) and one another person. During

      the course of the investigation, statement of eye­witness –

      Narender has been recorded. In his statement under
Section 161
Cr.P.C., a specific role has been attributed to

      respondent No. 1 that he caught hold of the deceased and

      the co­accused Shekhar caused the injury on the neck of

      the deceased. In the FIR, the motive was also alleged. That

      respondent No. 1 came to be arrested on 24.06.2021. On

      conclusion   of   the   investigation   and   based   on   the

      statements of informant, witnesses and on the basis of

      evidence collected during the investigation, a chargesheet

      has been filed for the offence punishable under
Section 302
of IPC.
2.1   Respondent No. 1 – Gulveer filed a bail application before

      the learned Trial Court. The learned Sessions Judge

      dismissed the said bail application. Then, respondent No.

      1 – Gulveer filed the present bail application before the
2
High Court. Before the High Court, it was mainly

      contended on behalf of respondent No. 1 – accused that

      the only role attributed to him is catching hold of the

      deceased and the main role of causing injuries to the

      deceased is assigned to the co­accused Shekhar. By the

      impugned    judgment    and      order    without   considering

      seriousness and gravity of the offence committed and the

      role attributed to respondent No. 1 – accused and without

      assigning   any   reason   and     only   by   observing   that

      “Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, the

      submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties

      and keeping in view the nature of the offence, complicity of

      the accused, scrutinizing the facts mentioned in the FIR,

      statement of witnesses recorded under
Section 161
Cr.P.C.

      and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the

      case, the Court is of the view that the applicant has made

      out a case for bail” the High Court has released respondent

      No. 1 on bail.
2.2   From the aforesaid it can be seen that nothing has been

      discussed by the High Court on the role attributed to
3
respondent No. 1 – accused and his overt act in

commission of the offence. The High Court has not

appreciated that there is an eye witness, who has

categorically stated that respondent No. 1 caught hold of

the deceased. The High Court ought to have appreciated

that if respondent No. 1 would not have caught hold of the

deceased it would not have been possible for the co­

accused Shekhar to cause injuries on the deceased.

Therefore, the High Court ought to have appreciated that

the role attributed to respondent No. 1 can be said to be

very serious like co­accused Shekhar. As per the settled

position of law, gravity and seriousness of the offence is a

relevant consideration for the purpose of grant of bail. The

High Court was required to consider the gravity and the

seriousness of the offence and the nature of the allegations

against   respondent   No.   1   –   accused.   Under   the

circumstances, the impugned judgment and order passed

by the High Court releasing respondent No. 1 on bail for

the offence punishable under
Section 302
of IPC is

unsustainable.
4
3.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

     present appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and

     order passed by the High Court releasing respondent No. 1

     ­ accused on bail in Case Crime No. 80/2021 of Police

     Station Rohata, District Meerut for the offence punishable

     under
Section 302
IPC is hereby quashed and set aside.
4.   Now, respondent No. 1­ Gulveer – accused shall surrender

     before the concerned Court/Jail authority forthwith failing

     which he be arrested by issuing non­bailable warrant.

     However, it is observed that the learned Trial Court to

     conduct the trial in accordance with law and on its own

     merits and on the basis of the evidence led before it. The

     present appeal is accordingly allowed to the aforesaid

     extent. No costs.
………………………………….J.
                                   [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                         ………………………………….J.
SEPTEMBER 16, 2022                 [KRISHNA MURARI]
5