[Cites
59
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Abraham Patani Of Mumbai vs The State Of Maharashtra on 2 September, 2022
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
,
Surya Kant
REPORTABLE




                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.5929 OF 2022

[ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.13754 OF 2022]



       Dr. Abraham Patani of Mumbai & Anr.                           ..... Appellants



                                               VERSUS



       The State of Maharashtra & Ors.                             ..... Respondents




                                              JUDGMENT
Surya Kant, J:
1.             Leave Granted.
2.             This appeal arises from the judgment dated 30.05.2022 passed

          by the Bombay High Court dismissing the Appellants’ Writ Petition in

          which they had sought to quash a series of resolutions passed by
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Respondent No. 2, as well as notifications and a final award of
Date: 2022.09.02
17:11:45 IST
Reason:
compensation under the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
(“LAA”) issued by
Page 1 of 57
Respondent Nos. 10 & 11, which cumulatively resulted in acquisition

of parts of the Appellants’ property for construction of a new road.
A. FACTS
3.   The genesis and course of the present dispute spans several

decades and includes one prior round of litigation before this Court.

The crux of the matter arises from the opposition by Appellants to the

construction of a road through their property by Respondent No. 2,

the Municipal Corporation of Mumbai. The property in question was

acquired by the Appellants in 1959, and a building known as the

“INGA Building” was constructed on it in 1965.
4.   The possibility of having a road through the Appellants’ land was

floated initially in a Development Plan (“DP”) of 1976. After this, the

road was realigned in 1984 in order to secure smooth passage through

Appellants’ land. Appellants raised objections in this regard in 1992

and the planned road was deleted from the DP via notification dated

12.11.1992 issued by Respondent No. 1.
5.   During this period, various complaints were allegedly received

from residents in surrounding areas regarding the need for a road in

order to connect the Mahakali Caves with the Central Industrial

District. Respondent No. 1 issued a directive under
Section 37(1)
of

the Maharashtra Regional Town Planning Act, 1966 (“MRTP Act”) on
Page 2 of 61
07.06.1993, acknowledging the need for a connecting road but stating

that it was “not feasible” to pursue construction of an 18.30 metre

road through the Appellants’ land. Thus, Respondent No. 2 was

instructed to analyse the legal and technical aspects of the project

before submitting a proposal for setting up the road with minor

modifications in the DP under Section 37 of the MRTP Act.
6.   Meanwhile, Appellants completed construction of a bungalow on

their land in 1994. However, subsequent sanctions sought by the

Appellants for further buildings were rejected by the Municipal

Corporation on the ground that a proposal for creation of a link road

through the property was under consideration.
7.   Respondent No. 2 eventually passed Resolution No. 651 on

10.09.1996 that renewed the proposal to have the link road

constructed through Appellants’ land. Two further resolutions were

then passed: a) Resolution No. 39 dated 18.08.1998 by the

Improvement Committee affirming the proposal for the link road; b)

Resolution No. 536 on 08.12.1998 by Respondent No. 2 under Sec.

126 of the MRTP Act and Secs. 90(1) & (3) of the
Mumbai Municipal

Corporation Act
(“
MMC Act
”) for the acquisition of land in order to

build the new road line.
Page 3 of 61
8.   The Office of the Chief Engineer (Development Plan) forwarded

an application to Respondent No. 1 on 05.02.1999 seeking to initiate

proceedings under the LAA. Appellants filed protestations before the

state authorities claiming that the dimensions and route for the link

road would touch the buildings that had been constructed by them.

Given these continuing disputes, Respondent No. 2 eventually passed

Resolution No. 1167 on 09.03.2001 which noted that there were three

other road lines that connected the Mahakali Caves with the Central

MIDC. Consequently, it was concluded that an additional road

through Appellants’ property was redundant.
9.   Private Respondents, Nos. 6­9, challenged this decision before

the HC in WP No. 1072 of 2001. While this was pending, Respondent

No. 2 proposed to reconsider Resolution No. 1167. Appellants filed a

Notice of Motion in the already pending WP, seeking to restrain

Respondent No. 2 from once again tabling the motion to have a link

road through their land. This Notice was dismissed by the High Court

on 18.10.2002 with liberty granted to Respondent No. 2 to reconsider

the decision made on 09.03.2001 but with a caveat that any fresh

resolution passed thereafter would only be given effect to after

obtaining leave from the Court.
Page 4 of 61
10.   Respondent No. 2 proceeded to pass Resolution No. 1117 on

28.10.2002 which withdrew Resolution No. 1167, and partially

modified the earlier resolution passed on 08.12.1998. The net result of

this was that the acquisition of Appellants’ land was sanctioned for

building an 18.30 metre new road line. Appellants moved Writ Petition

No. 3060 of 2002 challenging the renewal of the plan to construct the

link road and seeking to quash three Resolutions: a) No. 651 on

10.09.1996; b) No. 536 on 08.12.1998; c) No. 1117 on 28.10.2002.
11.   Meanwhile, the High Court disposed of WP No. 1072 of 2001

with the observation that after the passage of Resolution No. 1117, the

WP in question had become infructuous and the validity and legality of

the Resolution would be decided by the High Court in the proceedings

initiated by Appellants.
12.   During pendency of the Appellants’ WP, and pursuant to the

application of 05.02.1999, the acquisition exercise under the LAA was

put in motion. Respondent No. 10 and 11 issued notifications under
Sections 4
and
6
of the LAA directing that Appellants’ land be acquired

in public interest. The award of compensation under
Section 11
was

declared on 26.11.2007. Appellants consequently incorporated a

challenge to the notification under
Sec. 6
and the award of

compensation, into their prayer in the pending Writ Petition.
Page 5 of 61
13.   Appellants’ interim prayer for status quo vis­à­vis the property

was rejected by the High Court and, being aggrieved by this denial,

they instituted SLP (Civil) No. 22849 of 2008 in which the Supreme

Court ordered that status quo be maintained as on 22.09.2008. The

SLP remained pending for over a decade until it was disposed of vide

order dated 05.12.2019 with a request to the High Court to finally

decide the matter. The order of status quo was extended till the final

judgment by the High Court.
14.   Before the High Court, the Appellants assailed the entire land

acquisition process on broadly three grounds: a) The MRTP Act formed

a complete code for the purpose of town planning and development,

and hence, Respondent No. 2 could not resort to the provisions of the
MMC Act
to circumvent a DP that is approved under the MRTP Act.

Instead, it was mandatory to seek permission from Respondent No. 1

for effectuating minor modifications in the DP under Section 37 of the

MRTP Act; b) In arguendo, the procedure under the
MMC Act
for land

acquisition had not been followed.
Section 91
of the MMC Act required

Respondent No. 3 to initiate the process of acquiring land under
Section 296
for laying down a new road under
Section 291
. However,

in this case, the Office of the Chief Engineer had been the authority

which took the first step which was an incurable defect. Additionally,

no authorization had been granted by Respondent No. 1, as required
Page 6 of 61
under
Section 91
of the MMC Act; c) Appellants had not been given

sufficient    opportunity    to   voice   their   grievances   in   respect    of

Respondent No. 2’s plan to build the link road through their land.
15.   The Appellants’ Writ Petition was eventually dismissed vide the

impugned judgment whereby the High Court declined to quash the

various resolutions passed by Respondent No. 2, and the notification

and award of compensation under the LAA. Thus, the High Court

affirmed the need to acquire Appellants’ land for construction of the

link road in public interest.
16.   The Division Bench held: ­
i)     The acquisition of Appellants’ land and decision to lay a new

             road through it was taken pursuant to
Sections 91
,
291(a)
and
296
, of the MMC Act. The MMC Act conferred

             Respondent No. 2 with the power to acquire land and build a

             new road which required neither prior permission from the

             State Govt., nor for the road itself to be reflected in the DP;
ii)    The MMC Act and MRTP Act are distinct, and the powers

             granted to Respondent No. 2 under the former would not be

             impliedly repealed by the latter merely because it was a

             subsequent statute. Rather, they would exist side­by­side

             and supplement each other in the areas where there was an
Page 7 of 61
overlap of powers. Thus, Respondent No. 2 had the option of

      either going through the MRTP Act or the
MMC Act
and it

      had used its discretion to exercise the latter option;
iii) While it was true that the link road was not included in the

      DP after its deletion in 1992, this did not prevent

      Respondent No. 2 from acting under the
MMC Act
. The

      MRTP Act dealt with crafting of development plans at the

      macro level, while Respondent No. 2 was at liberty to

      exercise its powers under the
MMC Act
to iron out minute

      details and carry out work that would be in furtherance of

      such a plan, such as the construction of a link road;
iv)   Sec. 37 of the MRTP Act which laid out a rigorous process

      for making minor adjustments to a DP would not be

      relevant, as Respondent No. 2 had acted under the
MMC Act
and not the MRTP Act to facilitate the acquisition of land

      and setting up of the road;
v)    The requirements under
Section 91
of the MMC Act had

      been complied with. Even though the Office of the Chief

      Engineer rather than Respondent No. 3 had forwarded the

      letter to Respondent No. 10 seeking to initiate the land

      acquisition proceedings, this was only a minor defect that

      would not invalidate the process;
Page 8 of 61
vi)   Respondent No. 1 had acceded to the steps taken by

            Respondent Nos. 2 & 3 to acquire the Appellants’ land by

            initiating the land acquisition proceedings under the LAA

            through Respondent Nos. 10 & 11, which showed that it was

            in agreement with the need for obtaining the property for the

            link road;
vii) There was a clear and urgent need for building the road to

            alleviate traffic congestion in the area caused by the lack of

            a connector from the Mahakali Caves to the Central MIDC.

            Thus, public interest would have to trump the private

            interests of Appellants.
It is in this context that Appellants have approached this Court for the

second time.
B. SUBMISSIONS
17.   Mr. Shyam Divan & Mr. V. Giri, learned Senior Counsels for the

Appellants, have raised the following contentions while assailing the

impugned judgment: ­
i)    The DP under the MRTP Act holds a position of primacy. It

            is not possible for Respondent No. 2 to act on its own

            initiative in proposing construction of a road when the road

            itself is not reflected in the DP. Respondent No. 1 had
Page 9 of 61
already made its opinion on the matter clear by deleting the

      road from the overall DP through a notification on

      12.11.1992, and had then suggested that Respondent No. 2

      re­examine the issue in its Directive under Section 37 of the

      MRTP Act, dated 07.06.1993;
ii)   Section 31 of the MRTP Act provides the entire process by

      which a DP is finalized and sanctioned. The overall scheme

      under
Section 31
envisages a consultative process with the

      general public whereby objections and suggestions are

      invited and considered. Respondent No. 2 has taken away

      the right accorded under
Section 31
to object to aspects of

      the plan by circumventing it by way of a resolution under

      the
MMC Act
;
iii) The High Court’s ruling permits a subordinate authority, the

      Municipal Corporation, to subvert the State Government’s

      DP. This would cause violence to the mandate of the MRTP

      Act;
iv)   Given the hierarchy established between the MRTP Act and

      the MMC Act, Respondent No. 2’s usage of provisions of the

      latter to do what cannot be done under the former, is merely

      a colourable exercise of power;
Page 10 of 61
v)    The MRTP Act is a complete code that provides for every

            aspect of formulating, modifying, and finalizing a DP. Any

            actions taken under either the MCC Act or the LAA, to

            acquire land and use it for any purpose that is not expressly

            sanctioned in the DP, are illegal. Reliance is placed on

            Girnar Traders v. State of Maharashtra & Ors. (“Girnar

            Traders
2011”)1    and   Manohar     Joshi   v.    State    of

            Maharashtra & Ors.2
vi)   Permitting a Municipal Corporation to act outside of a DP

            will create a chaotic situation and facilitate unbridled usage

            of the powers under the relevant municipal corporation

            statute. Such discretion cannot be accorded to a municipal

            corporation to act outside the contours of the relevant DP;
vii) Even under the
MMC Act
, the requirement of Respondent

            No. 3 initiating the process under
Section 91
has not been

            fulfilled. The minimum safeguard provided under
Section 91
is for the municipal commissioner himself/herself to at least

            apply his/her mind to the proposal and then make an

            application to the State Govt. under
Section 91
. These are

            not minor defects but basic protections under the
MMC Act
1 (2011) 3 SCC 1.
2 (2012) 3 SCC 619.
Page 11 of 61
and must be construed strictly. The judgment in Girnar

            Traders v. State of Maharashtra (“Girnar Traders

            2007”)3 is cited in this regard;
viii) Notwithstanding the aforementioned defect,
Section 91
of

            the MMC Act requires the State Govt., upon receipt of an

            application for the acquisition of land, to authorize the

            initiation   of   proceedings   under   the   LAA.     No   such

            authorization has been granted in this case and the DP does

            not provide for the road in any case.
ix)   Resolution No. 1167 had explicitly noted that the proposed

            road seemed to be for the benefit of private individuals,

            Respondent Nos. 4­9, and was not for any discernible public

            interest.
18.   Arguing in support of the impugned judgment, learned Counsel

Mr. Girish Godbole, appearing for Respondent Nos. 2 & 3, learned

Senior Counsel, Mr. Shekhar Naphade, appearing for Respondent Nos.

6­9, alongside learned Counsel Mr. S.C. Dharmadhikari, appearing for

Respondent Nos. 4 & 5, have placed the following submissions:
i)    Sanction for construction of the link road was obtained via

            three resolutions: i) No. 651 on 10.09.1996; ii) Resolution


3 (2007) 7 SCC 555.
Page 12 of 61
No. 39 by the Improvement Committee on 18.08.1998; iii)

      Resolution No. 536 of 08.12.1998 which was a composite

      resolution under Section 126 of the MRTP Act, and
Section

      90(1)
& (3) of the
MMC Act
. Mr. Godbole clarifies that the

      third resolution was, in effect, under
Section 91
of the MMC

      Act and the mention of
Section 90
is merely a typographical

      error;
ii)   In terms of authorization required from Respondent No. 1

      for carrying out the acquisition process,
Sections 4
&
6
of

      the LAA provide that the State Govt. is the party that

      initiates the process of issuing a notification and then

      declaring that a parcel of land is needed for a public

      purpose. Hence, the steps taken subsequently under the

      LAA demonstrate that the State Govt. was ad idem with the

      municipal corporation on the need to procure Appellants’

      land;
iii)
Section 91
of the MMC has been complied with. The fact

      that the Office of the Chief Engineer forwarded the

      application to the State Govt. is inconsequential as the

      action is a formality. The Commissioner was part of the

      Ministerial   Committee   where   the   decision     regarding

      Appellants’ land was taken and the application was only
Page 13 of 61
made   after   accruing   the    approval   of   the    committee,

      including the Commissioner;
iv)   The MMC Act and MRTP Act operate in completely different

      fields and co­exist simultaneously. If the State legislature

      intended to erode the powers under the
MMC Act
, it would

      have included provisions to that effect.
v)    Resort to
Sections 91
,
291(a)
and
296
of the MMC Act as the

      mode of acquisition was ideal for Appellants as they would

      receive compensation via the statutory mechanism under

      the LAA. Moreover, the plan for the road, as proposed by

      Respondent     No.   2,   does   not   impact     the    buildings

      constructed on the land. Hence, no substantial prejudice is

      caused to Appellants;
vi)   The directive dated 07.06.1993 cannot be classified as

      coming under Section 37 of the MRTP Act. The State Govt.

      merely suggested that Respondent No. 2 reconsider the

      technical and legal aspects of the proposed link road after

      which no further steps were taken. There was no express

      modification directed to be made, and this was merely part

      of the process of revisions and consideration of the DP.
vii) Appellants’ conduct and the manner in which they had the

      buildings on the land constructed in defiance of an
Page 14 of 61
undertaking that was given to the state authorities,

           disentitles them to any relief on equitable grounds. Further,

           their   repeated     representations   directly   to     the   State

           authorities    and     attempts   to   manipulate        the    road

           construction show mala fide intent;
viii) The link road is in public interest, and such a consideration

           must override private interest.
19.   Learned senior counsel, Mr. Divan, countered Respondents’

submissions in his rejoinder by raising the following points:
i)   The Resolution of 08.12.1998 was under
Section 90
of the

           MMC Act which is for acquisition by consent. There was

           neither consent for acquisition nor any separate resolution

           under
Section 91
of the MMC Act that was passed by

           Respondents. Even if the submission by Mr. Godbole that

           this was essentially a resolution under
Section 91
is to be

           accepted,     the    subsequent   Resolution      No.     1167    of

           09.03.2001, and letter dated 14.03.2001 by Respondent No.

           2, expressly noted there was no need for a road to be built

           through Appellants’ property. Hence, this nullified any

           purported decision that may have been taken under
Section

           91
in the resolution dated 08.12.1998.
Page 15 of 61
ii)   The argument regarding disentitlement to relief on equitable

            grounds is unfounded, since it is the municipal corporation

            that has repeatedly changed its stance on the need for the

            link road;
iii) The affidavit submitted by Vyaravali Village Development

            Assn. before the High Court in the WP filed by Respondent

            Nos. 6­9, shows that there was a clear application of mind to

            the issue of constructing the link road. Resolution No. 1167

            was the product of these deliberations. Thus, no claim of

            manipulation   and   mala   fides   can   be   raised   against

            Appellants.
iv)   Having devoted our earnest attention to the submissions

            advanced by both sides, and after perusing the record, we

            now proceed to consider the issues that have been raised.




C. ANALYSIS

C.1. Interplay between the MRTP Act and the MMC Act
20.   The primary issue that emerges from the arguments raised by

the parties is with regard to the interaction between the MRTP Act and

the MMC Act. Specifically, the Appellants posit that the procedure
Page 16 of 61
under Section 37 of the MRTP Act for amendment of a DP is the sole

method by which construction that is not provided for within the DP

can subsequently be authorized.
21.   Section 37 of the MRTP Act (relevant part) sets out the following

process:
37. Modification of final Development plan
           (1) Where a modification of any part of or any proposal
           made in, a final Development plan * * *, the Planning
           Authority may, or when so directed by the State
           Government [shall, within ninety days from the date of
           such direction, publish a notice] in the Official Gazette
           [and in such other manner as may be determined by it]
           inviting objections and suggestions from any person with
           respect to the proposed modification not later than one
           month from the date of such notice ; and shall also serve
           notice on all persons affected by the proposed
           modification and after giving a hearing to any such
           persons, submit the proposed modification (with
           amendments, if any,) [to the State Government for
           sanction within one year from the date of publication of
           notice in the Official Gazette. If such modification
           proposal is not submitted within the period stipulated
           above, the proposal of modification shall be deemed to
           have lapsed:
Provided that, such lapsing shall not bar the Planning
           Authority from making a fresh proposal.]
           [(1A) If the Planning Authority fails to issue the notice as
           directed by the State Government, the State Government
           shall issue the notice, and thereupon the provisions of
           sub­section (1) shall apply as they apply in relation to a
           notice to be published by a Planning Authority.]
           [(1AA)(a) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­
           sections (1), (1A) and (2), where the State Government is
           satisfied that in the public interest it is necessary to
           carry out urgently a modification of any part of, or any
           proposal made in, a final Development plan of such a
           nature that it will not change the character of such
           Development plan, the State Government may, on its own,
           publish a notice in the Official Gazette, and in such other
Page 17 of 61
manner as may be determined by it, inviting objections
         and suggestions from any person with respect to the
         proposed modification not later than one month from the
         date of such notice and shall also serve notice on all
         persons affected by the proposed modification and the
         Planning Authority.
(b) The State Government shall, after the specified period,
         forward a copy of all such objections and suggestions to
         the Planning Authority for its say to the Government
         within a period of one month from the receipt of the
         copies of such objections and suggestions from the
         Government.
(c) The State Government shall, after giving hearing to
         the affected persons and the Planning Authority and
         after making such inquiry as it may consider necessary
         and consulting the Director of Town Planning, by
         notification in the Official Gazette, publish the approved
         modifications with or without changes, and subject to
         such conditions as it may deem fit, or may decide not to
         carry out such modification. On the publication of the
         modification in the Official Gazette, the final
         Development plan shall be deemed to have been modified
         accordingly.]
22.   As opposed to this, Respondents have attempted to make a case

that the power vested in the municipal corporation under
Sections 91
,
291(a)
, and
296
of the MMC Act, are unaffected by Section 37 of the

MRTP Act. The interpretation of the three provisions comprise the crux

of the present case and they are reproduced below (relevant part):
91. Procedure when immoveable property cannot be
         acquired by agreement.
(1) Whenever the Commissioner is unable to acquire any
         immovable property under the last preceding section by
         agreement [the [State] Government] may, in their
         discretion, upon the application of the Commissioner,
         made with the approval of [the Improvements Committee]
         [and subject to the other provisions of this Act] order
         proceedings to be taken for acquiring the same on behalf
         of the corporation, as if such property were a land
Page 18 of 61
needed for a public purpose within the meaning of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1870.*
(2) The amount of compensation awarded and all other
charges incurred in the acquisition of any such property
shall, subject to all other provisions of this Act, be
forthwith paid by the Commissioner and thereupon the
said property shall vest in the corporation.
x­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­x­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­x
291. Power to make new public streets
The Commissioner, when authorised by the corporation in
this behalf may at any time—
(a) lay out and make a new public street;
(b) agree with any person for the making of a street for
public use through the land of such person, either
entirely at the expense of such person or partly at the
expense of such person and partly at the expense of the
corporation, and that such street shall become, on
completion, a public street;
[(c) declare any street made under an improvement
scheme duly executed in pursuance of the provisions of
the City of Bombay Improvement Act, 1898, or the City of
Bombay Improvement Trust Transfer Act, 1925, to be a
public street.]
x­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­x­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­x
296. Power to acquire premises for improvements of
public street
(1) The Commissioner may, subject to the provisions of
section 90
,
91
and
92
—
(a) acquire any land required for the purpose of opening,
widening, extending or otherwise improving any public
street or of making any new public street, and the
buildings, if any standing upon such land;
(b) acquire in addition to the said land and the buildings,
if any, standing, thereupon, all such land with the
buildings, if any, standing thereupon, as it shall seem
expedient for the corporation to acquire outside of the
regular line, or of the intended regular line, of such
street;
(c) lease, sell or otherwise dispose of any land or building
purchased under clause (b).
(2) Any conveyance of land or of a building under clause
(c) may comprise such conditions as the Commissioner
Page 19 of 61
thinks fit, as to the removal of the existing building, the
         description of new building to be erected, the period
         within which such new building shall be completed and
         other such matters.
23.   Under the MCC Act, the power to make a new public street is

derived from
Section 291
. For the purpose of making a new street,
Section 296
of the Act empowers the Commissioner to acquire land,

subject to fulfilment of the conditions stipulated in
Sections 90
­92.

For our purposes,
Section 91
is the consequential provision since

Appellants’ land could not, evidently, be acquired by agreement and

had to be procured under the terms of the procedure provided therein.
24.   The entire scheme of land acquisition for the purpose of laying a

new road line is provided within the contours of
Sections 91
,
291(a)
and
296
. There is undoubtedly a certain degree of overlap between

these provisions, and Section 37 of the MRTP Act as they deal with

procurement of land. However, the latter is relevant in the context of a

DP whereas the MCC Act regulates the manner in which the Mumbai

Municipal Corporation operates. Moreover, merely because both

statutes are concerned with land acquisition, may not necessarily

result in conflict between them.
25.   Learned Senior Counsels for the Appellants urged that the

interpretation of the provisions of the MRTP Act and MMC Act must be

such that actions under the latter could only be taken if sanction and
Page 20 of 61
approval for them had been obtained under the MRTP Act. While it is

true that the respective provisions in both Statutes deal with the

method for procuring land in public interest, there is nothing

contained within them which explicitly or impliedly makes them

subject to one another. A bare reading indicates that they operate in

distinctive fields which may not always be co­dependent. Appellants’

interpretation amounts to curtailing the power that Respondent No. 2

would have otherwise been able to exercise under the
MMC Act
,

outside the contours of the MRTP Act.
26.    It is well settled that provisions of one statute should not be

construed or interpreted in a manner that they render redundant the

provisions in another statute. The Court’s endeavour shall always be

to harmoniously construct such provisions so that the legislative

intent underlying both statutes can be fulfilled.
27.
In
The Chief Inspector of Mines & Ors. v. Lala Karam Chand

Thapar & Ors.4
the Court had reconciled a seeming contradiction

between the
Mines Act, 1923
, and the
General Clauses Act
, through a

harmonious construction of the provisions in the two Acts:
“13. If the words of
s. 31(4)
are construed to mean that
           the regulations became part of the Act to the extent that
           when the Act is repealed, the regulations also stand
           repealed, a conflict at once arises between
s. 31(4)
and
           the provisions of
s. 24
of the General Clauses Act. In

4 (1962) 1 SCR 9.
Page 21 of 61
other words, the
Mines Act, 1923
, while saying in
s. 31(4)
that the repeal of the Act will result in the repeal of the
regulations, will be saying, in the provisions of
s. 24
of
the General Clauses Act as read into it, that on the
repeal of the Act, when the Act is repealed and re­
enacted, the regulations will not stand repealed but will
continue in force till superseded by regulations made
under the re­enacted Act. To solve this conflict the courts
must apply the rule of harmonious construction… We
have to seek therefore some other means of harmonising
the two provisions. The reasonable way of harmonising
that obviously suggests itself is to construe
s. 31(4)
to
mean that the regulations on publication shall have for
some purposes, say, for example, the purpose of deciding
the validity of the regulations, the same effect as if they
were part of the Act, but for the purpose of the continuity
of existence, they will not be considered part of the Act,
so that even though the Act is repealed, the regulations
will continue to exist, in accordance with the provisions
of
s. 24
of the General Clauses Act. This construction will
give reasonable effect to
s. 31(4)
of the Mines Act, 1923
and at the same time not frustrate the very salutary
object of
s. 24
of the General Clauses Act. One may pause
here to remember that regulations framed under an Act
are of the very greatest importance. Such regulations are
framed for the successful operation of the Act. Without
proper regulations, a statute will often be worse than
useless. When an Act is repealed, but re­enacted, it is
almost inevitable that there will be some time lag
between the re­enacted statute coming into force, and
regulations being framed under the re­enacted statute.
However efficient the rule making authority may be it is
impossible to avoid some hiatus between the coming into
force of the re­enacted statute and the simultaneous
repeal of the old Act and the making of regulations.
Often, the time lag would be considerable. Is it
conceivable that any legislature, in providing that
regulations made under its statute will have effect as if
enacted in the Act, could have intended by those words to
say that if ever the Act is repealed and re­enacted (as is
more than likely to happen sooner or later), the
regulations will have no existence for the purpose of the
re­enacted statute, and thus the re­enacted statute, for
some time at least, will be in many respects, a dead
letter. The answer must be in the negative. Whatever the
purpose be which induced the draftsmen to adopt this
legislative form as regards the rules and regulations that
Page 22 of 61
they will have effect "as if enacted in the Act", it will be
          strange indeed if the result of the language used, be that
          by becoming part of the Act, they would stand repealed,
          when the Act is repealed. One can be certain that that
          could not have been the intention of the legislature. It is
          satisfactory that the words used do not produce that
          result. For, if we apply the rule of harmonious
          construction, as has been pointed out above, s. 31(4) does
          not stand in the way of the operation of
s. 24
of the
          General Clauses Act.”
28.   The primacy of taking a harmonious construction was affirmed

in
Anwar Hasan Khan v. Mohd. Shafi5
as well:
“8. It is settled that for interpreting a particular
          provision of an Act, the import and effect of the meaning
          of the words and phrases used in the statute has to be
          gathered from the text, the nature of the subject matter
          and the purpose and intention of the statute. It is
          cardinal principle of construction of a statute that effort
          should be made in construing its provisions by avoiding
          the conflict and adopting a harmonious construction.
          The statute or rules made thereunder should be read as a
          whole and one provision should be construed with
          reference to the other provision to make the provision
          consistent with the object sought to be achieved. The well
          known principle of harmonious construction is that effect
          should be given to all the provisions and a construction
          that reduce one of the provisions to a "dead letter" is not
          harmonious construction.”
29.   When the legislature knowingly allows two statutes to operate in

the same space, it is a reasonable presumption that the legislative

design would have been for both to remain operative without any

overriding effect, save and except when a contrary intent is explicitly

provided. In other words, the Court shall steer two statutes away from




5 (2001) 8 SCC 540.
Page 23 of 61
a direct collision with each other, even if their areas of operation are

broadly similar.
30.    Learned      Senior     Counsel,     Mr.     Shyam      Divan,     has    placed

substantial reliance on decisions of this Court in Girnar Traders

2011 and Manohar Joshi to advance the Appellants’ argument. In

Girnar Traders 2011 the issue under consideration was whether

Section 11A6 of the LAA could be read into the MRTP Act’s scheme for

acquisition of land.
Section 11A
of the LAA provided a two­year time

period within which an award under
Section 11
had to be made to

individuals claiming compensation under the Act. Failure to do so

would lead to the entire land acquisition process lapsing.
31.    It is in this context that the Constitution Bench of this Court

held that the MRTP Act is a self­contained code. It elaborated that

mere reference to certain provisions of the LAA would not result in the

importation of the entire scheme of the said statute unto the MRTP

Act. The Court thus held:
6 11A. Period shall be which an award within made. –
        The Collector shall make an award under
section 11
within a period of two years
from the date of the publication of the declaration and if no award is made within that
period, the entire proceeding for the acquisition of the land shall lapse:
Provided that in a case where the said declaration has been published before the
commencement of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984 (68 of 1984), the award
shall be made within a period of two years from such commencement.
Explanation ­ In computing the period of two years referred to in this section, the
period during which any action or proceeding to be taken in pursuance of the said
declaration is stayed by an order of a Court shall be excluded.]
Page 24 of 61
“84. The MRTP Act besides being a code in itself has one
        pre­ dominant purpose, i.e., planned development. Other
        matters are incidental and, therefore, should be
        construed to achieve that pre­ dominant object. All the
        provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act
cannot be applied
        to the MRTP Act. The provisions of the MRTP Act have to
        be implemented in their own field. As far as the
        provisions relating to preparation, approval and
        execution of the development plans are concerned, there
        is hardly any dependency of the State Act on the
        provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act
. It may be
        necessary, sometimes, to acquire land which primarily
        would be for the purpose of planned development as
        contemplated under the MRTP Act. Some of the provisions
        of the State Act have specifically referred to some of the
        provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act
but for the limited
        purpose of acquiring land. Thus, the purpose of such
        reference is, obviously, to take aid of the provisions of
        the Central Act only for the purpose of acquiring a land
        in accordance with law stated therein rather than letting
        any provision of the Central Act hamper or obstruct the
        principal object of the State Act, i.e. execution of the
        planned development.”
                                             (Emphasis Applied)
32.   Unmistakably,    the    Constitution    Bench’s     objective   was

safeguarding against the transposition of conditions under the LAA

into the MRTP Act. Allowing this to happen would have made the task

of achieving the object and purpose of the MRTP Act more onerous.

The crucial factor that weighed with the Court in that instance was

that it could not allow the LAA to “hamper or obstruct” the MRTP Act’s

primary goals.
33.   A similar concern was deliberated upon by this Court in
Manohar Joshi
(Supra). The Court
in that case
was inter alia dealing
Page 25 of 61
with a conflict that arose between a DP and an earlier Town Planning

Scheme under Section 597 of the MRTP Act. The DP reserved the area

in question for the construction of a primary school whereas the town

planning scheme had marked it as a residential zone.
34.    While noting the express provision under
Section 39
8
that a town

planning scheme would be subordinate to, and be suitably modified to

bring it in congruence with the DP, this Court held:
“84. As noted above,
Section 39
specifically directs that
            the Planning Authority shall vary the TP Scheme to the
            extent necessary by the proposals made in the final
            development plan, and
Section 59(1)(a)
gives the purpose
            of the TP scheme viz. that it is for implementing the
            proposals contained in the final development plan. Under
Section 31(6)
of the Act, a development plan which has
            came into operation is binding on the Planning Authority.
            The Planning Authority cannot act contrary to the DP
            plan and grant development permission to defeat the
            provision of the DP plan. Besides, it cannot be ignored
            that a duty is cast on every Planning Authority
            specifically under
Section 42
of the Act to take steps as
            may be necessary to carry out the provisions of the plan
            referred to in
Chapter III of the Act
, namely, the
            development plan.”
                                                          (Emphasis Applied)



7 59. Making of town planning schemes.
[(1)] Subject to the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force
—
(a) a Planning Authority may for the purpose of implementing the proposals in the
final Development plan 4[or in respect of any land which is likely to be in the course of
development or which is already built upon], prepare one or more town planning schemes
for the area within its jurisdiction, or any part thereof ;…
8 39. Variation of town planning scheme by Development plan.
Where a final Development plan contains proposals which are in variation, or
modification of those made in a town planning scheme which has been sanctioned by the
State Government before the commencement of this Act, the Planning Authority shall vary
such scheme suitably under
section 92
to the extent necessary by the proposals made in
the final Development plan.
Page 26 of 61
35.   Upon a close examination of these judgments, we fail to see how

they assist the Appellants’ case. In both instances, the concern was

regarding frustration of the DP by either importation of
Section 11A
of

the LAA into the scheme of the MRTP Act (Girnar Traders 2011), or

due to a conflict between the DP and the town planning scheme

(Manohar Joshi). Neither of these eventualities have arisen in the

present case.
36.   Even apart from that, the principle on which this Court

proceeded in the cases cited above is that external statutes or

alternate schemes/plans under the MRTP Act or otherwise, should not

be allowed to frustrate the DP or the overall objective of planned

development under the MRTP Act. As the DP is the primary means of

achieving the purpose of the MRTP Act, any violence done to the

former would necessarily affect the latter. Conversely, if the former is

left essentially undisturbed then it cannot be said that the spirit and

scheme of the MRTP Act has not been honoured.
37.   The construction of the link road in the present case does not, in

any way, frustrate the DP or defeat the overall objective of the statute.

The motivation for building the connector is to alleviate traffic

congestion in the area caused due to the need for commuters to take a

protracted detour around the boundaries of Appellants’ property. It is
Page 27 of 61
only in instances where a requirement of the DP is being abrogated

that a conflict arises and the observations in Girnar Traders 2011

(Supra) and
Manohar Joshi
(Supra) become relevant.
38.    Moreover, the decision in
Manohar Joshi
(Supra) contains a

crucial distinguishing factor between the town planning scheme

sought to be effectuated
in that case
, and the proposed link road in

the present instance. Under Section 39 of the MRTP Act, the town

planning scheme is expressly made subordinate to the DP. No such

express provision has been placed in either the MRTP Act or the
MMC

Act
, to curtail the powers of Respondent Nos. 2 & 3 under
Sections 91
,
291(a)
, and
296
of the MMC Act.
39.    In fact, the
MMC Act
under
Section 61(m)
9
mandates that

Respondent No. 2 take any lawful measures possible to provide for the

construction, maintenance, alteration, and improvement of public

streets. The wording of this provision is mandatory, in contrast to
Section 6310
of the MMC Act which grants discretion to the Municipal



9 61. Matters to be provided for by the corporation.
It shall be incumbent on the corporation to make adequate provision, by any means
or measures which it is lawfully competent to them to use or to take, for each of the
following matters, namely :—
        …
(m) the construction, maintenance, alteration and improvement of public streets,
bridges, culverts, causeways and the like 1[and also other measures for ensuing the safe
and orderly passage of vehicular and pedestrian traffic on streets];…
10 63. Matters which may be provided for by the corporation at their discretion.
The corporation may, in their discretion, provide from time to time, either wholly or
partly, for all or any of the following matters, namely :—
        …
Page 28 of 61
Corporation to make arrangements for the subjects listed thereunder,

if it so chooses.
40.   This Court should not, therefore, unduly erode the powers vested

in Respondent No. 2 to carry out its statutory duties under
Section 61
.

This is especially true in a case where the object and purpose of the

MRTP Act is left unaffected by the actions taken by the Municipal

Corporation.
41.   In this background, we find significant merit in learned Counsel,

Mr. Godbole’s argument, that the MRTP Act and the MMC Act exist in

separate spheres without any preconceived hierarchy. There may be

instances where there is overlap, such as when a DP is formulated for

a municipal area where the municipal corporation also exercises

jurisdiction. However, even in such a scenario the two statutes would

exist side­by­side and supplement each other.
42.   The exception to this, to borrow from
Manohar Joshi
(Supra),

would be where the actions taken by the municipal corporation or any

other external authority “defeat the provision of the DP plan”. In such

an eventuality the appropriate course of action would be to seek a

modification of the DP under the MRTP Act.
43.   For these reasons, we reject the contention of the Appellants that

the only means by which the link road through their property could
Page 29 of 61
have been constructed was through an amendment to the DP under

Section 37 of the MRTP Act. Respondent No. 2 had the option to either

follow the procedure under the MRTP Act, or to invoke the parallel

process provided under
Sections 91
,
291(a)
and
296
of the MMC Act.

Respondent No. 2’s recourse to the latter cannot be said to defeat any

provision of the DP or be contrary to the scheme of the MRTP Act.
44.   Having held as such, we also do not find merit in the argument

that Respondent No. 2’s resort to the
MMC Act
constitutes a

colourable exercise of power. This Court in
Sonapur Tea Co. Ltd. v.

Must
.
Mazirunnessa11 had characterized the colourable exercise of

powers as:
“9…The doctrine of colorable legislation really postulates
          that legislation attempts to do indirectly what it cannot
          do directly. In other words, though the letter of the law is
          within the limits of the powers of the Legislature, in
          substance the law has transgressed those powers and by
          doing so it has taken the precaution of concealing its
          real purpose under the cover of apparently legitimate
          and reasonable provisions…”
45.   Once we have ascertained that the two legislations in question,

the MRTP Act and the MMC Act, exist in separate spheres with only

incidental overlap, the possibility of a colourable exercise of power by

Respondent No. 2 falls away. As elaborated above, there is no direct or

indirect bar on the exercise of powers under
Sections 91
,
291(a)
, and
296
of the MMC Act which are all in furtherance of Respondent No. 2’s

11 (1962) 1 SCR 724.
Page 30 of 61
responsibilities under
Section 61
. The only exception to this would be

in those cases where a provision of the DP itself is being abrogated.
46.   Mr. Divan, learned Senior Counsel for the Appellants, had also

raised an issue regarding the lack of appropriate safeguards under the
MMC Act
as compared to the MRTP Act. He urged that the existence of

the right to object by interested parties to amendments in a DP under

Section 37 of the MRTP Act was further backing for his contention

that the MRTP Act was a complete code and is meant to control the

entire field in regard to planned development. This, he argued, was in

contrast to
Section 91
of the MMC Act which contains no such right of

objection prior to the municipal corporation passing a resolution.
47.   In our considered opinion, this does not advance Appellants’

case either. Merely because a right to object to a modification of a DP

exists under Section 37 of the MRTP Act does not automatically give it

an ascendant position in the hierarchy that Appellants seek to create

between the MRTP Act and the MMC Act. It is up to the legislature to

determine the amount of discretion that is accorded to the relevant

authorities under each statute.
48.   While it is true that this Court has previously read the

requirement of giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard into

statutes and provisions which did not provide for it, such a right was
Page 31 of 61
held even in those cases to not be absolute. 12 However, we need not

even go so far. A closer reading of the
MMC Act
and the LAA shows

that there are adequate safeguards available and, in the facts of the

case, Appellants were given ample opportunity to object to the

proposed expropriation of their land.
49.   When an application is made under
Section 91
of the MMC Act,

it is not the case that a notice for acquisition is issued immediately.

The State Govt. must first satisfy itself that the land sought to be

acquired is indeed required for a public purpose. Respondent No. 1

must scrutinize the application submitted before it and come to the

conclusion that the property in question necessitates reservation in

public interest before initiating the process under the LAA via

notification under
Section 4
.
50.   Thereafter, a mechanism for hearing objections is provided

under the LAA.
Section 5A
of the LAA, as it was at the relevant time, is

reproduced below:
5A. Hearing of objections. –
          (1) Any person interested in any land which has been
          notified under section 4, subsection (1), as being needed
          or likely to be needed for a public purpose or for a
          Company may, [within thirty days from the date of the
          publication of the notification], object to the acquisition
          of the land or of any land in the locality, as the case may
          be.
12
Olga Tellis & Ors. v. Bombay Municipal Corporation & Ors.
(1985) 3 SCC 545;
C.B.
Gautam v. Union of India & Ors.
(1993) 1 SCC 78.
Page 32 of 61
(2) Every objection under sub­section (1) shall be made to
           the Collector in writing, and the Collector shall give the
           objector an opportunity of being heard [in person or by
           any person authorized by him in this behalf] or by
           pleader and shall, after hearing all such objections and
           after making such further inquiry, if any, as he thinks
           necessary, [either make a report in respect of the land
           which has been notified under
section 4
, sub­section (1),
           or make different reports in respect of different parcels
           of such land, to the appropriate Government, containing
           his recommendations on the objections, together with the
           record of the proceedings held by him, for the decision of
           that Government]. The decision of the [appropriate
           Government] on the objections shall be final.
(3) For the purpose of this section, a person shall be
           deemed to be interested in land who would be entitled to
           claim an interest in compensation if the land were
           acquired under this Act.]
51.    In light of this, the claim that adequate safeguards were not

available under the route provided in
Section 91
of the MMC Act

cannot be countenanced. Not only does the State Govt. first evaluate

the application under
Section 91
, but
Section 5A
of the LAA also

permits the landowners themselves to air their grievances.
52.    Notice under
Section 4(1)
13
of the LAA was issued to Appellants

on 24.03.2005 by the Special Land Acquisition Officer (“SLAO”)

regarding the proposed acquisition of land for constructing the link

road and setting a deadline of 15.04.2005 for filing objections.


13 4. Publication of preliminary notification and power of officers thereupon. –
        (1) Whenever it appears to the [appropriate Government] the land in any locality [is
needed or] is likely to be needed for any public purpose [or for a company], a notification to
that effect shall be published in the Official Gazette [and in two daily newspapers
circulating in that locality of which at least one shall be in the regional language], and the
Collector shall cause public notice of the substance of such notification to be given at
convenient places in the said locality [(the last of the dates of such publication and the
giving of such public notice , being hereinafter referred to as the date of the publication of
the notification)].
Page 33 of 61
Appellants responded on 11.04.2005, opposing the acquisition inter

alia on the grounds that the matter was sub­judice before the High

Court in WP No. 3060 of 2002, and that the order dated 18.10.2002

passed in WP No. 1072 of 2001 had directed that actions would not be

taken pursuant to any subsequent resolution by Respondent No. 2

without leave being granted by the High Court. Their objections stated

that:
10. Our clients submit that for the reasons mentioned in
        Writ Petition No.3060 of 2002 filed by our clients, the
        proposed acquisition of land out of our clients' property
        bearing CTS Nos.23, 24 and 26 of Mulgaon is not for any
        public purpose and the same is not in accordance with
        law. No portion of our clients' properties bearing CTS
        Nos.23, 24 and 26 of Mulgaon is or is likely to be needed
        for construction of any public road. Proposed acquisition is
        at the instance of and for serving the private purpose of
        Developers of properties lying to East of our clients'
        properties and is malafide and in colourable exercise of
        powers under the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
and
Mumbai
        Municipal Corporation Act, 1888
. Construction of a private
        road through the property of our clients is bound to
        destroy our clients' property and cause irreparable
        damage to our clients' property, without serving any public
        purpose.
x­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­x­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­x
12. In the circumstances, our clients object to the proposed
        acquisition on the ground that the same is in willful
        disobedience and breach of Order dated 18th October,
        2002 passed by the Bombay High court in Writ Petition No.
        l072 of 2001 and amounts to interference with the
        proceedings in Writ Petition No.3060 of 2002 filed by our
        clients and pending before the Bombay High Court and
        contempt of the Bombay High Court as also on the ground
        that the same is not under authority of Appropriate
        Government and the ground that the same is malafide and
        in colourable exercise of powers and not in public interest,
        but merely to favour and confer largesse on Developers of
Page 34 of 61
property lying to the East of the property of our clients, by
           seeking to destroy the property of our clients and other
           grounds.
53.    It appears from the record that Appellants sent several letters to

this effect over the following months demanding that the acquisition

process cease on the aforementioned grounds stated in their letter of

11.04.2005. Appellants had eventually filed a contempt petition

against Respondent Nos. 2, 3 and 10, alleging violation of the order of

18.10.2002. This contempt petition was dismissed by the High Court

on 18.08.2006.
54.    Indeed, the award of compensation under
Section 11
of the LAA 14

passed on 26.11.2007 recorded at several instances that multiple

hearings were fixed and sufficient opportunity had been given to

14 11. Enquiry and award by Collector. –
        [(1)] On the day so fixed, or on any other day to which the enquiry has been
adjourned, the Collector shall proceed to enquire into the objection (if any) which any
person interested has stated pursuant to a notice given under section 9 to the
measurements made under section 8, and into the value of the land [at the date of the
publication of the notification under section 4, sub­section (1)], and into the respective
interests of the persons claiming the compensation and shall make an award under his
hand of­
(i) the true area of the land;
(ii) the compensation which in his opinion should be allowed for the land; and
(iii) the apportionment of the said compensation among all the persons known or
believed to be interested in the land, or whom, or of whose claims, he has information,
whether or not they have respectively appeared before him :
[Provided that no award shall be made by the Collector under this sub­section
without the previous approval of the appropriate Government or of such officer as the
appropriate Government may authorize in this behalf:
Provided further that it shall be competent for the appropriate Government to direct
that the Collector may make such award without such approval in such class of cases as
the appropriate Government may specify in this behalf.
…
Page 35 of 61
interested parties to be heard. In terms of the inquiry under
Section 5
of the LAA, the award noted:
After going through the objection raised by M/S Soloman
          & Co. Adv. Mentioned above and legal advice dt. 10/5/05
          revived from M.C.G.M.: the S.L.A.O. came to the conclusion
          that he need not to wait till the decision of the Hon. High
          Court, Mumbai in writ. Petition No.3060/02 filed by the
          interested parties as asked for in the objection mentioned
          above and S.L.A.O. decided to [proceed] with proceedings
          under
sec. 6
of L.A. Act. The detailed report in form 'D' as
          required under
sec. 5A
of L.A. Act and draft notification
          under
sec. 6
of L.A. Act have been submitted to the Addl.
          Commissioner Konkan Division through the Addl. Collector
          M.S.D. on 16/6/05 for the approval and publication of
          notification under
sec. 6
in Govt Gazette and newspaper
          etc.
55.   The award then goes on to note that no documentation had been

submitted by any of the interested parties showing title/rights over the

land and no claims for compensation had been filed under the LAA

either:
E. EVIDENCE IN SUPPORT OF CLAIM BY THE LAND
          OWNERS
          Nobody from owners or interested persons has filled their
          claims of compensation nor they have produced any
          documentary evidence of ownership of land under
          acquisition. Sufficient times were given them by fixing
          hearing from time to time and heard them. Finally letters
          dt. 12/5/06, 13/7/06 and 20/3/07 were issued to them
          asking to file their claims of compensation and documents
          of ownership. However, nobody came forward to file their
          claims of compensation or claims of ownership.
          Only one Shri Abraham Pattani through his advocate, filed
          every time his objection for acquisition of said lands and
          tried to stay acquisition proceedings.
Page 36 of 61
56.   What emerges from this sequence of events is that Appellants

appear to have been given sufficient opportunity to be heard and for

their objections to be considered. However, the Appellants remained

preoccupied with attempting to halt the acquisition proceedings on the

ground that the matter was sub­judice before the High Court and,

thus, no further steps under the LAA could be taken. After

scrutinizing the legal situation, the SLAO dismissed their objections

and continued to perform the various steps under the LAA. There was

no stay granted during this time, and Appellants’ contempt petition

had been dismissed, as mentioned above.
57.   The Appellants seemingly did not submit any documentation in

support of their claim of title and neither did they seek quantification

of compensation they may have been entitled to under the LAA. As a

result, they cannot now claim that there was no opportunity given to

them to voice their concerns with regard to the acquisition process.
The decision by the Appellants to stick to their position in terms of the

notification and award being non­est due to the pendency of their WP

at the High Court cannot entitle them to now argue that they were

treated unfairly in the proceedings under the LAA.
58.   This also fortifies our earlier observation regarding the co­

existence of the
MMC Act
alongside the MRTP Act. The contentions
Page 37 of 61
raised by the Appellants have failed to persuade us and we see no

reason to enact a hierarchy between the two Statutes. We affirm, once

again, the position articulated by Respondents that it was open to

Respondent No. 2 to act under the
MMC Act
to acquire Appellants’

land for the public purpose of building the link road.


C.2. Compliance with the procedure under the MMC Act
59.   Having held that Respondent No. 2 was entitled to exercise its

powers under the
MMC Act
, it is now incumbent on us to examine

whether the procedure under the Statute was properly followed. We

refer to our earlier observations on the scheme of procurement under

the
MMC Act
from a combined reading of
Sections 91
,
291(a)
, and
296
contained therein.
60.   To begin with, it is necessary to recap the sequence of events

that led to the land acquisition proceedings. Learned Counsel for the

Municipal Corporation and the Municipal Commissioner, Mr. Godbole,

has highlighted the initial trio of resolutions, Nos. 651, 39 & 536, by

Respondent No. 2 that set the ball rolling in terms of land acquisition.

Resolution No. 536 was a composite resolution under Section 126 of

the MRTP Act and
Section 90
of the MMC Act. According to him, this

was in effect a resolution under
Section 91
as the reference to
Section

90
was merely a typographical error due to
Section 90
15
, acquisition
15 90. Acquisition of immovable property by agreement.
Page 38 of 61
via consent, being the first option under the
MMC Act
. When that

failed, the natural next step would be the second option under
Section

91
of the MMC Act.
61.    Subsequently the Office of the Chief Engineer had made an

application to Respondent No. 1 on 05.02.1999 for procuring the

Appellants’ land. The link road proposal was then shelved via

Resolution No. 1167, before being revived once again by Resolution

No. 1117 dated 28.10.2002.
62.    Following the renewal of the link road proposal, the land

acquisition proceedings were recommenced under
Section 91
and the

necessary steps under the LAA were taken on the basis of the same

application of 05.02.1999 that had been submitted by the Office of the

Chief Engineer. This finally culminated in the passing of the award of

compensation under
Section 11
of the LAA on 26.11.2007.
63.    In this backdrop, learned Senior Counsels for the Appellants

have    argued      that    there    has     been     non­compliance         with    two

requirements under Section 91 of the MCC Act: a) The application for

acquisition of land was forwarded from the Office of the Chief Engineer

(Development Plan) and not the Commissioner; b) There was no
       (1) Wherever it is provided by this Act that the Commissioner may acquire or
whenever it is necessary or expedient for any purpose of this Act that the Commissioner
shall acquire, any immovable property, such property may be acquired by the
Commissioner on behalf of the corporation by agreement 6[subject to the provisions of sub­
section (3)].
…
Page 39 of 61
authorization granted or order passed by Respondent No. 1 to proceed

with such an acquisition.
64.   Adverting       to   the   first   submission,   we    acknowledge    the

unambiguous          language    of
Section   91
which   contemplates   an

application being submitted by the Commissioner, Respondent No. 3.

However, when dealing with such matters of procedure the old adage

of procedural laws being the handmaid of justice must be kept in

mind. As has been exhaustively and extensively reiterated by this

Court in the past, procedural rules must not be allowed to defeat the

basic purpose of a statute or hamper the pursuit of justice unless

violation of the procedure would itself amount to grave injustice.
65.
In
Sangram Singh v. Election Tribunal, Kotah & Anr.16
this

Court in the context of procedural rules held:
“16…It is procedure, something designed to facilitate
          justice and further its ends: not a penal enactment for
          punishment and penalties; not a thing designed to trip
          people up. Too technical a construction of sections that
          leaves no room for reasonable elasticity of interpretation
          should therefore be guarded against (provided always
          that justice is done to both sides) lest the very means
          designed for the furtherance of justice be used to
          frustrate it.”
                                                 (Emphasis Applied)




16 (1955) 2 SCR 1.
Page 40 of 61
66.   Similarly, in
Ghanshyam Dass v. Dominion of India17
the

ethos behind “adjective law” was elaborated upon while dealing with

issuance of notice under
Section 80
of the Civil Procedure Code:
“12. In the ultimate analysis, the question as to whether
          a notice under
Section 80
of the Code is valid or not is a
          question of judicial construction. The Privy Council and
          this Court have applied the rule of strict compliance in
          dealing with the question of identity of the person who
          issues the notice with the person who brings the suit.
          This Court has however adopted the rule of substantial
          compliance in dealing with the requirement that there
          must be identity between the cause of action and the
          reliefs claimed in the notice as well as in the plaint. As
          already stated, the Court has held that notice under this
          section should be held to be sufficient if it substantially
          fulfils its object of informing the parties concerned of the
          nature of the suit to be filed. On this principle, it has
          been held that though the terms of the section have to be
          strictly complied with, that does not mean that the
          notice should be scrutinized in a pedantic manner
          divorced from common sense. The point to be considered
          is whether the notice gives sufficient information as to
          the nature of the claim such as would the recipient to
          avert the litigation.”
                                                (Emphasis Applied)
67.
In the same vein,
Sugandhi v. P. Rajkumar18
promoted an

approach that sought to achieve substantial justice when confronted

with breaches of procedural law, especially when the other party did

not suffer any significant prejudice. This Court opined:
“9. It is often said that procedure is the handmaid of
          justice. Procedural and technical hurdles shall not be
          allowed to come in the way of the court while doing
          substantial justice. If the procedural violation does not
          seriously cause prejudice to the adversary party, courts

17 (1984) 3 SCC 46.
18 (2020) 10 SCC 706.
Page 41 of 61
must lean towards doing substantial justice rather than
          relying upon procedural and technical violation. We
          should not forget the fact that litigation is nothing but a
          journey towards truth which is the foundation of justice
          and the court is required to take appropriate steps to
          thrash out the underlying truth in every dispute.”
                                               (Emphasis Applied)
68.   A Constitution Bench of this Court in
State of U.P. & Ors. v.

Babu Ram Upadhya19
, while laying down the test for determining if

the legislature intended for a provision to be directory or mandatory in

nature, held as follows:
“29…For ascertaining the real intention of the
          Legislature, the Court may consider, inter alia, the
          nature and the design of the statute, and the
          consequences which would follow from construing it the
          one way or the other, the impact of other provisions
          whereby the necessity of complying with the provisions in
          question is avoided, the circumstance, namely, that the
          statute provides for a contingency of the non­compliance
          with the provisions, the fact that the non­compliance
          with the provisions is or is not visited by some penalty,
          the serious or trivial consequences that flow therefrom,
          and, above all, whether the object of the legislation will
          be defeated or furthered.”
                                               (Emphasis Applied)
69.   It is with these time tested principles in mind that we must now

analyse Appellants’ contentions and consider whether the requirement

of the Commissioner making the application under
Section 91
is

directory or mandatory in nature. While doing so, we avert to learned

Counsel Mr. Godbole’s argument that the Commissioner is, at all


19 (1961) 2 SCR 679.
Page 42 of 61
times, involved in the decision making process and is an integral

member of the Ministerial Committee that signs off on initiating a land

acquisition process under the
MMC Act
.
70.   Thus, a common sense approach would lead to the conclusion

that rigid adherence to the notion that the Commissioner can be the

only official to actually send an application under
Section 91
may not

be warranted in all scenarios. The construction of the provision that

has been suggested by the Appellants would prevent the kind of

“reasonable elasticity of interpretation” that was noted in
Sangram

Singh
(Supra) to be vital when construing a statute.
71.   Further, we are unable to ascertain what prejudice has been

caused to the Appellants merely because it was the Office of the Chief

Engineer which officially forwarded the application to the prescribed

authority under
Section 91
. The consequence in both scenarios,

whether the Commissioner or some other official acts under the

provision, would be that land acquisition proceedings are commenced

under the LAA. None of the Appellants’ rights are abrogated by the

Chief Engineer making the application under
Section 91
. This is

further accentuated by the fact that, in any case, Respondent No. 3

was part of the decision­making process.
Page 43 of 61
72.    Appellants have placed reliance on Girnar Traders 2007

(Supra) to contend that the requirement of Respondent No. 3 being

the specific official to make the application cannot be deviated from.

The Court in that instance was dealing with lapsing of a reservation of

land under the MRTP Act in terms of
Section 127
. 20 The area in

question had been marked as part of a DP but no steps had been

taken to acquire it for a full decade thereafter. The Commissioner was

the designated authority authorized to act under
Section 126
to

initiate the steps for land acquisition. While analysing Sections 126 &

127 of the MRTP Act21, the majority opined:
20 127. Lapsing of reservations.
[(1) If any land reserved, allotted or designated for any purpose specified in any plan
under this Act is not acquired by agreement within ten years from the date on which a final
Regional Plan, or final Development Plan comes into force 2[or if a declaration under sub­
section (2) or (4) of
section 126
is not published in the Official Gazette within such period,
the owner or any person interested in the land may serve notice, alongwith the documents
showing his title or interest in the said land, on the Planning Authority, the Development
Authority or, as the case may be, the Appropriate Authority to that effect; and if within
twelve months] from the date of the service of such notice, the land is not acquired or no
steps as aforesaid are commenced for its acquisition, the reservation, allotment or
designation shall be deemed to have lapsed, and thereupon, the land shall be deemed to be
released from such reservation, allotment or designation and shall become available to the
owner for the purpose of development as otherwise, permissible in the case of adjacent land
under the relevant plan.
…
21 126. Acquisition of land required for public purposes specified in plans.
(1) Where after the publication of a draft Regional plan, a Development or any other
plan or town planning scheme, any land is required or reserved for any of the public
purposes specified in any plan or scheme under this Act at any time, the Planning
Authority, Development Authority, or as the case may be, 1[any Appropriate Authority may,
except as otherwise provided in section 113A] 2[acquire the land,—
(a) by agreement by paying an amount agreed to, or
(b) in lieu of any such amount, by granting the land­owner or the lessee, subject,
however, to the lessee paying the lessor or depositing with the Planning Authority,
Development Authority or Appropriate Authority, as the case may be, for payment to the
lessor, an amount equivalent to the value of the lessor’s interest to be determined by any of
the said Authorities concerned on the basis of the principles laid down in the
Land
Acquisition Act, 1894
, Floor Space Index (FSI) or Transferable Development Rights (TDR)
against the area of land surrendered free of cost and free from all encumbrances, and also
further additional Floor Space Index or Transferable Development Rights against the
Page 44 of 61
“54. When we conjointly read Sections 126 and 127 of
           the MRTP Act, it is apparent that the legislative intent is
           to expeditiously acquire the land reserved under the
           Town Planning Scheme and, therefore, various periods
           have been prescribed for acquisition of the owner's
           property.
The intent and purpose of the provisions of
Sections 126
and
127
has been well explained in
Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay
Case (supra). If
           the acquisition is left for a time immemorial in the hands
           of the concerned authority by simply making an
           application to the State Government for acquiring such
           land under the
LA Act, 1894
, then the authority will
           simply move such an application and if no such
           notification is issued by the State Government for one
           year of the publication of the draft regional plan under
Section 126(2)
read with
Section 6
of the LA Act, wait for
           the notification to be issued by the State Government by
           exercising suo motu power under Sub­section (4) of
Section 126
; and till then no declaration could be made
           under
Section 127
as regards lapsing of reservation and
           contemplated declaration of land being released and
           available for the land owner for his utilization as
           permitted under
Section 127
.
Section 127
permitted
           inaction on the part of the acquisition authorities for a
           period of 10 years for de­reservation of the land. Not only
           that, it gives a further time for either to acquire the land
           or to take steps for acquisition of the land within a
           period of six months from the date of service of notice by
           the land owner for de­reservation. The steps towards
           commencement of the acquisition in such a situation
           would necessarily be the steps for acquisition and not a
           step which may not result into acquisition and merely for
           the purpose of seeking time so that
Section 127
does not
           come into operation.
55. Providing the period of six months after the service of
           notice clearly indicates the intention of the legislature of
           an urgency where nothing has been done in regard to the
           land reserved under the plan for a period of 10 years and
           the owner is deprived of the utilization of his land as per
           the user permissible under the plan. When mandate is
           given in a Section requiring compliance within a
           particular period, the strict compliance is required
development or construction of the amenity on the surrendered land at his cost, as the
Final Development Control Regulations prepared in this behalf provide, or
(c) by making an application to the State Government for acquiring such land under
the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
,
       …
Page 45 of 61
thereof as introduction of this Section is with legislative
         intent to balance the power of the State of 'eminent
         domain'…”
                                              (Emphasis Applied)
73.   It was in this context that the majority noted that the Executive

Engineer, who was not authorized to act as the appropriate authority

under
Section 126
, could not have taken on the mantle of making an

application for initiating proceedings under the LAA. What weighed

with the court was the legislative intent of
Sections 126
and
127
which was to “balance the power of the State of ‘eminent domain’”. The

consequence of not acting in an expeditious manner under Sections

126 & 127 was the automatic de­reservation of land that was meant to

be part of the DP.
74.   Thus, there are two important distinguishing factors between

Girnar Traders 2007 (Supra) and our scenario. The first is the

mandate and purpose of
Sections 126
&
127
which are meant to

ensure the DP is acted upon swiftly and efficiently. The prejudice

caused to a private citizen if his land is reserved for a public purpose

under the MRTP Act but then not acquired for years afterwards was

eloquently elaborated upon by the majority. The individual would be

deprived of the usage of his land due to the reservation, while not

receiving compensation for it under the LAA. It was to safeguard

against such an eventuality that strict adherence to
Sections 126
&
Page 46 of 61
127 of the MRTP Act was necessary. This rationale cannot be

transplanted to
Section 91
of the MMC Act.
75.   The second is the lack of any penal provision or consequence

attached to a failure to follow the exact procedure mentioned under
Section 91
. As observed in
Babu Ram Upadhya
(Supra) the existence

of a penal mechanism attached to non­compliance is one of the means

by which the nature of a provision can be ascertained. Under the

MRTP Act the consequence of non­compliance with the designated

procedure under
Section 126
is the eventual de­reservation of the land

in question under
Section 127
.
76.   In this context, the Doctrine of Purposive Interpretation is also of

assistance. This Court in
Reserve Bank of India v. Peerless General

Finance and Investment Co. Ltd. & Anr.22
referred to the need for

interpretation of a statute to be based on the context and purpose

behind it, in the following terms:
“33. Interpretation must depend on the text and the
          context. They are the bases of interpretation. One may
          well say if the text is the texture, context is what gives
          the colour. Neither can be ignored. Both are important.
          That interpretation is best which makes the textual
          interpretation match the contextual. A statute is best
          interpreted when we know why it was enacted. With this
          knowledge, the statute must be read, first as a whole and
          then Section by section, Clause by clause, phrase by
          phrase and word by word. If a statute is looked at, in the
          context of its enactment, with the glasses of the statute­

22 (1987) 1 SCC 424.
Page 47 of 61
maker, provided by such context, its scheme, the
           sections, clauses, phrases and words may take colour
           and appear different than when the statute is looked at
           without the glasses provided by the context. With these
           glasses we must look at the Act as a whole and discover
           what each section, each clause, each phrase and each
           word is meant and designed to say as to fit into the
           scheme of the entire Act. No part of a statute and no
           word of a statute can be construed in isolation. Statutes
           have to be construed so that every word has a place and
           everything is in its place.”
77.   Along similar lines,
S. Gopal Reddy v. State of A.P.
23

expounded on the approach to be taken while interpreting statutes

and held:
“12. It is a well­known Rule of interpretation of statutes
           that the text and the context of the entire Act must be
           looked into while interpreting any of the expressions
           used in a statute. The courts must look to the object
           which the statute seeks to achieve while interpreting any
           of the provisions of the Act. A purposive approach for
           interpreting the Act is necessary. We are unable to
           persuade ourselves to agree with Mr. Rao that it is only
           the property or valuable security given at the time of
           marriage which would bring the same within the
           definition of 'dowry' punishable under the Act, as such an
           interpretation would be defeating the very object for
           which the Act was enacted. Keeping in view the object of
           the Act, "demand of dowry" as a consideration for a
           proposed marriage would also come within the meaning
           of the expression dowry under the Act.”
78.   It   appears     to   us   that
Section   91
imposes   a   statutory

responsibility on Respondent No. 3, the Commissioner, to initiate the

land acquisition process. The object behind the expression “…upon

the application of the Commissioner, made with the approval of


23 (1996) 4 SCC 596.
Page 48 of 61
the…” unequivocally suggests that the Commissioner must apply

his/her mind and take a conscious decision in favour of the

acquisition proceedings being initiated under the LAA. Once the

Commissioner       is   party   to   the   Ministerial   Committee    and   a

determination is made by the Committee that a new public street

must be laid and land must be acquired for this purpose under

Section 91 of the MCC Act read with the LAA, it is no longer

consequential which authority conveys this decision. The conclusion

that the land is required for the construction of the road cannot be

invalidated on this ground.
79.   To the extent that Respondent No. 3 is required to forward the

application under
Section 91
, we see no reason to consider this a

mandatory condition. Nevertheless, even for such directory provisions

substantial compliance is necessary. In Sharif­ud­din v. Abdul Gani

Lone24 the level of compliance with directory rules, as well as the

distinction between mandatory and directory requirements under a

statute, was detailed and
laid down in
the following terms:
“9. The difference between a mandatory rule and a
          directory rule is that while the former must be strictly
          observed, in the case of the latter, substantial
          compliance may be sufficient to achieve the object
          regarding which the rule is enacted. Certain broad
          propositions which can be deduced from several decisions
          of courts regarding the rules of construction that should
          be followed in determining whether a provision of law is
24 (1980) 1 SCC 403.
Page 49 of 61
directory or mandatory may be summarized thus: The
         fact that the statute uses the word 'shall' while laying
         down a duty is not conclusive on the question whether it
         is a mandatory or directory provision. In order to find out
         the true character of the legislation, the Court has to
         ascertain the object which the provision of law in
         question is to sub­serve and its design and the context in
         which it is enacted. If the object of a law is to be defeated
         by non­compliance with it, it has to be regarded as
         mandatory.”
                                               (Emphasis Applied)
80.   We are inclined to hold and affirm that there has been

substantial compliance with
Section 91
to the extent that it achieves

the objective behind the provision. Learned Counsel, Mr. Godbole, has

already pointed out the practicalities of the decision making process in

Respondent No. 2. Undoubtedly, Respondent No. 3 would have been a

participant in the deliberations on whether to initiate the process

under
Section 91
for procurement of land. The final application was

made only after gaining approval from him and the rest of the

Committee.
81.   Appellants have urged that the need for Respondent No. 3 to

personally take the first step under
Section 91
is part of the minimal

safeguards that exist under the
MMC Act
and must be adhered to. We

feel that the purpose behind the provision of ensuring that the

highest­ranking officer in the municipal corporation is privy and

amenable     to   the   acquisition   proceedings     is   achieved      by   his
Page 50 of 61
participation and sign off on the action, regardless of whether he

personally sends the application.
82.
In this respect, the holding of a Division Bench of the Bombay

High Court in
Harakchand Misirimal Solanki & Ors. v. The

Collector & Ors.25
becomes relevant. The High Court was dealing

with the
Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporation Act, 1949
, and

efforts made by the Pune Municipal Corporation to set up a “Forest

Garden”. One of the several alleged defects in the process which arose

for consideration before the High Court pertained to the fact that the

Assistant Commissioner, instead of the Commissioner, had made the

application for commencing proceedings under the LAA. It was urged

that the Commissioner was the designated authority under
Section 78
of the Act.26 Rejecting this argument, the Division Bench observed:
“24. We do not find any substance in the contention of
           the petitioner that it is not the Assistant Municipal
           Commissioner but the Commissioner himself who should
           have applied for initiation of proceedings under the said
           Act…Therefore, even if contention of the petitioner is
           accepted that the actual application sent to the Collector
           seeking to initiate proceedings under the said Act for
           compulsory acquisition of the lands in issue was signed

25 2008 SCC OnLine Bom 1067.
26 78. Procedure when immovable property cannot be acquired by agreement
       (1) Whenever the Commissioner is unable under
section 77
to acquire by agreement
any immovable property or any easement affecting any immovable property vested in the
Corporation or whenever any immovable property or any easement affecting any immovable
property vested in the Corporation is required for the purposes of this Act, the1 [State]
Government may in its discretion, upon the application of the Commissioner, made with the
approval of the Standing Committee and subject to the other provisions of this Act, order
proceedings to be taken for acquiring the same on behalf of the Corporation, as if such
property or easement were land needed for a public purpose within the meaning of the
Land
Acquisition Act, 1894
[I of 1804].
Page 51 of 61
and sent by the Assistant Municipal Commissioner and
         not by the Commissioner of the said Corporation himself,
         we do not find that this will constitute a gross illegality
         in the initiation of the acquisition proceeding in issue. In
         our view, once the proposal is shown to have been
         accepted by the Commissioner, processed by the
         Commissioner and sent to the Collector in terms of the
         directions of the Commissioner, only because the same
         was formally signed not by the Commissioner himself but
         by the Assistant Municipal Commissioner, in law, would
         not be so vital to warrant vitiating of the entire
         acquisition proceeding. In our view, if it is demonstrated
         that substantial compliance is done with the statutory
         requirement of
Section 78
of the said Act, no fault can be
         found with these acquisition proceedings, on this ground
         as claimed by the petitioners.”
                                               (Emphasis Applied)
83.   The High Court, thus, rebutted this particular contention raised

by the Petitioners. However, the Petitioners’ Writ Petitions were

allowed overall due to certain other discrepancies that were discovered

in the setting up of the Forest Garden. The Pune Municipal

Corporation filed an SLP against this judgment assailing the High

Court’s final conclusion which is unrelated to the specific issue we are

concerned with in the present case. Notwithstanding the fact that the

matter remains sub­judice on other facets of the case, we find some

prima facie merit in the reasoning by the Bombay High Court for

repelling the argument that only the Commissioner may submit the

application for reservation and acquisition of land under the LAA.
84.   As submitted by learned Counsel, Mr. Godbole, Respondent No.

3’s seal of approval was granted for the actions taken under Section
Page 52 of 61
91 of the
MMC Act
. We, therefore, hold that once the proposal has

been approved by the Commissioner, the lack of a formal signature

from him on the eventual application is not a serious defect and

cannot annul the entire process that followed.
85.   Based on the discussion above, we are satisfied that
Section 91
of the MMC Act has been substantially complied with in this case. We

now turn our attention to the second contention by the Appellants on

the issue of compliance with procedural requirements, which is the

purported absence of an order by the State Govt. for initiating land

acquisition proceedings under the LAA.
86.   To ascertain the veracity of the Appellants’ claim we may refer

once again to the final award of compensation passed on 26.11.2007.

Under the sub­heading “Introduction” under the main heading

“Reasons for the Award”, it is noted that the Office of the Chief

Engineer sent the application to the Collector 05.02.1999 for

procuring the land in question. Following the application, it was

recorded that:
“The Addl. collector M.S.D. along with his letter dt.
         21/7/99 sent the said proposal to this office directing this
         office to process acquisition proceeding.”
87.   We are, therefore, unable to spot the infirmity in the actions of

Respondent authorities. The Additional Collector, acting on behalf of
Page 53 of 61
Respondent No. 1, forwarded the proposal from Respondent No. 2 to

the SLAO for further processing and commencement of the procedure

under the LAA. There is no indication in
Section 91
of the MMC Act

that the order of the State Govt. to carry out the land acquisition is

supposed to be in a specific form. Keeping this in mind, we have no

hesitation in taking a pragmatic and practical approach to this

requirement. It is enough that the relevant office in Respondent No. 1

accepted the application from Respondent No. 2 and conveyed it to the

authorities empowered to act under the LAA. The direction from the

Additional Collector for the SLAO to process the request from

Respondent No. 2 would be sufficient compliance with
Section 91
of

the MMC Act.
88.   In any case, Respondent Nos. 10 & 11, in performing the steps

under the LAA to procure the land, acted for and on behalf of

Respondent No. 1. Thus, it is incontrovertible that Respondent No. 1

was fully on board with the initiative to acquire Appellants’ land for

constructing the link road. The fact that all the steps under the LAA

were carried out is sufficient evidence that there has been adherence

to the spirit and scheme of
Section 91
regarding Respondent No. 1

being involved and sanctioning the actions of Respondent Nos. 10 &
11.
Page 54 of 61
89.   In summation, we conclude that the objections by the Appellants

on the grounds of non­adherence to procedural requirements under
Section 91
of the MMC Act are without merit. There has been

substantial compliance with the provision and the objective underlying

it has been honoured.
C.3.
Public Interest v. Private Interest
90.   It is important for us to take stock of the nature of the present

dispute. The Appellants are private citizens who have valid title and

ownership over the land in question. Without doubt, their personal

and private rights are of great importance. In a democratic society

governed by the rule of law, the rights of an individual carry immense

importance and are the foundational blocks on which our legal, social,

and political milieu thrives. Under no circumstances should the rights

of individual citizens be trodden upon arbitrarily and any curtailment

of them must be scrutinized with utmost care.
91.   At the same time, we must not lose sight of the fact that in

several situations, the needs of the many must outweigh that of the

few. We say so not with any fervour nor as a mantra, but as a solemn

acknowledgment of the realities of modern life. The question of what

constitutes “public interest” has been contemplated upon multiple

times and the history of this Court is full of musings by different
Page 55 of 61
benches on the exact contours of this phrase in the context of various

situations and statutes.
92.
In
Manimegalai v. Special Tehsildar,27
it was surmised that:
“14. Similarly, public purpose is not capable of precise
          definition. Each case has to be considered in the light of
          the purpose for which acquisition is sought for. It is to
          serve the general interest of the community as opposed to
          the particular interest of the individual. Public purpose
          broadly speaking would include the purpose in which the
          general interest of the society as opposed to the
          particular interest of the individual is directly and
          vitally concerned. Generally, the executive would be the
          best judge to determine whether or not the impugned
          purpose is a public purpose. Yet it is not beyond the
          purview of judicial scrutiny. The interest of a Section of
          the society may be public purpose when it is benefitted by
          the acquisition. The acquisition in question must indicate
          that it was towards the welfare of the people and not to
          benefit a private individual or group of individuals joined
          collectively. Therefore, acquisition for anything which is
          not for a public purpose cannot be done compulsorily.”
93.
In
B.P. Sharma v. Union of India & Ors.
28 the nebulous

nature of phrases such as “public interest” or “in the interest of the

general public” was commented upon, with the Court stating:
“15. …The phrase "in the interest of the general public"
has come to be considered in several decisions and it has
          been held that it would comprise within its ambit
          interests like public health and morals, economic
          stability, stability of the country, equitable distribution
          of essential commodities at fair prices for maintenance
          of purity in public life, prevention of fraud and similar
          considerations…”




27 (2018) 13 SCC 491.
28 (2003) 7 SCC 309.
Page 56 of 61
94.   This    point    was   emphasized      in
Bihar    Public       Service

Commission v. Saiyed Hussain Abbas Rizwi & Anr.
29 as well,

which held that no strict definition for “public interest” existed:
“22. The expression "public interest" has to be understood
          in its true connotation so as to give complete meaning to
          the relevant provisions of the Act. The expression "public
          interest" must be viewed in its strict sense with all its
          exceptions so as to justify denial of a statutory
          exemption in terms of the Act. In its common parlance,
          the expression "public interest", like "public purpose", is
          not capable of any precise definition. It does not have a
          rigid meaning, is elastic and takes its colour from the
          statute in which it occurs, the concept varying with time
          and state of society and its needs. It also means the
          general welfare of the public that warrants recognition
          and protection; something in which the public as a whole
          has a stake.”
95.   It is unnecessary to belabour the point. The proposition is simply

that the notion of public interest will necessarily reflect the

specificities of the situation at hand. In the present case, the public

interest which has been emphasized upon by Respondents is the

urgent need for the creation of a connecting road through the

Appellants’ property. The need stems from the traffic congestion

caused on the route from the Mahakali Caves to the Central MIDC.

The lack of a direct linkage requires detours to be taken that

significantly increase commuting time and cause inconvenience to the

general public.
29 (2012) 13 SCC 61.
Page 57 of 61
96.   When the public interest is so clearly articulated and is an

urgent and pressing exigency, private interests must give way to the

extent required. This Court has acknowledged this before, such as in
Ramilila Maidan Incident v. Home Secretary, Union of India &

Ors.30
:
“119. The right to freedom in a democracy has to be
          exercised in terms of
Article 19(1)(a)
subject to public
          order. Public order and public tranquillity is a function
          of the State which duty is discharged by the State in the
          larger public interest. The private right is to be waived
          against public interest. The action of the State and the
          Police was in conformity with law. As a large number of
          persons were to assemble on the morning of 5th June,
          2011 and considering the other attendant circumstances
          seen in light of the inputs received from the intelligence
          agencies, the permission was revoked and the persons
          attending the camp at Ramlila Maidan were dispersed.”
                                                 (Emphasis Applied)
97.
In
K.T. Plantation Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v. State of Karnataka,31
the origins of “Eminent Domain” were traced and the ethos behind

acquisition of land by the government for public good was discussed.

The Court elaborated on this in the following terms:
“134. Hugo Grotius is credited with the invention of the
          term "eminent domain" (jus or dominium eminens) which
          implies that public rights always overlap with private
          rights to property, and in the case of public utility, public
          rights take precedence. Grotius sets two conditions on
          the exercise of the power of eminent domain: the first
          requisite is public advantage and then compensation
          from the public funds be made, if possible, to the one who
          has lost his right. Application of the above principle

30 (2012) 5 SCC 1.
31 (2011) 9 SCC 1.
Page 58 of 61
varies from countries to countries. Germany, America and
            Australian Constitutions bar uncompensated takings.
            Canada's constitution, however, does not contain the
            equivalent of the taking clause, and eminent domain is
            solely a matter of statute law, the same is the situation
            in United Kingdom which does not have a written
            constitution as also now in India after the 44th
            Constitutional Amendment.”
                                                (Emphasis Applied)
98.      With these considerations in mind, we deem the present case to

be    an    appropriate   instance   where    public   interest   must   have

paramountcy over private interest. We emphasize once again before

parting that the rights of the individual must only be watered down

when the necessary circumstances demanding such a drastic measure

exist.
99.      Learned Counsel, Mr. Godbole, has candidly explained to us that

the plan for the road through the Appellants’ property is mapped in

such a way that it will not disturb the buildings that have been

constructed on it. Learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Divan, has fairly

admitted that this is indeed the case. Given this, we consider that a

suitable middle ground has been arrived at which is practical and

optimally balances the competing interests between the parties.


D. CONCLUSION
100. For the reasons detailed above, we find that Respondent No. 2

validly exercised its powers under the
MMC Act
to direct the
Page 59 of 61
acquisition of the Appellants’ land. The argument by the Appellants

that the MRTP Act maintains supremacy over the
MMC Act
is not the

correct position of law, in our opinion, and the two statutes exist side­

by­side with some degree of overlap. The powers under the
MMC Act
remain intact even in cases where they cover a subject that is also

provided for in the MRTP Act.
101. The procedure contemplated under
Section 91
of the MMC Act to

commence proceedings under the LAA for procuring land was

substantially complied with. The part of the provision relied upon by

the Appellants is directory in nature and requires substantial

compliance rather than strict compliance. The objections raised by the

Appellants regarding certain aspects of the process are unfounded as

no prejudice was caused to them, and the purported defects are not

nearly grave enough to cause an annulment of the entire process.
102. In light of these findings, we do not consider it necessary to

comment upon the submissions by learned Senior Counsel, Mr.

Naphade, regarding the bona fides of the Appellants and their

entitlement to relief on the grounds of equity. Considering the other

issues which have been answered in favour of the Respondents, this

point becomes moot.
Page 60 of 61
103. In the final outcome, we dismiss the present appeal as being

devoid of merit.
104. Pending applications, if any, are also disposed of.
………….……………..J.
                                                    (SURYA KANT)



                                                 ………….……………..J.
                                                    (ABHAY S. OKA)



NEW DELHI:
SEPTEMBER 02, 2022
Page 61 of 61