[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Nazeer @ Nazeer Mohammed vs State Rep By Inspector Of Police on 29 September, 2022
Author:
Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
,
Dinesh Maheshwari
1




                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1216 OF 2011


             NAZEER @ NAZEER MOHAMMED                                             ……..Appellant(s)

                                                VERSUS

             STATE REP BY INSPECTOR OF POLICE                                     ………Respondent(s)


                                                    JUDGMENT
DINESH MAHESHWARI, J.
1.          By   way   of    this    appeal,          the   accused-appellant           has

             questioned         the      judgment    and       order        dated      09.11.2009    as

             passed       by    the      High    Court        of    Judicature         at   Madras    in

             Criminal Appeal No. 93 of 2009, whereby the High Court,

             while       dismissing       the     appeal,          affirmed    the      judgment     and

             order        dated     20.01.2009,          as        passed    by     the     Additional

             Sessions Judge, Puducherry at Karaikal in S.C. No. 56 of

             2007,       convicting       the     accused-appellant               of    the   offences

             under
Sections 302
and
201
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (‘
IPC
’)

             and awarding varying punishments, including that of life

             imprisonment for the offence under
Section 302
IPC.
Signature Not Verified
2.
Digitally signed by
The appellant has been held guilty of the offences
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2022.10.01
18:25:36 IST
Reason:
aforesaid after the Trial Court and the High Court have

             concurrently found proved the entire chain of circumstances
2
connecting the appellant with the killing of the victim

Ravi, who was a driver on the car belonging to PW-1 Kumar @

Marumaiyan. Though, there had not been any eye-witness to

the incident but, the Courts have found that the evidence

led by the prosecution clearly established the connectivity

of     the     appellant           with      the        deceased      with     regular

communications at the material point of time between them;

and they having been seen together in the car in question.

The Courts have further found that later on, a dead body

found on the road-side was ultimately identified to be of

the deceased Ravi by his brother PW-10 Meganathan with

reference to the photographs; and the evidence established

the dealings of the appellant with the car and its stepney

after demise of the victim car driver Ravi. One of the

strong circumstances relied upon by the prosecution has

also    been        of    the   recovery       of       driving    licence     of    the

appellant with the dead body of the victim.
3.      We have heard Mr. Atul Y. Chitale, learned senior

counsel,       ably      assisted       by    Ms.       Tanvi   Kakar    and   Mr.    A.

Radhakrishnan            for    the    appellant          and   Mr.     Aravindh     S.,

learned counsel for the respondent-State at some length.
4.      Learned          counsel      for    the       appellant   has    strenuously

argued       that    conviction        of     the       appellant,    based    on    the

alleged last seen evidence with reference to the testimony

of PW-5 Natarajan and PW-6 Bala @ Balasubramanian; on the

alleged recovery of his driving license with the dead body
3
of an unknown person; and on the alleged identification of

the said dead body being that of the victim Ravi by PW-10,

carry several shortcomings and lacunae, and do not provide

a complete chain of circumstances so as to rule out any

other hypothesis.
5.   It is also submitted that even the seizure of driving

licence of the appellant, as allegedly found near the dead

body of the victim is not free from doubt, particularly

when the Seizure Mahazar Ex. P-2 does not show any seal of

the jurisdictional Court in the State of Karnataka, from

where it was allegedly sent to Puducherry. It has also been

pointed     out    that   the     person       who    allegedly   gave      the

information       about   dead    body    was    never    examined    by    the

prosecution.
6.   Learned counsel for the appellant has also drawn our

attention to a fact occurring in the testimony of PW-7

Kalarani,     sister      of     the     deceased,       that   she   had     a

conversation with the deceased on 05.09.2006. If this fact

is taken into account, according to the learned counsel,

the unknown dead body recovered on 04.09.2006 could not

have been of Ravi, brother of PW-7. It has also been argued

that the dead body was allegedly identified by PW-10 only

by looking at the photographs and the assertions so made

remain    suspicious      and     then,       there   had   not   been      any

corroboration in that regard. It is also submitted that the

chain of circumstances, being either incomplete or carrying
4
such factors which do not provide necessary links, is not

decisive in nature and hence, the appellant cannot be held

guilty of the offence punishable under
Section 302
IPC

beyond reasonable doubt. Learned counsel would contend that

the accused No. 2 in this case was rightly extended the

benefit of doubt and the same benefit ought to have been

extended to the appellant.
7.      Learned counsel for the respondent has duly supported

the judgment and order passed by the High Court and the

Trial Court.       Apart from other pieces of evidence, the

learned counsel has particularly drawn our attention to the

testimony of PW-22 G.Vengadachalapathy, S.I. read with the

document Ex. P-29 establishing that on 02.09.2006, in the

morning and noon hours, precisely the date and time when

the deceased had taken the vehicle of PW-1 on the pretext

of receiving the guests of PW-2 at Bangalore, the appellant

was    regularly   communicating    with      the     deceased.   Learned

counsel has further pointed out that even the doubts as

suggested with reference to the testimony of PW-7 stand

quelled by the other part of her statement where she made

it clear that later on, she could realise that the call

made on 05.09.2006 from a different mobile number, was not

from    his   brother    Ravi   (the       deceased)    but    from     some

stranger.
8.      Having   heard   learned   counsel      for    the    parties    and

having scanned through the record, we are not persuaded to
5
consider interference in the concurrent findings of fact as

recorded by the Trial Court and the High Court in this

case.
9.      We have taken note of the totality of circumstances

of the case and are clearly of the view that even when the

prosecution     has   not   examined       the   person    who     firstly

informed about the location of dead body by way of his

information Ex.P-1; and even if the Mahazar Ex. P-2 as such

does not show the seal of jurisdictional Court in the State

of Karnataka, these factors remain trivial in nature and do

not take away the substance of the matter.
10.     In an overall appreciation of evidence, it is but

clear that the entire chain of circumstances is complete,

starting from the deceased Ravi taking the vehicle of PW-1

on the pretext of receiving the guests at Bangalore; the

appellant having been in connectivity with deceased Ravi on

his mobile at the material time on the material date; the

deceased having been found in the company of the appellant

in the same car by PW-5 and PW-6; the driving licence of

the appellant having been found near the dead body; the

said dead body having been identified by PW-10 to be that

of Ravi; and the appellant having been found dealing with

the car in question and its stepney, as established by the

testimony     of   PW-11    Chandru    @    Chandrasekar     and     PW-16

Prabakar.
6
11.   When   all    the   circumstances       and   factors   are   taken

together, they lead to the result that the findings of fact

as recorded by the Trial Court and the High Court are

cogent findings and do not suffer from any such infirmity

as to call for interference by this Court in this appeal.
12.   In   view    of   the   above,   this    appeal   fails   and   is,

therefore, dismissed.
13.   All pending applications also stand disposed of.
……………………………………………………J.
                                              [DINESH MAHESHWARI]



                                               ……………………………………………………J.
                                              [BELA M. TRIVEDI]
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 29,2022.