[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Joseph Johnson N. Maithkuri vs Subrahmanya on 9 September, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1439 OF 2022
          Joseph Johnson N. Maithkuri                               …Appellant(s)


                                               Versus
          Subrahmanya & Another                                   …Respondent(s)
                                            WITH
                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1440 OF 2022


          Joseph Johnson N. Maithkuri                           …Appellant(s)


                                            Versus
          Rajesh & Another                                      …Respondent(s)


                                            JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment(s) and order(s) dated 10.06.2021 & 08.11.2021

                         passed by the High Court of Karnataka at Dharwad Bench

                         in Criminal Petition Nos. 101007/2021 & 101621/2021
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
respectively, by which the High Court has allowed the said
SNEHA
Date: 2022.09.09
16:58:52 IST
Reason:
criminal petitions preferred by the accused Subrahmanya
1
and Rajesh (respondent No. 1 in the respective appeals)

      and has directed to release the accused ­ Subrahmanya

      and Rajesh on bail in connection with Case Crime No.

      157/2019 of Dharwad Rural Police Station for the offences

      punishable under Sections 120(B), 302, 201 read with
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code and
Section 27(3)
of

      the Arms Act, 1959, the original complainant has preferred

      the present appeals.
2.    Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant –

      complainant    has     vehemently   submitted   that   while

      directing the accused ­ respondent No. 1 in the respective

      appeals to be released on bail, the High Court has not at

      all considered the gravity of the offences. It is submitted

      that the High Court has not at all considered the fact that

      in the present case that there are two eye­witnesses and

      respondent No. 1 – accused has been identified.

2.1   It is submitted by learned counsel appearing on behalf of

      the appellant that in case of co­accused, namely, Umesh

      Nagappa URF Sangappa, this Court vide judgment and

      order dated 06.01.2022 in Criminal Appeal No. 39/2022

      has set aside the similar order passed by the High Court
2
releasing   the   said   co­accused      on   bail   and   has

      consequently cancelled the bail order.

2.2   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State has

      supported the appellant.
3.    We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      appellant as well as the State. Though served, none has

      appeared on behalf of the accused ­ respondent No. 1 in

      the respective appeals. We have perused the impugned

      judgment(s) and order(s) passed by the High Court

      releasing the accused on bail. Even liberty is reserved to

      the State to move for cancellation of bail in the event of

      this Court cancelling the bail of accused No. 4 ­ Umesh

      Nagappa URF Sangappa.
4.    At the outset, it is required to be noted that in the case of

      co­accused, namely, Umesh Nagappa URF Sangappa, who

      was also released on bail by the High Court, this Court

      vide judgment and order in Criminal Appeal No. 39/2022

      has set aside the order passed by the High Court and has

      consequently cancelled the bail order in favour of the co­

      accused. The grounds on which the said co­accused was
3
released on bail and the grounds on which the present

respondent No. 1 – Subrahmanya is released on bail are

same. In paragraph 7, the High Court has observed as

under: ­


          “7. As per the charge­sheet, CWs. 18 and 19 are
   eye­witnesses to the incident. CW­19 who is running
   tea shop near the spot has identified accused Nos. 1,2
   and 4 in Test Identification Parade held on
   31.10.2019. The police took accused Nos. 1,2 and 4 on
   29.09.2019 to different places like Dandeli, Haliyal
   and Dharwad and taken their photographs. Therefore,
   the photographs of accused Nos. 1,2 and 4 were
   available with the police and there are every chances
   of the police showing them to the witnesses namely
   CW­19. CW­18 is another eyewitness, who is the driver
   of the vehicle of the deceased, who has also identified
   accused Nos. 1,2 and 4 in the Test Identification
   Parade and there are also chances of the police
   showing the photographs of the accused to CW­18
   prior to Test Identification Parade. Even if the presence
   of the petitioner/accused No.5 is taken into
   consideration, there is no overt act alleged against
   him. He was sitting on bike and the overt act alleged is
   against accused No.1, who fired from the pistol to the
   deceased and went away on the motorcycle along with
   the accused Nos. 2 and 4. Therefore, there is no
   specific     overt     act     alleged    against     the
   petitioner/accused No.4”

   That thereafter this Court has set aside the order

passed by the High Court by observing in paragraphs 6 to

8 as under:
“6. By observing the above, virtually the High
   Court has acquitted the accused. The observations
   made by the High Court in para 7 are on surmises and
   conjectures and the High Court has observed that
   there might have been the chances of the witnesses
   showing them the accused before the T.I. Parade. The
4
fact remains that the accused have been identified in a
         T.I. Parade by CWs. 18 & 19, who are eyewitnesses to
         the incident.
7. The High Court has not at all considered the
         gravity of the offence while releasing the respondent
         No.1­accused on bail. Therefore, the judgment and
         order passed by the High Court releasing the
         Respondent No.1 on bail is unsustainable and
         deserves to be quashed and set aside.
8. In view of the above and for the reasons
         stated above, the present Appeal succeeds. The
         impugned order passed by the High Court in releasing
         the accused on bail in connection with Crime No.
         157/2019 of Dharwad Rural Police Station is hereby
         quashed and set aside. The Respondent No.1 now to
         surrender before the competent authority/appropriate
         jail authority within a period of one week from today.
5.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated in

     judgment and order dated 06.01.2022 passed in Criminal

     Appeal No. 39/2022, the impugned judgment(s) and

     order(s) passed by the High Court releasing the accused –

     Subrahmanya and Rajesh, respondent No. 1 herein in the

     respective appeals on bail also deserve to be quashed and

     set aside. At this stage, it is required to be noted that while

     releasing the accused Rajesh on bail the High Court in the

     impugned judgment and order has observed that in case

     this Court cancels the bail granted in favour of accused

     no. 4 – Umesh Nagappa URF Sangappa it would be open

     for the State to move an appropriate application for
5
cancellation of the bail. Therefore, once the bail in favour

     of Umesh Nagappa URF Sangappa has been cancelled by

     this Court, the bail in the present case also requires to be

     cancelled.
6.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

     present Appeals succeed. The impugned judgments and

     orders passed by the High Court releasing the accused

     Subrahmanya and Rajesh, respondent No. 1 in the

     respective appeals on bail in connection with Case Crime

     No. 157/2019 of Dharwad Rural Police Station for the

     offences punishable under Sections 120(B), 302, 201 read

     with
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code and
Section 27(3)
of the Arms Act, 1959 are hereby quashed and set aside.
Accused Subrahmanya and Rajesh are now directed to

     surrender before the competent authority/appropriate jail

     authority within a period of two weeks from today. If the

     accused Subrahmanya & Rajesh do not surrender within a

     period of two weeks from today, the concerned police

     authority is directed to arrest the accused Subrahmanya
6
and Rajesh and the learned Trial Court to issue non­

     bailable warrant against them.
7.   However, it is observed that the learned Trial Court to

     decide and dispose of the trial in accordance with law and

     on its own merits on the basis of the evidence led before it

     and without, in any way, influenced by any of the

     observations made by the High Court in the impugned

     judgment(s) and order(s) which otherwise are set aside by

     the present order.
With this, the present Appeals are allowed.
………………………………….J.
                                   [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                         ………………………………….J.
SEPTEMBER 09, 2022                 [KRISHNA MURARI]
7