[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Aminuddin vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 30 September, 2022
Author:
Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
,
Dinesh Maheshwari
1

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.      OF 2022
                          (Arising out of SLP (Criminal) No.5181 of 2021)


             AMINUDDIN                                                 ……Petitioner(s)

                                       VERSUS

             STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.                             …..Respondent(s)

                                                    WITH

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.      OF 2022
                          (Arising out of SLP (Criminal) No.5182 of 2021)

                                                  JUDGMENT
DINESH MAHESHWARI,J.
Leave granted.
2.           Both these appeals are directed against the orders

             dated 26.08.2020 and 17.06.2020 as passed by the High Court

             of          Judicature    at   Allahabad,       respectively    in   Criminal

             Miscellaneous Application Nos. 21839 of 2020 and 11840 of

             2020, whereby the High Court has granted the concession of

             bail to the accused persons who are arrayed as respondent

             No. 2 in each of these appeals.
3.           Perusal of the orders impugned make it explicit that

             the High Court had passed the said orders essentially with

             reference to the relief granted to the other co-accused

             persons, as could be noticed from the following submissions
Signature Not Verified
taken
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
note   of   by   the   High   Court    in   the   order   dated
Date: 2022.10.01
18:24:45 IST
Reason:
26.08.2020:
2
“ Heard learned counsel for the applicant,
        learned AGA for the State and perused the
        material placed on record.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted
        that he has been falsely implicated in the
        present case. There is general allegation against
        all the accused and co-accused Faim & Nasir
        having an identical role has been enlarged on
        bail by this Court in Criminal Misc. Bail
        Application No. 6083 of 2020 & 11840 of 2020 vide
        orders dated 25.2.2020 & 17.6.2020 respectively.
        The case of applicant stands on similar footing,
        hence the appellant is also entitled for bail on
        the   ground   of   parity.  The   appellant   is
        languishing in jail since 21.8.2019 and he has no
        criminal history except the present case to his
        credit.
Learned A.G.A. has opposed the prayer for bail,
        but could not dispute the aforesaid facts.”
4.      Similar have been the contentions and observations in

the other impugned order dated 17.06.2020.
5.      On the matters being taken up for consideration, it

is not in dispute that in relation to the other co-accused

persons related with this matter, this Court has dealt with

the orders granting bail and while disapproving, has set

aside    the   same.   To   be   specific,   in   the   order   dated

15.03.2021 in Criminal Appeal No. 317 of 2021, this Court

considered and disapproved the order granting bail to the

co-accused Fahim. Thereafter, in the order dated 23.09.2022

in Criminal Appeal No. 1669 of 2022, this Court disapproved

another bail order made in relation to another co-accused

Naim.
3
6.   In essence, in the orders aforesaid, this Court has

found that the High Court proceeded to grant the concession

of bail, while proceeding on irrelevant considerations and

while ignoring relevant features of the case. The orders

impugned in the present appeals also suffer from the same

shortcomings. In fact, these orders have been passed only

following the orders passed earlier in relation to the co-

accused persons, which have already been disapproved by

this Court.
7.   Faced       with    this     position,              the     learned      counsel

appearing for the accused-respondent No. 2 has attempted to

submit    that   the    said    decisions           of    this    Court       may   not

operate    against      the     present         respondents            for    certain

distinguishing      features.         In     this        regard,       the    learned

counsel has submitted that the accused, in whose relation

the order dated 15.03.2021 was passed by this Court, had

remained    in   custody       only    for      a    period       of    six    months

whereas, the present respondents have been in custody for

thirteen months and nine months respectively, before being

granted the concession of bail. Learned counsel has further

submitted that the orders impugned were passed more than

two years ago and it may not serve the cause of justice, if

the orders are set aside now and at this juncture. The

learned counsel has further read out all the conditions

imposed    by the      High Court          while granting           bail and        has
4
submitted that stringent conditions have been imposed and

it   has    not    been   the    case    of       anyone     that    the   accused-

respondents       have    violated      any       of   these   conditions.      The

learned counsel has also submitted that in the generalized

accusations        without      any   specific         role    of    the    persons

concerned, the High Court has rightly granted bail to the

present respondents which may not be interfered with, even

if this Court has taken contra view in relation to the

other co-accused persons.
8.     Learned counsel for the appellant as also the learned

counsel for the State have essentially relied upon the said

two decisions of this Court and have submitted that there

is   no     material      distinction         in       the    case    of    present

respondents, who were granted the concession of bail only

in parity with the co-accused persons, whose bail plea has

already been declined by this Court. Hence, the impugned

orders deserve to be set aside.
9.     In    the    judgment      and    order         dated    15.03.2021,      in

Criminal Appeal No. 317 of 2021, this Court has, inter

alia, observed and ordered as under:
“ 7.   The circumstances would indicate that a
       brutal murder has been committed of the son of
       the appellant. The postmortem report would
       indicate as many as eight ante mortem injuries.
       The offence is alleged to have taken place in
       broad day light. The First Information Report
       being Case Crime No 438 of 2019 was registered at
       about 2108 hours, within a period of four hours
       of the incident which is alleged to have taken
       place at 1715 hours on the same day. After the
5
investigation was completed, the charge-sheet has
     been submitted before the competent court under
Section 173
of the Code of Criminal Procedure
     1973. In several judgments of this Court, the
     need for the High Court to adduce reasons while
     granting bail has been underscored. At this
     stage, we may advert to the recent decision in
Mahipal vs Rajesh Kumar1
, which was relied on by
     Ms Bansuri Swaraj, learned counsel for the State
     of UP. Speaking for a two-Judge Bench, one of us
     (Justice D Y Chandrachud, J) observed:
“25. Merely recording “having perused the
          record” and “on the facts and circumstances
          of the case” does not subserve the purpose
          of a reasoned judicial order. It is a
          fundamental premise of open justice, to
          which our judicial system is committed, that
          factors which have weighed in the mind of
          the Judge in the rejection or the grant of
          bail are recorded in the order passed. Open
          justice is premised on the notion that
          justice should not only be done, but should
          manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be
          done. The duty of Judges to give reasoned
          decisions   lies  at   the  heart   of   this
          commitment. Questions of the grant of bail
          concern   both    liberty   of    individuals
          undergoing criminal prosecution as well as
          the interests of the criminal justice system
          in ensuring that those who commit crimes are
          not afforded the opportunity to obstruct
          justice. Judges are duty-bound to explain
          the basis on which they have arrived at a
          conclusion.
27. Where an order refusing or granting bail
          does not furnish the reasons that inform the
          decision, there is a presumption of the non-
application of mind which may require the
          intervention of this Court.”
8. In the present case, the High Court has merely
     observed that bail was being granted after
     considering the submissions and having regard to
     the “larger mandate of Article 21”. There can be
     no manner of doubt that the protection of
     personal   liberty   under
Article   21
is   a
     constitutional value which has to be respected by
     the High Court, as indeed by all courts. Equally,
     in a matter such as the present, where a serious
1 (2020) 2 SCC 118
6
offence of murder has taken place, the liberty of
        the accused has to be necessarily balanced with
        the public interest in the administration of
        criminal justice system which requires that a
        person who is accused of a crime is held to
        account. Having regard to the settled principles
        which govern the grant of bail in a matter
        involving a serious offence in a case such as the
        present, we are of the view that the order of the
        High Court does not clearly pass muster. No case
        for the grant of bail is made out. In granting
        bail, the High Court has failed to notice
        relevant considerations which ought to have been,
        but have not been taken into account.
9. In the above circumstances, we allow the
        appeal and set aside the impugned judgment and
        order of the High Court dated 25 February 2020.
        As a consequence of this order, the second
        respondent shall surrender forthwith.”
10.     Further, in the order dated 23.09.2022, this Court

took note of the other facts and circumstances of the case.

In the said case, a distinction was sought to be suggested

before this Court from the case of the other accused that

no proper contest was made on his behalf before this Court.
11.     This   Court   took   note   of    all   the    features   of    the

matter and thereafter, set aside the impugned order dated

03.12.2020 while, taking note of the previous judgment and

order    dated    15.03.2021     and       thereafter     observing      and

directing as under:
“14.   The position aforesaid equally applies to
      the present case too. Moreover, when the bail
      granted to co-accused person has been disapproved
      by this Court and such grant of bail to co-
      accused had been the only reason for which the
      bail was granted to the respondent No. 2, the
      impugned order is liable to be set aside.
15.      The   submissions         on    behalf     of     the
7
respondent No. 2 that there was no proper contest
on behalf of the said co-accused in this Court
could hardly take away the substance of the
dictum of this Court. It is clear that in said
case, the High Court had proceeded in a rather
cursory manner and without regard to the salient
feature of the case at hand, being that of
gruesome day-light murder of the son of the
appellant with 8 grievous injuries, including
those of incise wounds and stab wounds on and
around the neck and the chest.
16.     As regards the case of respondent No. 2,
we are constrained to observe that even if the
High Court proceeded to consider the fact that
the co-accused person had been granted bail, at
least this much was required that the relevant
facts of the case were indicated as also the
reasons as to how the case of respondent No. 2
was treated to be identical. The relied upon
order had been suffering from failure on the part
of the High Court to notice the relevant
considerations and the impugned order equally
suffers from the shortcoming that the relevant
features of the case have not at all been
considered by the High Court.
17.    The submissions that the respondent No. 2
had been in custody since 02.09.2019 or that he
had no negative antecedents, by themselves, do
not make out a case for grant of bail, looking to
the seriousness of crime in question. In this
regard, the submissions of the Investigating
Officer cannot go unnoticed that while the
incident took place on 10.07.2019 and one of the
accused persons was arrested on 11.07.2019, the
other accused persons remained absconding and the
respondent No. 2 surrendered as late as on
02.09.2019. So far the questions relating to the
role assigned to the respondent No. 2 or about
the doubt on the prosecution case, suffice it to
observe at the present stage that the respondent
No. 2 has specifically been named in the FIR as
one of the assailants; and looking to the nature
of the accusations and the nature of injuries,
the prosecution case, prima facie, cannot dubbed
as fanciful or improbable.
18.    For what has been noticed hereinabove, the
impugned order is required to be set aside.
8
19.    We have pondered over the question as to
      the order that needs to be passed in this matter
      finally. It is noticed that in the judgment and
      order dated 15.03.2021, this Court disapproved
      the order dated 15.02.2020 granting bail to the
      co-accused   and   directed  him   to   surrender
      forthwith. More or less the same position would
      apply to the present case too. Herein, the order
      granting bail was passed on 03.12.2020 and the
      present matter was initially taken up for
      consideration on 12.07.2021. Even if one witness,
      that is, the present appellant, has already been
      examined, the other witnesses, including the eye-
      witnesses, are to be examined in the trial. In
      the given circumstances and in the interest of
      justice, we also deem it proper to leave it open
      for the respondent No. 2 to apply for bail afresh
      after surrendering and at an appropriate stage.
20.    Accordingly and in view of above, this
      appeal is allowed; the impugned order dated
      03.12.2020 is set aside with the requirement that
      the respondent No. 2 shall surrender forthwith.
      In the interest of justice, it is provided that
      if the respondent No. 2 applies for bail afresh
      after surrendering and at an appropriate stage,
      such an application may be considered on its own
      merits.
21.    In the interest of justice, it is also
      made clear that we have not pronounced on the
      merits of the case either way and none of the
      observations herein, by itself, would operate
      prejudicial to the interests of the parties nor
      shall have any bearing on the final verdict by
      the Trial Court.”
12.   The aforesaid position equally applies to the present

case too. The length or the period of custody of any of the

co-accused persons has hardly any bearing on the subject-

matter   of   these   appeals.   Similarly,   even   if   stringent

conditions have been imposed, the orders impugned cannot

sustain themselves, for being hit by the dictum of this
9
Court. The other submissions about want of specification of

the prosecution case are also of an uncertain nature and in

any case, do not provide any distinction to the case of

present respondents.
13.     Of course, it remains a fact that the orders impugned

were passed about more than two years before this date but

then, the fact of the matter remains that these petitions

were filed on 30.06.2021. This aspect of the matter has

also acquired the attention of this Court, as noticed from

paragraph ‘19’ of the judgment and order dated 23.09.2022.

In fact, this Court has also observed that even if the

trial has proceeded and the present appellant has already

been   examined,     yet    the       parity   operating    in   the    matter

cannot be taken away. Of course, this Court has left it

open for the said accused to apply for bail afresh after

surrendering and at an appropriate stage.
14.     Before concluding the matter, we may also take note

of    the fact     that the       learned counsel       for the     accused-

respondent    No.    2     has    attempted      to   submit     that    these

petitions    are    barred       by    limitation     and   no   prayer    for

condonation of delay has been made. The submission does not

stand in conformity with the record and in any case, even

if there had been any delay, that does not take away the

substance of the matter.
15.     Accordingly and in view of the above, these appeals
10
succeed   and    are    allowed;    the   impugned   orders    dated

26.08.2020      and    17.06.2020   are   set   aside   with     the

requirement that the respective respondent No. 2 of these

appeals shall surrender forthwith.
16.   In the interest of justice, it is also provided that

if they apply for bail afresh after surrendering and at an

appropriate stage, such an application may be considered on

its own merits.
17.   In the interest of justice, it is also made clear

that we have not pronounced on the merits of the case

either way and none of the observations herein, by itself,

would operate prejudicial to the interests of the parties

nor shall have any bearing on the final verdict by the

Trial Court.
18.   All pending applications also stand disposed of.
………………………………………………………J.
                                          [DINESH MAHESHWARI]



                                           ………………………………………………………J.
                                          [BELA M. TRIVEDI]

NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 30, 2022.