[Cites
23
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Sukhbiri Devi vs Union Of India on 29 September, 2022
Author:
C.T. Ravikumar
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
Ajay Rastogi
1


                                                                         Reportable


                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                                CIVIL APPEAL NO.10834 OF 2010



          SUKHBIRI DEVI & ORS.                                    ……APPELLANTS

                                               VERSUS

          UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                   ……RESPONDENTS



                                          J U D G M E N T
C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J.
1.             This appeal by Special Leave is directed against

          the            judgment   and   order       in   RSA   No.79/2007   dated

          25.08.2009 passed by the High Court of Delhi. The

          appellants were plaintiffs in Suit No.410 of 2000 on

          the file of the Court presided over by Shri Vidya

          Prakash, Civil Judge, Delhi, (hereinafter referred to

          as ‘the Trial Court’), filed seeking reliefs mainly

          against the 5th Respondent.
Signature Not Verified                                 The Trial Court framed a
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
Date: 2022.09.29
preliminary
19:02:09 IST
Reason:                          issue    on   the     question    of   limitation,

          evidently, upon forming the opinion that case may be
2
disposed of on an issue of law and that it warrants

postponement       of    settlement        of   other     issues       until

after that issue has been determined and to deal with

the   suit   in    accordance      with       the     decision    on   that

issue.     Accordingly,        the        Trial       Court     framed     a

preliminary       question    as     to       “whether    the     Suit    is

within the limitation”. Upon answering the same in

the negative, in accordance with the said decision,

the   suit    was        dismissed       as     per     judgment       dated

13.05.2005.        The    defendants          challenged        the     said

judgment and decree before the Court presided over by

Shri Sukhdev Singh, Additional District Judge, Delhi,

(hereinafter       referred    to        as   the     ‘First     Appellate

Court’) in Civil Appeal No.99/2005 and it dismissed

the appeal and confirmed the judgment and decree of

the Trial Court, as per judgment dated 08.12.2006.

Thereupon, they took up the matter in second appeal

before the High Court. As per the impugned judgment

dated 25.08.2009 the High Court concurred with the

findings     and    dismissed        the      appeal     answering       the

question of law against the appellants.                         Leave was

granted in Special Leave Petition No.34648 of 2009
3
filed against the stated judgment of the High Court

and     in    this       civil     appeal,     the          respondents      were

granted liberty to file counter affidavits.
2.    We have heard the learned counsel appearing for

the appellants and also the learned counsel appearing

for the respective respondents.
3.    At     the      outset,      it   is   to        be    noted    that   the

challenge          in    this    appeal       is       against       concurrent

findings by three Courts, as mentioned hereinbefore.

The scope of an appeal by special leave under
Article

136
of     the       Constitution        of        India    against      the

concurrent findings is well settled.
In
State of

Rajasthan        vs.     Shiv    Dayal1
reiterating         the    settled

position, this Court held that a concurrent finding

of    fact     is       binding,    unless        it    is     infected      with

perversity.           It was held therein:-
“When any concurrent finding of fact is
           assailed in second appeal, the appellant
           is entitled to point out that it is bad
           in law because it was recorded de hors
           the pleadings or it was based on no
           evidence or it was based on misreading
           of material documentary evidence or it
           was recorded against any provision of
           law and lastly, the decision is one

1 (2019) 8 SCC 637.
4
which no Judge acting judicially could
           reasonably     have    reached.     (see
           observation made by learned Judge Vivian
           Bose,J. as His Lordship then was a Judge
           of the Nagpur High Court in Rajeshwar
           Vishwanath Mamidwar & Ors. vs. Dashrath
           Narayan Chilwelkar & Ors., AIR 1943
           Nagpur 117 Para 43).”
4.   Thus,     evidently,    the        settled   position      is     that

interference       with    the     concurrent      findings       in     an

appeal under
Article 136
of the Constitution is to be

made sparingly, that too when the judgment impugned

is absolutely perverse. On appreciation of evidence

another view is possible also cannot be a reason for

substitution of a plausible view taken and confirmed.

We will now, bearing in mind the settled position,

proceed to consider as to whether the said appellate

power invites invocation in the case on hand.
5.   For making a consideration as mentioned above, it

is only apposite to make a brief reference to the

facts      involved   in     the        case    revealed       from    the

averments in the plaint.            The predecessor-in-interest

of   the    appellants,     viz.,       Shri    Rama   Nand,    was    the

bhumidar      of   certain       extent    of     agricultural         land

situated in Village Naraina in Delhi.                   The said plot
5
of agricultural land was acquired and Award No.19/75-

76    was   passed     in    relation          to        its    acquisition      on

09.01.1976.         Subsequently,            Rama    Nand        died,     leaving

behind his widow, two sons – Nahar Singh and Dhan

Singh and four daughters - Smt. Shakuntala Devi, Smt.

Krishna Devi, Smt. Parvati Devi and Smt. Santhosh.

Later, the widow of Shri Rama Nand also died. As per

the   policy, whereunder             the land             was acquired,         the

bhumidar     was     entitled       to       allotment          of    alternative

residential         plot    in     lieu       of     the        acquired       land.

Later,      the      alternative             plot         was        allotted     by

respondent Nos.1 to 4 in the exclusive name of Dhan

Singh,       upon          his     production                  of      registered

Relinquishment             Deed,         as         per         letter         No.F-

31(11)/8/87/L&B/ALT/8226             dated          08.03.1991.          The    said

letter      dated    08.03.1991          to    the       5th    respondent       for

allotment of an alternative residential plot in his

name, based on the Relinquishment Deed issued by the

other legal heirs in his favour, came to the notice

of Shri Nahar Singh, who thereupon filed an objection

on 05.04.1991, before respondent Nos.1-4 stating that

alternative         plot     shall       not        be     allotted       in    the
6
exclusive name of Dhan Singh. Further, it was stated

therein that the Relinquishment Deed produced before

the    Authorities     was    obtained         fraudulently      by   Dhan

Singh.     Subsequently, Nahar Singh died on 14.05.1993.

Thereupon, his widow and children stepped into his

shoes.     Furthermore, it is averred in the plaint that

thereupon,     the     original          plaintiff      No.1   submitted

similar representations to the Authorities in a bid

to make them refrain from allotting the alternative

plot in the exclusive name of the 5th respondent.                       It

is    thereafter that        they instituted            Suit No.410     of

2000,    on   14.06.2000.            All        these    averments     are

specifically        made   in   the        said    plaint.      At    this

juncture, it is to be noted that the four sisters of

Nahar Singh who are also the legal heirs of deceased

Rama Nand did not join them for instituting the suit

against Dhan Singh (the 5th respondent in the Suit)

and    virtually,     they    were       made    proforma      defendants

therein.
6.    A bare perusal of the plaint would reveal that

the    suit   was    instituted          for    declaratory     reliefs,

inter alia, stating that the cause of action arose
7
when application for alternative plot was made by the

Defendant No.5 by playing fraud and claiming himself

to be the sole and exclusive heir of deceased Rama

Nand      and        further    when      objections          through

representations were made to the wrongful application

of allotment, on number of dates.
Based    on   such   averments    it    was   prayed    for   a

decree    declaring      that   the    Plaintiffs    are   the   co-

owners in the allotment of the suit Plot No.13, Type

A-I in Sector 26, Rohini, New Delhi (allotted in lieu

of permanent acquisition of the lands of Shri Rama

Nand, s/o Bhupan) and the Defendant No.5 is not the

exclusive allotted/owner of the said residential plot

in suit. The further relief sought for is entirely

dependant on the above declaratory relief.
7.     Defendant Nos.1,2 and 4 (respondent Nos.1,2 and 4

herein) filed a joint written statement and the fifth

respondent filed it separately. In view of the nature

of the judgment of the Trial Court, the Appellate

Court     and    the    High    Court    and    also    nature       of

consideration, which we are intending to undertake, it
8
is   absolutely        unnecessary          to     delve       into     their

pleadings.
8.   Based     on     the       impugned     judgment,          the     rival

pleadings     and     the       arguments        advanced      before       us,

following          substantial            questions            call         for

consideration:-
(a)     Whether      the     issue     of     limitation         can    be

determined as a preliminary issue under Order XIV,

Rule 2(2)
of the Code of Civil Procedure
(for short

‘
CPC
’)?
(b) Whether a larger period of limitation of 12

years would be available to the plaintiffs to bring in

a suit by virtue of application of
Article 136
of the
Limitation     Act,       1968
(for      short       ‘
The    Act
’),       as

contended     by    the     appellant      and     in    the    facts       and

circumstances obtained in this case?
(c) Whether
Article 17
or
Article 65
of the Act

got any application, as contended by the appellants,

in view of the plaint averments, in case
Article 136
of the Act is found inapplicable?
9.   As relates the first question bifold contentions

have been raised by the appellants. Limitation being a
9
mixed    question         of    law     and       facts,    in    view      of   the

provisions         under    Order       XIV,      Rule     2(2),      the   course

adopted       by    the    Trial      Court        and     confirmed        by   the

Appellate      Court       and    the    High       Court,       is   absolutely

impermissible in law, it is contended.                           If at all that

preliminary issue was to be considered it ought to

have been made under Rule 11,
Order VII, CPC
and then,

subject to its outcome, at the worst, the plaint could

have been rejected in terms of Clause (d) of Rule 11

of
Order VII, CPC
, it is further contended.
10. The contentions raised in resistance on behalf of

the     5th    respondent          appears          to      be     syllogistic.

According          to     him,     the        foundational            facts      for

determining         the        nature        of     Suit     No.410/2000          as

declaratory suit and the starting point of limitation

as relates a declaratory suit are available in the

plaint averments themselves. The second proposition is

that    despite         coming    to     know       about    the      registered

Relinquishment Deed dated 21.10.1985, the predecessor-

in-interest of the plaintiffs Shri Nahar Singh and/or

the plaintiffs did not resort to civil remedy to get

it set aside evenafter maintaining the stand that it
10
was fraudulently obtained. The third proposition is

that       repeated         representations        or   applications    to

respondent Nos.1 to 4 would not extend the period of

limitation.             To wit, according to the 5 th respondent

the suit was barred by limitation on those counts and,

it     was    rightly       dismissed       as   nothing   further   could

survive for adjudication in the suit thenceforth.
11.            Citing        various    decisions,         such    as
C.

Natarajan Vs. Ashim Bai & Anr.2
,
Popat And Kotecha

Property Vs. State Bank of India Staff Assn3
,
Daya

Singh & Anr. Vs. Gurdev Singh (Dead) by LRs
.
& Ors.4,

Mt. Bolo vs. Mt. Koklan5 and Mst.
Rukhmabai Vs. Lala

Laxminarayan6
the appellants attempted to drive home

their points.
12. In C. Natarajan’s case2 and in Popat And Kotecha

Property’s          case3    the   plaints       were   rejected   on   the

ground of being barred by Order VII, Rule 11(d),
CPC
unlike the case on hand where the suit was dismissed

in accordance with the decision on the preliminary

issue. This Court held that Order VII, Rule 11(d)

2   (2007) 14 SCC 183
3   (2005) 7 SCC 510
4   (2010) 2 SCC 194
5   AIR 1930 PC 270
6   1960 (2) SCR 253
11
would apply if the averments in the plaint were given

face value and taken to be correct in their entirety

appear to be barred by any law. Furthermore, it was

held   that    in   that   regard     the   Court   would   not   be

entitled to consider the case of the defence.
13. The Privy Council in the decision in Mt. Bolo’s

case5 held that there could be no ‘right to sue’ until

there is an accrual of the right asserted in the suit

and    its    infringement      or    at    least   a   clear     and

unequivocal     threat     to   infringe     that   right   by    the

defendant against whom the suit is instituted. In Daya

Singh’s case4 the question was with respect to the

‘right to sue’ for declaration.               This Court, after

referring to the decision in Mt. Bolo’s case5, held

that a mere adverse entry in revenue records would not

give rise to cause of action and it would accrue only

when right asserted in the suit is infringed or when

there is a clear and unequivocal threat to infringe

that right.
14. In Mst. Rukhmabai’s case6, involving question of

limitation in a suit for declaration of a deed as

sham, this court considered the question of limitation
12
under
Article 120
of the Limitation Act, 1908 and held

that     the      ‘right      to    sue’    would    accrue       when     the

defendant       clearly       and     unequivocally        threatened       to

infringe the right asserted by the plaintiff in the

suit.     Further it was held that every threat to such a

right would not amount to a clear and unequivocal

threat to compel him to file a suit and whether any

particular        threat      would    give   rise    to    a     compulsory

cause of action would depend on the question as to

whether that threat effectively invades or jeopardise

the said right. In case on further deliberation a

consideration of the case on hand in the light of the

above     decisions          became    inevitable,         then    we     will

undertake such an exercise.
15. Now,        we     will        consider   the     first        question:
‘whether the issue of limitation can be determined as

a preliminary issue under Order XIV, Rule 2,
CPC
’. It

is no longer res integra.
In the decision in
Mongin

Realty      and      Build    Well     Private      Limited       vs.    Manik

Sethi7
, even while holding that the course of action

followed by the learned Trial Judge of directing the


7 2022 SCC Online SC 156
13
parties        to       address        arguments       on      the    issue       of

limitation as irregular since it being a case where

adduction of evidence was required, a two-Judge Bench

of this Court referred to a three-Judge Bench decision

of    this     Court         in
Nusli        Neville     Wadia     Vs.    Ivory

Properties8
observing       that      the   issue     therein         was

whether the issue of limitation could be determined as

a preliminary issue under Order XIV, Rule 2,
CPC
.
After     taking        note      of     the    fact   that     going       by   the

decision in Nusli Neville Wadia’s case8, in a case

where question of limitation could be decided based on

admitted facts it could be decided as a preliminary

issue under Order XIV, Rule 2(2)(b),
CPC
., the two-

Judge        Bench      held      that    in     the   case     before       their

Lordships the question of limitation could not have

been decided as a preliminary issue under
Order XIV,

Rule     2    of       CPC
as    determination          of    the    issue      of

limitation
in that case
was not a pure question of

law. In the said contextual situation it is worthy and

appropriate to refer to paragraphs 51, in so far as it




8 [(2020) 6 SCC 557]
14
is relevant, and 52 of the decision in Nusli Neville

Wadia’s case8 and they read thus:-
“51.[…] As per Order 14 Rule 1, issues
      arise when a material proposition of
      fact or law is affirmed by the one party
      and denied by the other. The issues are
      framed on the material proposition,
      denied by another party. There are
      issues of facts and issues of law. In
      case specific facts are admitted, and is
      the question of law arises which is
      dependent upon the outcome of admitted
      facts, it is open to the court to
      pronounce the judgment based on admitted
      facts and the preliminary question of
      law under the provisions of Order 14
      Rule 2. In Order 14 Rule 2(1), the court
      may decide the case on a preliminary
      issue. It has to pronounce the judgment
      on all issues. Order 14 Rule 2(2) makes
      a departure and the court may decide the
      question of law as to jurisdiction of
      the court or a bar created to the suit
      by any law for the time being in force,
      such as under the
Limitation Act
.
52.   […]  In   a   case,  question   of
      limitation can be decided based on
      admitted facts, it can be decided as a
      preliminary issue under Order 14 Rule
      2(2)(b). Once facts are disputed about
      limitation, the determination of the
      question of limitation also cannot be
      made under Order 14 Rule 2(2) as a
      preliminary issue or any other such
      issue of law which requires examination
      of the disputed facts. In case of
      dispute as to facts, is necessary to be
      determined to give a finding on a
      question of law. Such question cannot be
      decided as a preliminary issue. In a
      case, the question of jurisdiction also
15
depends upon the proof of facts which
          are disputed and the question of law is
          dependent upon the outcome of the
          investigation   of   the    facts,    such
          question of law cannot be decided as a
          preliminary     issue,     is      settled
          proposition of law either before the
          amendment
of CPC
and post amendment in
          the year 1976.”
                                   (Emphasis added)
16. In view of the legal position obtained from the

decision in Nusli Neville Wadia’s case8 the following

decisions also assume relevance.
In the decision in
National Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Rattani9
this Court

held that an admission made in the pleadings by a

party      is    admissible       in    evidence     proprio   vigore.
Equally well settled is the principle of law that an

admission        made    by   a    party    in     his   pleadings   is

admissible         against    him       proprio    vigore   (see     the

decisions in
Ranganayakamma & Anr. Vs. K.S. Prakash

(Dead) By LRs
.
&
Ors.10 and Vimal Chand Ghevarchand

Jain & Ors. Vs. Ramakant Eknath Jadoo11
.
17. In the context of the usage of the expression

“admitted facts” in paragraph 52 of the decision in


9 [(2009) 2 SCC 75]
10 [(2008) 15 SCC 673]
11 [(2009) 5 SCC 713]
16
Nusli Neville Wadia’s case8 and the word ‘admission’

employed   the    National        Insurance    CO.    Ltd.   case9 a

reference to
Sections 17
,
18
and
58
of the Indian

Evidence Act would not be inappropriate. A conjoint

reading    of    the    said      provision   would    reveal     that

‘statements’ by a party to proceedings are admissions

and facts admitted need not be proved.
18. We referred to the said provisions and decisions

only to stress upon the point that the appellants

cannot legally have any dispute or grievance in taking

their statements in the plaint capable of determining

the starting point of limitation for the purpose of

application of Order XIV, Rule 2(2)(b)
of the CPC
.

Though, limitation is a mixed question of law and

facts it will shed the said character and would get

confined    to    one       of    question    of     law   when   the

foundational fact(s), determining the starting point

of limitation is vividly and specifically made in the

plaint averments.           In such a circumstance, if the

Court   concerned      is    of   the    opinion   that    limitation

could be framed as a preliminary point and it warrants

postponement      of    settlement       of   other    issues     till
17
determination of that issue, it may frame the same as

a preliminary issue and may deal with the suit only in

accordance with the decision on that issue. It cannot

be said that such an approach is impermissible in law

and in fact, it is perfectly permissible under Order

XIV,     Rule     2(2)(b),
CPC
and    legal       in      such

circumstances. In short, in view of the decisions and

the provisions
,
referred above
, it is clear that the

issue limitation can be framed and determined as a

preliminary issue under Order XIV, Rule 2(2)(b),
CPC
in a case where it can be decided on admitted facts.
19. With the above observations and conclusions we

will now, refer to the findings returned by the Trial

Court on the stated preliminary issue of limitation,

with a view to answer the question as to whether the

impugned    judgment         confirming       the    First      Appellate

Court    which,    in    turn,       confirmed      the   judgment      and

decree of the Trial Court, requires intervention. In

that    regard    it    is    only    apposite      to    refer    to   the

following    recital         from    the    Trial   Court’s       judgment

carrying    plaint      averments          indicating     the     starting
18
point   of   limitation   and    also   findings   on   the

preliminary issue:
“As per averments made in para 8 of the
        plaint    plaintiffs    themselves    have
        mentioned that their predecessor in
        interest alongwith defendants Nos.6 to
        9 had executed relinquishment deed in
        favour of defendant no. 5.        Although
        they have also taken the plea that same
        was obtained defendant no. 5 by playing
        fraud on the pretext of mutation of
        residential house in MCD records. Such
        averments made in the said para goes to
        show that Ld. Predecessor in interest
        of plaintiffs was very well aware about
        the execution of registered release
        deed since date of its execution. Even
        if it be considered that defendant no.
        5 had played fraud upon predecessor in
        interest of plaintiffs and the said
        fraud came to the knowledge of Sh.
Nahar   Singh   through    letter   dated.
        8.3.1991 then the period of limitation
        for seeking said relinquishment deed as
        null and void started the said date
        i.e. 8.3.1991. The reason being that
        plaintiffs are seeking declaration to
        the effect that they are co-owners of
        the suit plot and defendant no. 5 is
        not the exclusive owner thereof. The
        said relief can be granted by the court
        only when the relinquishment deed dated
        21.10.1985 is held to be illegal null
        and void and not binding upon them. In
        other words, unless and until the said
        relinquishment deed is held to be
        illegal    and   not  binding     on   the
        executants, the plaintiffs cannot be
        declared as co-owners of the suit plot
        along with defendants no. 5 to 9.
Therefore, the plaintiffs are also
19
seeking        declaration         regarding
cancellation of release deed dated
21.10.1985 indirectly which is being
alleged as having been obtained through
fraud and which fact admittedly came to
their knowledge on 8/3/1991. Plaintiffs
are claiming their title through Sh.
Nahar Singh one of the legal heirs of
deceased Sh. Rama Nand. Once Sh. Nahar
Singh came to know about the fraud and
illegality of the release deed the
period of limitation started running
from the said date of cancellation and
mere factum regarding death of Sh.
Nahar Singh would not stop the period
of limitation once it has been started.
Plaintiffs have stepped into the shoes
of Sh. Nahar Singh and were, therefore,
required to challenge the release deed
within    the    period     of    limitation
prescribed by law. It is needless to
mention here that period of limitation
prescribed for filing such a suit for
declaration    challenging     the   release
deed in question is three years from
the date of accrual of cause of action
which in the present case arose, in the
opinion of the court, on 8/3/1991 when
Sh. Nahar Singh came to know about the
alleged fraud being played by defendant
no. 5 upon him along with defendants
no. 6 to 9. The present suit has been
filed only on 14.6.2000, therefore, the
present suit is barred by limitation.
Hence,   court    finds    merit    in   the
arguments     raised     on     behalf    of
defendants that the present suit is not
maintainable       being       barred     by
limitation. The submissions made on
behalf of plaintiffs that there were
several representations being submitted
before     various       Authorities      by
plaintiffs from time to time and period
of limitation was continuing during all
20
these period is without any merit as
          mere sending representations on behalf
          of plaintiffs with authorities cannot
          extend   period    of   limitation.    The
          plaintiffs   slept    over   their   right
          during the whole period of limitation
          and therefore they cannot be permitted
          to plead that the present suit is
          within the period of limitation due to
          sending of representations with the
          departments.   Hence,    for   all   these
          reasons it is held that the present
          suit    is    barred     by    limitation.
Accordingly, issue is decided against
          the plaintiffs.”
20. Before            proceeding      further     with   the     above-

mentioned       issues and         the findings     returned, it      is

only     proper        to   consider       the   contention    of    the

Appellants regarding the applicability of
Article 136
of     the
Limitation       Act
.         According    to    us,   the

contention is jesuitical.                  A perusal of
Article 136
of the
Limitation Act
would reveal the indubitable

position that it applies only when an application for

execution of any decree (other than a decree granting

a mandatory injunction) or order of any Civil Court

is to be filed.             (See the decision of this Court in
Bikoba       Deora Gaikwad         & Ors.    vs. Hirabai      Marutirao

Ghorgare & Ors.12
12 (2008) 8 SCC 198
21
21. In the instant such a stage for application of
Article 136
of the
Limitation Act
had not reached

and,    in troth,      the question            involved is      relatable

only    to the    time restriction             for initiating         legal

proceedings to seek the alleged legal right. In the

said    circumstances,        the   inevitable          conclusion      can

only be that
Article 136
got no application in the

case on hand and as such the Appellants could not

claim for a larger period of limitation of 12 years.
22. The findings of the Trial Court with respect to

preliminary      issue   of    limitation         are    based    on    the

relevant   dates revealed           from the          pleadings of      the

plaintiffs in the plaint itself. True that in the

plaint     it     is     repeatedly             alleged        that     the

relinquishment deed was obtained fraudulently by the

5th respondent. However, conspicuously its date was

not mentioned.      But then the plaint averment is that

their    predecessor-in-interest               Shri    Nahar   Singh,    on

coming     to    know    about           the     use     of    the     said

Relinquishment Deed, had preferred an objection on

05.04.1991 to the authorities whereunder he sought

not only for its cancellation but also on the ground
22
of obtainment by playing fraud for refraining them

from issuing allotment of the alternative plot in the

exclusive name of the 5th respondent. In this context

it is also relevant to note that going by the plaint

averments    after   the    death      of   Shri   Nahar    Singh   on

14.05.1993 the original first plaintiff, who is none

other than one of the sons of Shri Nahar Singh, filed

representations on the lines of the objection taken

up by his father. Even if non-mentioning of the date

of   Relinquishment Deed          is not     taken as      purposeful

that   cannot    and       will    not       therefore     save     the

plaintiffs from the inescapable, adverse finding on

the question of limitation to bring in a suit against

the said Relinquishment Deed. Evidently, Suit No.410

of 2000 was filed only on 14.06.2000. Thus, it is

very much clear from the plaint averments that the

Relinquishment Deed is anterior to the date of letter

of intimation to the 5th respondent (08.03.1991) and

obviously, the date of objection against the same was

firstly     preferred   by    deceased        Nahar     Singh     viz.,

05.04.1991.     Evidently,        the       aforesaid    two      dates

specifically mentioned in the plaint were taken into
23
account    by    the     Trial       Court      as       also    by   the     First

Appellate Court and the High Court in the matter of

consideration of the question “whether the suit was

barred by limitation.” The manner of consideration by

the     Trial        Court     which          ultimately         resulted        in

dismissal of suit No.410/2000 would reveal, as stated

hereinbefore, that it had determined the preliminary

issue     regarding           the    period          of    limitation          with

reference       to     the     averments            in    the     plaint.       The

dismissal       of    the     suit   was       in    accordance         with    the

decision on the said preliminary issue. Since we have

already extracted the operative portion of the Trial

Court judgment, we do not think it necessary to refer

to its reasons and findings.
23. Coming to the judgment of the First Appellate

Court     whereby       it     dismissed            the    appeals       of     the

plaintiffs and confirmed the judgment and decree of

the   Trial      Court        it    is   evident          that    the    various

contentions          raised    by    the      appellants         therein       were

considered in detail by the First Appellate Court.

The   judgment         would       reveal      that       before      the     First

Appellate Court, besides reiterating the contentions
24
unsuccessfully             raised       before    the      Trial    Court,    the

appellants therein / the plaintiffs had contended,

relying on the decision in
Narinder Kaur & Anr. Vs.

Amar Jeet Singh Sethi & Anr.13
, that Relinquishment

Deeds do not relinquish the share of executant but

would       have       only      the     effect       of    transferring      the

shares. Paragraph 17 of the judgment of the First

Appellate          Court         would    reveal       that    it     correctly

exposited         the legal            position that        the question      of

limitation is to be considered not with reference to

the     validity         of      the    Relinquishment        Deed.    In    this

context it is also to be noted that despite taking up

a specific allegation that the Relinquishment Deed

was fraudulently obtained by the 5th respondent, the

plaintiffs had not chosen to assail and seek for its

setting aside. As noted earlier, even after seeking

for cancellation of the relinquishment deed before

the      authorities             as    early     as    on     05.04.1991     the

predecessor-in-interest had not chosen to get it set

aside by approaching a competent civil court during

his lifetime. Upon his death on 14.05.1993, though


13 [2000 III A D (Delhi), 599]
25
the period of limitation for seeking to set it aside

did not get arrested and ran against the plaintiffs

who stepped into the shoes of Nahar Singh, none of

them    seek to     get it   set aside    by moving   a civil

court, within the period of limitation. The pleadings

in this appeal and the arguments advanced would show

that till date with such a prayer no competent civil

court was moved by the original plaintiffs and also

the appellants herein. In short, in the absence of

any successful challenge against the validity of the

said Relinquishment Deed by making proper prayer in

an appropriate proceedings, and that too within the

prescribed period of limitation, the conclusion and

finding of the First Appellate Court, as aforesaid,

cannot be said to be perverse or illegal as there can

be     no   doubt   with   respect   to   the   position   that

consideration of validity of a relinquishment deed

and consideration of the period of limitation with

reference to the same are different and distinct.
24. It is also evident that another contention was

raised on behalf of the appellants before the First
26
Appellate       Court       relying    on   M/s
Crescent      Petroleum

Ltd.    Vs.    M.V.        Monchegorsk      &    Ors.14
that    power   of

dismissal of suit on the ground of absence of cause

of action shall be exercised by courts sparingly and

cautiously and the benefit of doubt must go to the

plaintiff. This contention was rightly repelled by

the First Appellate Court holding that in the case on

hand the question was not one of dismissal on the

ground of absence of cause of action but, on the

ground of being barred by limitation, reckoning the

nature of the suit as declaratory.
25. The challenge against the impugned judgment of

the High Court is that it wrongly applied
Article 58
of the
Limitation Act
while confirming the concurrent

decisions of the First Appellate Court and the Trial

Court. In this context, it is relevant to note the

prayers made in the suit by the plaintiffs which were

extracted      hereinbefore.          Undoubtedly,        the    plaintiffs

sought for declarations in the manner
referred above
and    thereby,        made     the    nature        of   the     suit    as

declaratory.        This      position      is    indisputable.      It   is
14 [AIR 2000 Bombay 161]
27
true that the Trial Court though found the period of

limitation     as three        years taking       into account          the

nature of the reliefs it did not specifically mention

the relevant provision in its judgment. There can be

little      doubt     with     respect    to   the     position        that

misquoting or non-quoting of a provision by itself

will not make an order bad so long as the relevant

enabling      provision        is    in   existence        and    it    was

correctly          applied      though     without         specifically

mentioning it. The High Court had only referred to

the    relevant,          applicable      provision         under       the
Limitation     Act
upon        considering the         nature of        the

suit and the reliefs sought for, in the plaint. We do

not find any perversity or illegality in the finding

of    the    High    Court     for    sustaining     the        concurrent

findings with respect to the issue whether the suit

was barred by limitation.
26. The relief sought for, in suit No.410/2000 would

reveal      that    the   first      prayer,   which       is    the   main

prayer, is declaratory in nature. Even according to

the    plaintiffs,        as   revealed    from      the    plaint      the
28
second       prayer     (extracted       hereinbefore)           is     only

consequential         relief. A    perusal of           the same      would

undoubtedly show that it is consequential and not an

independent one and therefore the courts below are

right in holding that the said prayer is grantable

only if the first prayer is granted. In this case

based on the determination on the preliminary issue

of limitation and in accordance with the decision on

that    preliminary issue         the suit          was dismissed.       As

held    by   the    three-judge     Bench       in     the    decision   in

Nusli    Neville      Wadia’s     case       (supra)    the    provisions

under Order XIV Rule 2(1) and Rule 2(2)(b) permit to

deal with and dispose of a suit in accordance with

the decision on the preliminary issue. In the case on

hand in view of the nature of the finding on the

preliminary issue and the consequential consideration

of the suit in terms of Order XIV Rule 2(2)(b) and

taking note of the fact that the suit do not survive

after    such       consideration        we    find     no     reason    to

consider      the     contention        of    the      appellants       with

reference to Order VII Rule 11 based on the decisions

relied on by them and referred hereinbefore. So also,
29
the contentions of the appellants based on
Articles

17
and
65
also would pale into insignificance and

warrant    no     consideration      at      all,      in    the

circumstances.
27. The upshot of the above discussion is that there

is   absolutely   no   perversity   or    illegality    in   the

concurrent findings of the courts below warranting

interference in invocation of the power under
Article

136
of the Constitution of India. In the result, the

appeal stands dismissed with costs.
28. All pending applications are disposed of.
…………………………………………….J.
                                               (AJAY RASTOGI)



                                         …………………………………………….J.
                                             (C.T. RAVIKUMAR)

New Delhi;
September 29, 2022