[Cites
11
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Maharishi Markandeshwar University vs Akriti Sharma on 19 September, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Hima Kohli
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
CA 6809/2022


                                                                                        Reportable


                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                              Civil Appeal No 6809 of 2022
                                        (Arising out of SLP (C) No 15036 of 2022)



                         Maharishi Markandeshwar University                       Appellants
                         And Another

                                                         Versus

                         Akriti Sharma and Others                                 Respondents




                                                   JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J
1.              Leave granted.
2.              The appeal arises from a judgment dated 2 August 2022 of a Division Bench

          of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh.
3.              The first appellant is a private state university in Himachal Pradesh

          established under the
Maharishi Markandeshwar University (Establishment and

          Regulation) Act
2010. The first appellant runs the Maharishi Markandeshwar
Signature Not Verified
Medical College and Hospital at Kumarhatti, District Solan. The medical college
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2022.10.15
11:17:26 IST
Reason:
1
CA 6809/2022
has a prescribed intake of 150 seats for admission to the MBBS degree course as

approved by the National Medical Commission 1.
4.       The first respondent is medical student currently pursuing her BDS course

in a government dental college. The second respondent, Atal Medical and

Research University, Himachal Pradesh, issued a prospectus for conducting

centralized counselling for MBBS/ BDS courses based on the order of merit in the

National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test2 2021 for the undergraduate medical

courses. The first respondent appeared in NEET-UG 2021 and secured 456 out of

720 marks with a rank of 1,26,537. On 29 January 2022, the second respondent

issued a schedule of admission for the MBBS/ BDS courses for academic session

2021-2022. The first respondent secured admission for the BDS course in Bhojia

Dental College, Nalagarh and joined the course on 02 February 2022. In the

second round of counselling, the first respondent secured admission for the BDS

course in the HP Government Dental College and Hospital, Shimla under the state

quota.
5.       After the completion of the second round of counselling, the medical college

of the first appellant had 44 vacancies which were open for mop up counselling for

admission to the first year MBBS degree course. Of these 44 seats, 4 were lying

vacant under the state quota out of which 3 were under the general quota and one

under the Scheduled Tribes quota. On 15 March 2022, the second respondent

issued a schedule for conducting the mop up round for MBBS/ BDS courses. The

appellant issued an advertisement for conducting the mop up round of counselling


1   “NMC”
2   “NEET”
2
CA 6809/2022
from NEET qualified candidates. Counselling was to take place from 10 am on 25

March 2022. On 24 March 2022, the second respondent forwarded to the

appellants a list of students who were eligible for admission under the state quota,

but were admitted in the management quota in the first and second rounds of

counselling. The letter stated that these students may be considered for being

shifted to the state quota if no students with more marks in NEET had applied in

the mop up round.
6.    The first respondent filed an application with the medical college of the

appellants together with the registration charges for admission to the MBBS course

in the state quota. According to the appellants, the state quota seats in the general

category were “automatically filled up” by upgrading the fifth, sixth and seventh

respondents from the management quota to the state quota on 25 March 2022.

The fifth, sixth, and seventh respondents secured 440, 441, and 442 marks

respectively, and were lower in merit to the first respondent, who secured 456

marks. Thereafter, the management seats were also filled up. Therefore, the first

respondent could not secure an MBBS seat under state quota in the medical

college run by the appellants.
7.    A writ petition was instituted by the first respondent before the High Court

on 29 March 2022 for redrawing the merit list for admission to the MBBS degree

course in the mop up round of counselling held on 25 March 2022 for the general

category seats under the state quota. The appellants filed replies. During the

pendency of the proceedings, the fifth, sixth, and seventh respondents, who were
3
CA 6809/2022
students originally admitted to the management quota but upgraded to the state

quota, were impleaded as parties on 11 May 2022.
8.    The High Court allowed the petition by the impugned judgment and order

dated 2 August 2022. It observed that the first respondent had the first right of

admission to the medical college run by the appellants by virtue of securing higher

marks than the fifth, sixth, and seventh respondents. The High Court further held

that students admitted under management quota can be considered for

upgradation to the state quota only if no student with more marks in NEET applied

in the mop-up round. The High Court concluded that:
“In view of the above discussion, the instant petition is allowed.
               Admission of respondents 6 to 8 in state quota general category
               seats in MMMG on their upgradation from management quota by
               ignoring the merit of other applicants including the petitioner in mop-
               up round is held to be bad in law being against the express
               conditions of prospectus. Consequently, respondents No. 1 to 3 are
               directed to redraw the merit list of admission to MBBS course in
               MMMC in respect of the mop up round counselling held, on
               25.03.2022 against general category seats of State quota and after
               such redrawal of merit list, admit the petitioner to MBBS course in
               MMMC, Kumarhatti, District Solan, H.P., commencing academic
               year 2021-2022 forthwith, in case she finds place in merit so
               redrawn.”
9.    The crux of the controversy turns on the interpretation of clauses 3, 4 and

9(e) of the Common/ Centralized Counselling Prospectus for admission to MBBS

and BDS courses. The relevant clauses of the prospectus are extracted below:
"3. After completion of 1st & 2nd round of counselling, the schedule
               for Mop-up round of counselling shall be issued by the University
               and the online counselling form shall be made available on the
               University website www.amruhp.ac.in. Candidates who are eligible
               for participating in the mop-up round on online counselling are
               required to fill up fresh choices/preferences of course, college and
               quota in the online application form within stipulated period for
               provisional allocation against vacant seats along with requisite
               amount as prescribed for token amount of fee, as applicable. If
               candidate is satisfied with his/her seat allocated during the previous
               rounds of online counselling, he/she is not required to participate in
               the subsequent round of online counselling. No inter-se-shifting from
4
CA 6809/2022
one Government Medical College to another Medical college shall
               be allowed during the mop up Round of Counselling as per
               MCI/NMC guidelines. However, shifting for upgradation of course
               and quota from private Dental Colleges to Govt. Dental College and
               Govt./private dental colleges to MMMC Solan and Government
               dental college/MMMC Solan to Govt. Medical Colleges in order of
               merit-cum-choices/preferences of the course, college and quota
               shall be allowed.
Note: (i) Candidates who had not participated / allocated seats in
               the 1st & 2nd rounds of counselling can also participate in the mop-
               up rounds(s) of counselling as per their AMRU merit Rank.
(ii) Candidates are advised to remain in touch with the AMRU
               websites regularly for any change in the counselling/ admission
               process as well as latest updating upto the last closing date of
               admission and University shall in no way be responsible for non-
communication on this account. For any query, please contact on
               Tel. No. 01905-243962, 243967, 292102."
4. The Himachali bonafide candidates admitted under management
               quota in the private Medical/Dental colleges will also be converted
               automatically from management quota to state quota in the colleges
               concerned against vacant/drop-out seats, if any, in order of merit,
               as the case, may be, subject to fulfillment of the eligibility criteria as
               prescribed for State Quota seats.
9(e). After 2nd round of Common/Centralized Counselling, the
               private medical college (MMMCH, Solan) shall be allowed to fill-up
               the left-out seats under State/ Management/ NRI Quota at institution
               level by making wide publicity amongst eligible candidates.
               However, AMRU, Ner Chowk, Mandi will forward the waiting list of
               2nd round of online counselling with their option to the Principal,
               MMMCH, Solan in order to fill-up the vacant seats strictly in order of
               merit-cum-choice of the candidates. The AMRU, Ner Chowk, Mandi
               may also upload the aforesaid waiting list on website
               www.amruph.ac.in."
10.    Mr Aseem Mehrotra, counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants submits

that the mop up round of counselling was carried out strictly in accordance with

clause 4 of the prospectus. According to the appellant, the list which was sent by

the second respondent did not include the name of the first respondent. Hence,

the appellant automatically upgraded the names of the three candidates, namely,

the fifth, sixth, and seventh respondents, from the management quota to the state

general quota seats. Moreover, the college also filled up the remaining

management quota/ NRI seats which were vacant. Hence, on 25 March 2022 all
5
CA 6809/2022
the state quota seats got filled up. The first respondent, it has been submitted,

instituted a writ petition thereafter on 29 March 2022 for redrawing the merit for

admission, at which point of time, all the state quota seats were filled up. Mr

Mehrotra submitted that in the absence of an interim order of the High Court, the

appellants proceeded to grant admissions to the fifth, sixth, and seventh

respondents.
11.   Mr Aseem Mehrotra further submitted that the first session of the first year

of the MBBS degree course has been completed and the students have completed

their studies over a period of four months. Moreover, it has been submitted that in

the event that the order of the High Court is allowed to stand, one student would

have to be ousted from among the admitted students who is not a party before this

Court. This, it has been submitted, would be the necessary consequence because

while one of the fifth, sixth, and seventh respondents would be reverted to the

management quota, the total number of admissions in the institution cannot exceed
150. The submission is that the grant of admission to the first respondent would

involve the appellants crossing the prescribed intake of 150 seats, as a

consequence of which one student who is lowest in merit would have to be ousted

without the student being a party to the proceedings.
12.   In the alternative, it has been submitted that if this Court were to accept the

correctness of the judgment of the High Court, the appellants may be permitted to

keep one seat vacant for the first respondent in the ensuing academic year 2022-

2023, subject to approval of the NMC.
6
CA 6809/2022
13.   On the other hand, it has been urged by Mr M C Dhingra, counsel appearing

on behalf of the first respondent that there was absolutely no delay on the part of

the first respondent in seeking access to her remedies before the High Court. The

submission is that the appellants were not justified in relying upon the provisions

of clause 4 of the prospectus for the up-gradation of Himachali students admitted

under the management quota. Counsel urged that the provisions of clause 3 of the

prospectus had to be operated first and it is only if any seat remained vacant as a

result that clause 4 could be operated.
14.   Before the High Court, the second respondent has supported the case of

the first respondent. The second respondent referred to its letter dated 24 March

2022 where it was advised that students admitted under management quota in the

first and second rounds of counselling could be admitted to the state quota

provided that no student with more marks in NEET applied in the mop-up round.

On 28 March 2022, the second respondent also sent an advisory to the appellants

to review the conversion of management quota seats to the state quota in the

general category. The relevant part of the advisory is extracted below:
“We have received a representation regarding incorrect conversion
               of management quota seats to HP quota. You are requested to
               review the allocation keeping in mind the directions issued by us
               vide letter No. AMRU/COE/Counselling/2021/-3083 dated 24th
               March, 2022, in which it was clearly mentioned that the candidates
               admitted under management quota may be shifted to vacant HP
               quota seat rank wise if no students with more ranks in NEET applies
               in Mop-Up round and also refer the decision of the Hon’ble High
               Court of H.P. vide CWP No. 2160/2020 decided on 10.7.2020 titled
Gunjan Ahuja & Others Vs. State of Himachal Pradesh
& others.”
7
CA 6809/2022
15.    This Court has consistently held that merit must be the primary consideration

for admission to medical colleges. 3 In
Asha v. Pt. B. D. Sharma University of

Health Sciences
4, a two-judge bench of this Court held that the rule of merit for

preference of courses and colleges should be strictly followed by all stakeholders

and authorities. It further observed that rule of merit is defeated by inefficient,

inaccurate or improper methods of admission to medical colleges:
21. … the criteria for selection has to be merit alone. In fact, merit,
                  fairness and transparency are the ethos of the process for
                  admission to such courses. It will be a travesty of the scheme
                  formulated by this Court and duly notified by the States, if the Rule
                  of Merit is defeated by inefficiency, inaccuracy or improper methods
                  of admission. There cannot be any circumstance where the rule of
                  merit can be compromised. … It will be useful to refer to the view
                  consistently taken by this Court that merit alone is the criteria for
                  such admissions and circumvention of merit is not only
                  impermissible but is also an abuse of the process of law.
16.    The High Court in the course of the impugned judgment has underscored

the importance of merit and of a fair procedure in completing admissions to medical

courses. The High Court has held that clause 3 of the Prospectus deals with a

situation where seats are available as a result of the mop up round which is a

continuation of the admission process, whereas clause 4 is available only in

respect of vacant/ drop out seats which would be the position when the entire

process of counselling, including the mop up round is completed. Hence, the High

Court rejected the contention of the appellants that the up-gradation which was

granted to the fifth, sixth, and seventh respondents was justified in terms of the

prospectus for admission.
In giving relief to the first respondent, the High Court

held that she had been denied admission to the MBBS degree course by the


3
Pradeep Jain v. Union of India
(1984) 3 SCC 654; Association of Management of Unaided Private
Medical and Dental College v. Pravesh Niyantran Samiti (2005) 13 SCC 704;
Priya Gupta v. State of
Chhattisgarh
(2012) 7 SCC 433
4 (2012) 7 SCC 389
8
CA 6809/2022
arbitrary action of the appellants. In other words, but for the wrong which was

committed by the appellants, the first respondent would have been entitled to

admission.
17.   Clause 3 of the prospectus stipulates that after the completion of the first

and second rounds of counselling, a schedule for the mop up round shall be issued

by the university and the online counselling form would be made available.

Candidates who are eligible for participating in the mop up round have to fill up

fresh choices/ preferences in respect of the course, college and quota online.

Shifting for up-gradation of a course and quota from private dental colleges to

government dental colleges and government/ private dental colleges to MMMC

Solan and government dental colleges/ MMMC Solan to government medical

colleges in order of merit-cum-choices/ preferences has to be allowed. The

provisions of clause 3 are abundantly clear. The first respondent admittedly ranked

higher in merit than the fifth, sixth, and seventh respondents. She was therefore

clearly entitled to admission in terms of the provisions of clause 3.
18.   Clause 4 of the prospectus provides that students belonging to Himachal

Pradesh who were admitted under the management quota in private

medical/dental colleges will also be converted automatically from the management

quota to the state quota in the colleges concerned against vacant/drop out seats,

if any, in order of merit. As the High Court has correctly observed, clause 4 in its

plain terms applies to vacant/drop out seats which would necessarily refer to the

position as it obtains after the mop up round of counselling is completed. Hence,
9
CA 6809/2022
the interpretation which has been placed by the High Court on clauses 3 and 4 of

the prospectus cannot be faulted.
19.      The next question which arises for our consideration is whether the High

Court was right in directing the appellants to redraw the merit list of admission to

the MBBS course for granting admission to the first respondent for the academic

session 2021-2022.
20.
In
S. Krishna Sradha v. State of Andhra Pradesh
5, a three-judge bench

of this Court considered the nature of relief that can be granted to a meritorious

student who is denied admission illegally by the authorities. This Court observed

that denial of admission to a meritorious student for no fault of theirs would be

violative of their fundamental rights under the Constitution of India. Therefore, the

Court held that the primary relief must be in the nature of restitution and the courts

can, in rare and exceptional circumstances, grant admission to the student in the

same academic year even after the last prescribed date for admission. The

relevant part of the decision is extracted below:
13. In light of the discussion/observations made hereinabove, a
                   meritorious candidate/student who has been denied an admission
                   in MBBS course illegally or irrationally by the authorities for no fault
                   of his/her and who has approached the Court in time and so as to
                   see that such a meritorious candidate may not have to suffer for no
                   fault of his/her, we answer the reference as under:
13.1. That in a case where candidate/student has approached the
                   court at the earliest and without any delay and that the question is
                   with respect to the admission in medical course all the efforts shall
                   be made by the court concerned to dispose of the proceedings by
                   giving priority and at the earliest.
13.2. Under exceptional circumstances, if the court finds that there
                   is no fault attributable to the candidate and the candidate has
                   pursued his/her legal right expeditiously without any delay and there


5   (2020) 17 SCC 465
10
CA 6809/2022
is fault only on the part of the authorities and/or there is apparent
               breach of rules and regulations as well as related principles in the
               process of grant of admission which would violate the right of
               equality and equal treatment to the competing candidates and if the
               time schedule prescribed — 30th September, is over, to do the
               complete justice, the Court under exceptional circumstances and in
               rarest of rare cases direct the admission in the same year by
               directing to increase the seats, however, it should not be more than
               one or two seats and such admissions can be ordered within
               reasonable time i.e. within one month from 30th September i.e. cut-
off date and under no circumstances, the Court shall order any
               admission in the same year beyond 30th October. However, it is
               observed that such relief can be granted only in exceptional
               circumstances and in the rarest of rare cases. In case of such an
               eventuality, the Court may also pass an order cancelling the
               admission given to a candidate who is at the bottom of the merit list
               of the category who, if the admission would have been given to a
               more meritorious candidate who has been denied admission
               illegally, would not have got the admission, if the Court deems it fit
               and proper, however, after giving an opportunity of hearing to a
               student whose admission is sought to be cancelled.
13.3. In case the Court is of the opinion that no relief of admission
               can be granted to such a candidate in the very academic year and
               wherever it finds that the action of the authorities has been arbitrary
               and in breach of the rules and regulations or the prospectus
               affecting the rights of the students and that a candidate is found to
               be meritorious and such candidate/student has approached the
               court at the earliest and without any delay, the court can mould the
               relief and direct the admission to be granted to such a candidate in
               the next academic year by issuing appropriate directions by
               directing to increase in the number of seats as may be considered
               appropriate in the case and in case of such an eventuality and if it is
               found that the management was at fault and wrongly denied the
               admission to the meritorious candidate
,
in that case
, the Court may
               direct to reduce the number of seats in the management quota of
               that year, meaning thereby the student/students who was/were
               denied admission illegally to be accommodated in the next
               academic year out of the seats allotted in the management quota.

               13.4. Grant of the compensation could be an additional remedy but
               not a substitute for restitutional remedies. Therefore, in an
               appropriate case the Court may award the compensation to such a
               meritorious candidate who for no fault of his/her has to lose one full
               academic year and who could not be granted any relief of admission
               in the same academic year.
13.5. It is clarified that the aforesaid directions pertain to admission
               in MBBS course only and we have not dealt with postgraduate
               medical course.
11
CA 6809/2022
21.    Further, this Court on numerous occasions has held that courts cannot issue

directions to increase seats beyond the sanctioned strength decided by the NMC.6

In
National Medical Commission v. Mothukuru Sriyah Koumudi7
, a two-judge

bench of this Court was tasked with deciding the correctness of the judgment of

the High Court directing the NMC to create an additional seat and grant admission

to the respondent student, who was illegally denied admission to a post-graduate

medical course. This Court disagreed with the decision of the High Court by holding

that courts cannot issue directions to create seats and increase annual intake

capacity beyond those sanctioned by the NMC.
Further, it referred to
S. Krishna

Sradha
(supra) to grant monetary compensation of Rs. 10 lakhs to the respondent

student for loss of one academic year and also granted her admission for the next

academic year in the management quota of the concerned college.
22.    In the instant proceedings, the High Court understandably held that the first

respondent was wrongfully denied admission in the medical college run by the

appellants. However, the admissions for the MBBS degree courses were

concluded on 25 March 2022 for the academic session 2021-2022. Undoubtedly,

there were no laches on the part of the first respondent in moving the High Court

since she had instituted a writ petition on 29 March 2022. Nonetheless, by the time

the High Court decided the issue, the admissions had already been concluded and

the last prescribed date for admission was over.
6
Medical Council of India v. State of Karnataka
(1998) 6 SCC 131;
Satyabrata Sahoo v. State of
Orissa
(2012) 8 SCC 203;
Faiza Choudhary v. State of J&K
(2012) 10 SCC 149;
Aneesh D Lawande
v. State of Goa
(2014) 1 SCC 554
7 2020 SCC OnLine SC 992
12
CA 6809/2022
23.   The fifth, sixth, and seventh respondents who were the three students who

were upgraded in terms of clause 4 of the prospectus were impleaded as parties

to the proceedings. The issue however does not rest only with these three

students. The prescribed intake capacity of the medical college of the appellants

is 150 students. The consequence of the direction of the High Court to redraw the

merit list and grant admission to the first respondent gives rise to certain unfeasible

outcomes. The total strength of the students admitted for the MBBS course for the

academic session 2021-2022 would stand increased to 151 students and one of

the three students among the fifth, sixth and seventh respondents would be

reverted to the management quota, but the matter would not rest there. Once the

intake of the college increases to 151 seats after the admission of the first

respondent, one student who would be the lowest in merit would have to give way

for the admission which is directed to the first respondent. That student would not

have been impleaded as a party to the proceedings before the High Court.

Compounded with the above position is the fact that five months of the first session

for the MBBS degree course for the academic year 2021-2022 have been

completed and the admitted students are pursuing their studies. In this view of the

matter, it may not be possible for this Court to accede to the direction of the High

Court for the grant of admission to the first respondent. The alternative submission

which has been urged by Mr Aseem Mehrotra cannot also be acceded to because

it would not be appropriate for this Court to direct that admission be granted to the

first respondent against the seats available for the ensuing academic year 2022-

2023. Those seats should be filled on a competitive basis in accordance with the

governing prospectus.
13
CA 6809/2022
24.   However, we are clearly of the view that the first respondent cannot be left

without any remedy. She has suffered though she ranked higher than the fifth, sixth

and seventh respondents in merit in the NEET-UG 2021. She has been deprived

of the admission to which she was entitled under clause 3 of the prospectus by an

erroneous interpretation. Although the first respondent is currently pursuing her

BDS course in a government dental college, she aspires to a seat for the MBBS

degree course. The loss of one full academic year of the MBBS degree course can

only be partially compensated in terms of money. However, we are clearly of the

view that compensation must be provided to the first respondent and she cannot

be left in the lurch having lost a seat for admission for the MBBS degree course.
25.   On a considered view of the matter, we direct that the appellants shall pay

to the first respondent compensation quantified at Rs 10 lakhs within a period of

one month from the date of this order. Hence, for the reasons which are indicated

above, we are in agreement with the interpretation which has been placed by the

High Court on the interplay between clauses 3 and 4 of the prospectus. However,

for the reasons set out above, we set aside the direction of the High Court for

redrawing of the merit list and to grant admission to the first respondent and

substitute it with the direction that the appellants shall pay compensation quantified

at Rs 10 lakhs to the first respondent. The compensation shall be paid within one

month.
14
CA 6809/2022
26.    The appeal is partially allowed in the above terms.
27.    Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
.....………....….......………………........J.
                                                  [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                ..……....…........……………….…........J.
                                                  [Hima Kohli]




      New Delhi;
September 19, 2022
      CKB
15