[Cites
10
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Securities And Exchange Board Of India vs Abhijit Rajan on 19 September, 2022
Author:
V. Ramasubramanian
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Indira Banerjee
REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     Civil Appeal No.563 of 2020


  SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA                             ...APPELLANT(S)

                                               VERSUS

  ABHIJIT RAJAN                                                      ...RESPONDENT(S)



                                           JUDGMENT
V. Ramasubramanian
1.                  The Securities and Exchange Board of India has come up with the

  above appeal, challenging an Order of the Securities Appellate Tribunal,

  by which the Order of its Whole Time Member (for short “WTM”)

  directing the respondent to disgorge the amount of unlawful gains made

  by him, was set aside.
2.                  We have heard Mr. Arvind P. Datar, learned senior counsel for the
Signature Not Verified
appellant and Mr. Somasekhar Sundaresan, learned counsel appearing
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2022.09.19
16:39:22 IST
Reason:
1
for the respondent.
3.   The background facts leading to the above appeal are as follows:
(i)     The   respondent   herein   was   the   Chairman    and
                  Managing Director of a company by name Gammon
                  Infrastructure Projects Limited (hereinafter referred to
                  as “GIPL”) till September 20, 2013. Thereafter, he
                  ceased to be the Chairman Managing Director, but
                  continued to be a Director of the Company.
(ii)    In the year 2012 GIPL was awarded a contract by
                  National Highways Authority of India. The total cost of
                  the project was Rs.1648 crores. For the execution of
                  the project, GIPL set up a special purpose vehicle
                  called Vijayawada Gundugolanu Road Project Private
                  Limited (“VGRPPL”).
(iii)   Similarly,   another   company    by    name    Simplex
                  Infrastructure Limited (SIL) was awarded a contract by
                  NHAI in Jharkhand and West Bengal and the total cost
                  of the project was Rs.940 crores. For the execution of
                  the project, SIL set up a special purpose vehicle called
                  Maa Durga Expressways Private Limited (MDEPL).
(iv)    GIPL entered into two shareholders agreements with
                  SIL. Under these agreements, GIPL was to invest in
                  MDEPL and SIL was to invest in VGRPPL for their
2
respective projects. The mutual investments were to be
         tuned in such a manner that GIPL and SIL would hold
         49% equity interest in each other’s projects.
(v)      However, on 9.08.2013 the Board of Directors of GIPL
         passed a resolution authorizing the termination of both
         shareholders agreements.
(vi)     On 22.8.2013, the respondent sold about 144 lakhs
         shares (approx.) held by him in GIPL, for an aggregate
         value of approximately Rs.10.28 crores.
(vii)    On 30.08.2013 GIPL made a disclosure to the National
         Stock exchange of India and BSE regarding the
         termination of two shareholders agreements.
(viii)   On 20.09.2013 the respondent resigned from the post
         of Chairman and Managing Director of GIPL.
(ix)     Pursuant to an input received from the National Stock
         Exchange, about the aforesaid transaction and the
         possibility of the trading having taken place on the
         basis of unpublished price sensitive information, SEBI
         conducted a preliminary enquiry. After completion of
         the preliminary enquiry, SEBI passed an ex­parte
         interim order on 17.07.2014 holding prima facie that
         the respondent violated the provisions of Section
         12A(d) and (e) of
The Securities and Exchange Board of
         India Act, 1992
(hereinafter referred to as “SEBI Act,
3
1992”) and consequently restraining the respondent
      from buying, selling or dealing in securities and
      accessing the security markets directly or indirectly.
This ex­parte interim order was also confirmed by a
      confirmatory order dated 23.03.2015, passed after
      providing an opportunity of hearing to the respondent.
      The appeal filed by the respondent against the said
      confirmatory order was dismissed as withdrawn on
      4.02.2016.
(x)   In the interregnum, SEBI completed the investigation
      and issued certain directions on 21.03.2016, followed
      by a show cause notice dated 29.03.2016. The show
      cause notice was addressed not only to the respondent
      herein,   but   also       to   another   Company   by   name
      Consolidated Infrastructure Company Private Limited
      and two of its Directors. The noticees filed their replies
      and after giving an opportunity of hearing to the
      noticees, the WTM passed an Order dated 13.07.2016.
      By the said order the WTM held the respondent herein
      guilty of insider trading and hence liable to disgorge
      the amount of unlawful gains made by him to the tune
      of Rs.1.09 crores. The show cause notices issued to the
      others, namely, Consolidated Infrastructure Company
      Private Limited and its Directors were closed without
4
any directions, on the ground that no case was made
                 out against them.
(xi)   Challenging the said order of the WTM, the respondent
                 filed a statutory appeal before the Securities Appellate
                 Tribunal. The appeal was allowed by the Tribunal by
                 an Order dated 08.11.2019 and it is against the said
                 order that SEBI has come up with the above appeal.
4.   The reasons for the Securities Appellate Tribunal allowing the

appeal of the respondent are three­fold, namely, (i) that the information

regarding the termination of the two shareholders agreements, was not

actually a price sensitive information, since the investment of GIPL in

Simplex Project, to the tune of Rs. 4.9 crores constituted only 0.05% of

GIPL’s order book value at the end of August, 2013 and only 0.7% of its

turnover for the financial year; (ii) that in any case the respondent was

in dire need to sell the shares at that time for the purpose of CDR

(Corporate Debt Restructuring) package and hence he cannot be said to

have indulged in trading on the basis of information within his

knowledge; and (iii) that there was no reason why SEBI did not take into

account the last trade price of 03.09.2013, but chose the price as on
5
04.09.2013.
5.   Assailing the order of the Securities Appellate Tribunal, it is argued

by Mr. Arvind P. Datar, learned senior counsel for the appellant:­
(a)   that proportionality is a dangerous and subjective
                ground in matters involving insider trading, especially
                since one­third of the total number of directors of a
                listed company are independent directors and even
                transactions involving thousands of crores might be a
                minor proportion to the turnover, if the company is very
                large in size;
(b)   that Regulations 3 and 4 contain an absolute prohibition
                against insider trading and such a statutory prohibition
                cannot be diluted by arguing that the total value of the
                contracts terminated by the company was just a minor
                percentage of the order book value and the total
                turnover of the company;
(c)   that in any case the total value of the contracts
                terminated on both sides was nearly Rs.2600 crores
                (Rs.1648 crores + 940 crores) and hence the information
                relating to the termination of the contracts was definitely
                likely to materially affect the price of the securities of the
                company under
Regulation 2(ha)
;
(d)   That Explanation (vi) under
Section 2(ha)
which speaks
6
about “significant changes in policies, plans or operations
      of the company” cannot limit the scope of the main part
      of the definition and in this case as a matter of fact the
      price of the share dropped in just one day and the
      respondent avoided a loss of Rs.85 lakhs;
(e)   that the de minimis syndicate has no application to
      insider   trading,   as   it   introduces   an   element   of
      subjectivity;
(f)   that bona fide intentions or grounds of necessity, such
      as those pleaded in this case, cannot frustrate the object
      of strict ban on insider trading, especially when the
      expression “lawful excuse” as used in about 88 Central
      Statutes to justify non­compliance, is conspicuously
      absent in the Statute on hand;
(g)   that in any case, SEBI took note of the situation in
      which the respondent was placed, warranting the
      necessity to sell the shares and hence confined the final
      order only to disgorgement, which is merely in the
      nature of restitutionary relief;
(h)   that the intimation regarding the termination of the
      contracts was given to the Bombay Stock Exchange at
      1.05 p.m. and to NSE at 2.40 p.m. on 03.09.2013 and
      the trading concluded at 3:30 p.m. and hence the
      adoption of the closing price on 03.09.2013 would not
7
correctly determine either the gains made or the losses
                averted; and
(i)   that therefore, the question of SEBI taking the closing
                price as on 03.09.2013 did not arise.
6.   Responding to the above submissions made on behalf of the

appellant, Mr. Somasekhar Sundaresan, learned counsel for the

respondent raised the following contentions:­
(a)   that the primary object of Insider Trading Regulations
                anywhere in the world is to prohibit an insider from
                taking advantage of asymmetrical access to unpublished
                price sensitive information over others who do not have
                such access;
(b)   that the question whether an information is price
                sensitive or not, would depend upon its potency to
                materially impact, upon publication, the price of the
                securities;
(c)   that therefore by its very nature, it is barely a question
                of fact or at the most, a mixed question of fact and law
                which will not fall within the scope of
Section 15Z
of
                SEBI Act, 1992 warranting interference by this Court;
(d)   that one of the key factors which the Courts take into
                account while interpreting the circumstances revolving
8
around transactions such as the one in question, is the
                           purpose for which the transaction was effected;
(e)      that apart from looking into the purpose of the
                           transaction, Courts have also taken into account other
                           circumstances such as the scale of the transaction,
                           pattern of trading and honesty in responses during the
                           proceedings               as      is       evident        from        the       decisions           in
(
i) Chintalapati Raju vs. SEBI
;1 (
ii) Rajiv Gandhi
                           vs. SEBI
;2 (iii) Miller vs. Pezzani3; and (
iv) SEBI vs.

                           Kanaiyalal Baldevbhai Patel4
;
(f)      that in the case on hand, the information in question,
                           namely, the termination of the Agreements actually
                           resulted in GIPL gaining total control of a larger project
                           worth Rs.1648 crores and that in other words what was
                           lost by the termination was far lesser than what was
                           gained and hence the information relating to the
                           termination of the Agreements was actually a favourable
                           and not adverse information;
(g)      that as seen from SEBI’s own computation, the value of
                           the contract terminated was just 3.1% to 4.1% and
                           hence it cannot be reasonably expected to have a


1    (2018) 7 SCC 443
2    (Appeal No.50/2007 decided by the Ld. SAT on 09.05.2008) – (Civil Appeal 5302 of 2008 against this order was dismissed)
3    (A decision of the US Court of Appeals)-the US Supreme Court refused to entertain a challenge to it
4   (2017) 15 SCC 1
9
material impact on the market price of the shares of
      GIPL;
(h)   that    GIPL’s   investments   in   the   project   of   SIL
      represented 0.05% of GIPL’s order book and 0.7% of its
      turnover;
(i)   that a project with a small percentage of the order book
      and a miniscule percentage of the turnover cannot ipso
      facto become material for information about it to become
      UPSI;
(j)   that on facts, the shares sold by the respondent on
      22.08.2013 constituted 0.99% of the share capital of
      GIPL;
(k)   that what was sold by the respondent was 70% of his
      total shareholding in GIPL and the sale was not an
      isolated one but coupled with the sale of multiple other
      assets to raise money to fund promoters’ contribution to
      the CDR package of Gammon India Limited, the listed
      parent company of GIPL;
(l)   that the failure of the respondent to meet the obligation
      towards CDR package would have led to GIL filing for
      bankruptcy;
(m)   that every penny of the sale proceeds of the shares, was
      transferred      by    the   respondent     towards      the
      implementation of CDR package and hence it is a
10
misconception to think that he made unlawful gains
                that ought to be disgorged;
(n)   that SEBI itself has accepted the fact that the sale
                proceeds were used for funding the CDR package;
(o)   that SEBI itself exonerated the co­noticee, namely,
                Consolidated Infrastructure Company Private Limited,
                on the ground that its sale of shares was on account of a
                pressing need to meet a margin shortfall to its stock
                broker;
(p)   that SEBI thus applied two different yardsticks, one in
                respect of the respondent and another in respect of the
                co­noticee      in   the    very   same   proceeding,   which
                necessitated interference by the Tribunal; and
(q)   that therefore the present appeal does not raise a
                substantial question of law and that in any case the
                order of the Appellate Tribunal does not call for any
                interference.
7.   From the rival contentions, we think that the questions arising for

our determination can be formulated as follows:
(i)   whether the information regarding the decision of the
          Board of Directors of GIPL to terminate the aforesaid two
          contracts can be characterized as “price sensitive information”
11
within the meaning of
Section 2(ha)
of the Securities and
          Exchange Board of India (Prohibition of Insider Trading)
          Regulations 1992, (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Regulations’);
(ii)   whether the sale by the respondent of the equity shares
          held by him in GIPL, under peculiar and compelling
          circumstances in which he was placed, would fall within the
          mischief of ‘insider trading’ in terms of
Regulation 3(i)
read
          with
Regulation 4
of the Regulations;
(iii) whether SEBI should have taken into account the last
          trade price of the day on which information was disclosed
          instead of the trade price of the next day;
Question Nos.1 & 2
8.   Before we proceed to analyze the points, we must note that this is

an appeal under
Section 15Z
of SEBI Act, 1992 and we are concerned in

such appeals with “any question of law arising out of the order of the

Tribunal”. The focus of
Section 15Z
is on ‘any question of law’ and not

‘any substantial question of law’. Keeping this in mind, we shall now

proceed further.
9.
The SEBI Act, 1992
is intended, as seen from its preamble, “to

provide for the establishment of a Board to protect the interests of
12
investors in securities and to promote the development of and to regulate

the securities market”. As a matter of fact, the Securities and Exchange

Board of India was established even before the Act was enacted. Since

the Board was already in place, the Parliament enacted the Act with a

view among other things, to vest SEBI with statutory powers.
10. In exercise of the powers conferred by
Section 30
of the Act, the

Board issued a set of Regulations known as “Securities and Exchange

Board of India (Prohibition of Insider Trading) Regulations, 1992”, with

the previous approval of the Central Government.
Regulation 2(ha)
of

these Regulations defines the expression “price sensitive information” as

follows:­

            “2(ha) “price sensitive information” means any information
            which relates directly or indirectly to a company and which if
            published is likely to materially affect the price of securities
            of company.
Explanation.—The following shall be deemed to be price
            sensitive information :­
(i) periodical financial results of the company;
(ii) intended declaration of dividends (both interim and
                     final);
(iii) issue of securities or buy­back of securities;
(iv) any major expansion plans or execution of new
                    projects.
(v) amalgamation, mergers or takeovers;
(vi) disposal of the whole or substantial part of the
13
undertaking;
(vii) and significant changes in policies, plans or operations
                  of the company.”
11.
Regulation 2 (k)
defines the expression “unpublished” as follows:
“Unpublished” means information which is not published by
           the company or its agents and is not specific in nature.
Explanation.– Speculative reports in print or electronic media
           shall not be considered as published information.”
12.
Regulation 3
imposes a prohibition on dealing, communicating or

counseling on matters relating to insider trading. It reads as follows:­

             “3. No insider shall –
(i)    either on his own behalf or on behalf of any other
                    person, deal in securities of a company listed on any
                    stock exchange when in possession of any
                    unpublished price sensitive information; or
(ii)   communicate or counsel or procure directly or
                    indirectly   any     unpublished price   sensitive
                    information to any person who while in possession
                    of such unpublished price sensitive information
                    shall not deal in securities :
Provided that nothing contained above shall be applicable
             to any communication required in the ordinary course of
             business or profession or employment or under any law.”
13.
Regulation 4
declares the circumstances under which a person

shall be held guilty of insider trading. It reads as follows:­
14
“4. Any insider who deals in securities in contravention of
            the provisions of regulation 3 or 3A shall be guilty of insider
            trading.”
14. Interestingly, the Regulations do not define the words, “insider

trading”. But Regulation 4 declares a person guilty of insider trading if,
(i) he happens to be an insider; and (ii) if he deals in securities in

contravention of
Regulation 3
.
15. The word “insider” is defined in
Regulation 2(e)
as follows:­

            “(e) “insider” means any person who,
(i) is or was connected with the company or is deemed to
            have been connected with the company and is reasonably
            expected to have access to unpublished price sensitive
            information in respect of securities of a company, or
(ii) has received or has had access to such unpublished price
            sensitive information.
16. The words “dealing in securities” is defined in
Regulation 2(d)
as

follows:­

            “(d) “dealing in securities” means an act of subscribing,
            buying, selling or agreeing to subscribe, buy, sell or deal in
            any securities by any person either as principal or agent.”
17. We may note at this stage that the Regulations underwent

sweeping    changes      through     SEBI      (Insider   Trading)    (Amendment)

Regulations 2002, w.e.f. 20.02.2002. Prior to the amendment made in
15
the year 2002, the words, “unpublished price sensitive information” were

defined through a single definition clause, namely
Regulation 2(k)
as

follows:­

            “2(k) Unpublished price sensitive information means any
            information which related to the following matters or is of
            concern, directly or indirectly, to a company, and is not
            generally known or published by such company for general
            information, but which if published or known, is likely to
            materially affect the price of securities of that company in
            the market –
(i)     financial results (both half­yearly and annual) of the
                    company;
(ii)    intended declaration of dividend (both interim/final);
(iii)   issue of shares by way of public rights, bonus etc.;
(iv)    any major expansion plans or execution of new
                    projects;
(v)     amalgamations, mergers and takeovers;
            (vi)    disposal of the whole or substantially the whole of the
                    undertaking;
(vii)   such other information as may affect the earnings of
                    the company.”
18. But      under      the   Amendment         Regulations,    2002,    the   word,

“unpublished” alone is defined in
Regulation 2(k)
and the rest of the

words “price sensitive information” is defined in
Regulation 2(ha)
.
19. The important modifications brought forth under the Amendment

Regulations of 2002 to the definition of what is unpublished price

sensitive information are two­fold namely, (i) that the definition of words
16
unpublished is expanded; and (ii) that even significant changes in

policies, plans and operations of the company are brought within the

definition of the expression “price sensitive information”, through a

deeming provision in the Explanation under
Regulation 2(ha)
.
20. Therefore in view of the Regulations discussed above, a person can

be held guilty of violating
Regulation 3
, only if the following conditions

are satisfied:­
(i)    He must be an insider within the meaning of the word
           “insider”, under
Regulation 2(e)
, by virtue of his past or
           present connection or deemed connection with the company
           and he is also reasonably expected either to have had access
           to UPSI or has received such information;
(ii)   The information that such a person received or has had
           access or reasonably expected to have had access should be
           unpublished, in the sense that it was not published by the
           company or its agent or though published, it was not specific
           in nature;
(iii) Such unpublished information should fall within the
           definition of the expression “price sensitive information” within
           the meaning of Section 2(ha) of the Regulations; and
(iv) He must have indulged in trading, either by dealing in
17
securities of the company or in communicating or counseling
          or procuring directly or indirectly any such information to any
          person.
21. In other words, to find out if a person is guilty of violation of
Regulation 3
, the Court should address itself to the following questions

namely, (i) is he an insider?; (ii) did he possess or have access to any

information relating to the company?; (iii) whether such information

was price sensitive?; (iv) whether the information was unpublished?;

and (v) whether he dealt in securities by subscribing, buying, selling or

agreeing to do any of these things in any securities?
22. Before we proceed to find an answer to the above questions in the

context of the present appeal we must take note of one important fact

namely, that the price sensitivity of an information has a correlation

directly to the materiality of the impact that it can have on the price of

the securities of the company. An information may materially affect the

price of the security of a company either positively or negatively. The

impact may be beneficial or adverse. The information should have the

potential either to catapult the price of the securities of the company to
18
a higher level or to make it plunge. The effect can be bullish or bearish.

But the effect should be material and not completely insignificant.
23. Keeping the above parameters in mind if we come to the facts of

the case on hand, it will be clear, (i) that the respondent was certainly

an insider, as he was a Chairman and Managing Director of GIPL till

20.09.2013 and was a party to the resolution of the Board of Directors

passed on 09.08.2013 authorising the termination of the shareholders’

Agreements; (ii) that the information relating to the termination of both

the shareholders’ Agreements that the respondent had, would certainly

fall under the category of “significant changes in policies, plans or

operations of the Company” under
Regulation 2(ha)(vii)
; (iii) that the

respondent dealt in securities by selling 144 lakhs of shares on

22.08.2013, which was a month before his resignation as Chairman and

Managing Director; and (iv) that the termination of the shareholders’

Agreements on 09.08.2013 was disclosed to the NSE and BSE on

30.08.2013, after the sale of the shares, which made the information

relating to the termination of the Agreements unpublished as on the
19
date of the sale.
24. Therefore, it may appear at first blush, that the respondent, who

was an insider and who possessed information which was both

unpublished and price sensitive, was guilty of the charge of insider

trading as he undoubtedly dealt in securities.
25.   But the catch lies in understanding the true scope of Explanation
(vii) under
Regulation 2(ha)
. As we have seen earlier, the main part of
Regulation 2(ha)
defines “price sensitive information” to mean any

information, which relates directly or indirectly to a company and which

if published is likely to materially affect the price of securities of a

company. The Explanation under
Regulation 2(ha)
creates a deeming

fiction and it makes 7 items of information listed thereunder as price

sensitive information.
26. It may be interesting to note that out of the 7 items of information

listed under the Explanation, all the others except Item No.(vii) are likely

to have an impact directly upon the financial strength of the company.

Item No.(vii) stands apart, in that it is very broad and general in nature.
20
While nothing more is required to show that the information listed in

Items (i) to (vi) of the Explanation under
Regulation 2(ha)
is likely to

materially affect the price of securities of a company, the same is not the

case insofar as the information in Item No.(vii) is concerned. In other

words, the likelihood of the price of the securities getting materially

affected, is inherent in Items (i) to (vi) namely,

             “(i) periodical financial results of the company;
(ii) intended declaration of dividends (both interim and
                    final);
(iii) issue of securities or buy­back of securities;
(iv) any major expansion plans or execution of new
                   projects.
(v) amalgamation, mergers or takeovers;
(vi) disposal of the whole or substantial part of the
                   undertaking;”

But such is not the case with the information in Item No.(vii).
27. Therefore, while dealing with a case falling under Explanation (vii)

of
Regulation 2(ha)
, one may have to see whether there was any

likelihood of the said information materially affecting the price of the

securities of the company. Additionally, the activity in which the insider

was involved also determines his culpability for violation of Regulation
3. For instance, the sale by a person in possession of price sensitive

information, at a time when the price is likely to take a plunge, will
21
certainly be an attempt at taking advantage of or encashing the

information. Similarly the purchase by a person in possession of UPSI

at a time when the price of the security is about to skyrocket, will

certainly be an attempt to take advantage.
28. But the above logic cannot be applied to cases which fall on the

opposite side of the spectrum. For instance, the sale by a person at a

time when the price of the securities is likely to shoot up on account of

price sensitive information coming into the public domain or the

purchase by a person at a time when the price of the shares is likely to

go downward due to price sensitive information getting published,

cannot come under the category of insider trading. While it is true that

the actual gaining of profit or sufferance of loss in the transaction, may

not provide an escape route for an insider against the charge of violation

of
Regulation 3
, one cannot ignore normal human conduct. If a person

enters into a transaction which is surely likely to result in loss, he

cannot be accused of insider trading. In other words, the actual gain or

loss is immaterial, but the motive for making a gain is essential.
22
29. The words, “likely to materially affect the price” appearing in the

main part of
Regulation 2(ha)
gain significance for the simple reason

that profit motive, if not actual profit should be the motivating factor for

a person to indulge in insider trading. This is why the information in

Item No.(vii) of the Explanation under
Regulation 2(ha)
may have to be

examined with reference to the words “likely to materially affect the

price”. Keeping this in mind let us now come back to the facts of the

case.
30. GIPL was awarded a contract for the execution of a project, whose

total cost was admittedly Rs. 1648 crores. SIL was awarded a contract

for a project whose cost was Rs. 940 crores. Both GIPL and SIL created

Special Purpose Vehicles and then they entered into two shareholders

Agreements. Under these Agreements, GIPL and SIL will have to make

investments in the Special Purpose Vehicles created by each other, in

such a manner that each of them will hold 49% equity interest in the

other's project.
23
31. It means that GIPL could have acquired 49% equity interest in the

project worth Rs. 940 crores and SIL would have acquired 49% equity

interest in a project worth Rs. 1648 crore.
32.   In arithmetical terms, the acquisition by GIPL, of an equity

interest in SIL’s project was worth Rs. 460 crores approximately.

Similarly, the acquisition by SIL, of the equity interest in GIPL's

project was worth Rs. 807.52 crores. Therefore, the cancellation of the

shareholders Agreements resulted in GIPL gaining very hugely in

terms of order book value. In such circumstances an ordinary man of

prudence would expect an increase in the value of the shares of GIPL

and would wait for the market trend to show itself up, if he actually

desired to indulge in insider trading. But the respondent did not wait

for the information about the market trend, after the information

became public. The reason given by him, which is also accepted by

the WTM and the Tribunal is that he had to dispose of his shares as

well as certain other properties for the purpose of honouring a CDR

package.   It is on record that if the CDR package had not gone
24
through successfully, the parent company of GIPL namely, Gammon

India Ltd., could have gone for bankruptcy.
33. Therefore,    the     Tribunal   was      right   in    thinking    that     the

respondent had no motive or intention to make undeserved gains by

encashing on the unpublished price sensitive information that he

possessed.
34. As a matter of fact, the Tribunal found that the closing price of

shares rose, after the disclosure of the information. This shows that

the unpublished price sensitive information was such that it was

likely to be more beneficial to the shareholders, after the disclosure

was made. Any person desirous of indulging in insider trading, would

have waited till the information went public, to sell his holdings. The

respondent did not do this, obviously on account of a pressing

necessity.
35. We agree with the contention of Shri Arvind P. Datar, learned

senior counsel for the appellant, that the allegation of insider trading

cannot be measured in terms of the value of the contracts terminated

and   the    percentage    of   shares    sold   and       that   the   theory    of
25
proportionality cannot be applied in such cases. The magnitude of

what an insider did, in relation to the size of the company, may not

have a bearing upon the question whether someone indulged in

insider trading or not.   But what is sought to be encashed by the

insider should be an information which if published is likely to

materially affect the price of the securities of the company.
36. The contention of Shri Arvind P. Datar, learned senior counsel,

that the total value of the contracts terminated on both sides was

nearly Rs.2600/­ crores (Rs.1648 crores + Rs.940 crores) and that

therefore the information relating to the termination of the contracts

was surely likely to materially affect the price of the securities of the

company, is unsustainable for the simple reason that the net effect of

the termination of both the contracts, for GIPL was a positive

advantage of about Rs.800 crores. We have already provided in

paragraph 32 above, the simple arithmetics of the whole transaction,

which put GIPL in a more advantageous position after the termination

of the contract.
26
37. It is true that the de minimis Rule has no application to insider

trading, as it introduces an element of subjectivity. This is why we

have not gone on the basis that GIPL’s investments in the project of

SIL represented 0.05% of GIPL’s order book value and 0.7% of its

turnover. We have gone on the basis that the termination of both the

contracts put GIPL in a more advantageous position, in which one

would have expected the price of the securities to soar. The normal

human conduct would be to wait for this event to happen. This event

could have happened only after the publication of the information in

question. The fact that the respondent did not wait to take advantage

of the situation, convinces us that his intention was not to indulge in

insider trading.
38. Shri Arvind P. Datar, learned senior counsel is right in pointing

out that in as many as 88 Central Statutes, the expression “lawful

excuse” is used as a justification for non­compliance. But the same is

not used in
SEBI Act, 1992
or the Regulations issued thereunder.

Therefore, we have not tested the conduct of the respondent solely on

the argument of necessity. But we have taken note of the admitted
27
position that the respondent had to save the parent company going

bankrupt, by selling his stock, at a time when he had every reason to

wait for the information regarding the termination of the contracts to

go public. This is not a case where the respondent has come up with

an excuse to justify his action that was intended to give him a

financial advantage. This is a case where a man of ordinary prudence

would have expected the price of the shares to go up, after the

information became public, due to the impact that the information

was likely to have on the turnover/net worth of the company.
39. The contention of the appellant that SEBI took note of the situation

in which the respondent was placed and the dire need that he had to

sell the shares and that therefore SEBI confined the final order only to

disgorgement, is neither here nor there. This argument is actually an

argument of convenience. It so happened in this case that according to

SEBI the closing price of the stock on 03.09.2013 showed favourable

position for the respondent and SEBI was able to calculate as though

the respondent made a profit.     But if a company is likely to gain

strength by making a significant change in its policy, the price of its
28
securities is likely to shoot up. Despite such a natural phenomena, if a

person sells his stocks without waiting for the market trend to show up,

it can only be taken as a sale, devoid of any desire to make unlawful

gains, even if it cannot be termed as a distress sale.
40.
In
SEBI vs. Kishore R. Ajmera5
, this Court was concerned with

the question as to what is the degree of proof required to hold a broker

liable for fraudulent/manipulative practices under SEBI (Prohibition of

Fraudulent and Unfair Trade Practices relating to Securities Market)

Regulations, 2003 as well as the Conduct Regulations of 1992. After

taking note of the fact that
SEBI Act
and the Regulations framed

thereunder are intended to protect the interest of investors and that the

provisions of the Act and the Regulations have to be understood and

interpreted in that light, this Court held in Para 26 as follows:­

               “It is the judicial duty to take note of the immediate
               and proximate facts and circumstances surrounding
               the events on which the charges/allegations are
               founded and to reach what would appear to the Court
               to be a reasonable conclusion therefrom. The test
               would always be that what inferential process that a
               reasonable/prudent man would adopt to arrive at a
               conclusion.”



5   (2016) 6 SCC 368
29
41. While dealing with yet another case arising out of allegations of

violation of SEBI (Prohibition of Fraudulent and Unfair Trade Practices

relating to Securities Market) Regulations, 2003, this Court held in
Kanaiyalal Baldevbhai Patel
(Supra) (para­58) that the volume, the

nature of the trading and the timing of the transactions may have to be

taken into account to find out whether there was an attempt at

encashing the benefit of the information that the insider was in

possession.
It is no doubt true that the Court clarified in paragraph 62

of its decision in
Kanaiyalal Baldevbhai Patel
(supra) that mens rea is

not an indispensable requirement to attract the rigor of FUTP

Regulations, 2003.   This Court held that the correct test is one of

preponderance of probabilities.
42. But an attempt by the insider to encash the benefit of the

information is not exactly the same as mens rea. Therefore, the Court

can always test whether the act of the insider in dealing with the

securities, was an attempt to take advantage of or encash the benefit of

the information in his possession. This is the test we have applied to

the case on hand.
30
43.
In
Chintalapati Srinivasa Raju
(supra), this Court approved the

minority judgment of the Securities Appellate Tribunal (in para 20),

which took note of the compelling circumstances under which the

individual was selling shares. The fact that this has been taken note of

by WTM as a mitigating factor, while passing a mere restitutionary

order, does not take away the validity of the defence taken by the

respondent.
44. Therefore, we are of the view on Question No.1 that the information

regarding the termination of the two contracts can be characterised as

price sensitive information, in that it was likely to place the existing

shareholders in an advantageous position, once the information came

into the public domain.       In such circumstances, our answer to

Question No.2 would be that the sale by the respondent, of the shares

held by him in GIPL would not fall within the mischief of insider trading,

as it was somewhat similar to a distress sale, made before the

information could have a positive impact on the price of the shares.
31
45. In view of our answers to Question Nos. 1 and 2, we are of the view

that there is no necessity to go into Question No.3.     Our answers to

Question Nos. 1 and 2 are sufficient to hold that the impugned order of

the Tribunal does not call for any interference. Therefore, the appeal is

dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.
…..…………....................J.
                                            (Indira Banerjee)




                                           .…..………......................J
                                            (V. Ramasubramanian)
NEW DELHI
SEPTEMBER 19, 2022
32