[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Vijaya vs State Rep By The Inspector Of Police on 15 September, 2022
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
Surya Kant
1

                                                                                        REPORTABLE

                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1573/2022
                      (@Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No.5139/2020)

     VIJAYA                                                                        Petitioner(s)

                                                            VERSUS


     STATE REP BY THE INSPECTOR OF POLICE                                          Respondent(s)

                                                   J U D G M E N T
SURYA KANT, J.
Leave granted.
2.                  The   appellant   is   wife   of    the     de­facto   complainant   Mani   @

     Allimuthu. After about 2 years of their marriage, the couple was

     blessed with a daughter. It appears that on account of appellant’s

     failure to cook sufficient food for her in­laws, who visited their

     house, a quarrel took place between the husband and the wife. The

     appellant, unfortunately, decided to commit suicide and consumed a

     poisonous substance, Odeuvanthlai, which she also administered to

     their 10 months old daughter. The husband of the appellant, namely,

     the de­facto complainant, had gone for work at that time and when

     he came back to his house after his work on 10­10­2012, he found

     both the appellant and their daughter unconscious. They were taken
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
to Vinayaga Mission Hospital, Salem where the baby girl died on
Date: 2022.09.22
11:53:09 IST
Reason:
13­10­2012. When the appellant gained consciousness, her purported

     Dying Declaration (Exhibit `P­20’) was recorded on 11­10­2012 by
2
learned Judicial Magistrate (P.W. 13). The appellant eventually

survived. The husband of the appellant had meanwhile reported the

matter to the Police, which led to registration of a case under
Sections 302
and
309
of the Indian Penal Code (in short ‘Code’)

against the appellant for causing the death of their daughter.
3.   The appellant was put on trial, in which 14 witnesses were

examined     from   the   prosecution       side,   besides    reliance    on   23

documents.
4.   The Principal Sessions Judge, Namakkal found the appellant

guilty of the offences under
Sections 304(1)
and
309
of the Code

and sentenced her under
Section 304(1)
to undergo imprisonment for

one year along with fine of Rs.5,000/­, in default whereof, she was

required to undergo further imprisonment for                  three   months. The

appellant was also sentenced to undergo imprisonment for six months

under
Section 309
of the Code along with fine of Rs.1,000/­.
5.   The   appellant      preferred   appeal    before   the     High   Court   of

Judicature at Madras, but her appeal was turned down by the High

Court on the following premise:­

     “10. On reading of the entire materials EX.P20 recorded by
     P.W. 2 stated that being the dying declaration at the time
     when she was admitted in the hospital, the learned
     Magistrate recorded the statement from the appellant. The
     appellant has clearly admitted that she consumed poison due
     to the stomach pain and also she gave the poison to the
     child. The statement under
Section 164
of Cr.P.C., made
     before the learned Judicial Magistrate, and the evidence of
     the doctor that she has consumed poison and the same was
     corroborated by the evidence of P.W.8. Therefore no other
     evidence is necessary to find out that the accused has
     committed the    offence.   The   medical   evidence   also
3
corroborated the same. The learned counsel for            the
     appellant would submit that the accused was admitted in   the
     Government hospital, Salem, but the medical certificate   was
     not produced. FIR also registered after three days from   the
     date of occurrence.
11. On considering the case, there was a wordy quarrel
     between the family members and due to the quarrel the
     accused suddenly taken the decision to consume poison and
     gave the same to her child also. Thereafter, she was
     admitted in Government hospital immediately. The statement
     recorded under
Section 164
of Cr.P.C., from the deceased
     which was marked as Ex.P20 and which was corroborated by
     the evidence of P.W.8 doctor who has given treatment to the
     deceased Kanishka and the accused Vijaya.”
6.   The question that arises for consideration is whether it is

tenable to uphold the conviction of the appellant solely on the

basis of her purported dying declaration (Exhibit `P20’) which also

appears to have been classified as a Statement under
Section 164
of

the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, considering that Appellant

has denied making any statement?
7.   In this regard, there has been a clear and consistent approach

taken by this Court toward a dying declaration when the individual

in question subsequently survives.
In
State of U.P. v. Veer Singh
(2004) 10 SCC 117, it was held:
“5. It is trite law that when maker of purported dying
     declaration survives the same is not statement under
Section 32
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (for short
     the '
Evidence Act
') but is a statement in terms of
Section 164
of the Code. It can be used under
Section 157
of the Evidence Act for the purpose of corroboration and
     under
Section 155
for the purpose of contradiction.”
4
8.     There are also some decisions of this Court which cast doubt

on    whether    such   a   statement   can   be    treated   as   a   confessional

statement.      We may, in this regard, rely upon two decisions,             i.e.,
(i) “Ramprasad vs State of Maharashtra, (1999) 5 SCC 30 and (ii)

“S. Arul Raja vs State of Tamil Nadu, (2010) 8 SCC 233.
9.     In Ramprasad (Supra) the bar on classifying a statement as a

dying declaration when the conveyer of the declaration does not

succumb to his/her injuries, was detailed as follows:
“We are in full agreement with the contention of the
       learned counsel that Ext.52 cannot be used as evidence
       under
Section 32
of the Evidence Act though it was
       recorded as a dying declaration. At the time when PW.1
       gave the statement he would have been under expectation
       of death but that is not sufficient to wiggle it into the
       cassette of
Section 32
. As long as the maker of the
       statement is alive it would remain only in the realm of a
       statement recorded during investigation.”
10.    The Court in S. Arul Raja (Supra) then went on to address the

issue    of     such    a   statement   being      treated    as   a   confessional

statement, by holding:
“40. This Court in the case of Sharawan Bhadaji Bhirad &
       Others v. State of Maharashtra reported in (2002) 10 SCC
       56 held that when a statement is recorded as a dying
       declaration and the victim survives, such statement need
       not stand the strict scrutiny of a dying declaration, but
       may be treated as a statement under Section 164, Cr.P.C.
41. Therefore, with the said statement inadmissible as a
       dying declaration, the question that arises is: whether
       the statement could be admissible either as a confession
       or as an extra­judicial confession?
42. The events surrounding the confession made by A1
       while in hospital, and more significantly, in police
       custody, are too ambiguous to support conviction of the
       appellant.
5
43.
Section 164
Cr.P.C. provides guidelines to be
      followed for taking the statement of accused as a
      confession. The one essential condition is that it must
      be made voluntarily and not under threat or coercion.
This Court in
Aloke Nath Dutta & Ors. v. State of West
      Bengal
reported in (2007) 12 SCC 230 held as under: ­


      "87. Confession ordinarily is admissible in evidence. It
      is a relevant fact. It can be acted upon. Confession may
      under certain circumstances and subject to law
laid down
      by
the superior judiciary from time to time form the
      basis for conviction.
It is, however, trite that for the
      said purpose the court has to satisfy itself in regard
      to:
(i) voluntariness of the confession; (ii) truthfulness of
      the confession; (iii) corroboration.”
11.   Hence, the focus of our inquiry is two­fold: i) Whether the

statement made by the Appellant, which does not qualify as a dying

declaration under
Section 32
of the Evidence Act but, rather, as a

statement under
Section 164
of                 the CrPC, may      be treated as      a

confession     statement;      and   ii)       Whether    there   is   corroborative

evidence that supports the prosecution’s case.
12.   At the outset, the subsequent denial by the Appellant of the

statement attributed to her is of relevance. It further appears

that PWs 1 & 5, Appellant’s husband who is also the complainant,

and   her   father­in­law,      have   both      turned     hostile.   However,     the

learned     Sessions   Judge    brushed    aside     this    factor    based   on   the

rationale that these individuals were, ultimately, interested in

ensuring that the Appellant was acquitted and hence resiled from

their earlier statements which had supported her guilt. The trail

court opined that the prosecution version of events was, by far,
6
the more plausible and logically resulted in the demise of the

Appellant’s daughter.
13.   Learned Senior Counsel, Mr. S. Nagamuthu, has vehemently urged

that the only basis for the conviction of Appellant after the

hostile   turn   of    this     class   of     witnesses,   was   the   purported

declaration   made     by     the   Appellant    while   she   was   admitted   in

hospital and the statement of the doctor entrusted with treating

the Appellant, PW8. However, he assails PW8’s statement as being

shorn of any particulars beyond the fact that he treated Appellant

and that both the Appellant and the deceased had consumed the same

poisonous substance.
14.   Undoubtedly     there    is   some   murkiness     surrounding    the   exact

circumstances in      which     the Appellant and        her daughter consumed

Odeuvanthlai. The Appellant has attributed her initial statement on

11.10.2012, when she had regained consciousness in the hospital, to

influencing from the police who allegedly convinced her that they

would apprehend the individuals who had offered her daughter and

her the tainted honey, and also recover the jewelry that these

unidentified persons had stolen. However, she claimed that they

asked her to remain silent about these details and simply convey

that the two of them had consumed Odeuvanthlai.
15.   This sequence of events has been disbelieved by the Sessions

Judge and the High Court. Be that as it may, this necessarily has

an impact on the genuineness of the initial statement made by the

Appellant. Combined with the subsequent hostile turns taken by some
7
of the vital witnesses in the trial, a seed of doubt is planted in

terms of the conviction of the Appellant.
16.   At this stage, it is important to understand the ambit of

“reasonable doubt” in a criminal proceeding.
In
State of Haryana v.

Bhagirath & Ors.
(1999) 5 SCC 96 the difficulty in demarcating the

contours of “reasonable doubt” was remarked upon:
“10. It is nearly impossible in any criminal trial to
      prove all elements with scientific precision. A criminal
      court could be convinced of the guilt only beyond the
      range of a reasonable doubt. Of course, the expression
      "reasonable doubt" is incapable of definition. Modern
      thinking is in favour of the view that proof beyond a
      reasonable doubt is the same as proof which affords moral
      certainty to the judge.
11. Francis Wharton, a celebrated writer on Criminal Law
      in United States has quoted from judicial pronouncements
      in his book on "Wharton's Criminal Evidence" as follows
      (at page 31, volume 1 of the 12th Edition):
It is difficult to define the phrase "reasonable doubt."
      However, in all criminal cases a careful explanation of
      the term ought to be given. A definition often quoted or
      followed is that given by Chief Justice Saw in the
      Webster Case. He says: "It is not mere possible doubt,
      because everything relating to human affairs and
      depending upon moral evidence is open to some possible
      or imaginary doubt. It is that state of the case which,
      after the entire comparison and consideration of all the
      evidence, leaves the minds of the jurors in that
      consideration that they cannot say they feel an abiding
      conviction to a moral certainty of the truth of the
      charge.
12. In the treatise on "The Law of Criminal Evidence"
authored by HC Underbill it is stated (at page 34,
      Volume 1 of the Fifth Edition) thus:
The doubt to be reasonable must be such a one as an
      honest, sensible and fair­minded man might, with reason,
      entertain consistent with a conscientious desire to
      ascertain the truth. An honestly entertained doubt of
      guilt is a reasonable doubt. A vague conjecture or an
      inference of the possibility of the innocence of the
8
accused is not a reasonable doubt. A reasonable doubt is
      one which arises from a consideration of all the
      evidence in a fair and reasonable way. There must be a
      candid consideration of all the evidence and if, after
      this candid consideration is had by the jurors, there
      remains in the minds a conviction of the guilt of the
      accused, then there is no room for a reasonable doubt.”
17.   Thus, the focus for us when ascertaining reasonable doubt is

not merely the possibility of doubt or of another version of events

but rather a version that survives the scrutiny of an honest and

conscientious judicial mind. In the present case, we note that

following the incident, the marriage between the Appellant and PW1,

the complainant, continues to subsist and that she has given birth

to two minor children.
18.   When considering the Appellant’s guilt, the Sessions Judge and

the High Court have not satisfactorily considered the effect and

impact of    PW1 & PW’5’s failure to support the prosecution. When

considering the disputed confession by the Appellant, the bedrock

on which the prosecution’s case stood was undone but the Sessions

Judge and the High Court proceeded on what prima facie appears to

be an almost unqualified acceptance that the confession remained

unassailable. This was in spite of the fact that only PW8 remained

to provide some degree of corroboration regarding the prosecution’s

story.
19.   The reasons for why PW1 & PW5 turned hostile may be numerous

and   as   compelling   as   each   other.   While   the lower courts have
9
considered      them         to   be   interested         witnesses      concerned       with    the

acquittal of the Appellant, we are unable to ascertain why that is

a more likely reason for their non­cooperation than the fact that

they believed the Appellant was being wrongly accused and that

their initial statements were taken under duress.
20.    Undoubtedly, it is not incumbent upon us, nor possible, to

undertake      such      a    factual    analysis         at   this     stage.      We   can    only

observe that further consideration of this point was necessary,

especially in light of the guilt of the Appellant not tallying

easily with her continuing marriage to PW1 and her fostering of two

children after the tragic loss of her first born. It is the absence

of    an evaluation of this nuance on                         the record that creates             a

reasonable doubt in our minds regarding Appellant’s conviction.
21.    When the facts and circumstances of a case are as peculiar as

the one before us, the judicial responsibility to scrape the bottom

of    the    barrel      and      address     the       specificities        head   on    is    even

greater. It is in the same vein, that we are compelled to observe

that    there      are       issues     of    contention         that,       having      not    been

adequately addressed, benefit the Appellant.
22.    For   the    reasons        aforesaid,           the   appeal    is     allowed    and    the

Judgment      dated      27­4­2017       of    the       learned       Trial    Court     and    the

impugned Judgment dated 19­3­2019 passed by the High Court both are

set aside.
10
23.   Needless   to   state   that   interim   protection   granted   by   this

Court to the appellant on 13­8­2020 and continued on 16­10­2020, is

made absolute.
................J
                                                   (SURYA KANT)




                                                   .................J
                                                   (HRISHIKESH ROY)
NEW DELHI;
15TH SEPTEMBER, 2022.