[Cites
1
, Cited by
8
]
Supreme Court of India
The Board Of Control For Cricket In India vs Cricket Association Of Bihar on 14 September, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Hima Kohli
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Reportable


                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                        IA No 49930 of 2020
                                                                 in
                                                   Civil Appeal No 4235 of 2014


     The Board of Control for Cricket in India                                           .... Appellant


                                                               Versus


     Cricket Association of Bihar & Ors                                                 ....Respondents




                                                          JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J


     1                   By the judgment of this Court in Board of Control for Cricket in
India v Cricket

                         Association of Bihar
1, the draft Constitution of the Board of Control for Cricket in

                         India 2 was approved. The Court stipulated that any amendment to the Constitution

                         shall not be given effect to without the leave of the Court.          Clause 45 of the

                         Constitution, as approved, contains the following provision:
Signature Not Verified
“These Rules and Regulations of the BCCI shall not be repealed,
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2022.09.15
18:58:29 IST
Reason:                                 added to, amended or altered except when passed and adopted by a

     1                   (2018) 9 SCC 624
     2                   “BCCI”
2
3/4th majority of the members present and entitled to vote at a
                  Special General Meeting of the General Body convened for the
                  purpose or at the Annual General Meeting. Any such amendment will
                  not be given effect to without the leave of the Hon’ble Supreme
                  Court.”
2   On 1 December 2019, certain amendments were approved unanimously at the

    Annual General Meeting 3.
3   An interim application has been filed for seeking the leave of the Court to give effect

    to the amendments. A reference to the relevant clauses which are proposed to be

    amended would be necessary.
4   Clause 6(4) of the existing Constitution contains the stipulation that an office bearer

    who has held any post for two consecutive terms either in a state association or in

    the BCCI or a combination of both shall not be eligible to contest any further election

    without completing a cooling off period of three years. During the cooling off period,

    there is a prohibition on an office bearer becoming a member of the Governing

    Council or of any committee of the BCCI or of a state association. The rationale for

    adopting a cooling off period was elaborated in Section C of the judgment of this

    Court. The rationale was explained in paragraph 35 of the judgment in the following

    terms:
“…   A cooling-off period has several features which are of utmost
                  importance:
(i)    it is a safeguard against the development of vested personal
                         interests;
3   “AGM”
3
(ii)    it ensures against the concentration of power in a few hands;
(iii)   it facilitates a dispersal of authority; and
(iv)    it encourages the generation of a wider body of experienced
                         administrators.
Cooling-off must be accepted as a means to prevent a few individuals
                 from regarding the administration of cricket as a personal turf. The
                 game will be better off without cricketing oligopolies.”



5   While explaining the proposed provision for a cooling off period after the completion

    of two consecutive terms, this Court provided the following illustrations:
“However, in our view, it would be appropriate to direct that a cooling-
                 off period of three years would apply after an individual holds two
                 successive terms in office either in BCCI, or in any State Association
                 or a combination of the two. For instance, if an office-bearer has held
                 office for two consecutive terms in any post in a State Association,
                 such an individual must face a cooling-off period of three years.
                 Likewise, if an individual has held any post as an office-bearer of
                 BCCI for a total period of six years in succession, the individual must
                 have a cooling-off period of three years before seeking election again
                 either to BCCI or to a State Association. The cooling-off period would
                 apply also in a situation where an individual holds a post for one term
                 in a State Association followed by a post in BCCI successively or vice
                 versa. This would ensure that after a period of six years involving two
                 consecutive terms, a cooling-off period would be attracted. Allowing
                 an individual to act as an office-bearer for six years in continuation, is
                 a sufficiently long period for experience and knowledge gained to be
                 deployed in the interest of the game without at the same time
                 resulting in a monopoly of power.”
6   An amendment of Clause 6.4 has been proposed on the ground that the BCCI

    undertakes its activities both at the national and international level. On the other

    hand, the activities of the state associations are conducted at the level of each state.
Though there may be a degree of overlap between the functions associated at the
4
state level, on the one hand, and the national level by the BCCI, on the other hand, it

    has been submitted that the functions are distinct in a large number of areas and

    activities.
7   Mr Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General appearing on behalf of the applicant, submitted

    that Clause 6(4), as approved by this Court, indicates that a person who has

    completed one term at the state level followed by one term at the BCCI would have

    to complete a cooling off period of three years. In other words, though an office

    bearer at the BCCI has completed only one term at the BCCI, the cooling off period

    would come into effect. It has been submitted that the unanimous view at the AGM

    is that this provision should be modified so as to stipulate that the cooling off period

    would come into effect after an office bearer has completed two consecutive terms

    at the same level, that is in a state association or at the BCCI. In other words, an

    office bearer who completes two consecutive terms in a state association would

    necessarily have to complete a cooling off period of three years before assuming

    any elected office at the state association. Likewise, an office bearer who completes

    two consecutive terms at the BCCI would have to mandatorily undergo a cooling off

    period of three years before seeking any election at the level of the BCCI.
8   The amended provision, as proposed at the AGM, seeks to confine the requirement

    of a cooling off period only to the posts of President and Secretary. The amendment

    as proposed envisages in other words that the cooling off period will not apply to

    other posts.
5
9        Mr Maninder Singh, senior counsel, who was requested to assist this Court as an

         amicus curiae, submitted that there would be no justification to confine the cooling

         off period only to the post of President and Secretary and must extend to all other

         office bearers of the BCCI and the state associations.
10       In order to bring clarity to the position, a tabulated chart has been placed before this

         Court indicating:
(i)          The existing provision;


         (ii)         The amended provision proposed by BCCI; and


         (iii)        The proposed clause after incorporating the suggestions made by the amicus

                      curiae.


11       The tabulated position (in track mode) reads as follows:


CLAUSE          EXISTING PROVISION                         AMENDED PROVISION PROPOSED BY PROPOSED     CLAUSE                        AFTER
                                                           BCCI                          AMICUS’S SUGGESTION
6(4)                                                       A President or SecretaryAn office bearer 6.4.1 An office bearer who has held
                An office bearer who has held any post
who has served in such position held any any post for two consecutive terms in
                for two consecutive terms either in a
                                                           post for two consecutive terms either in a the BCCI shall not be eligible to
                state association or in the BCCI (or a
                                                           state association or in the BCCI (or a contest any further election in the
                combination of both) shall not be
                                                           combination of both) shall not be eligible BCCI without completing a cooling off
                eligible to contest any further election
                                                           to contest any further election without period of three years.
                without completing a cooling off period
                                                           completing a cooling off period of three During this cooling off period, such an
                of three years. During the cooling off
                                                           years. During the cooling off period, such office bearer shall not be a member of
                period, such an office bearer shall not
                                                           ‘Office bearer’ an office bearer shall not the Governing Council or of any
                be a member of the Governing Council
                                                           be a member of the Governing Council or committee whatsoever of the BCCI.
                or of any committee whatsoever of the
                                                           of any committee whatsoever of the The expression ‘office bearer’ should
                BCCI or of a state association. The
                                                           BCCI. or of a state association. The not be permitted to be circumvented
                expression ‘office bearer’ should not be
                                                           expression   ‘President’   or   ‘Secretary’ by being a member of any other
                permitted to be circumvented by being
                                                           office bearer’ should not be permitted to committee    or   of   the   Governing
                a member of any other committee or of
                                                           be circumvented by being a member of Council in BCCI, as the case may be.
                the Governing Council in BCCI or any
6
state association, as the case may be.   any other committee or of the Governing
                                         Council in BCCI or any state association, 6.4.2     If a person has served two
                                         as the case may be.                       consecutive terms each, in the State
                                                                                   Association and in the BCCI [or vice
                                                                                   versa]    continuously       without        any
                                                                                   break, such person shall not be
                                                                                   eligible to contest any further election
                                                                                   in the State Association or in the
                                                                                   BCCI, without completing a cooling
                                                                                   off period of three years.
During this cooling off period, such an
                                                                                   office bearer shall not be a member of
                                                                                   the Governing Council or of any
                                                                                   committee whatsoever of the BCCI or
                                                                                   of a state association. The expression
                                                                                   ‘office bearer’ should not be permitted
                                                                                   to be circumvented by being a
                                                                                   member of any other committee or of
                                                                                   the Governing Council in BCCI or any
                                                                                   state association, as the case may
                                                                                   be.
The      State      Associations           may
                                                                                   separately have the following clause:-
6.4.1 An office bearer who has held
                                                                                   any post for two consecutive terms in
                                                                                   the State Association shall not be
                                                                                   eligible to contest any further election
                                                                                   in such State Association without
                                                                                   completing a cooling off period of
                                                                                   three years.
During this cooling off period, such an
                                                                                   office bearer shall not be a member of
                                                                                   the Governing Council or of any
                                                                                   committee whatsoever of the state
                                                                                   association. The expression ‘office
                                                                                   bearer’ should not be permitted to be
                                                                                   circumvented by being a member of
                                                                                   any     other    committee     or     of    the
                                                                                   Governing       Council   in    the        state
                                                                                   association, as the case may be.
6.4.2     If a person has served two
                                                                                   consecutive terms each, in the State
7
Association and in the BCCI [or vice
                                                                versa]   continuously    without    any
                                                                break, such person shall not be
                                                                eligible to contest any further election
                                                                in the State Association or in the
                                                                BCCI, without completing a cooling
                                                                off period of three years.
During this cooling off period, such an
                                                                office bearer shall not be a member of
                                                                the Governing Council or of any
                                                                committee whatsoever of the BCCI or
                                                                of a state association. The expression
                                                                ‘office bearer’ should not be permitted
                                                                to be circumvented by being a
                                                                member of any other committee or of
                                                                the Governing Council in BCCI or any
                                                                state association, as the case may
                                                                be.
12   As the above tabulation indicates, the amicus curiae has proposed a bifurcation, for

     the sake of clarity, of the existing provision by introducing similar requirements of

     cooling off periods both at the level of the BCCI and in the state associations.
Clause 6(4), as originally incorporated, is hence sought to be bifurcated separately

     for the BCCI and the state associations. The Solicitor General has stated that the

     amendment as proposed by the amicus curiae is acceptable to the BCCI.
13   Having considered the application and the reasons which have been set out, we are

     of the considered view that the amendment as proposed in the third column above,

     should be accepted in terms of the suggestions of the amicus curiae. The reasons

     for accepting the above proposal are indicated below.
14   The principal rationale for adopting a cooling off period has been explained in the

     judgment of this Court, extracted above. This Court had adopted the rationale that
8
the cooling off period would kick in after an individual holds two successive terms in

     office either at the BCCI or in any state association or a combination of the two. The

     effective consequence of the existing position is that:
(i)     A person who is elected as an office bearer in a state association for two

             consecutive terms would have to undergo a cooling off period;
(ii)    A person who is elected as an office bearer at the BCCI for two consecutive

             period would have to undergo a cooling off period; and
(iii)   A person who is elected as an office bearer in a state association for one term

             followed by election as an office bearer at the BCCI for one term would

             similarly have to undergo a cooling off period.
15   The consequence, therefore, is that a person who has held office as an elected

     office bearer for only one term at the BCCI would have to undergo a cooling off

     period. The submission is that the application of a cooling off period after one term

     at a particular level (the BCCI or state association, as the case may be on after an

     immediately prior term at another level) is unduly stringent and needs to be modified

     having regard to the purpose for which the cooling off period was introduced.
16   BCCI is an autonomous sports body. The judgment of this court did not abrogate its

     power, as a registered society, to amend its Constitution. The stipulation that an

     amendment be carried by a three fourths majority and should not be implemented

     without the prior leave of this court is in order to ensure that the purpose underlying
9
the adoption of the Constitution of BCCI is not defeated. The purpose for which the

         cooling off period was introduced, would not be diluted by the proposed amendment,

         subject to the stipulations suggested by the amicus curiae. The proposed stipulation

         that the cooling off period comes into effect after two consecutive terms at the same

         level namely, at the state associations or the BCCI does not abrogate the purpose of

         a cooling off period. We, therefore, accept the amendment as set out in Column 3

         above.
17       The next amendment is proposed to Clause 6(5) of the BCCI’s Constitution. As in

         the case of Clause 6(4), the amendment which was proposed to Clause 6(5) was

         deliberated upon during the course of the hearing and certain suggestions have

         been made in the course of the discussion by the amicus curiae. The position is

         tabulated below (in track mode):
CLAUSE     EXISTING PROVISION                          AMENDED PROVISION PROPOSED BY PROPOSED     CLAUSE                                   AFTER
                                                       BCCI                          AMICUS’S SUGGESTION
6(5)                                                   A person shall be disqualified from A person shall be disqualified from
           A person shall be disqualified from
                                                       being an Office Bearer, or an Apex being an Office Bearer, a member of
           being an Office Bearer, a member of
                                                       Council Member of the BCCI a member the Apex Council, Governing Council
           the    Governing     Council     or   any
                                                       of     the     Governing     Council      or   any or any Committee of the BCCI if he or
           Committee or a representative to the
                                                       Committee or a representative to the she:
International Cricket Council or any
                                                       International Cricket Council or any (a)                     is not a citizen of India;
           similar organization if he or she:
similar organization if he or she:                  (b)      has attained the age of 70
           (a)      is not a citizen of India;
                                                            (a)     is not a citizen of India;                      years;
           (b)      has attained the age of 70
                                                            (b)     has attained the age of 70 (c)                  is declared to be insolvent,
                    years;
                                                                    years;                                          or of unsound mind;
           (c)      is declared to be insolvent, or
                                                            (c)     is declared to be insolvent, or of (d)          is a Minister or Government
                    of unsound mind;
                                                                    unsound mind;                                   Servant;
           (d)      is a Minister or Government
                                                            (d)     is a Minister or Government
                    Servant or holds a public                                                              (e)      has been an Office Bearer
                                                                    Servant or holds a public office;
                    office;                                                                                         of   the     BCCI      for   a
                                                            (e)     holds any office or post in a
           (e)      holds any office or post in a                                                                   cumulative    period    of   9
                                                                    sports or athletic association or
                    sports or athletic association                                                                  years; or
10
or   federation   apart   from             federation apart from cricket;                     (f)   has been convicted by a
             cricket;                            (f)(e) has been an Office Bearer of the                         Court    of     Law   for
       (f)   has been an Office Bearer of               BCCI for a cumulative period of                          commission of a criminal
             the BCCI for a cumulative                  9     years;      or       of       a     State          offence and sentenced to
             period of 9 years or of a State            association for a cumulative                             imprisonment.
             association for a cumulative               period of 9 years; or
             period of 9 years; or               (f)    Has been convicted charged by
       (g)   Has been charged by a Court                a Court of Law for commission
             of Law for having committed                of a having committed any
             any criminal offence, i.e. an              criminal offence and sentenced
             order framing charges has                  to imprisonment for a period not
             been passed by a court of law              less than three (3) years.
             having competent jurisdiction.    6.5.2 A person shall be disqualified from
                                               being a member of the Governing
                                               Council or any Committee of the BCCI if
                                               he or she:
                                                  (a)   is not a citizen of India;
                                                  (b)   is declared to be insolvent, or of
                                                        unsound mind;
                                                  (c)   is a Minister or Government
                                                        Servant;
                                                  (d)   Has,     i.e.    an        order        framing
                                                        charges has been convicted
                                                        passed by a Court of Law for
                                                        commission            of        a       criminal
                                                        offence         and        sentenced          to
                                                        imprisonment for a period not
                                                        less than three (3) years.court of
                                                        law         having                  competent
                                                        jurisdiction.
18   BCCI has submitted that the disqualification from holding any office or post in a

     sports or athletic association or federation apart from cricket needs to be modified

     since several cricketers of eminence are associated with other sporting activities

     such as football and golf after retirement from cricket and there is no reason to

     disqualify them on that ground.                          Secondly, it has been submitted that the

     disqualification which is attached to a person who is charged of having committed a
11
criminal offence is proposed to be modified so as to apply to a person who is

     convicted of an offence and is sentenced to a term of imprisonment of three years.
This amendment, it has been submitted, is intended to protect office bearers who

     may be subjected to frivolous prosecutions. Finally, it has been submitted that the

     expression “or holds a public office” is over-broad and that the disqualification

     should only apply to a person who holds office as a Minister or government servant.
19   The stipulation that the disqualification should attach on a conviction of an offence

     may be accepted. However, the further condition that a disqualification would follow

     upon a sentence of imprisonment of three years or more cannot be accepted. During

     the hearing, BCCI agreed that the disqualification would govern a conviction and

     sentence of imprisonment. The reasons set out for the other amendments are

     acceptable. Subject to what has been observed above, the amendment as tabulated

     in column 3 above does not detract from the basic purpose and object underlying

     the judgment of this Court. The amendment, as proposed in Column 3 above, is

     hence permitted to be effected.
20   An amendment has been proposed to Clauses 14.3 and 14.4, as well as to Clause

     3(b)(vii) which are consequential to the amendments which have been made to

     Clauses 6(4) and 6(5). The amendments to Clauses 14.3 and 14.4 and Clause

     3(b)(vii) are in the following terms:
12
CLAUSE        EXISTING PROVISION   AMENDED PROVISION PROPOSED BY PROPOSED     CLAUSE                           AFTER
                                   BCCI                          AMICUS’S SUGGESTION
14(3)   and
(4)                                                              14.3 A person shall be disqualified
                                                                 from being a Councillor if he or she:
(a)           is not a citizen of India;
(b)           has attained the age of 70
                                                                               years;
(c)           is declared to be insolvent,
                                                                               or of unsound mind;
(d)           is a Minister or Government
                                                                               Servant;
(e)           has been an Office Bearer
                                                                               of the BCCI for a cumulative
                                                                               period of 9 years; or
(f)           has been convicted by a
                                                                               Court         of          Law      for
                                                                               commission of a criminal
                                                                               offence and sentenced to
                                                                               imprisonment.
14.4.1 Each of the elected Councillors
                                                                 shall have a term of 3 years in office,
                                                                 subject to a maximum of 3 Terms on
                                                                 the Apex Council.
A Councillor who has held any post
                                                                 for two consecutive Terms in the
                                                                 BCCI shall not be eligible to contest
                                                                 any further election in the BCCI
                                                                 without       completing         a cooling off
                                                                 period of three years. During the
                                                                 cooling off period, such a Councillor
                                                                 shall not be a member of the
                                                                 Governing        Council           or     of    any
                                                                 committee whatsoever of the BCCI.
The expression ‘Councillor’ should not
                                                                 be permitted to be circumvented by
                                                                 being     a     member           of     any    other
                                                                 committee        or    of        the    Governing
                                                                 Council in BCCI.
14.4.2        If a person has served two
                                                                 consecutive terms each as Councillor,
                                                                 in the equivalent body of a State
13
Association and in the BCCI [or vice
                                                            versa]    continuously              without    any
                                                            break, such person shall not be
                                                            eligible to be a Councillor in the
                                                            equivalent         body        of      a      State
                                                            Association or in the BCCI, without
                                                            completing a cooling off period of
                                                            three years. During this cooling off
                                                            period, such a Councillor shall not be
                                                            a member of the Governing Council
                                                            or of any committee whatsoever of
                                                            the BCCI or of a State Association.
The expression ‘Councillor’ should not
                                                            be permitted to be circumvented by
                                                            being     a    member          of     any     other
                                                            committee          or    of   the      Governing
                                                            Council       in    BCCI       or     any     State
                                                            Association, as the case may be.
3(b)(vii)   There shall be a provision whereby an           3(b)(vii)(A) There shall be a provision
            office bearer or an elected member of           whereby an office bearer or an
            the Governing Council / Managing                elected member of the Governing
            Committee / Apex Council who has                Council / Managing Committee / Apex
            held any post for two consecutive               Council who has held any post for two
            terms either in the State Association or        consecutive         terms      in     the     State
            in the BCCI (or a combination of both)          Association shall not be eligible to
            shall not be eligible to contest any            contest any further election in such
            further election without completing a           State Association without completing
            cooling off period of three years.              a cooling off period of three years.
            During the cooling off period, such an          During this cooling off period, such an
            office bearer or an elected member of           office bearer or an elected member of
            the   Governing   Body    /   Managing          the Governing Council / Managing
            Committee / Apex Council shall not be           Committee / Apex Council shall not
            a member of the Governing Council or            be a member of the Governing
            of any Committee whatsoever of the              Council       or        of    any      committee
            BCCI or of a State Association.                 whatsoever of the state association.
The expression ‘office bearer’ should
                                                            not be permitted to be circumvented
                                                            by being a member of any other
                                                            committee          or    of   the      Governing
                                                            Council in the state association, as
14
the case may be.
3(b)(vii)(B) There shall be a provision
                                                                                           whereby if a person has served two
                                                                                           consecutive terms each, in the State
                                                                                           Association and in the BCCI [or vice
                                                                                           versa]      continuously        without       any
                                                                                           break, such person shall not be
                                                                                           eligible to contest any further election
                                                                                           in the State Association or in the
                                                                                           BCCI, without completing a cooling off
                                                                                           period of three years.
During this cooling off period, such an
                                                                                           office bearer or an elected member of
                                                                                           the Governing Council / Managing
                                                                                           Committee / Apex Council shall not
                                                                                           be a member of the Governing
                                                                                           Council        or     of     any     committee
                                                                                           whatsoever of the BCCI or of a state
                                                                                           association. The expression ‘office
                                                                                           bearer’ should not be permitted to be
                                                                                           circumvented by being a member of
                                                                                           any     other       committee       or   of   the
                                                                                           Governing Council in BCCI or any
                                                                                           state association, as the case may
                                                                                           be.
21 Certain amendments of an administrative nature are proposed in Clauses 7(3), 15(3)

       and (4) and 19(2), which are tabulated below:
CLAUSE      EXISTING PROVISION                   AMENDED PROVISION PROPOSED BY PROPOSED     CLAUSE                                  AFTER
                                                 BCCI                          AMICUS’S SUGGESTION
7(3)
            The Secretary shall;                 The Secretary shall;                      The Secretary shall;
(a) to (e) ...............           (a) to (e) ...............                (a) to (e) ...............
(f) Have the power to delegate any work (f) Have the power to delegate any
            Have the power to delegate any work
            to the Honorary Joint Secretary.    to the Honorary Joint Secretary or any work to the Honorary Joint Secretary
                                                 person in management.                     or any person in management.
(g) Exercise all powers in relation to (g) Exercise all powers in relation to
                                                 cricketing and non cricketing matters with cricketing and non cricketing matters
                                                 the respective management personnel with           the    respective         management
                                                 including CEO reporting to him on a personnel including CEO reporting to
15
regular basis.                                           him on a regular basis.
(h) the Management personnel, the staff (h) the Management personnel, the
                                                                       and the CEO shall work under the direct staff and the CEO shall work under
                                                                       supervision, control and direction of the the direct supervision, control and
                                                                       Secretary.                                               direction of the Secretary.
15(3)   and
              (3)    The Apex Council shall exercise (3)                       The Apex Council shall exercise (3)                   The Apex Council shall exercise
(4)
superintendence over the CEO,                             superintendence over the CEO,                              superintendence over the
                     the Cricket Committees and the                            the Cricket Committees and the                             CEO,          the          Cricket
                     Standing      Committees             in    the            Standing Committees through                                Committees           and        the
                     discharge           of    their          duties           the Secretary in the discharge of                          Standing            Committees,
                     generally, and in particular, in                          their duties generally, and in                             through the Secretary, in
                     accordance with any general or                            particular, in accordance with                             the discharge of their duties
                     special direction of the General                          any general or special direction                           generally, and in particular,
                     Body, except for the Governing                            of the General Body, except for                            in   accordance       with      any
                     Council of the IPL which is                               the Governing Council of the IPL                           general or special direction
                     directly     accountable            to     the            which is directly accountable to                           of the General Body, except
                     General Body.                                             the General Body.                                          for the Governing Council
              (4) In addition to and without prejudice (4)                  In addition to and without prejudice                          of the IPL which is directly
                     to   the    generality         of    powers               to the generality              of    powers                accountable to the General
                     conferred           directly        or      by            conferred           directly        or      by             Body.
necessary           implication          under            necessary           implication          under (4)        In addition to and without
                     these Rules and regulations and                           these Rules and regulations and                            prejudice to the generality
                     the Memorandum of Association,                            the           Memorandum                    of             of powers conferred directly
                     the Apex Council shall exercise                           Association, the Apex Council                              or by necessary implication
                     the powers and perform the                                shall exercise the powers and                              under    these      Rules       and
                     duties hereafter mentioned:                               perform       the     duties        hereafter              regulations         and         the
(a) to (c) …............                                         mentioned:                                                 Memorandum                       of
(d) To institute or defend any action or                         (a) to (c) …............                                   Association,        the      Apex
                    proceedings for or against the                             (d) To institute or defend through                         Council shall exercise the
                    BCCI or against any Office‐                                         the Secretary any action                          powers and perform the
                    Bearer or employee of the BCCI.                                     or   proceedings            for    or             duties hereafter mentioned:
against       the      BCCI        or            (a) to (c) …............
(e) to (m) ............(n) To frame, in
                                                                                        against any Office‐Bearer                        (d)   To institute or defend,
              consultation with the CEO, rules for the
                                                                                        or employee of the BCCI.                               through the Secretary,
              appointment of Managers, Secretaries,
                                                                                                                                               any         action          or
              Administrative Officers, Peons and (e) to (m) ............
proceedings          for    or
              other service personnel and staff and
                                                                                                                                               against the BCCI or
for payment to them and other persons (n) To frame, in consultation with the
                                                                                                                                               against        any    Office‐
              in return for their services rendered to CEO, rules for the appointment of
                                                                                                                                               Bearer or employee of
              the BCCI, salaries, wages, gratuities, Managers,                       Secretaries,       Administrative
                                                                                                                                               the BCCI.
16
pensions,                 honorariums, Officers,      Peons     and     other     service   (e) to (m)    ............
           compensations, any exgratia payment personnel and staff and for payment to                            (n) To frame, in consultation
           and/or provident fund and to regulate them and other persons in return for their                             with the CEO, rules
           discipline   by   suspending,       fining, services rendered to the BCCI, salaries,                         for the appointment of
           removing     or     dismissing       such wages,          gratuities,           pensions,                    Managers,
           employees.                                 honorariums,       compensations,         any                     Secretaries,
                                                      exgratia payment and/or provident fund                            Administrative
                                                      and to regulate discipline by suspending,                         Officers, Peons and
                                                      fining, removing or dismissing such                               other                     service
                                                      employees.                                                        personnel           and staff
                                                                                                                        and for payment to
                                                                                                                        them           and          other
                                                                                                                        persons in return for
                                                                                                                        their                    services
                                                                                                                        rendered to the BCCI,
                                                                                                                        salaries,                 wages,
                                                                                                                        gratuities,          pensions,
                                                                                                                        honorariums,
                                                                                                                        compensations,               any
                                                                                                                        exgratia                 payment
                                                                                                                        and/or provident fund
                                                                                                                        and           to         regulate
                                                                                                                        discipline                     by
                                                                                                                        suspending,                fining,
                                                                                                                        removing                       or
                                                                                                                        dismissing                  such
                                                                                                                        employees.
19(2)     (2)     The day‐to‐day management of (2)          The day to day management of the (2)          The day‐to‐day management of
                 the BCCI shall be conducted by               BCCI shall be conducted by the               the BCCI shall be conducted by
                 professionals in both cricketing             professionals in both cricketing             the      professionals            in     both
                 and non‐cricketing matters.                  and non‐cricketing matters under             cricketing     and         non‐cricketing
                                                              the direct supervision, direction            matters       under             the     direct
                                                              and control of the respective                supervision,             direction        and
                                                              Office Bearers.                              control of the respective Office
                                                                                                           Bearers.
22      The above amendments as tabulated in Column 3 above are accepted.
23      An amendment was sought in Clause 45 to delete the provision requiring the leave of

        the Court to amend BCCI’s Constitution. The proposed amendment is not pressed

        by BCCI.
17
24   Paragraphs 45.2 and 45.3 of the earlier judgment of this Court dated 9 August 2018

     reported in (2018) 9 SCC 624 contains the following directions:
“45.2. Upon the registration of the said Constitution of BCCI, each of the
                  members shall undertake registration of their respective Constitutions
                  on similar lines within a period of 30 days thereafter. A compliance
                  certificate must be furnished to the CoA, which shall file a status
                  report before this Court with reference to the compliance undertaken
                  by the State Associations; and

           45.3.   In the event that any State Association does not undertake
                   compliance with the abovesaid directions, the directions contained in
                   the orders of this Court dated 7-10-2016 [BCCI v. Cricket Assn. of
                   Bihar, (2016) 10 SCC 23] and 21-10-2016 [BCCI v. Cricket Assn. of
                   Bihar, (2016) 10 SCC 231] shall revive.”
25   The above directions shall also apply to the amendments as approved by the

     present judgment.
26   Mr Akhilesh Kumar Pandey, counsel, appeared in these proceedings on behalf of

     two individuals who were earlier, members of an entity called Association of Bihar

     Cricket. While opposing the amendments, counsel submitted that any modification

     of the clauses in the terms as proposed would affect the underlying object of the

     provisions in the original Constitution.
27   Having carefully assessed the grievance, we do not find any merit for the reasons

     which we have already indicated.
18
28    The interim application is accordingly disposed of in the above terms.
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                     [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                    …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                     [Hima Kohli]

New Delhi;
September 14, 2022
-S-