[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
K. Paramasivam vs The Karur Vysya Bank Ltd. on 6 September, 2022
Author:
Indira Banerjee
Bench:
Indira Banerjee
,
Hemant Gupta
,
Surya Kant
,
M.M. Sundresh
,
Sudhanshu Dhulia
REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9286 OF 2019



                         K. PARAMASIVAM                                     …..Appellant (s)


                                                       Versus




                         THE KARUR VYSYA BANK LTD. & ANR.               …..Respondent (s)




                                                    JUDGMENT
Indira Banerjee, J.
This appeal under Section 62 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy

                         Code, 2016, hereinafter referred to as the “IBC”, is against a final

                         judgment and order dated 18th November 2019, passed by the

                         National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) dismissing the

                         Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.538 of 2019, against an order

                         dated 8th April 2019 passed by the Adjudicating Authority, admitting

                         the application filed by the Respondent No.1 being CP/1314/IB/2018
Signature Not Verified
under Section 7 of the IBC for initiation of the Corporate Insolvency
Digitally signed by
GULSHAN KUMAR
ARORA
Date: 2022.09.06
17:24:05 IST
Reason:
Resolution Process (CIRP) against the Corporate Debtor, Maharaja
1
Theme Parks and Resorts Private Limited, hereinafter referred to as

“Maharaja Theme Parks and Resorts”.
2.      The Appellant is the promoter, shareholder and suspended/

discharged director of Maharaja Theme Parks and Resorts, a company

registered under the
Companies Act, 1956
.             The Respondent No.1,

hereinafter referred to as “Financial Creditor” had advanced credit

facilities to the following three entities:-
(i)    Sri Maharaja Refineries, a Partnership Firm;
(ii)   Sri Maharaja Industries, a proprietary concern of K. Paramasivam;
and
(iii) Sri Maharaja Enterprises,         a      proprietary   concern   of   P.
      Sathiyamoorthy
3.      Maharaja Theme Parks and Resorts stood guarantor for the

loans availed by all the three borrowers.           The borrowers failed to

repay the debts payable by them to the Financial Creditor.
4.      On or about 24th October 2018, the Financial Creditor filed an

application under
Section 7
of the IBC being CP/1314/IB/2018 for

initiation of CIRP against Maharaja Theme Parks and Resorts.           In the

said application the Financial Creditor stated that Maharaja Theme

Parks and Resorts had extended corporate guarantee(s) for loans

availed by each of the borrowers.           On failure of the borrowers to

repay the loans, Maharaja Theme Parks and Resorts, as Guarantor,

became liable to repay the loan.
2
5.    Maharaja Theme Parks and Resorts filed its counter statement

before the Adjudicating Authority, objecting to the jurisdiction of the

NCLT to entertain the petition under
Section 7
of the IBC, on the

contention that, the company, Maharaja Theme Parks and Resorts

Private Limited, was not a Corporate Debtor, which is defined in
Section 3(8)
of the IBC to mean, “a corporate person who owes a

debt to any person.”    It was contended that Maharaja Theme Parks

and Resorts did not owe any financial debt to the Financial Creditor.
6.    The Appellant contends that, Maharaja Theme Parks and

Resorts does not also fall within the definition of ‘Corporate

Guarantor’ in
Section 5(5A)
of the IBC, which reads       “ ‘corporate

guarantor’ means a corporate person who is the surety in a contract

of guarantee to a corporate debtor.” Mr. Mishra, appearing for the

Appellant, submitted that Maharaja Theme Parks and Resorts had not

guaranteed any loan given to a corporate person.
7.    Mr. Mishra referred to the definition of ‘Corporate Person’ in
Section 3(7)
of the IBC which reads: -
“3. …

     (7) "corporate person" means a company as defined in
     clause (20) of
section 2
of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of
     2013), a limited liability partnership, as defined in
     clause (n) of sub-section (1) of
section 2
of the Limited
     Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009), or any other
     person incorporated with limited liability under any law for
     the time being in force but shall not include any financial
     service provider;”
3
8.    Mr. Mishra argued that on a conjoint reading of
Section 5(5A)
,
Section 3(7)
and
Section 3(8)
of the IBC, it is apparent that a

Corporate Guarantor is the surety in a contract of guarantee to a

Corporate Debtor.       The borrowers not being Corporate Debtors,

Maharaja Theme Parks and Resorts is not a Corporate Guarantor as

defined in
Section 5(5A)
of the IBC.
9.    By an order dated 8th April 2019, the Adjudicating Authority

admitted the petition under
Section 7
of the IBC and initiated the CIRP

against Maharaja Theme Parks and Resorts.        The Respondent No.2

was appointed Interim Resolution Professional.
10.   Being aggrieved by the order dated 8th April 2019 of the

Adjudicating Authority, admitting the application for CIRP, the

Appellant filed an appeal.     The appeal filed by the Appellant, has

been dismissed by the NCLAT (Appellate Authority), by the judgment

and order impugned.
11.   Mr. Amitesh Chandra Mishra appearing on behalf of the

Appellant submitted that the appeal filed by the Appellant under

Section 61 of the IBC has been dismissed by the Appellate Authority

(NCLAT) on the ground that the company, Maharaja Theme Parks and

Resorts, is a Corporate Guarantor, without considering the fact that

Maharaja Theme Parks and Resorts does not fall within the ambit of

the definition of Corporate Guarantor, and therefore CIRP cannot be

initiated against it.
4
12.    Mr. Nikhil Nayyar, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of

the Respondent Financial Creditor submitted that the issue of whether

an action under
Section 7
of the IBC can be initiated by a Financial

Creditor, against a corporate person, in relation to a corporate

guarantee, given by that corporate person, in respect of a loan

advanced to the principal borrower, who is not a corporate person,

has been answered by this Court in
Laxmi Pat Surana v. Union

Bank of India and Another1
.
13.    Under
Section 7
of the IBC, CIRP can be initiated against a

Corporate entity who has given a guarantee to secure the dues of a

non-corporate entity as a financial debt accrues to the corporate

person, in respect of the guarantee given by it, once the borrower

commits default. The guarantor is then, the Corporate Debtor.
14.
In
Laxmi Pat Surana
(supra), this Court held: -
“19. It is no more res integra that the Code is a complete
      code — provisioning for actions and proceedings relating to,
      amongst others, reorganisation and insolvency resolution of
      corporate persons in a time bound manner for maximisation
      of value of assets of such persons, availability of credit and
      balance the interests of all the stakeholders including
      alteration in the order of priority of payment of government
      dues and to establish an Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board
      of India, and for matters connected therewith or incidental
      thereto.
***
1 (2021) 8 SCC 481
5
22. The term “financial creditor” has been defined in
Section 5(7)
read with expression “creditor” in
Section 3(10)
IBC to mean a person to whom a financial debt is owed and
includes a person to whom such debt has been legally
assigned or transferred to. This means that the applicant
should be a person to whom a financial debt is owed. The
expression “financial debt” has been defined in
Section 5(8)
.
Amongst other categories specified therein, it could be a
debt along with interest, which is disbursed against the
consideration for the time value of money and would include
the amount of any liability in respect of any of the guarantee
or indemnity for any of the items referred to in sub-clauses
(a) to (h) of the same clause. It is so provided in sub-clause
(i) of
Section 5(8)
IBC to take within its ambit a liability in
relation to a guarantee offered by the corporate person as a
result of the default committed by the principal borrower.
The expression “debt” has been defined separately in the
Code in
Section 3(11)
to mean a liability or obligation in
respect of “a claim” which is due from any person and
includes a financial debt and operational debt. The
expression “claim” would certainly cover the right of the
financial creditor to proceed against the corporate person
being a guarantor due to the default committed by the
principal borrower. The expression “claim” has been defined
in
Section 3(6)
, which means a right to payment, whether or
not such right is reduced to judgment, fixed, disputed,
undisputed, legal, equitable, secured or unsecured. It also
means a right to remedy for breach of contract under any
law for the time being in force, if such breach gives rise to a
right to payment in respect of specified matters.
23. Indubitably, a right or cause of action would enure to the
lender (financial creditor) to proceed against the principal
borrower, as well as the guarantor in equal measure in case
they commit default in repayment of the amount of debt
acting jointly and severally. It would still be a case of default
committed by the guarantor itself, if and when the principal
borrower fails to discharge his obligation in respect of
amount of debt. For, the obligation of the guarantor is
coextensive and coterminous with that of the principal
borrower to defray the debt, as predicated in
Section 128
of
the Contract Act. As a consequence of such default, the
status of the guarantor metamorphoses into a debtor or a
corporate debtor if it happens to be a corporate person,
within the meaning of
Section 3(8)
IBC. For, as aforesaid, the
expression     “default”    has    also     been    defined    in
Section 3(12) IBC to mean non-payment of debt when
whole or any part or instalment of the amount of
debt has become due or payable and is not paid by
6
the debtor or the corporate debtor, as the case may be.
24. A priori, in the context of the provisions of the Code, if
the guarantor is a corporate person [as defined in
Section
3(7)
IBC], it would come within the purview of the expression
“corporate debtor”, within the meaning of
Section 3(8)
IBC.
25. It may be useful to also advert to the generic provision
contained in
Section 3(37)
. It postulates that the words and
expressions used and not defined in the Code, but defined in
enactments referred to therein, shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in those Acts. Drawing
support from this provision, it must follow that the lender
would be a financial creditor within the meaning of the Code.
The principal borrower may or may not be a corporate
person, but if a corporate person extends guarantee for the
loan transaction concerning a principal borrower not being a
corporate person, it would still be covered within the
meaning of the expression “corporate debtor” in
Section
3(8)
IBC.
26. Thus understood, it is not possible to countenance the
argument of the appellant that as the principal borrower is
not a corporate person, the financial creditor could not have
invoked remedy under
Section 7
IBC against the corporate
person who had merely offered guarantee for such loan
account. That action can still proceed against the guarantor
being a corporate debtor, consequent to the default
committed by the principal borrower. There is no reason to
limit the width of
Section 7
IBC despite law permitting
initiation of CIRP against the corporate debtor, if and when
default is committed by the principal borrower. For, the
liability and obligation of the guarantor to pay the
outstanding dues would get triggered coextensively.
27. To get over this position, much reliance was placed on
Section 5
(5-A) IBC, which defines the expression “corporate
guarantor” to mean a corporate person, who is the surety in
a contract of guarantee to a corporate debtor. This definition
has been inserted by way of an amendment, which has
come into force on 6-6-2018. This provision, as rightly urged
by the respondents, is essentially in the context of a
corporate debtor against whom CIRP is to be initiated in
terms of the amended
Section 60
IBC, which amendment is
introduced by the same Amendment Act of 2018. This
change was to empower NCLT to deal with the insolvency
resolution or liquidation processes of the corporate debtor
and its corporate guarantor in the same Tribunal pertaining
7
to same transaction, which has territorial jurisdiction over
the place where the registered office of the corporate debtor
is located. That does not mean that proceedings under
Section 7
IBC cannot be initiated against a corporate person
in respect of guarantee to the loan amount secured by
person not being a corporate person, in case of default in
payment of such a debt.
28. Accepting the aforementioned argument of the
appellant would result in diluting or constricting the
expression “corporate debtor” occurring in
Section 7
IBC,
which means a corporate person, who owes a debt to any
person. The “debt” of a corporate person would mean a
liability or obligation in respect of a claim which is due from
any person and includes a financial debt and operational
debt. The expression “debt” in
Section 3(11)
is wide enough
to include liability of a corporate person on account of
guarantee given by it in relation to a loan account of any
person including not being a corporate person in the event
of default committed by the latter. It would still be a
“financial debt” of the corporate person, arising from the
guarantee given by it, within the meaning of
Section 5(8)
IBC.
29.     Notably, the expression “corporate guarantee” is not
defined in the Code. Whereas, expression “corporate
guarantor” is defined in
Section 5
(5-A) IBC. If the legislature
intended to exclude a corporate person offering guarantee in
respect of a loan secured by a person not being a corporate
person, from the expression “corporate debtor” occurring
in
Section 7
, it would have so provided in the Code [at least
when
Section 5
(5-A) came to be inserted defining expression
“corporate guarantor”]. It was also open to the legislature to
amend
Section 7
IBC and replace the expression “corporate
debtor” by a suitable expression.        It could have even
amended
Section 3(8)
to exclude liability arising from
a guarantee given for the loan account of an entity not
being a corporate person. Similarly, it could have also
amended the expression “financial debt” in
Section 5(8)
IBC,
“claim” in
Section 3(6)
, “debt” in
Section 3(11)
and “default”
in
Section 3(12)
. There is no indication to that effect in the
contemporaneous legislative changes brought about.
30.     The expression “corporate debtor” is defined
in
Section 3(8)
which applies to the Code as a whole.
Whereas, expression “corporate guarantor” in
Section 5
(5-
A), applies only to Part II IBC. Upon harmonious and
purposive construction of the governing provisions, it is not
possible to extricate the corporate person from
the liability (of being a corporate debtor) arising on account
8
of the guarantee given by it in respect of loan given to a
      person other than corporate person. The liability of
      the guarantor is coextensive with that of the principal
      borrower. The remedy under
Section 7
is not for recovery of
      the amount, but is for reorganisation and insolvency
      resolution of the corporate debtor who is not in a position to
      pay its debt and commits default in that regard. It is open to
      the corporate debtor to pay off the debt, which had become
      due and payable and is not paid by the principal borrower, to
      avoid the rigours of Chapter II IBC in general and
Section
      7
in particular.”
15.    The issue of whether CIRP can be initiated against the

Corporate Guarantor without proceeding against the principal

borrower has been answered by this Court in
Laxmi Pat Surana
(supra). The relevant paragraphs are set out hereinbelow: -
“21.
Section 7
is an enabling provision, which permits the
      financial creditor to initiate CIRP against a corporate debtor. The
      corporate debtor can be the principal borrower. It can also be a
      corporate person assuming the status of corporate debtor
      having offered guarantee, if and when the principal
      borrower/debtor (be it a corporate person or otherwise) commits
      default in payment of its debt.”

                                     ***
23. Indubitably, a right or cause of action would enure to the
      lender (financial creditor) to proceed against the principal
      borrower, as well as the guarantor in equal measure in case
      they commit default in repayment of the amount of debt acting
      jointly and severally. It would still be a case of default
      committed by the guarantor itself, if and when the principal
      borrower fails to discharge his obligation in respect of amount of
      debt. For, the obligation of the guarantor is coextensive and
      coterminous with that of the principal borrower to defray the
      debt, as predicated in
Section 128
of the Contract Act. As a
      consequence of such default, the status of the guarantor
      metamorphoses into a debtor or a corporate debtor
      if it happens to be a corporate person, within the
      meaning of
Section 3(8)
IBC. For, as aforesaid, the expression
      “default” has also been defined in Section 3(12) IBC to mean
      non-payment of debt when whole or any part or instalment
      of the amount of debt has become due or payable and
9
is not paid by the debtor or the corporate debtor, as the case
      may be.
16.    The issues raised in this appeal are settled by this Court in
Laxmi Pat Surana
(supra).
As held by this Court in
Laxmi Pat

Surana
(supra), the liability of the guarantor is co-extensive with

that of the Principal Borrower.
The judgment in
Laxmi Pat Surana
(supra), rendered by a three-Judge Bench of this Court is binding on

this Bench. It was open to the Financial Creditor to proceed against

the guarantor without first suing the Principal Borrower.
17.    We find no ground to interfere with the concurrent findings of

the Adjudicating Authority (NCLT) and the Appellate Authority

(NCLAT).
18.    The appeal is, therefore, dismissed.
.……………………………,J.
[ INDIRA BANERJEE ]




                                              .……………………………,J.
[ J.K. MAHESHWARI ]
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 6, 2022
10