[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
P. Vijay Nataraj vs The State on 5 September, 2022
Bench:
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1



                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1448 OF 2022
                                (Arising out of SLP (Criminal) No.3826 of 2022)



     P. VIJAY NATARAJ & ORS.                                                     Appellants

                                                         VERSUS

     STATE & ANR.                                                                Respondents




                                                    O R D E R
Leave granted.
This    appeal     challenges    the     judgment     and   order    dated

     10.08.2021 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras in

     Criminal Original Petition No.9763 of 2018.
The    aforesaid    Criminal     Original      Petition     was   directed

     against the order dated 18.01.2018 passed by the Principal

     District & Sessions Judge, Coimbatore in C.C. No.41 of 2015.

     The                 Revision    in    turn   had    arisen   out     of   the   rejection   of

     application                    preferred     by     the    present    appellants      seeking

     discharge in connection with crime registered pursuant to C.C.
Signature Not Verified
No.284 of 2011 (renumbered as CC No.1524 of 2019) on the file
Digitally signed by
NEETU KHAJURIA
Date: 2022.09.10
09:11:21 IST
Reason:
of Judicial Magistrate, Court No.III, Coimbatore.
2
It was submitted in said criminal case that the present

appellants    had     executed       two   separate     sale-deeds       conveying

their   interest      in    the    land    in    question     in   favour   of   the

complainant; that though the documents were registered, it was

not brought to the notice of the complainant that there was a

reservation in respect of said land and it was subject matter

of proceedings under the provisions of
Tamil Nadu Town and

Country Planning Act, 1971
.
The contention advanced on behalf of the appellants, on

the other hand, was that the appellants were not aware of such

proceedings     and    therefore      there      was   such    averment     in   the

document of title.            In any case, they had never claimed any

interest   in    the       land    after   the     conveyance      and    that   the

complainant was entitled to enjoy the lands in his capacity as

a title holder.
The application for discharge was however rejected by the

Trial   Court,        which       order    was    confirmed        in    revisional

jurisdiction by the Court of Principal District & Sessions

Judge, Coimbatore in Crl. Revision Case No.41 of 2015, which

in turn was subject matter of challenge before the High Court.

    The High Court, however, rejected the challenge vide its

judgment and order which is presently under challenge.
3
In    this      appeal,    we    have    heard    Mr.   K.V.    Viswanathan,

learned Senior Advocate for the appellants and Mr. R. Basant,

learned Senior Advocate for the complainant.
Mr. Viswanathan has brought to our notice the fact that

the appellants had approached the High Court of Judicature at

Madras by filing Writ Petition No.417 of 2022 submitting inter

alia       that   in    view     of    the    inaction   on    the    part   of   the

authorities,           the   land      in     question    stood      released     from

reservation/designation and that such release ought to be in

favour of the complainant.                  It is submitted that accepting the

submissions so made, the High Court vide its judgment and

order dated 12.01.2022 observed as under:
“8. In that view of the matter this Court is
       inclined to dispose of this writ petition with the
       following order:
*      That   the  land  in   question  owned   by  the
              petitioners   in  S.   Nos.26/2B  and   26/3  of
              Tudiyalur Village which was part of the land
              proposed for the inner ring road in the
              Coimbatore Master Plan under G.O. Ms. No.661,
              Housing and Urban Development Department dated
              12.10.1994 is declared to be land released under
Section 38
of the Tamil Nadu Town and Country
              Planning Act.
*      As a sequel, the respondents 1 and 2 as well as
              the third respondent shall take necessary steps
              to release the land to and in favour of the
              petitioners within a period of four weeks from
              the date of receipt of a copy of this order.

       *      It is made clear that once the land in question
              is released in favour of the petitioners, since
              the same has already been transferred in the
              name of the fourth respondent, subsequently the
              fourth respondent shall establish and execute
4
his right       over      the   property         as    the    lawful
              owner.”

       As has been observed by the High Court, the land would be

released in favour of the 4th respondent in the proceedings

before the High Court, that is to say, the complainant.
Mr. Viswanathan submits that the appellants stand by the

petition and the order passed by the High Court as stated

above.    It    is    further    submitted        that    in    case      the   original

complainant so desires, the appellants are willing to return

the amount of consideration.
Considering the fact that the appellants never claimed

any interest in the land and the fact that his bona fides are

clear when he sought release in favour of 4th respondent i.e.

the    complainant,         in    our     view,     the    application            seeking

discharge      as     filed      by     the   present      appellants           deserves

acceptance.
We, therefore, allow this appeal and discharge the appellants

of the charges levelled against them in said C.C. No.284 of 2011

(renumbered as CC No.1524 of 2019)              initiated by the complainant.
Needless to say, that consistent with the stand taken by

the appellants, it is declared that they have nothing to do

with    the    land    in   question      and     that    the       land    now    stands

released in favour of the complainant herein in terms of the

directions      issued      by   the     High     Court    in       its    order   dated

12.01.2022.
5
With these observations, the appeal is allowed.
...............................CJI.
                             [UDAY UMESH LALIT]




                             .................................J.
                             [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 05, 2022