[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Usha Gopirathnam vs P.S.Ranganathan (Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 23 September, 2022
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
B.R. Gavai
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2741 OF 2009
                            ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 15685 OF 2008


          USHA GOPIRATHNAM & ORS.                                       ..APPELLANT(S)

                                                  VERSUS

          P.S.RANGANATHAN (D) THR. LRs. & ORS.                         ..RESPONDENT(S)


                                             JUDGMENT
1.             This appeal is directed against the final judgement and

          order dated 22.01.2008 passed by the High Court of Karnataka

          at Bangalore, whereby the High Court dismissed an appeal filed

          by the Appellants herein and affirmed the order of the II

          Additional           Civil   Judge    (Senior   Division),   Bangalore   Rural,

          Bangalore dated 16.09.2006, which had dismissed a civil suit

          filed           by   the     Plaintiff/Appellants   seeking    dissolution   of

          Respondent No. 4/Partnership Firm, M/s. High Clere Stud and

          Agricultural Farm.
Signature Not Verified
2.
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
Parties before this Court: The Appellants before this Court
Date: 2022.09.23
17:22:18 IST
Reason:
are the legal heirs of late Mr. Gopirathnam. Mr. Gopirathnam
1
was one of the partners of the Respondent No. 4 Firm. The

partnership firm originally comprised of Mr. P.S. Ranganathan,

Mr. Lavakumar and Mr. Basanth Kumar, apart from Mr.

Gopirathnam. Respondent Nos. 1.1 and 1.2 are the legal heirs of

late Mr. P.S. Ranganathan. Respondent Nos. 2.1 and 2.2 are the

legal heirs of Mr. Lavakumar and Respondent No. 3 is Mr.

Basanth Kumar himself. Respondent Nos. 5 to 7 are subsequent

purchasers of certain properties originally owned by the Firm.
3.1   Facts leading to the filing of this Appeal: The factual

background of the present case has a long history, which can be

traced back to 01.01.1966, when a deed of partnership was

entered into between Late Mr. Gopirathnam, Late Mr. P.S.

Ranganathan, Late Mr. Lavakumar and Mr. Basanth Kumar. The

partners   were   related   to   each   other   with   Gopirathnam,

Lavakumar and Basanth Kumar being brothers and P.S.

Ranganathan being the brother­in­law of Gopirathnam. The

partnership firm, which was named as M/s. High Clere Stud and

Agricultural Farms, was a “partnership at will”. In so far as

profit­sharing ratio between the partners was concerned, the

partnership deed provided that the share of P.S. Ranganathan
2
would be 50%, Gopirathnam’s would be 20% and the other two

partners would have a 15% share in the profits. The loss­sharing

ratio was slightly different, with 50% of the losses to be borne by

Ranganathan and 25% each by Gopirathnam and Lavakumar.

Basanth Kumar did not have any share in the loss, because at

the relevant time, he was a minor and was admitted only to the

benefits of the firm.
3.2   The partnership firm was constituted with the object and

purpose of breeding livestock and carrying on agricultural

activities. For this purpose, the Firm purchased 39 acres of land

from one Mr. P.S. Devdas. Soon after the purchase of the land,

when the time came to repay Mr. Devdas, the Firm faced

immense financial difficulties. In fact, the Firm came under

severe pressure, with Mr. Devdas also having taken legal

recourse by filing a criminal case.
3.3   On 29.03.1973, which is around the same time when the

Firm was going through tough circumstances, it is alleged that

Gopirathnam sent a letter to Ranganathan, expressing his desire

to retire from the Firm. Ranganathan is said to have replied to

this letter on 15.04.1973 and accepted the resignation of
3
Gopirathnam. Pursuant to this retirement, Gopirathnam is

alleged to have been paid Rs. 20,000 as full and final satisfaction

of his share in the Firm.
3.4   Parallelly, in 1975, the Firm happened to take a loan from

State Bank of India to meet the maintenance cost of race horses,

sink two bore wells and clear off outstanding dues. Interestingly,

the loan application mentioned Gopirathnam as a partner of the

firm. Later, around 1982, when this loan was not repaid, SBI

initiated legal proceedings to recover the loan and it arrayed

Gopirathnam as a Respondent for being a partner of the firm and

also for having executed a guarantee in favour of SBI.
4.    Civil Suit by Appellant: Be that as it may, Gopirathnam

passed away on 27.12.1997. Three years post his demise, in the

year 2000, the legal heirs of Gopirathnam, who are also the

Appellants before this Court, filed a civil suit seeking dissolution

of the firm, rendition of accounts and partition of the Firm’s

property, on the ground that Ranganathan was acting against the

interests of the Appellants and the Firm. Notably, the suit was

filed by the Appellants in the capacity of partners of the firm. For
4
this purpose, they pressed into service Clause 17 of the

partnership deed which provides as follows:
“17) The partnership firm shall not be dissolved
          by the death or insolvency of any one or more of
          the partners. The heirs or representatives in
          interest of such dead partners shall be entitled
          to be partners in the firm. The assessment of
          the share of such partner shall be on the basis
          of the audited statement of accounts for the
          year ending 31st December previous to such
          death or insolvency.”
5.   Interim Protection pending the suit: On 25.10.2002, when the

matter came up for hearing before the Trial Court, the Court

passed an order restraining the Respondents from alienating the

share of the Appellants. However, on 03.11.2004, during the

subsistence and operation of the interim order, the Firm was

dissolved with Lavakumar and Basanth Kumar giving up their

share in favour of Ranganathan. Soon thereafter, Ranganathan

also executed sale deeds qua the Firm’s property and entered into

joint development agreements with Respondent Nos. 5­7 herein.

It is important to note that while developing the land in

furtherance of the joint development agreements, 8 acres of land

was kept aside towards the share of the Appellants, which was of

course subject to the outcome of the suit.
5
6.   Decision of the Trial Court: The Civil Suit ultimately came to

be dismissed by the Trial Court on 16.09.2006. After perusing

the evidence on record and the arguments advanced. While

arriving at its decision, the Court held that the Appellants have

no locus to claim the reliefs sought for, since Clause 17 of the

partnership deed is not applicable as Gopirathnam had retired in

1973 and was not a partner till his death in 1997. The Court held

that the Appellants herein had not produced any cogent evidence

to disprove this factum of retirement, and even their argument on

Gopirathnam’s     signature     being    fabricated,    was    left

unsubstantiated. With respect to the issue of the Appellants

becoming partners after the death of Gopirathnam, the Court

held that there is no concept of legal heirs becoming partners

automatically after the death of a partner. It was held that the

Appellants were obligated to assert and claim their rights as

partners by doing an overt act, which they did not. Lastly, the

Court also held that the suit is barred by limitation, as

Gopirathnam had retired in 1973 and the suit was instituted 27

years later.
6
7.    Appeal and interim orders pending appeals: Aggrieved by the

order of the Trial Court, the Appellants filed an appeal before the

High Court of Karnataka. By its order dated 12.10.2007, the High

Court also passed a similar interim order to that of the Trial

Court by directing Respondent Nos. 5­7 herein to reserve 8 acres

of land while carrying out the developmental works.

8.1   Decision of the High Court: The appeal came to be decided by

the High Court on 22.01.2008. In order to decide the appeal, the

High Court framed two questions, which are as follows:
a)    Whether Gopirathnam retired from the partnership
      firm because of the letter dated 29.03.1973 and hence he
      ceased to be a partner of the 4 th Respondent Firm
      following the letter of acceptance dated 15.04.1973?
b)   Whether the Appellants became the partners of the
      Firm automatically by virtue of Clause 17 of the
      Partnership Deed?
8.2   The High Court answered the first question in the

affirmative by holding that Gopirathnam had indeed retired in

1973. The argument of the Appellants that the letter dated

29.03.1973 was just an intention to retire and was not the final

letter of retirement was rejected by the Court by observing that if

his letter was not a final expression of retirement, then he should

have replied to the letter dated 15.04.1973 sent by Ranganathan
7
accepting the retirement, which he evidently did not. The second

factor which prompted the Court to come to a conclusion that

Gopirathnam had retired in 1973 was by the fact that there was

no evidence regarding Gopirathnam receiving profits after 1973,

which ideally, he should have if he was a partner of the Firm.

This made the Court draw such an inference as he never cared to

protest about the non­payment of profits right from 1973 till, he

died in 1997. With respect to the argument regarding non­

compliance with
Section 32
of the Partnership Act, 1932 1, the

Court held that
Section 24
of the Act2 prevails over Section 323,

thereby meaning that the notice of retirement sent only to the

managing partner is sufficient and there is no legal necessity to

send a notice of retirement to each and every partner of a firm.

Further, the High Court also held that Gopirathnam signing a

loan application form and him being made a party to the suit


1 hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’.
2
Section 24
: Effect of notice to acting partner — Notice to a partner who habitually
acts in the business of the firm of any matter relating to the affairs of the firm operates, as
notice to the firm, except in the case of a fraud on the firm committed by or with the
consent of that partner.
3
Section 32
: Retirement of a partner —
        (1) A partner may retire—
(a) With the consent of all the other partners,
(b) in accordance with an express agreement by the partners, or
(c) where the partnership is at will, by giving notice in writing to all the other
   partners of his intention to retire.
(2) ………….
(3) ………….
(4) ………….
8
filed by SBI is immaterial, as the said suit was decided without

any contest. Before concluding its findings on this issue, the

Court observed that Gopirathnam retired when the Firm was

going through tough times. Therefore, now when the Firm is

doing well, his legal heirs are not entitled to come back and seek

a share in the Firm, especially after a delay of 27 long years.


8.3   With respect to the second issue, the Court answered it in

the negative by holding that the Appellants do not automatically

become partners of the Firm by virtue of Clause 17 of the

partnership deed. The Court held that one of the fundamental

principles of partnership law is that the existence of a contract is

a sine­quo­non for the relationship of partnership. It was held

that the phrase ‘entitled to’, as it appears in Clause 17, does not

confer an automatic right but the said right is to be asserted by

doing a positive act, which the Appellants did not in this case.
9.    After taking note of the basic facts we were of the opinion

that this is a fit case for amicable settlement as the contesting

parties are all closely related to each other. We put forth our

suggestion to the learned counsel appearing for the parties that it

would be in the larger interest, that they resolve the dispute in an
9
amicable and peaceful manner. We must place on record the

positive response received from the learned counsels, who agreed

with the suggestion of the Court. We also indicated to the learned

counsels that as an extent of eight acres of land has all along

been secured, we may also consider passing an appropriate order

granting a portion of the land to the Appellants for doing

complete justice between the parties. However, we were not

inclined to take a unilateral decision. We, therefore, suggested

that we will proceed with the hearing and upon conclusion of the

submissions we will reserve the case for orders and the parties

may resort to mediation and intimate the result thereof within

four weeks.
10.1 Submission of parties: Shri Ranjit Kumar, Senior Advocate

along with Shri Ankur S. Kulkarni, AOR, appeared on behalf of

the Appellants. Their submissions can be broadly categorised

into 3 parts. First, that there can be no retirement which is

contrary to the intention of the parties. Second, that a retirement

is non­est in law if it has taken place in disregard to the statutory

framework. Third, that the Appellants herein became partners of

the Firm automatically after the death of Gopirathnam.
10
10.2   In support of their first contention, it was submitted by

Shri Ranjit Kumar that no valid retirement had taken place

because­(i)   Gopirathnam’s   signature   on   the   letter   dated

29.03.1973 through which he is said to have expressed his

intention to retire is different from his signature on other

admitted documents; (ii) the loan applications submitted before

SBI in 1975 and the suit instituted by SBI in 1982, show

Gopirathnam as a partner of the Firm; (iii) Gopirathnam had

given a personal guarantee to the loan and had also signed a

form for opening a bank account in the name of the Firm, both,

in the capacity of a partner after the alleged date of retirement;
(iv) the records maintained by the Stud Book Authority, Pune,

indicated that Gopirathnam was a partner of the Firm till his

death; (v) Clause 16 of the partnership deed allows a partner to

retire by giving a one­month notice. However, there is no evidence

that Gopirathnam gave such a time­bound notice; and (vi) by a

communication dated 09.10.2002, Ranganathan had called upon

the Appellants to meet the tax recovery officer to resolve the

property issues of the Firm. According to the Appellants, this

clearly shows that they were treated as partners and such

conduct of the Respondents should act as estoppel.
11
10.3       In so far as the second submission goes, Shri Ranjit

Kumar contended that – (i) there is non­compliance with
Section

32
of the Act as Gopirathnam did not give a notice in writing to

the other two partners indicting his intention to retire from the

Firm and simultaneously, there is no proof that the other

partners agreed to his alleged retirement; (ii) there is non­

compliance with
Sections 634
and
725
of the Act as the change in

the constitution of the Firm, post the retirement of Gopirathnam,

was not informed to the Registrar and, no public notice regarding

the retirement was given.
10.4 The last leg of Shri Ranjit Kumar’s submission dealt with

the Appellants becoming partners of the Firm automatically after


4
Section 63
: Recording of changes in and dissolution of a firm.
(1) When a change occurs in the constitution of a registered firm any incoming,
 continuing or outgoing partners, and when a registered firm is dissolved any person who
 was a partner immediately before the dissolution or the agent of any such partner or
 person specially authorised in this behalf may give notice to the Registrar of such change
 or dissolution specifying the date thereof; and the Registrar shall make a record of the
 notice in the entry relating to the firm in the Register of Firms, and shall file the notice
 along with the statement relating to the firm filed under
section 59
.
(2) Recording of withdrawal of a minor – …..
5
Section 72
: Mode of giving public notice — A public notice under this Act is given —
(a) Where it relates to the retirement or expulsion of a partner from a registered firm,
 or to the dissolution of a registered firm, or to the election to become or not to become a
 partner in a registered firm by a person attaining majority who was admitted as a minor to
 the benefits of partnership, by notice to the Registrar of firms under section 63, and by
 publication in the Official Gazette and in at least one vernacular newspaper circulating in
 the district where the firm to which it relates has its place or principal place of business,
 and
(b) in any other case, by publication in the Official Gazette and in at least one
 vernacular newspaper circulating in the district where the firm to which it relates has its
 place or principal place of business.
12
the death of Gopirathnam. To buttress his submission, he relied

upon a judgement of this Court in
Khushal Khemgar Shah and

Ors. v. Mrs. Khorshed Banu Dadiba Boatwalla and Anr.6
.

11.1     The main thrust of Shri Gurukrishna Kumar, Senior

Advocate appearing on behalf of Respondent Nos. 5 to 7 is that

the Appellants do not automatically become partners after the

death of Gopirathnam. He contended that such is the scheme of

the Act too. In support of his submissions, he relied on
Sections

4
and
5
of the Act to contend that a partnership is creature of a

contract and not of status, with the only exception being
Section

30(5)
7
of the Act. Further, he also placed reliance on
Section 31
of

the Act to contend that any new partner can be inducted only

with the consent of all the then existing partners. He stated that

such a consent is absent in the facts of this case. In support of

these submissions, he relied on the decisions of this Court in




6 (1970) 1 SCC 415
7
Section 30
: Minors admitted to the benefits of partnership –
       (1) to (4) ……………..
(5) At any time within six months of his attaining majority, or of his obtaining
knowledge that he had been admitted to the benefits of partnership, whichever date is later,
such person may give public notice that he has elected to become or that he has elected not
to become a partner in the firm, and such notice shall determine his position as regards the
firm:
Provided that ­ if he fails to give such notice, he shall become a partner in the firm
on the expiry of the said six months.
(6) ……………..
13
Commissioner of Income Tax v. Seth Govindram Sugar Mills
8, and
S.P. Misra & Ors. v. Mohd. Laiquddin Khan & Anr.9
.

11.2     Shri     Gurukrishna     Kumar,       further   countered     the

submissions made by Shri Ranjit Kumar by contending that – (i)

no dispute qua the signature of Gopirathnam should be raised

before this Court, as there are concurrent findings by the courts

below    on     the   same   point;   (ii)   the   communication     dated

09.10.2002 was issued by Ranganathan to the Appellants when

they were arrayed as LRs of Gopirathnam in a decree for recovery

in favor of a Bank. Immediately thereafter, Ranganathan even

filed an application before the DRT expressly stating that

Gopirathnam had retired and that his LRs have nothing to do

with the Firm; (iii) even if certain documents bear the name of

Gopirathnam, it is immaterial as they will not create any rights in

favour of the Appellants, as the doctrine of holding out which is

applicable in cases like these, is meant only for the protection of

third parties and it does not affect the inter­se relationship of the

parties; and (iv) Gopirathnam never took any action for rendition

of accounts for twenty­five long years.
8 (1965) 3 SCR 488
9 (2019) 10 SCC 329
14
11.3 Responding to the contentions of Shri Ranjit Kumar made

on certain legal aspects concerning
Sections 24
,
32
,
63
and
72
of

the Act, Shri Gurukrishna Kumar contended that – (i) a reading

of
Sections 32(i)(c)
with
Section 24
points that notice to the acting

partner who habitually acts in business of the firm operates as

notice to the firm. In light of this, it was submitted that a notice

given to Ranganathan would operate as a notice on the Firm; and
(ii)
Sections 63
and
72
are only intended to protect third parties.

Not following the mandate of these provisions will not inure any

rights to the Appellants herein.
12.   Shri Raghavendra S. Srivatsa, AOR, who appeared on behalf

of Respondents Nos. 1­4 put forth the contention that – (i) postal

acknowledgement to Ranganathan’s letter dated 15.04.1973

bears the signature of Gopirathnam. In that view of the matter, it

is clear that it was the intention of Gopirathnam to retire from

the Firm; (ii) no reliance should be placed on the records of the

Stud Book Authority, as Gopirathnam was shown as a partner in

1998 even though he died in 1997 and that the name of

Lavakumar was never shown although he was a partner; and (iii)

Gopirathnam retired when the firm was going through tough

times. It was Ranganathan who rescued the sinking ship and
15
gave it a new lease of life. It would be unfair to allow the

Appellants to come back and seek a share in the Firm, especially

at a time when the Firm is thriving.
13.   Having heard the parties in detail we reserved the case for

orders on 03.08.2022.       After four weeks, on 01.09.2022 the

learned counsels informed this Court that the parties could not

arrive at any settlement.
14.   Conclusion: We have given our anxious consideration to the

dispute in hand.    Our impression that the parties must settle

their disputes amicably got strengthened after we heard the

parties in detail. Adversarial litigation focuses on the enquiry into

the truth or otherwise of every disputed fact, which most of the

time is technical in nature. By the end of it, when a Court takes a

decision, there is no scope for reconciliation or sharing, which is

essential for enduring happiness in a family. We are of the view

that a decision based on adjustment of equities between the

parties will be far more beneficial than rendering a decision

based on inferences drawn on contested facts and pure legalities.
15.   It is apparent from the record that from the very inception

of the legal proceedings, the interests of the parties were secured
16
with     the   Trial   Court   passing   an   order   directing   the

Defendant/Respondent to set aside an extent of eight acres of

land. This was an interim order subject to the outcome of the

proceedings. Though the suit was dismissed, the interim order

continued during the subsistence of the appeal before the High

Court.     Even this Court by its order dated 13.04.2009 had

directed the Respondents to ensure that the said eight acres are

kept vacant.     In fact, even Respondents Nos. 5 to 7 have kept

aside the eight acres of land outside the development that they

have undertaken. This submission was recorded in the order

dated 28.01.2013. By virtue of these two orders, eight acres of

land is vacant and free from any encumbrance.
16.    Orders passed by the Trial Court, High Court as well as this

Court to keep aside eight acres of land was only to secure the

probable share of the Appellants, in the event they succeeded.

Though, the Appellants have lost in the suit as well as in the

appeal, a direction can be given for granting a portion of the said

land to the Appellants so that their claim to some extent stands

satisfied. We are inclined to take this step because the parties are

closely related to each other.     Our order is confined only to a

small extent and this will not deprive the Respondents of the
17
fruits of the litigation in which they have succeeded concurrently.

The Appellants have also been contesting the case for more than

two decades. Having considered the matter in detail, we are of the

opinion that such an order could enure to the benefit of not only

the Appellants, but also that of the Respondents herein, for

building and reviving the relationship between the close members

of the family.
17.   In view of the above, while upholding the impugned

judgment passed by the High Court of Karnataka, we direct that

the Appellants will be entitled to three acres, out of the eight

acres of land set aside under the orders passed by the Trial

Court, the High Court and also by this Court. It has come on

record that the Firm had leased an extent of one acre to M/s

Karnataka    Dyeing   and   Processing   Company,    a   registered

partnership firm in which the first Appellant is one of the

partners and this partnership had also made certain investments

in the leased portion of the property. We direct that the three

acres to be allotted to the Appellant should include this one acre

of land. The remaining two acres shall be allotted by the

Respondents to the Appellants from the eight acres, which may

ideally be abutting the said one acre so that the Appellants can
18
enjoy a contiguous piece of three acres of land. We will, however,

leave it to the Respondents to decide upon the location of the two

acres as per their choice. These directions shall be complied

within a period of three months from today.
18.   For the reasons stated above, Civil Appeal No. 2741 of 2009

against the judgment of the High Court of Karnataka dated

22.01.2008 is disposed of with the direction that the Appellants

be entitled to an extent of three acres out of the eight acres of

land set aside as per the orders of this Court dated 13.04.2009

and 28.01.2013. The specific area to be allotted to the Appellants

shall be in accordance with the directions given in the above

paragraph.    These   directions        shall   be   complied   by   the

Respondents within a period of three months from today.
19.   The parties shall bear their own costs.
……………………………….J.
                                                 [B.R. GAVAI]

                                  ……………………………….J.
                          [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 23, 2022
19