[Cites
23
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Avani Jain vs Abhisheik Singh on 2 September, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Hima Kohli
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Reportable


                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION




                                       Criminal Appeal Nos 1408-1409 of 2022

                                    (Arising out of SLP(Crl) Nos 9992-9993 of 2016)




          XYZ                                                                         .... Appellant


                                                        Versus


          Abhisheik & Anr                                                         ...Respondents




                                               JUDGMENT
Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud, J



          1              Leave granted.
2              The appeals arise from the judgments of a Single Judge of the High Court of

                         Madhya Pradesh dated 22 August 2016 in Criminal Revision No 278 of 2016
Signature Not Verified
and Misc Criminal Case No 5495 of 2016. The High Court, while allowing a
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2022.09.12
revision against the decision of the 4th Additional Sessions Judge, Satna
14:30:38 IST
Reason:
dated 21 December 2015 came to the conclusion that the first respondent
2
was a juvenile on the date of the incident. We hold, for the reasons to follow,

      that the High Court has erred in its findings and that the plea of juvenility of

      the first respondent is based on fabricated documents.
3     On 24 July 2015, FIR No. 433/2015 was registered on the basis of information

      provided by the appellant at PS City Kotwali, Satna for the commission of

      offences punishable under
sections 363
,
366A
,
376
,
506
, and
120B
of the

      Indian Penal Code 1860 1 and
sections 3
and
4
of the Protection of Children

      from Sexual Offences Act 2012 2. The appellant, who was a minor at the time

      of commission of the offence, alleged that she had been subjected to gang

      rape by the first respondent and other persons. The alleged offence is stated

      to have taken place about three to four months prior to the registration of the

      FIR on 24 July 2015. During the course of the investigation, the first

      respondent was arrested along with other accused alleged to be involved in

      the commission of the offences.
4     On 6 August 2015, the first respondent was produced before the Court of the

      Judicial Magistrate First Class, Satna 3. The first respondent took the plea that

      he was a juvenile under the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)

      Act, 2000
4 on the date of the alleged offence. The counsel appearing on his

      behalf filed an application for bail, together with a certificate purported to have

      been issued by the Madhyamik Siksha Mandal, Madhya Pradesh pertaining

      to the appearance of the first respondent at the high school examination. The



1 “
IPC
”
2 “
POCSO Act
”
3 “JMFC”
4 “2000 Act”
2
3
certificate indicated that the date of birth of the first respondent was 30

    January 1999.
5   The JMFC conducted an inquiry and found that the certificate produced by

    the first respondent was fabricated. Therefore, the JMFC directed the police

    to register FIR No. 292/2015 dated 20 August 2015 in PS Civil Lines, Satna

    under
sections 193
,
465
,
466
,
468
, and
471
of IPC against the first respondent

    for intentionally using fabricated documents in judicial proceedings.


6   The 4th Additional Sessions Judge, Satna was directed to conduct an inquiry

    by an order dated 4 September 2015 of the Sessions Judge. The 4th

    Additional Sessions Judge conducted an inquiry, during the course of which

    the statements of witnesses were recorded. An inquiry report dated 21

    December 2015 was submitted to the Sessions Judge. The inquiry report

    arrived at a specific finding that:
(i)     PW-1 Maya Singh, the mother of the first respondent, had stated that

             the first respondent had not appeared for any examination after class

             9;
(ii)    The forged matriculation mark sheet was produced on behalf of the

             accused at the stage of the remand;
(iii)   The first school which was alleged to have been attended by the first

             respondent was being conducted by a relative;
(iv)    The admission form was not available in the school and the month of
3
4
the birth had been incorrectly recorded; and
(v)      The extract from the birth register was found to be interpolated and

                   there were no signatures of a competent officer on the corrections and

                   overwriting.
7        Due to the non-availability of a document confirming the age of the first

         respondent, the 4th Additional Sessions Judge decided to seek a medical

         opinion in accordance with rule 12(3)(b) of the Juvenile Justice (Care and

         Protection of Children) Rules, 2007 5. Accordingly, the 4th Additional Sessions

         Judge sought the opinion of the District Medical Board, which examined the

         first respondent. The District Medical Board opined that the approximate age

         of the first respondent was between 17 to 21 years based on medical

         evidence and literature. The 4th Additional Sessions Judge calculated the

         approximate age of the first respondent as 19 years. Thus, the 4th Additional

         Sessions Judge came to the conclusion that the first respondent was not a

         juvenile on the date of the incident.
8        In the meantime, the police completed the investigation in FIR No. 433/2015

         and submitted a charge sheet before the competent court dated 02 November

         2015 against the first respondent and six other co-accused persons for

         offences punishable under
sections 363
,
366
,
376(2)(vi)
,
120-B
and
506
of

         IPC. Thereafter, the police also completed the investigation in FIR No.

         292/2015 and filed a charge sheet dated 03 December 2015 against the first



5   “2007 Rules”
4
5
respondent and his counsel for offences punishable under
sections 193
,
465
,
466
,
468
,
471
, and
120B
of IPC.
9    The first respondent moved the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in a criminal

     revision against the report of the 4th Additional Sessions Judge dated 21

     December 2015. The Single Judge, by an order dated 22 August 2016,

     allowed the revision and accepted the plea of the first respondent that he was

     a juvenile at the time of the lodging of the FIR on 24 July 2015.


10   In support of the above conclusion, the High Court observed that a

     matriculation or equivalent certificate, if it is available, and, in its absence the

     date of birth from the school first attended would have to be accepted in the

     determination as to whether the first respondent was a juvenile on the date of

     the incident. The High Court has proceeded on the basis that the first

     respondent was admitted to Class 1 where his date of birth is mentioned as

     30 June 1999, which was corroborated by PW-4, the Director of Guardian and

     Guide Public School, Satna. The High Court noted that the birth certificate

     issued by the Municipal Corporation on 18 April 2002 indicated the date of

     birth as 30 January 1999. In this context, the High Court has held:
“17. As per birth and death register а certificate was issued by dispatch No.284
          on 18.4.2002 in regard to birth of Abhisheik Singh which is recorded as
          30.1.1999 at S. No.1545. Сору of the certificate is filed as Ех. А. 7. The same
          was issued with the signature and seal of Harimangal Singh, Registrar, Birth and
          Death, Municipal Corporation, Satna. These two documents have bееn
          discarded by the trial Court on the ground that the Director of Guardian and
          Guide School Мr. Chandra Mouliya is related to family of the accused. The
          admission form of the accused is not available in the record. The trial Court has
          also discarded the certificate issued bу the Municipal Corporation on the ground
          that there is some overlapping in the register. It is further observed by the trial
          Court that certificate was issued after а period of two years and Municipal
          Corporation was not eligible to issue certificate after а period of two years. The
5
6
trial Court has not considered the fact that certificate was issued in the year 2002
          much prior to the date of incident. The report of the offence was lodged at the
          concerning Р.S. on 24.7.2015.”




11   The High Court noted that the birth certificate issued by the Municipal

     Corporation in 2002 was valid as it was signed by the competent authority

     and was accompanied by a dispatch number, namely, entry no. 1545. The

     High Court observed that there was no reason for the accused to obtain a

     false document in 2002 for an incident which took place in 2015. Further, the

     High Court noted that the trial court has not recorded any finding that the birth

     certificate is forged or that it is not genuine. On this basis, the High Court

     reversed the findings of the 4th Additional Sessions Judge, Satna in the

     exercise of its revisional jurisdiction.
12   Notice was issued in these proceedings on 15 December 2016. During the

     course of the hearing, an order was passed on 18 April 2022 in the following

     terms:
“1 In order to enable the Court to form a correct view on the issue of juvenility,
          it is necessary that the State of Madhya Pradesh produces the original record of
          the Municipal Corporation, Satna pertaining to the alleged birth certificate of the
          accused Abhisheik Singh.
2 The Standing Counsel shall communicate the aforesaid direction and call the
          original record which shall be produced before this Court within a period of four
          weeks.
3 List the Special Leave Petitions on 17 May 2022.”




13   In pursuance of the above directions, an affidavit has been filed on behalf of

     the State of Madhya Pradesh by the Additional Superintendent of Police,

     Satna. The affidavit indicates that a committee of five officials was constituted
6
7
on 16 May 2022 to retrieve the records. A report has been submitted on 30

     May 2022 by the five-member committee. The relevant part of the report is

     in the following terms:
14   The translation of the relevant paragraph is extracted below:
“[…] On the basis of the aforesaid information the record kept in the Birth-Death
          Branch (Registration Booklet of April, 2002 and May, 2002) is submitted by the
          present clerk Sh. Rishi Kumar. Upon perusal of record it is found that the
          registration No. 1545 dated 18.04.2002 submitted before the court is not found
          marked in the register. The last entry made in the available record for the month
          of April 2002 is 1544 and the registration booklet and the issuing register for the
          next month of May, 2002 is also not available in the office. This information is
          given by Clerk Sh. Rishi Kumar Patel posted in Birth-Death branch.”
7
8
15   While setting aside the report of the 4th Additional Sessions Judge, the High

     Court has placed reliance on the extract from the birth register according to

     which the entry pertaining to the date of birth of the first respondent dated 30

     January 1999 at entry no. 1545 has been adverted to. Upon inquiry, as the

     above extract indicates, it has emerged that there is no entry at entry no. 1545

     dated 18 April 2002 in the birth register pertaining to the month of April 2002.
The 4th Additional Sessions Judge conducted a detailed inquiry on the plea

     of juvenility. The report of the 4th Additional Sessions Judge contains cogent

     reasons for coming to the conclusion that a fabricated record was produced

     in support of the plea of juvenility.
16   In a counter filed on behalf of the first respondent, it was submitted that the

     trial court could not have sought the opinion of the medical board under rule

     12(3) of the 2007 Rules without giving a clear finding against the birth

     certificate and the school certificate produced before it. It was urged that the

     birth certificate issued by the Municipal Corporation in 2002 is a valid

     document. Further, it was urged that the entry in the register of the school in

     which the first respondent was admitted to the first standard mentioning the

     first respondent’s date of birth as 30 June 1999 has been corroborated by a

     competent witness – the Director of Guardian and Guide Public School,

     Satna.
17   Before proceeding with our analysis, it is necessary to consider the relevant

     legal provisions.
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,

     2015
is a sequel to the now repealed 2000 Act. Section 7-A of the 2000 Act
8
9
provided the procedure to be followed when a claim of juvenility is raised

         before any court:
“7-A Procedure to be followed when claim of juvenility is raised before any
              court:
(1) Whenever a claim of juvenility is raised before any court or a court is of
              opinion that an accused person was a juvenile on the date of commission of the
              offence, the court shall make an inquiry, take such evidence as may be
              necessary (but not on affidavit) so as to determine the age of such person, and
              shall record a finding whether the person is a juvenile or a child or not, stating
              his age as nearly may be:
Provided that a claim of juvenility may be raised before any court and it shall be
              recognised at any stage, even after final disposal of the case, and such claim
              shall be determined in terms of the provisions contained in this Act and the Rules
              made thereunder, even if the juvenile has ceased to be so on or before the date
              of commencement of this Act.
(2) If the court finds a person to be a juvenile on the date of commission of the
              offence under sub-section (1), it shall forward the juvenile to the Board for
              passing appropriate orders and the sentence, if any, passed by a court shall be
              deemed to have no effect.”
18       Rule 12(3) of the 2007 Rules provides the procedure for determining the age

         by a court or by the Juvenile Justice Board 6. The rule is extracted below:
“12. Procedure to be followed in determination of age – (1) (2) * * *

              (3) In every case concerning a child or juvenile in conflict with law, the age
              determination inquiry shall be conducted by the court or the Board or, as the
              case may be, the Committee by seeking evidence by obtaining -
(a) (i) the matriculation or equivalent certificates, if available; and in the absence
              whereof;
(ii) the date of birth certificate from the school (other than a play school) first
              attended; and in the absence whereof;
(iii) the birth certificate given by a corporation or a municipal authority or a
              panchayat;
(b) and only in the absence of either (i), (ii) or (iii) of clause (a) above, the medical
              opinion will be sought from a duly constituted Medical Board, which will declare


6   “Board”
9
10
the age of the juvenile or child. In case exact assessment of the age cannot be
               done, the Court or the Board or, as the case may be, the Committee, for the
               reasons to be recorded by them, may, if considered necessary, give benefit to
               the child or juvenile by considering his/her age on lower side within the margin
               of one year.
and, while passing orders in such case shall, after taking into consideration such
               evidence as may be available, or the medical opinion, as the case may be,
               record a finding in respect of his age and either of the evidence specified in any
               of the clauses a(i), (ii), (iii) or in the absence whereof, clause (b) shall be
               conclusive proof of the age as regards such child or the juvenile in conflict with
               law.”

19      Rule 12(3)(a) of the 2007 Rules provides that for the purposes of the ‘age

        determination enquiry’ of a child or juvenile, evidence may be obtained by

        relying upon the following documents: (i) matriculation or equivalent

        certificates; (ii) date of birth certificate from school first attended; or (iii) birth

        certificate given by corporation or municipal authority or panchayat. At the

        end of sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (a) the rule uses the expression “and

        in the absence whereof”. Moreover, in the absence of any of the

        abovementioned three documents, medical opinion could be sought from a

        duly constituted Medical Board.
20       In
Ashwani Kumar Saxena v. State of Madhya Pradesh
7 a two-judge

        bench of this Court considered the provisions of Section 7-A of the 2000 Act

        along with rule 12(3)(a) of the 2007 Rules. The court held that it is only in

        cases where the documents stipulated under rule 12(3)(a) are found to be

        fabricated or manipulated that the court or the Board may direct a medical

        examination for age determination. The Court further laid down the guidelines

        for conducting the age determination inquiry:
7   (2012) 9 SCC 750
10
11
“32. “Age determination inquiry” contemplated under
Section 7-A
of the Act read
               with Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules enables the court to seek evidence and in that
               process, the court can obtain the matriculation or equivalent certificates, if
               available. Only in the absence of any matriculation or equivalent certificates, the
               court needs to obtain the date of birth certificate from the school first attended
               other than a play school. Only in the absence of matriculation or equivalent
               certificate or the date of birth certificate from the school first attended, the court
               needs to obtain the birth certificate given by a corporation or a municipal
               authority or a panchayat (not an affidavit but certificates or documents). The
               question of obtaining medical opinion from a duly constituted Medical Board
               arises only if the abovementioned documents are unavailable. In case exact
               assessment of the age cannot be done, then the court, for reasons to be
               recorded, may, if considered necessary, give the benefit to the child or juvenile
               by considering his or her age on lower side within the margin of one year.”
21      Thereafter, in
Abuzar Hossain v. State of West Bengal8
a three-judge

        bench of this Court observed that the credibility and acceptability of the

        documents stipulated under rule 12(3)(a) would depend upon the facts and

        circumstances of each case and no hard and fast rule as such could be laid

        down. The court held:
“39.3. As to what materials would prima facie satisfy the court and/or are
               sufficient for discharging the initial burden cannot be catalogued nor can it be
               laid down as to what weight should be given to a specific piece of evidence which
               may be sufficient to raise presumption of juvenility but the documents referred to
               in Rules 12(3)(a)(i) to (iii) shall definitely be sufficient for prima facie satisfaction
               of the court about the age of the delinquent necessitating further enquiry under
               Rule 12. The statement recorded under Section 313 of the Code is too tentative
               and may not by itself be sufficient ordinarily to justify or reject the claim of
               juvenility. The credibility and/or acceptability of the documents like the
               school leaving certificate or the voters' list, etc. obtained after conviction
               would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and no hard-
               and-fast rule can be prescribed that they must be prima facie accepted or
               rejected. In Akbar Sheikh [(2009) 7 SCC 415 : (2009) 3 SCC (Cri) 431]
               and Pawan [(2009) 15 SCC 259 : (2010) 2 SCC (Cri) 522] these documents
               were not found prima facie credible while in Jitendra Singh [(2010) 13 SCC 523
               : (2011) 1 SCC (Cri) 857] the documents viz. school leaving certificate,
               marksheet and the medical report were treated sufficient for directing an inquiry
               and verification of the appellant's age. If such documents prima facie inspire
               confidence of the court, the court may act upon such documents for the purposes



8   (2012) 10 SCC 489
11
12
of Section 7-A and order an enquiry for determination of the age of the
               delinquent.”

                                                                   (emphasis supplied)
22      The decision in
Abuzar Hossain
(supra) has been considered in successive

        decisions of this Court.
In
Parag Bhati v. State of Uttar Pradesh
9 a two-

        judge bench of this Court held that an enquiry for the determination of the age

        of a juvenile is permissible if there is any doubt or a contradictory stand is

        being taken by the accused. In this case, the Board disregarded date of birth

        of the accused recorded by the school on the ground that it was based on a

        forged transfer certificate. This Court did not find any illegality in the decision

        of the Board. The court observed that courts should be wary of adopting a

        casual or cavalier approach while deciding the juvenility of an accused in

        circumstances where a grave and heinous offence is committed.
23      In
Sanjeev Kumar Gupta v. State of Uttar Pradesh
10 this Court was called

        upon to decide the credibility and authenticity of a matriculation certificate for

        the purpose of an age determination enquiry of the accused. This Court

        observed that the matriculation certificate provided by the Central Board of

        Secondary Education was purely on the basis of records maintained by the

        Senior Secondary School, where the accused was a student from Class 5 to

        Class 10. It emerged that the records maintained by the school were without

        any underlying documents. The court held that the plea of juvenility could not

        be accepted because there was clear and unimpeachable evidence as to the




9   (2016) 12 SCC 744
10   (2019) 12 SCC 370
12
13
date of birth of the accused which had been recorded in the records of another

        school.
24      In another recent decision in
Rishipal Singh Solanki v. State of Uttar

        Pradesh
11, this Court was tasked to decide the credibility of the matriculation

        certificate issued by the Board of High School and Intermediate Examination,

        Uttar Pradesh. The Court upheld the credibility of the matriculation certificate

        on the ground that the date of birth recorded in the matriculation certificate

        was corroborated by school admission records. Further, it was observed that

        no other document indicated that the date of birth of the accused was contrary

        to what was indicated in the matriculation certificate.


25      In the present case, the mother of the first respondent categorically stated

        during the course of the enquiry that the first respondent had not studied

        beyond Class 9, and therefore did not appear for his matriculation

        examinations. The first respondent’s counsel submitted a matriculation

        certificate at the remand stage which was found to be forged by the JMFC

        after inquiry. This was specifically adverted to in the report of the 4th

        Additional Sessions Judge. In the absence of a matriculation certificate, it was

        the birth certificate from the school first attended which could have been relied

        upon.
26      The first respondent’s mother stated that the first respondent was admitted to

        Class 1 of Guardian and Guide Public School, Satna. The ‘scholar register’

        produced by the school mentions the date of birth of the first respondent as


11   2021 SCC OnLine SC 1079
13
14
30 June 1999. During the course of cross-examination, PW-4, who is the

     Director of Guardian and Guide Public School, admitted that no document

     regarding date of birth of the first accused was filed at the stage of admission.

     The mother of the first respondent has also admitted in the cross-examination

     that the date of birth in the scholar register is wrong. Additionally, the

     occupation of the first respondent’s father was initially mentioned as teacher,

     which was later corrected to service. However, the mother of first respondent

     has admitted during cross-examination that her husband was neither a

     teacher, nor did he do any service. It was also admitted that PW-4 is a relative

     of the first respondent. In view of the aforesaid circumstances, the 4th

     Additional Sessions Judge was right in doubting the credibility of birth

     certificate obtained from school.
27   In the absence of a credible birth certificate from school, the 4th Additional

     Sessions Judge examined the birth certificate given by the municipal

     authority. The birth certificate issued by the municipal authority is dated 18

     April 2002 under entry no. 1545 wherein the date of birth of the first

     respondent is mentioned as 30 January 1999. The 4th Additional Sessions

     Judge doubted the credibility of the birth certificate issued by the municipal

     authority because the documents were improperly maintained by the staff and

     were also found to be tampered. It was found that the birth register was

     interpolated and there were no signatures of the competent authority on the

     corrections and overwriting. The 4th Additional Sessions Judge has

     specifically adverted to the reasons for doubting the genuineness of the birth
14
15
certificate issued by the municipal authority. There is no valid basis to discard

     the finding.
28   In terms of the order dated 18 April 2022 in these proceedings, a five-member

     committee was constituted by Municipal Corporation, Satna to search out the

     birth certificate of the first respondent. After due scrutiny, it has been found

     that there is no entry of registration bearing entry no. 1545 pertaining to the

     date 18 April 2002 and the last entry is entry no 1544. Hence, it is apparent

     that the documents placed before the High Court by the first respondent in

     support of his claim of juvenility are fabricated and manipulated. In the

     circumstances, we find that the High Court was in error in relying on a

     fabricated birth certificate issued by the municipal authority to determine the

     juvenility of the first respondent.
29   The finding which was arrived at by the 4th Additional Sessions Judge, Satna

     was borne out from the record of the inquiry conducted. The High Court has

     manifestly erred in reversing that conclusion and entering a finding of

     juvenility. Counsel appearing on behalf of the State of Madhya Pradesh has,

     it may be noted, also drawn the attention of the Court to the report of the

     medical board. It is evident from the report of the medical board that the first

     respondent was not a juvenile. The entire record which was sought to be

     relied upon by the first respondent in support of the plea of juvenility was

     fabricated. The High Court has erred in accepting the plea of juvenility.
15
16
30   We accordingly set aside the impugned judgments of the High Court dated

     22 August 2016. The report of the 4th Additional Sessions Judge, Satna,

     rejecting the plea of juvenility shall accordingly stand sustained.


31   The appeals are allowed in the above terms.
32   The name of the appellant shall be redacted and reflected as ‘XYZ’ in the

     record.
33   Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                         [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                        …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                         [Hima Kohli]



New Delhi;
September 02, 2022
-S-
16