[Cites
14
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Yashpal Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 15 September, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE


                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1509 OF 2022


          Yashpal Singh                                                 …Appellant(s)
                                                 Versus
          State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.                               …Respondent(s)




                                               JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned final

                         judgment and order dated 18.01.2022 passed by the High

                         Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Criminal Misc. Bail

                         Application No. 49828 of 2021, by which, the High Court

                         has directed to release respondent No. 2 – original accused

                         on bail in Case Crime No. 95 of 2021 of Police Station

                         Falavda, District Meerut for the offences punishable under
Signature Not Verified
Sections 147, 148, 149, 324, 427, 441, 323, 506, 447, 307,
Digitally signed by
SNEHA
Date: 2022.09.15
17:03:56 IST
Reason:
302   and   34   of
IPC
,   original   informant   –   original
1
complainant has preferred the present appeal.
2.   At the outset, it is required to be noted that respondent

     No. 2 herein and others were specifically named in the FIR.

     A land dispute was going on between respondent No. 2 –

     Mehtab and the complainant side. It was specifically

     alleged in the FIR which was given by the appellant that

     the land dispute of a land in possession of informant –

     Yashpal Singh was pending in the Court against accused

     Mehtab and Deepak. It was further alleged that on

     intervening night of 29/30.06.2021 a tractor was driven

     over standing crops on the disputed land in question by

     the accused persons with intention to take over possession

     and all these accused persons were armed with pistols,

     lathi, iron rod etc. It was further alleged that informant

     along with his family members and people of village came

     to the spot and at that time accused persons attacked

     them with intention to kill, consequent to which Sompal

     brother of informant died on the spot and Sunder, Naresh,

     Mohit, Luvkush and Ankush were seriously injured. It was

     further alleged that accused Vikas @ Pappu fired shot at

     the deceased and the accused persons fled extending
2
threat of death. During the investigation, the statement of

      injured eye witness – appellant herein has been recorded

      and he supported the FIR version.
2.1   That thereafter respondent No. 2 herein, after his arrest

      and after his bail was rejected by the learned Trial Court,

      approached the High Court by way of present bail

      application. By the impugned judgment and order without

      considering the seriousness and/or gravity of the offences

      committed by the accused more particularly respondent

      No. 2 and without giving any reason, has released

      respondent No. 2 on bail.
3.    We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      respective parties at length.
4.    We have gone through the allegations made in the FIR. It

      is required to be noted that the land dispute between

      respondent No. 2 – Mehtab and complainant side is the

      motive. It is alleged in the FIR that on the earlier night

      they ran over the tractor on the standing crop and the

      accused persons tried to take over the possession. That

      thereafter when the informant and others gathered at the

      spot the accused persons named in the FIR attacked them
3
and in the said incident brother of the informant died and

      other persons were seriously injured. The aforesaid aspect

      has not at all been considered by the High Court while

      releasing respondent No. 2 on bail. No reason whatsoever

      has been given by the High Court while releasing

      respondent No. 2 on bail. When the accused person is

      facing the trial under
Sections 147
,
148
,
307
,
302
and

      other offences of
IPC
, which can be said to be are very

      serious offences, the High Court ought to have given

      cogent reasons while releasing respondent No. 2 on bail

      except narrating the submissions made on behalf of the

      accused and the State, no further independent reason has

      been given by the High Court while releasing respondent

      No. 2 on bail.
4.1   From the impugned judgment and order passed by the

      High Court, it appears that it was submitted on behalf of

      the accused that there was a dark night therefore, it was

      not possible to identify the accused and/or the person who

      attacked and it appears that without giving any cogent

      reason the High Court has prima facie accepted the same.

      However, it is required to be noted that the accused
4
persons were known to the complainant. There was a prior

     enmity. They came in a tractor. Therefore, at this stage it

     could not have been concluded and/or opined that it was

     not possible to identify the accused. Be that as it may,

     even otherwise the aforesaid can be said to be a defence on

     the part of the accused which is required to be considered

     at the time of trial. In the present case in the FIR the

     injured ­ informant – complainant has specifically named

     the accused persons. Even in his statement recorded

     under
Section 161
of the CrPC the informant has stood by

     what he has stated in the FIR. Under the circumstances,

     when the nature of allegations and the seriousness and

     gravity of the offences has not at all been considered by

     the High Court and no reasons whatsoever have been

     assigned by the High Court while releasing respondent No.

     2 – accused on bail, the impugned judgment and order

     passed by the High Court directing to release respondent

     No. 2 on bail is unsustainable and the same deserves to be

     quashed and set aside.
5.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

     present Appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and
5
order passed by the High Court releasing respondent No. 2

     on bail in connection with Case Crime No. 95 of 2021 of

     Police Station Falavda, District Meerut for the offences

     punishable under
Sections 147
,
148
,
149
,
324
,
427
,
441
,
323
,
506
,
447
,
307
,
302
and
34
of IPC, is hereby quashed

     and set aside. Now, respondent No. 2 – accused to

     surrender before the concerned Jail Authority forthwith.

     The present Appeal is accordingly allowed.
………………………………….J.
                                  [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                        ………………………………….J.
SEPTEMBER 15, 2022                [KRISHNA MURARI]
6