[Cites
12
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
1. Chandrabhan (Deceased) Through Lrs vs Saraswati on 22 September, 2022
Author:
Indira Banerjee
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
,
Indira Banerjee
REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.            OF 2022
                                [ARISING OUT OF S.L.P.(C) NO.8736 OF 2016]



          CHANDRABHAN (DECEASED) THROUGH
          LRS. & ORS.                                                    ....Appellant (s)

                                                     Versus


          SARASWATI & ORS.                                            .…Respondent (s)




                                                 JUDGMENT
Indira Banerjee, J.
Leave granted.
2.             This appeal filed by the Original Plaintiff, Chandrabhan, (since

          deceased, represented by his legal representatives), is against a final

          judgment and order dated 11 th January 2016 passed by the Aurangabad

          Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, allowing Second Appeal

          No. 45 of 1995 filed by the Respondents, reversing the judgment and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
order dated 10th November 1994 passed by the Additional District Judge,
NEETA SAPRA
Date: 2022.09.22
16:41:54 IST
Reason:
Beed, in Regular Civil Appeal No.361 of 1984 and dismissing Regular Civil
1
Suit No. 198 of 1979 filed by the Original Plaintiff praying for the relief of

declaration of ownership and perpetual injunction in respect of the suit

property.
3.    Sambhaji, grandfather of the Original Plaintiff, Chandrabhan had two

sons, Baliram and Rambhau. Baliram was the elder of the two sons of

Sambhaji.    The Original Defendant No.1 Yamunabai, was the wife of

Baliram.
4.    Baliram and Yamunabai (Original Defendant No.1) were childless,

Rambhau, younger brother of Baliram however had two sons, Digamber

and Chandrabhan (Original Plaintiff).
5.    Since Baliram and Yamunabai were childless, Baliram decided to

adopt his nephew, Chandrabhan (Original Plaintiff).             Chandrabhan

(Original Plaintiff) was Baliram’s younger brother Rambhau’s son, as noted

above. It is stated that Baliram and Rambhau had mutually agreed that

Baliram would adopt Rambhau’s son, Chandrabhan (Original Plaintiff).
6.    In the plaint, it was pleaded that the Original Plaintiff, Chandrabhan

was adopted by his uncle Baliram, in accordance with the rites and

customs of the community, in a ceremony attended by relatives,

neighbours and friends.   According to the Appellants, the Original Plaintiff

Chandrabhan was about 14 years of age at the time of his adoption by his

paternal uncle Baliram, who became his adoptive father.
7.    Baliram died intestate, in 1951, about six months after he adopted

the Original Plaintiff. After the death of his adoptive father Baliram, the
2
Original Plaintiff Chandrabhan shifted to a nearby village, from where he

managed the properties left by Baliram.       The Original Defendant No.2

Champabai is the first wife of the Original Plaintiff, Chandrabhan. In 1979,

the Original Defendant No. 1, Yamunabai, wife of Baliram purportedly

gifted the suit properties to the Original Defendant No. 2 Champabai, wife

of the Original Plaintiff.
8.    On 8th May 1979, the Original Plaintiff filed Regular Civil Suit No. 198

of 1979, in the Court of the Civil Judge, Senior Division, at Beed,

Maharashtra against the Original Defendant No.1 being Yamunabai, the

wife of Baliram and the Original Defendant No.2 being Champabai, his

own first wife praying for declaration of ownership of the suit properties,

perpetual injunction and other reliefs.   The Original Defendants filed their

written statements in the suit contending that the Original Plaintiff had not

been adopted by Baliram.
9.    The Respondent Nos. 1 to 4 being the Original Defendant Nos. 3 to 6

in the suit, filed their written statement in the suit supporting the stand of

the Original Defendant Nos. 1 and 2.
10.   The Original Plaintiff examined himself as well as five other

witnesses, including Prabhu Yogiraj Swami, the priest who conducted the

rituals at the time of adoption, to prove that he had been adopted by

Baliram. The Original Plaintiff also examined Shahurao Tulsiram Dhas to

prove that he had the possession and cultivation of the suit lands. The

Respondents, on the other hand, examined Original Defendant No.2,
3
Champabai and several others to establish that the Original Plaintiff had

not been legally and/or validly adopted by Baliram.
11.   The Civil Judge, Junior Division, Beed, Maharashtra being the Trial

Court dismissed the Regular Civil Suit No. 198 of 1979, by a judgment and

order dated 31st July 1984.
12.   On 5th November 1984, the Original Plaintiff filed an appeal being

Regular Civil Appeal No.361 of 1984 in the Court of the Additional District

Judge, Beed, Maharashtra being the First Appellate Court. By a judgment

and order dated 10th November 1994, the First Appellate Court allowed the

Regular Civil Appeal No.361 of 1984 and set aside the judgment and order

dated 31st July 1984 of the Trial Court whereby Regular Civil Suit No.198 of

1979 had been dismissed.
13.   The First Appellate Court, after considering the evidence on record,

concluded that the Original Plaintiff had been adopted by Baliram and

thus entitled to succeed the property of Baliram after his death.
14.   The Respondent Nos.1 to 4, being the Original Defendant Nos. 3 to

6, in the suit, who were purchasers pendente lite of the suit property filed

a Second Appeal No.45 of 1995 in the High Court of Judicature at Bombay

(Aurangabad Bench).      The Original Defendant No.1 and the Original

Defendant No.2 did not challenge the order passed by the First Appellate

Court.
4
15.   The High Court admitted the Second Appeal, which was heard at

length and allowed by a judgment and order dated 11 th January 2016,

which is impugned in this appeal before us.
16.   The High Court considered the following questions.
“(I) Whether the first appellate Court has committed error in not
       considering the circumstance that other transactions of sale made by
       the defendant No.1 in respect of three agricultural lands like Survey
       Nos.86/1, 100/3 and 109/2 which were left behind by Baliram are not
       challenged by the plaintiff in the suit?
(II) Whether the first appellate Court has committed error in not
       considering the circumstance that after the death of Baliram name of
       defendant No.1 only was mutated in the revenue record as successor
       of Baliram and the name of the plaintiff was not entered as successor
       of Baliram?
(III) Whether the first appellate Court has committed error in not
       considering the circumstance that the cooperative credit society could
       not have given loan to the plaintiff on the lands left behind by Baliram
       as plaintiff was not shown as owner in the revenue record and further
       there is the circumstance that it is defendant No.1 who had repaid the
       loan?
(IV) Whether the first appellate Court has committed error in not
       giving due weight to the circumstance like plaintiff never used name of
       Baliram as his father anywhere and he continued to use the name of
       his natural father Rambhau?
(V) Whether due to absence of specific pleadings with regard to
       particulars of adoption and due to inconsistencies in the evidence of
       the witnesses it can be said that there is sufficient evidence to prove
       the factum of adoption?”
17.   We find there were no questions of law before the High Court, not to

speak of substantial questions of law.
18.   Admittedly, evidence was adduced at the trial. The Original Plaintiff

examined himself as witness and examined five other witnesses.               The

Original Plaintiff gave evidence of adoption.            The second witness

Trivenibai, wife of Digamber, the brother of the Original Plaintiff,
5
Chandrabhan stated that there was an adoption ceremony held at the

residence of Rambhau.          She also stated that the Original Plaintiff

Chandrabhan had performed the last rites of Baliram as his adopted son.

The other witnesses also deposed that they had attended the ceremony at

which the Original Plaintiff Chandrabhan had been given in adoption to

Baliram.     The Trial Court rejected the contention of the Plaintiff on the

ground of contradiction and inconsistencies in the evidence.
19.      The Trial Court also found that the performance of the essential

requisites of adoption, such as giving in adoption and taking in adoption

had not been established.
20.      The First Appellate Court re-analysed the evidence and found that

some discrepancies and inconsistencies were natural since the adoption

had taken place in 1950 and evidence was taken in 1984, about 34 years

later. Thereby, some inconsistencies were only natural.
21.      The finding of the First Appellate Court that the Original Plaintiff,

Chandrabhan was the adopted son of Baliram was based on :-
(i)         The evidence of Trivenibai (PW-2), wife of the Original Plaintiff,
              Chandrabhan’s elder brother Digambar,
(ii)        The evidence of the priest, Prabhu Yogiraj Swami who
              conducted the ceremony of adoption. (PW-6).
(iii)       The admission that PW-6 was the family priest who performed
              rituals of the community to which the parties belonged.
(iv)        Evidence that the Original Plaintiff, Chandrabhan had been
              residing in the house of Baliram.
(v)         The Original Plaintiff Chandrabhan’s name shown as
              Chandrabhan Baliram in registers and documents dating back
              1960-61.
6
(vi)         The fact that Champabai, the first wife of the Original Plaintiff
                was residing with Original Defendant No.1, Yamunabhai.
(vii)        The properties of Rambhau were inherited by Digamber alone–
                the Original Plaintiff did not get any share in the properties.
(viii)       Evidence of PW-7, Bansi Hajare who had been Secretary of the
                Ghargaon society for the period from 1961 to 1963,
                mentioned that there was a crop loan account of Chandrabhan
                Baliram by Sl. No.35 in his register. The register shows that
                Chandrabhan Baliram repaid loan of Rs.150/- by 31st July 1961.
22.    The Original Plaintiff re-married one Shivganga while Champabai the

first wife continued to reside with the Original Plaintiff as stated in her

evidence.       Champabai had stated that the Original Plaintiff,           Shivganga

and her were residing together. The use of the middle name, which is the

father’s name, as Baliram instead of Rambhau after Chandrabhan, gave

rise to inference of adoption of Chandrabhan by Baliram.
23.    It is well settled that a Second Appeal under Section 100 of the Civil

Procedure Code, 1908 (
CPC
) can only be entertained on a substantial

question of law.
In
H.P. Pyarejan v. Dasappa (Dead) by LRs
. and

Others1, this Court held:-
“16. In our opinion, therefore, the judgment of the High Court
           suffers from serious infirmities. It suffers from the vice of exercise of
           jurisdiction which did not vest in the High Court under the law. Under
Section 100
of the Code (as amended in 1976) the jurisdiction of the
           High Court to interfere with the judgments of the courts below is
           confined to hearing on substantial questions of law.
Interference
           with finding of fact by the High Court is not warranted if it involves
           reappreciation of evidence (see
Panchugopal Barua v. Umesh
           Chandra Goswami
[(
1997) 4 SCC 713] and Kshitish Chandra
           Purkait v. Santosh Kumar Purkait
[(1997) 5 SCC 438] ). The High
           Court has not even discussed any evidence. No basic finding of fact
           recorded by the courts below has been reversed much less any
           reason assigned for taking a view contrary to that taken by the
           courts below. The finding on the question of readiness and

1 (2006) 2 SCC 496
7
willingness to perform the contract which is a mixed question of law
       and fact has been upset. It is statutorily provided by Section 16(1)(c)
       of the Act that to succeed in a suit for specific performance of a
       contract the plaintiff shall aver and prove that he has performed and
       has always been ready and willing to perform the essential terms of
       the contract which were to be performed by him other than the
       terms the performance of which has been prevented or waived by
       the defendant.”
24.
In
Ram Prasad Rajak v. Nand Kumar & Bros
. and

Another2, this Court held that, “Once the proceeding in the High

Court is treated as a Second Appeal under
Section 100
CPC, the

restrictions prescribed in the said Section would come into play. The

High Court could and ought to have dealt with the matter as a Second

Appeal and found out whether a substantial question of law arose for

consideration. Unless there was a substantial question of law, the

High Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the Second Appeal and

consider the merits.”
25.
In
Kshitish Chandra Purkait v. Santosh Kumar Purkait

and Others
3, this Court held that existence of substantial question

of law was the sine qua non for the exercise of jurisdiction under
Section 100
of the CPC.
26.
In
Kshitish Chandra Purkait
(supra), this Court held:-
“10. We would only add that (a) it is the duty cast upon the High
       Court to formulate the substantial question of law involved in the
       case even at the initial stage; and (b) that in (exceptional) cases, at
       a later point of time, when the Court exercises its jurisdiction under
       the proviso to sub-section (5) of
Section 100
CPC in formulating the
       substantial question of law, the opposite party should be put on
       notice thereon and should be given a fair or proper opportunity to
       meet the point. Proceeding to hear the appeal without formulating
       the substantial question of law involved in the appeal is illegal and is

2 (1998) 6 SCC 748
3 (1997) 5 SCC 438
8
an abnegation or abdication of the duty cast on court; and even
       after the formulation of the substantial question of law, if a fair or
       proper opportunity is not afforded to the opposite side, it will
       amount to denial of natural justice. The above parameters within
       which the High Court has to exercise its jurisdiction under
Section
       100
CPC should always be borne in mind. We are sorry to state that
       the above aspects are seldom borne in mind in many cases and
       second appeals are entertained and/or disposed of, without
       conforming to the above discipline.”
27.   The guidelines to determine what is a substantial question of

law within the meaning of
Section 100
CPC has been
laid down by
this

Court in Sir Chunnilal V. Lal Mehta & Sons v. Century Spinning

and Manufacturing Co. Ltd.4
28.
In Sir Chunilal V. Mehta and Sons (supra), this Court agreed with

and approved a Full Bench judgment of the Madras High Court in
Rimmalapudi Subba Rao v. Noony Veeraju and Ors.
5 which laid down

the principles for deciding when a question of law becomes a substantial

question of law.
29.
In
Hero Vinoth v. Seshammal6
, this Court followed Sir Chunilal

v. Mehta & Sons (supra) and other judgments and summarized the tests

to find out whether a given set of questions of law were mere questions of

law or substantial questions of law.
30.   The relevant paragraphs of the judgment of this Court in
Hero

Vinoth
(supra) are set out herein below:
“21. The phrase “substantial question of law”, as occurring in the
       amended
Section 100
CPC is not defined in the Code. The word
       substantial, as qualifying “question of law”, means of having
       substance, essential, real, of sound worth, important or

4 AIR 1962 SC 1314
5 AIR 1951 Mad 969
6 (2006) 5 SCC 545
9
considerable. It is to be understood as something in
       contradistinction with technical, of no substance or consequence, or
       academic merely. However, it is clear that the legislature has
       chosen not to qualify the scope of “substantial question of law” by
       suffixing the words “of general importance” as has been done in
       many other provisions such as
Section 109
of the Code or
Article
       133(1)(a)
of the Constitution. The substantial question of law on
       which a second appeal shall be heard need not necessarily be a
       substantial question of law of general importance. In Guran Ditta v.
Ram Ditta 55IA 235 : AIR 1928 PC 172] the phrase "substantial
       question of law" as it was employed in the last clause of the then
       existing
Section 100
CPC (since omitted by the
Amendment Act,
       1973
) came up for consideration and their Lordships held that it did
       not mean a substantial question of general importance but a
       substantial question of law which was involved in the case.
In Sir
       Chunilal case [1962 Supp (3) SCR 549 : AIR 1962 SC 1314] the
       Constitution Bench expressed agreement with the following view
       taken by a Full Bench of the Madras High Court in
Rimmalapudi
       Subba Rao v. Noony Veeraju
[AIR 1951 Mad 969 : (1951) 2 MLJ 222
       (FB)] : (Sir Chunilal case [1962 Supp (3) SCR 549 : AIR 1962 SC
       1314] , SCR p. 557)
          “[W]hen a question of law is fairly arguable, where there is
          room for difference of opinion on it or where the Court thought
          it necessary to deal with that question at some length and
          discuss alternative views, then the question would be a
          substantial question of law. On the other hand if the question
          was practically covered by the decision of the highest court or
          if the general principles to be applied in determining the
          question are well settled and the only question was of applying
          those principles to the particular fact of the case it would not
          be a substantial question of law.”
31.   The proper test for determining whether a question of law raised in

the case is substantial would be, whether it is of general public

importance or whether it directly and substantially affects the rights of the

parties and if so, whether it is either an open question in the sense that it

is not finally settled by this Court. If the question is settled by the highest

court or the general principles to be applied in determining the question

are well settled and there is a mere question of applying those principles

or the question raised is palpably absurd, the question would not be a

substantial question of law.
10
32.    To be ‘substantial’, a question of law must be debatable, not

previously settled by law of the land or a binding precedent, and must

have a material bearing on the decision of the case, if answered either

way, insofar as the rights of the parties before it are concerned. To be a

question of law "involving in the case" there must be first, a foundation for

it laid in the pleadings and the question should emerge from the

sustainable findings of fact arrived at by court of facts and it must be

necessary to decide that question of law for a just and proper decision of

the case. An entirely new point raised for the first time before the High

Court is not a question involved in the case unless it goes to the root of

the matter. It will, therefore, depend on the facts and circumstance of

each case whether a question of law is a substantial one and involved in

the case or not, the paramount overall consideration being the need for

striking a judicious balance between the indispensable obligation to do

justice at all stages and impelling necessity of avoiding prolongation in the

life of any lis. (See
Santosh Hazari v. Purushottam Tiwari7
).
33.    The principles relating to
Section 100
of the CPC relevant for this

case may be summarised thus:
(i)    An inference of fact from the recitals or contents of a

      document is a question of fact. But the legal effect of the terms of a

      document is a question of law. Construction of a document involving

      the application of any principle of law, is also a question of law.
Therefore, when there is misconstruction of a document or wrong



7 (2001) 3 SCC 179
11
application of a principle of law in construing a document, it gives rise

to a question of law.
(ii)   The High Court should be satisfied that the case involves a

substantial question of law, and not a mere question of law. A

question of law having a material bearing on the decision of the case

(that is, a question, answer to which affects the rights of parties to

the suit) will be a substantial question of law, if it is not covered by

any specific provisions of law or settled legal principle emerging from

binding precedents and involves a debatable legal issue.                 A

substantial question of law will also arise in a contrary situation,

where the legal position is clear, either on account of express

provisions of law or binding precedents, but the court below has

decided the matter, either ignoring or acting contrary to such legal

principle. In the second type of cases, the substantial question of law

arises not because the law is still debatable, but because the decision

rendered on a material question, violates the settled position of law.
(iii) The general rule is that the High Court will not interfere with

findings of facts arrived at by the courts below. But it is not an

absolute rule. Some of the well-recognised exceptions are where (i)

the courts below have ignored material evidence or acted on no

evidence; (ii) the courts have drawn wrong inferences from proved

facts by applying the law erroneously; or (iii) the courts have wrongly

cast the burden of proof. When we refer to "decision based on no

evidence", it not only refers to cases where there is a total dearth of
12
evidence, but also refers to any case, where the evidence, taken as a

      whole, is not reasonably capable of supporting the finding.
34.    In this case, it cannot be said that the First Appellate Court acted on

no evidence.    The Respondents in their Second Appeal before the High

Court did not advert to any material evidence that had been ignored by

the First Appellate Court.   The Respondents also could not show that any

wrong inference had been drawn by the First Appellate Court from proved

facts by applying the law erroneously.
35.    In this case, as observed above, evidence had been adduced on

behalf of the Original Plaintiff as well as the Defendants.         The First

Appellate Court analysed the evidence carefully and in effect found that

the Trial Court had erred in its analysis of evidence and given undue

importance to discrepancies and inconsistencies, which were not really

material, overlooking the time gap of 34 years that had elapsed since the

date of the adoption. There was no such infirmity in the reasoning of the

First Appellate Court which called for interference.
36.    Right of appeal is not automatic. Right of appeal is conferred by

statute. When statute confers a limited right of appeal restricted only to

cases which involve substantial questions of law, it is not open to this

Court to sit in appeal over the factual findings arrived at by the First

Appellate Court.
37.    The questions raised in High Court, did not meet the tests
laid down

by
this Court for holding that the questions are substantial questions of
13
law. We are constrained to hold that there was no question of law, let

alone any substantial question of law, involved in the Second Appeal.
38.   The appeal is, for the reasons, as discussed above, allowed. The

impugned judgment and order is set aside and the judgment and

order/decree of the First Appellate Court in Regular Civil Appeal No.361 of

1984 is restored.
.……..............................J.
                                                [ INDIRA BANERJEE ]




                                             …..................................J.
                                               [ J.K. MAHESHWARI ]
NEW DELHI
SEPTEMBER 22, 2022
14