[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Gyanendra Kumar Singh And Ors. Etc vs Bihar Legislative Assembly Patna And ... on 28 September, 2022
Bench:
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 5463-5464 OF 2015


     GYANDENDRA KUMAR & ORS.                                                 Appellants

                                                               VERSUS

     BIHAR LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY,
     PATNA & ANR. ETC.                                                       Respondents



                                                  O R D E R
The   instant    appeals      arise     out    of    the   order    of

     disqualification                    issued   by   the   then   Speaker    of   15th   Bihar

     Legislative Assembly.                        The term of said Assembly was from

     20.11.2010 till 20.11.2015.
One of the orders passed by the Speaker on 01.11.2014, in

     its operative part, directed as under:
“27. … I have reached this conclusion that due to
                              proved acts, conduct and attitude of the above
                              four Hon’ble Members they have been disqualified
                              from the membership of Bihar Assembly under the
                              para   2(1)(a)   of  the   tenth   schedule   of
                              Constitution.
28. Therefore I am hereby declaring Sh. Gyanendra
                             Kumar Singh, Sh. Rahul Kumar, Sh. Ravindra Rai
                             and Sh. Neeraj Kumar Singh as disqualified from
Signature Not Verified       the membership of Bihar Assembly and issuing
Digitally signed by
BABITA PANDEY
Date: 2022.10.01
instructions to delete the names of above four
13:51:35 IST
Reason:                      members from the list of members. Information to
                             this effect must be sent without delay to the
                             Election Commission of India.    As a result of
                             this order, the above four Hon’ble Members will
2
not get any facility as an Ex-Member of Bihar
             Assembly.”

    Without going into the details about the challenge raised

by the disqualified members, suffice it to state that the

order   of    disqualification    was   stayed   and       the   benefit   of

interim order was enjoyed by said disqualified Members all

through.
The 15th Legislative Assembly stood dissolved long back.

Today, the 17th Legislative Assembly is currently going on.

    Mr. Devadatt Kamat, learned Senior Advocate appearing for

the appellant has invited our attention to the decision of

this Court in
Shrimanth Balasaheb Patil v. Speaker, Karnataka

Legislative     Assembly   &     Others
,   (2020)      2     SCC   595     and

particularly to the following paragraphs:
“137. It is necessary for us to look at the submission
    of the learned Senior Counsel, Mr Kapil Sibal, that
    the Speaker can still be said to have inherent powers
    which allows him to pass restrictions like the one
    impugned herein. On this point, the counsel for the
    petitioners argued that such a broad inherent power
    does not exist with the Speaker. He contended that
    even for granting leave of absence, the Speaker is
    required to present the same before the Legislative
    Assembly, which needs to accept the leave application
    before leave of absence is actually granted.
138. We are unable to agree with the contention of
    the learned Senior Counsel, Mr Kapil Sibal, that the
    power of the Speaker to bar a disqualified Member
    from contesting re-election is inherent to his role
    and is required to be read into the Constitution to
    prevent the Speaker from becoming toothless. When the
    express provisions of the Constitution provide for a
    specific eventuality, it is not appropriate to read
    an “inherent” power to confer additional penal
3
consequences. To do so, and accept the contention of
    the respondents, would be against the express
    provisions of the Constitution.
141. It is clear that nothing can be added to the
    grounds of disqualification based on convenience,
    equity, logic or perceived political intentions.
142. It is the contention of the respondents that the
    Court should consider desirability of having a
    stricter model of disqualification wherein a person
    who has jumped the party lines should not be
    encouraged and should be punished with severe penal
    consequences for attempting to do so. Further,
    learned Senior Counsel, Mr Kapil Sibal, has termed
    the actions of the petitioners as a constitutional
    sin.”

    It is thus clear that in exercise of his powers under the

10th Schedule, the Speaker does not have the power either to

indicate      the    period    for    which   a    person        would        stand

disqualified nor to bar someone from contesting elections.
Relying on these principles, Mr. Kamat submits that the

direction issued by the Speaker, as quoted in paragraph 28 of

his order dated 01.11.2014, went far beyond the scope of his

power.
Since      the    15th    Legislative     Assembly      is     no     longer

functioning, we need not go into the basic issue whether the

order    of   disqualification       issued   by   the   Speaker         of    the

Assembly was correct or not.
At this juncture, we are called upon to consider the

effect of some of the directions issued by the Speaker in

paragraph 28 of his order and on the touchstone of the law
4
laid down by
this Court in
Shrimanth Balasaheb Patil
(supra)

in   our    considered   view,     the   Speaker      was   not    within    his

jurisdiction to issue directions other than those pertaining

to disqualification.
Since     we     have   not     gone      into     the       question    of

disqualification, all questions are left open.
We, therefore, set aside the directions other than those

pertaining to disqualification per se, issued by the Speaker

in paragraph 28 of his Order.
With     these   observations,      the    instant       appeals    stand

disposed of, with no order as to costs.
.....................…....CJI.
(UDAY UMESH LALIT)



                                   ............................J.
                                   (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)



                                   ............................J.
                                   (J.B. PARDIWALA)
New Delhi,
September 28, 2022