[Cites
8
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
M. Mohan vs The State Government Of Tamil Nadu on 2 September, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE


                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                           EXTRA­ORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION
              Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C) Nos. 12616­17/2022


         M. Mohan                                                     …Appellant(s)


                                                Versus


         The State Government of Tamil Nadu & Ors.                  …Respondent(s)


                                           JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         common judgment and order dated 22.03.2022 passed by

                         the High Court of Judicature at Madras in Writ Appeal Nos.

                         2169 and 2170 of 2021, by which, the Division Bench of

                         the High Court has dismissed the said appeals and has

                         confirmed the judgment and order passed by the learned

                         Single Judge in respective writ petitions, the original writ
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHA SUNDRIYAL
Date: 2022.09.02
18:03:48 IST
Reason:
1
petitioner – original land owner has preferred the present

      Special Leave Petitions.
2.   That the lands in question owned by the petitioner herein –

     original land owner were required to construct Grade

     Separators on Periyar EVR Salai near Aminjakari, Nelson

     Manickam Road Junction and Anna Nagar 3 rd Avenue

     junction, for the purpose of constructing a Flyover and

     Subway in the said location. The said lands were acquired

     under the provisions of the
Tamil Nadu Highways Act, 2001
(hereinafter referred to as the Act, 2001). That a notice

     under
Section 15(2)
of the Act, 2001 was issued inviting

     objections of owners and any other person having interest in

     the lands to be acquired to show cause as to why the lands

     may not be acquired. The petitioner herein – original land

     owner submitted his detailed objections and the notices

     were also sent to the highways authorities/department of

     the division concerned. According to the State, after

     considering the objections raised by the original land owner

     on the report submitted by the highways authorities, a

     notification under
Section 15(1)
of the Act, 2001 was issued.

     The   original   land   owners   being   aggrieved   with   the
2
notification issued under
Section 15(1)
of the Act, 2001 filed

writ petitions before the High Court contending, inter­alia,

that the notification under
Section 15(1)
of the Act, 2001 is

in violation of the procedure to be followed under Rule 5 of

the Tamil Nadu Highways Rules, 2003 (hereinafter referred

to as the Rules, 2003). It was the case on behalf of the

original writ petitioner that Rule 5 lays down the manner for

publication of the public notice and the manner of

conducting the enquiry. According to the original writ

petitioner, before publishing a notice under
Section 15(1)
,

the Government or Collector or Special Deputy Collector

shall call upon the owner and any other person having

interest in the land to show cause as to why the land may

not be acquired. If objections are received from a person

interested in the land, the Government or Collector or

Special Deputy Collector shall fix a date for hearing the

objections and give notice thereof to the objector as well as

to the Highways Department. According to the original land

owner, thereafter the Highways Department shall file, on or

before the date fixed by the Government or Collector or

Special Deputy Collector a statement by way of an answer
3
or response to the objections and may also depute a

      representative to attend the enquiry and thereafter the

      Government or Collector or Special Deputy Collector shall

      hear the objector and the Highways Department and record

      any evidence that may be produced by either party and on

      completion of the enquiry, the Collector shall submit all

      details of the enquiry to the Government to pass an order

      under sub­section (3) of
Section 15
. According to the

      original writ petitioner without waiting for the response from

      the   Highways    Department      and   without   giving   any

      opportunity of being heard to the objectors, the notification

      under
Section 15(1)
of the Act, 2001 has been issued, which

      is in clear violation of Rule 5 of Rules, 2003.

2.1   On the other hand, it was the case on behalf of the State

      that the notifications under
Section 15(1)
of the Act, 2001

      was issued after considering the report of the Collector on

      the objections submitted by the original land owners and

      even the response from the Highways Department was

      received. That the learned Single Judge by a detailed

      judgment and order dismissed the writ petitions by

      observing that the notification under
Section 15(1)
of the
4
Act, 2001 was followed by a detailed enquiry and after

      considering the objections raised by the original land

      owners. The learned Single Judge opined that there was

      substantial compliance and there is no illegality committed

      in issuing the notification under
Section 15(1)
of the Act,

      2001.
2.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and

      order passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the

      writ petitions, the original writ petitioner filed writ appeal(s)

      before the High Court. By the common impugned judgment

      and order, the Division Bench of the High Court has

      dismissed the said appeal(s) which has given rise to the

      present Special Leave Petitions.
3.    Shri Huzefa A. Ahmadi, learned Senior Advocate has

      appeared on behalf of the petitioner – original land owner. It

      is vehemently submitted by Shri Ahmadi that in the present

      case before issuing notification under
Section 15(1)
of the

      Act, 2001, the procedure required to be followed under Rule

      5 of the Rules, 2003, which was required to be strictly

      followed, have not been followed.
5
3.1   Shri Ahmadi, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf

      of the petitioner has submitted that before issuing a

      notification under
Section 15(1)
, the following procedure as

      per Rules 5(2) and 5(3) shall have to be strictly followed: ­
(i)  State’s delegated authority receives objections of

                    the land owner ­ Rule 5(2);
(ii)    State’s delegated authority fixes a date for

                    hearing the objections and gives notice thereof to

                    the objector and the requisitioning authority ­

                    Rule 5(2);
(iii)   Copy of the land owner’s objections shall be

                    forwarded to the requisitioning authority ­ Rule

                    5(2);
(iv)    On the date fixed for enquiry, the State shall

                    hear the objector and the representative of the

                    requisitioning   authority,   if   any    and   record

                    evidence ­ Rule 5(3);
(v)     On or before the date fixed for hearing, the

                    requisitioning authority may submit an answer

                    statement to the objections ­ Rule 5(2)

           It is submitted that in the present case, without

      waiting       for   any   response      from      the     Highways

      Department/authorities to the objections raised by the
6
original land owner, notification under
Section 15(1)
of the

      Act, 2001 has been issued.
3.2   It is further submitted that in the present case the

      acquisition of the petitioner’s land was sought to be done in

      two parts. While in the first part, the petitioner’s objections

      were submitted on 15.12.2010. However, the requisitioning

      authority’s (Highways Department) response thereto was

      sent only on 25.01.2011 – a month after the enquiry was

      superficially held on 24.12.2010. It is contended that the

      aforesaid is in clear violation of the procedure envisaged

      under the Rules. It is submitted that having forwarded the

      objections to the requisitioning authority seeking for its

      comments, the enquiry ought not to have been held prior to

      receipt of the comments. That even after receiving of the

      comments     of   the   requisitioning   authority,   post   the

      superficial enquiry, the same were not provided to the

      petitioner   and/or     no   fresh   enquiry   was    conducted

      thereafter, prior to the issuance of notification under
Section 15(1)
of the Act, 2001. That if such comments were

      provided to the petitioner, he would have been in a better

      position to place before the State, inter­alia, that his
7
objections were not properly considered and/or that the

      response of the requisitioning authority did not respond to

      his specific objections; the response was faulty, incorrect,

      etc. It is submitted that therefore, the petitioner was

      deprived of a meaningful enquiry under the Act and Rules,

      thereby causing grave prejudice to him.
3.3   It is submitted that meanwhile, in case of the acquisition

      under the second part, the petitioner submitted his

      objections on 15.12.2011, and the enquiry was superficially

      held on 15.12.2011 itself. It was an empty formality.

      Therefore, for the second part of the acquisition, the

      petitioner’s   objections   were   never   forwarded   to   the

      requisitioning authority, which is a mandatory requirement

      as per Rule 5(2). Further, there was no notice fixing a date

      for hearing of objections under Rule 5(2) and the hearing

      was held on the same day the objections were required to be

      submitted, which is also contrary to Rules.

3.4   It is submitted that even otherwise a perusal of the

      responses given by the requisitioning authority shows

      identical and mechanical responses it gave in response to
8
all objectors, thereby clearly showing non­application of

      mind.
3.5   It is further contended by Shri Ahmadi, learned Senior

      Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner that as such

      the Division Bench of the High Court has materially erred in

      not considering and/or in holding that Rules 5(2) and 5(3)

      are to be ignored as they are not in conformity with
Section

      15(2)
of the Act and therefore not enforceable. It is urged

      that there was no occasion for the Division Bench of the

      High Court to hold so, more particularly, when these Rules

      were    duly   framed   and   placed    before   the   Legislative

      Assembly and issued, and have stood the test of time. It is

      submitted that their vires have never been questioned and

      the State has been following the Rules without demur. That

      the High Court ought to have appreciated that the

      procedure set down by these Rules are a safeguard against

      arbitrariness,   and    protect   the    expectation     of   fair

      adjudication. Reliance is placed on the decision of this

      Court in the case of
State of Mysore & Ors. Vs. V.K.

      Kangan & Ors.
; (1976) 2 SCC 895 wherein it is held by

      this Court that there is no conflict between Rule 3(b) of the
9
Tamil Nadu Land Acquisition Rules and
Section 5A(2)
of the

      Land Acquisition Act, 1894. It is submitted that the said

      Rule 3(b) is similar to the present Rule 5(2).

3.6   Making the above submissions it is prayed to set aside the

      impugned judgment(s) and order(s) passed by the High

      Court and consequently to set aside the acquisition.
4.    Heard Shri Huzefa A. Ahmadi, learned Senior Advocate,

      appearing on behalf of the petitioner.
4.1   That the petitioner herein – original writ petitioner before

      the High Court challenged the acquisition of lands in

      question which were acquired under the provisions of the
Tamil Nadu Highways Act, 2001
. The acquisition was

      challenged, inter­alia, on the ground that the procedure

      required under Rule 5 of Rules, 2003 has not been followed

      and while considering the objections raised by the petitioner

      – land owner the opinion of the highways authorities of the

      division concerned was not considered and also on the

      ground that before issuing notification under
Section 15(1)
of the Act, 2001, the objections of the land owner were not

      properly   considered.   That   the   learned    Single   Judge

      dismissed the writ petitions observing that there was a
10
substantial compliance of the procedure as required to be

     followed under Rule 5 of Rules, 2003 inasmuch as the

     objections raised by the petitioner – original land owner,

     were specifically dealt with and considered before issuing

     the notification under
Section 15(1)
of the Act, 2001.

     However, while affirming the judgment and order passed by

     the learned Single Judge, the Division Bench of the High

     Court has further observed that Rule 5(2) to Rule 5(3) is not

     in consonance with
Section 15(2)
and therefore, it is to be

     ignored.
5.   While appreciating the submissions made by Shri Ahmadi,

     learned Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of the

     petitioner,
Section 15
of the Act, 2001 and Rule 5 of Rules,

     2003 are required to be referred to and considered, which

     are as under: ­

          “TAMILNADU HIGHWAYS ACT, 2001
Section 15
. Power to acquire land:
(1) If the Government are satisfied that any land is
          required for the purpose of any highway or for
          construction of bridges, culverts, causeways or other
          structures thereon or for any purpose incidental or
          ancillary thereto, in furtherance of the objects of this
          Act, they may acquire such land by publishing in the
          Tamil Nadu Government Gazette a notice specifying
          the description of such land and the particular
          purpose for which such land is required.
11
(2) Before publishing a notice under Sub­section (l),
the Government shall call upon the owner and any
other person having interest in such land to show
cause within such time as may be specified in the
notice, why the land should not be acquired. The
Government shall also cause a public notice to be
given in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Government may, after considering the cause,
if any, shown by the owner or other person having
interest on such land, pass such an order under sub­
section (1), as they may deem fit.”

“TAMIL NADU HIGHWAYS RULES, 2003
5. Manner of publication of the public notice. ­
Before publishing a notice under sub­section (1) of
section 15
, the Government or the Collector or the
Special Deputy Collector (Land Acquisition), Tamil
Nadu Urban Development Project III, as the case may
be shall in addition to calling upon the owner and any
other person having interest in the land to show cause
as to why the land should not be acquired, shall also
cause a public notice to that effect to be published in
one English and in one Tamil newspapers having
circulation in the locality. The said notice shall also be
displayed in the offices of the,­
(i)     Highways Authority of the division concerned;
(ii)    Village Administrative Officer of the village
        concerned; and
(iii)   Tahsildar of the taluk concerned.
(2) If any objection is received from a person interested
in the land within the time prescribed in the public
notice issued under sub­
section 2
of
section 15
, the
Government or the Collector or the Special Deputy
Collector (Land Acquisition), Tamil Nadu Urban
Development Project III, as the case may be, shall fix a
date for hearing the objections and give notice thereof
to the objector as well as to the Highways Department.
Copies of the objection shall also be forwarded to the
Highways Department. The Highways Department may
file on or before the date fixed by the Government or
the Collector as the case may be, a statement by way
of answer to the objections and may also depute a
representative to attend the enquiry;
12
(3) On the date fixed for enquiry or any other date to
           which the enquiry may be adjourned, the Government
           or the Collector or the Special Deputy Collector (Land
           Acquisition), Tamil Nadu Urban Development Project
           III, as the case may be, shall hear the objector or a
           person authorised by him in this behalf and the
           representatives, if any, of the Highways Department
           and record any evidence that may be produced in
           support of the objection and in support of the need for
           acquiring the land;
(4) Where the enquiry is conducted by the Collector, on
           completion of the enquiry, the Collector shall submit
           all the details of the enquiry to the Government to pass
           order under sub­section (3) of
section 15
;
(5) Where the enquiry is conducted by the
           Government, the Government will pass order under
           sub­section (3) of
section 15
;”


5.1   In the present case public notice under
Section 15(2)
of the

      Act, 2001 was issued on 30.11.2010 and paper publication

      under
Section 15(2)
notice was issued on 03.12.2010. That

      the petitioner submitted his objections on 15.12.2010;

      enquiry was conducted on 24.12.2010; objections were sent

      to the Highways Department and the remarks were called

      for on 20.12.2010. The Highways Department forwarded its

      reply/statement may be after conduct of the enquiry on

      24.12.2010 but before the notification under
Section 15(1)
of the Act, 2001 was issued. It is the case on behalf of the

      petitioner that at the time when the enquiry was conducted

      response from the Highways Department was not before the
13
authority and no opportunity was given to the petitioner to

put forward his case on the answers to the objections

tendered by the Highways Department. However, it is to be

noted that
Section 15
is a substantive provision which

confers powers upon the authority to acquire the land. Sub­

section (1) of
Section 15
provides for issuance of the

notification to acquire land required for the purpose of any

highway or for construction of bridges, culverts, causeways,

or other structures thereon or for any purpose incidental or

ancillary thereto. Sub­section (2) of
Section 15
provides that

before publishing a notice under sub­section (l), the

Government shall call upon the owner and any other person

having interest in such land to show cause within such time

as may be specified in the notice, why the land should not

be acquired. Sub­section (3) of
Section 15
provides that the

Government may, after considering the cause [objections

raised pursuant to the notice under sub­section (2) of
Section 15
], pass such order under sub­section (1). Rule 5

of the Rules, 2003 can be said to be a procedural provision

and it provides for the manner of publication of public

notice. Sub­rule (2) of Rule 5 provides that if any objection
14
is received from a person interested in the land within the

time prescribed in the public notice issued under sub­
section 2
of
Section 15
, the Government or the Collector or

the Special Deputy Collector (Land Acquisition), shall fix a

date for hearing the objections and give notice thereof to the

objector as well as to the Highways Department. It further

provides that copies of the objection shall also be forwarded

to the Highways Department and the Highways Department

MAY file on or before the date fixed by the Government or

the Collector, as the case may be, a statement by way of

answer or response to the objections and may also depute a

representative to attend the enquiry. The object and

purpose of sub­rule (2) of Rule 5 seems to be to give an

opportunity to the Highways Department also to meet with

the objections raised by the land owners and so as to give

an opportunity to the Highways Department to put forward

their   case.   It   further   provides   that   the   Highways

Department may file a statement by way of answer to the

objections. It is not a mandatory requirement. Therefore, the

Highways Department may or may not file a statement by

way of answer to the objections. There is no further
15
provision to furnish a statement by way of answer to the

     objections filed by the Highways Department to the original

     land owners. The object and purpose of said sub­rule (2) of

     Rule 5 as observed hereinabove is to hear the Highways

     Department on the objections raised by the original land

     owners. Therefore, non­filing of a statement by way of

     answer to the objections by the Highways Department

     and/or non­furnishing the copy of the same to the original

     land   owners   shall   not   vitiate   the   entire   process   of

     acquisition process and/or the notification issued under

     sub­section (1) of
Section 15
of the Act, 2001. It can be said

     that the said provision is for the benefit of the Highways

     Department so that no adverse decision is taken by the

     State Government without giving an opportunity to the

     Highways Department.
6.   In the present case, before issuance of notification under
Section 15(1)
of the Act, 2001, fullest opportunity has been

     given to the original land owner to submit his objections.

     Thereafter, the enquiry has been conducted as required

     under sub­section (2) of
Section 15
and after considering

     the objections and having been satisfied that the land is
16
required for the purpose of Highways Department, the

     notification under
Section 15(1)
of the Act, 2001 has been

     issued. It is to be noted that before issuing the notification

     under
Section 15(1)
of the Act, 2001, a statement by way of

     answer to the objections by the Highways Department was

     before the authority and thereafter the notification under
Section 15(1)
of the Act, 2001 has been issued. Therefore,

     the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench of the High

     Court was right in observing that there is a substantial

     compliance of
Section 15
of the Act, 2001 read with Rule 5

     of the Rules, 2003 and no interference of the Court is called

     for.
7.   However, at the same time Shri Ahmadi, learned Senior

     Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner, is right in

     making submission that as the validity of Rule 5 was not

     before the High Court therefore, the High Court ought not to

     have held Rule 5 to be ultra vires. However, from the

     impugned judgment and order of the Division Bench of the

     High Court, it appears that the Division Bench of the High

     Court was of the opinion that Rule 5 being a subordinate

     legislation is inconsistent with the provision of
Section 15(2)
17
of the Act, and therefore, the same is to be ignored. It is true

     that the same was not warranted and we are of the opinion

     that Rule 5 cannot be said to be inconsistent with
Section

     15(2)
of the Act. However, on merits and for the reasons

     stated above, we are in complete agreement with the

     ultimate view taken by the learned Single Judge confirmed

     by the Division Bench of the High Court upholding the

     acquisition in question. Hence, we do not propose to further

     enter into the observations made by the Division Bench that

     the provision of Rule 5 of the Rules, 2003 is inconsistent

     with
Section 15(2)
of the Act, 2001.
8.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, there

     is no substance in the present Special Leave Petitions and

     therefore, the same deserve to be dismissed and are

     accordingly dismissed.
………………………………….J.
                                      [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                            ………………………………….J.
SEPTEMBER 02, 2022                    [B.V. NAGARATHNA]
18