[Cites
30
, Cited by
63
]
Supreme Court of India
Smith Kline & French [India] Ltd.Etc vs Commissioner Of Income Tax on 16 April, 1996
Equivalent citations: JT 1996 (4), 231 1996 SCALE (3)562, AIRONLINE 1996 SC 595, (1996) 132 CURTAXREP 500, (1996) 132 TAXATION 170, (1996) 1 KER LT 769, (1996) 219 ITR 581, (1996) 4 JT 231 (SC), (1996) 85 TAXMAN 683, 1996 (8) SCC 579
Author:
B.P.  Jeevan Reddy
Bench:
B.P.  Jeevan Reddy
,
K.T Thomas
PETITIONER:
SMITH KLINE & FRENCH [INDIA] LTD.ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	16/04/1996

BENCH:
JEEVAN REDDY, B.P. (J)
BENCH:
JEEVAN REDDY, B.P. (J)
THOMAS K.T. (J)

CITATION:
 JT 1996 (4)   231	  1996 SCALE  (3)562


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
O R D E R
     A common  question arises in this batch of appeals. For
the sake  of convenience,  we may  refer to  the question in
Civil Appeal  No.455 of	 1987 directed	against a Full Bench
judgment of  the Kerala	 High  Court  [159  I.T.R.431].	 The
following question  was stated	by the	Income-Tax Appellate
Tribunal under
Section 256(1)
of the Income-tax Act for the
consideration of the Kerala High Court:
(1) "Whether Rs. 76,777/- being the
     surtax liability  is to  be allowed
     as a  deduction  in  computing  the
     total income  of the  assessee  for
     the assessment year 1976-77?"
The claim  for the  said deduction  was	 disallowed  by	 the
Income Tax  Officer on	the basis  of and  with reference to
sub-clause (ii}	 of clause (a) of
Section 40
which read thus
at the	relevant time:
40. Notwithstanding anything to the
     contrary in
Section 30
to
39
, the
     following	amounts	  shall	 not  be
     deducted in  computing  the  income
     chargeable under  the head 'profits
     and   gains    of	  business    or
     profession-
(a) in the case of any assessee-
(i).......................
(ii) any  sum paid  on account
	  of any  rate of  tax levied on
	  the profits  or gains	 of  any
	  business  or	 profession   or
	  assessed at  a proportion  of,
	  or otherwise	on the	basis of
	  any such profits or gains."
On appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner allowed
the assessee's	claim but on further appeal by the Revenues,
the Tribunal  upheld the Revenues' contention and disallowed
the claim  for deduction  on the basis of
Section 40(a)(ii)
.
The High  Court has affirmed the view taken by the Tribunal.
The only  question before us is whether the tax levied under
the
Companies Profits (Surtax) Act, 1964
is "a tax levied on
the profits  or gains  of  any	business  or  profession  or
assessed at a proportion of or otherwise on the basis of any
such profits or gains", as contemplated by the said
Section   40
opens   with   a   non-obstante   clause
"notwithstanding anything  to the contrary in
Sections 30
to
39
", which  means that	even if	 any amount  is entitled  to
deduction under	 any of the provisions contained in
Sections
30
to
39
, it  will be	disallowed if  it  falls  inter-alia
within sub-clause  (ii) of  clause (a)	of
Section  40
.	 The
question, therefore,  is whether  the tax  levied under	 the
Companies  Profits  (Surtax)  Act,  1964
falls	 within	 the
mischief of said sub-clause. We think it does.
The preamble  to the Surtax Act says that it is "an Act
to impose  a surtax  on the  profits of	 certain companies".
Indeed, the statement of objects and reasons appended to the
Bill makes  the said intention clear. It says "the object of
this Bill  is to  impose a  special tax	 on companies (other
than those  which have	no share  capital) on  their  excess
profits, namely,  the amount  by which the total income of a
company as  reduced by	certain types  of income and certain
sums and  the income-tax and super-tax payable by it exceeds
a sum  of ten  per cent	 of the capital reserves and certain
borrowed moneys	 or  a	sum  of	 Rs.2  lakhs,  whichever  is
higher..."
Section  4
is  the	charging  Section.  It	says
"subject to the provisions contained in this Act, there
shall be  charged on every company for every assessment year
commencing on  and from	 the first day of April, 1964, a tax
(in this  Act referred	to as  the surtax)  in respect of so
much of	 its chargeable	 profits of  the  previous  year  or
previous years,	 as the case may be, as exceed the statutory
deduction, at  the rate	 or rates  specified  in  the  Third
Schedule." The expression "chargeable profits" is defined in
clause 5  of
Section 2
. It reads: "Chargeable profits" means
the total  income of  an assessee computed under the Income-
tax Act,  1961 for  any previous  year or years, as the case
may be,	 and adjusted  in accordance  with the provisions of
the First  Schedule." It is thus clear beyond any doubt that
the surtax  is levied  on the profits of a company, i.e., on
the profits  above the	prescribed limit. The mere fact that
the tax	 is levied upon 'chargeable profits (which means the
total income  of the  assessee computed under the
Income-tax
Act, 1961
adjusted in accordance with the provisions of the
First Schedule)	 does not mean that the tax is not levied on
the profits  of business. In other words, the mere fact that
the First  Schedule provides  for certain further deductions
out of	the total  income computed  in accordance  with	 the
provisions of  the
Income-tax  Act, 1961
,  it Cannot be said
that amount  on which  the surtax is levied ceases to be the
profits of  the business.  For this reasons, it must be held
that the  surtax levied	 under the Surtax Act squarely falls
within the  mischief of	 sub-clause (ii)  of clause  (a}  of
Section 40
and cannot	be  allowed  as	 a  deduction  while
computing the  business income	of the	assessee  under	 the
provisions of the
Income-tax Act
.
The learned  counsel for  the assessee  sought to	rely
upon Section  15 of  the Surtax	 Act  in  support  of  their
contention that surtax does not fall within the four corners
of
Section  40(a)(ii)
.
Section 15
of the Surtax act reads as
follows: "Notwithstanding  anything contained  in clause (i)
of
Section  109
of  the Income	tax Act,  in  computing	 the
distributable income  of  a  company  for  the	purposes  of
Chapter XI-D  of that Act, the surtax payable by the company
for any	 assessment year  shall be deductible from the total
income of  the company assessable for that assessment year,"
A reading  of the  above provision makes it evident that its
operation  is	confined   to	the   computation   of	 the
distributable income  of  a  company  for  the	purposes  of
Chapter XI-D of the Income-tax Act
. It cannot be extended to
any other chapter or provision in the Act.
The learned  counsel for  the appellants  placed strong
reliance upon  the decision  of this Court in Jaipuria Samla
Amalgamated Collieries Ltd. v.. commissioner of	 Income-Tax.
West Bengal, (82 I.T.R. 580) to contend that a tax has to be
computed in accordance with the provisions of
Income-tax Act
to fall	 within the  mischief of
Section 40(a)(ii)
. Inasmuch
as the	surtax is  computed on	a basis	 different from	 the
basis prescribed  in the
Income-tax Act
, it is contended, it
cannot fall within the four corners of
Section 40(a)(ii)
. It
is not	possible to  agree with	 this contention either. The
said decision was rendered with reference to sub-section (4)
of
Section  10
of  the Indian  Income-tax  Act,	 1922  which
corresponds to	sub-clause (ii)	 of clause (a) of
Section 40
of the	present Act.  The question  therein was	 whether the
amount payable	as (i)	road and  public works	cess  levied
under the
Bengal Cess Act, 1880
and (ii) the education cess
levied under  the Bengal  (Rural) Primary Eduction Act, 1930
fall within  the mischief  of
Section 10(4)
. This Court held
that they  do not.  A perusal of the decision shows that the
road and  public works cess was levied on immovable property
to provide  for construction  and maintenance  of roads	 and
other works  of public	utility. Under
Section 5
of the Act
(Bengal	 Cess  Act,  1880)  all	 immoveable  property,	with
certain exceptions,  was subjected  to payment	of road cess
and public  works cess.
Section 6
provided that  the	said
cesses shall  be assessed  on the annual value of lands and,
until provision	 to the	 contrary was made by Parliament, on
the annual  net	 profits  from	mines,	quarries,  tramways,
railways and  other immovable property at such rates as were
to be  determined in  the manner  prescribed.
Similarly	 the
education cess	was also  levied under	Section	 29  of	 the
Bengal (Rural)	Primary Education  Act, 1930,  on  immovable
property   on which  the road  and public  works cesses were
assessed. The  rate at	which the  education cess  was to be
levied depended	 upon the  character  of  the  property;  in
respect of  miner and  quarries, it was leviable at the rate
of three  and a	 half pice  on	each  rupee  of	 annual	 net
profits. It  is thus  abundantly  clear	 that  the  levy  of
aforesaid cesses  was upon  the immovable properties and not
on profits.  It is  no doubt  true that the tax was measured
with reference	to the	net profits  of decisions  but it is
well-settled by a series of decisions of this Court that the
measure by  which a  tax is  computed does not determine the
character of  the tax  vide union  of
India  vs. Bombay Tyre
International
.
(A.I.R 1994 S.C.420) and Goodricke Tea Company
v. State  of West  Bengal,(1995 (1)  suppl.S.C.C.707).It is,
therefore idle	to contend  that the said decision helps the
assessees' case	 in any manner. The cesses considered in the
said decision were not taxes "levied on the profits or gains
of any business or profession or assessed at a proportion of
or otherwise  on the  basis of	any such  profits or  gains"
within	the   meaning  of
Section  40(a)(ii)
as  explained
hereinabove. The  learned counsel,  however, relied upon the
following observations	in the	said  decision:	 "the  words
"profits and  gains of any businesss profession or vocation"
which are  employed in
section 10(4)
cans, in the context,
have reference	only to profits or gains as determined under
section 10
and cannot cover the net profits or gains arrived
at or  determined in  a manner	other than  that provided by
section 10
.  The whole	purpose of enacting  sub-section (4)
of
section  10
appears to be to exclude from the permissible
deductions under  clause (ix)  and (xv)	 of sub-section	 (2)
such cesss,  rate or  tax which	 is levied on the profits or
gains of any business, profession or vocation or is assessed
at a proportion or on the basis of such profits or gains. In
other words,  sub- section (4) was meant to exclude a tax or
a cess	or rate	 the assessment	 of which  would follow	 the
determination or  assessment of	 profits  or  gains  of	 any
business, profession  or vocation  in  accordance  with	 the
provisions of
section	10
of	the  Act....  These  profits
arrived at  according to the provisions of the two Cess Acts
can by	no stretch  of reasoning  be equated  to the profits
which are  determined under
section 10
of the Act. It is not
possible to  see, therefore,  how
section  10(4)
could  be
applicable at  all in the present case." The learned counsel
pointed out  that  this	 Court	has  in	 the  said  decision
approved the  decision of  the Privy Council in
Commissioner
of Income-tax  vs. Gurupada  Dutta
, (14	 I.T.R.100) and	 has
further observed  that the Parliament must be deemed to have
accepted the view taken by the Privy Council by not changing
the language  of the  relevant provision  in  the  1961	 Act
[
Section 40(a)(ii)
].
We are  unable to see as to how these observations help
the assessees  herein. Firstly, it may be mentioned,
Section
10(4)
of  the 1922  Act or
Section 40(a)(ii)
of the present
Act do not contain any words indicating that the profits and
gains spoken  of by  them should be determined in accordance
with the  provisions of	 the
Income Tax Act
. All they say is
that it	 must be  a rate  or tax  levied on  the profits and
gains of  business or  profession. The	observations  relied
upon must  be read  in the said context and not literally or
as the	provisions in  a statute.  Bat so  for as  the issue
herein is  concerned, even  this literal reading of the said
observations does  not help the assessee. As we have pointed
out hereinabove	 the surtax  is essentially  levied  on	 the
business profits  of the company computed in accordance with
the provisions of the
Income-tax Act
. Merely because certain
further deductions  [adjustments] are provided by the Surtax
Act from the said profits, it cannot be said that the surtax
is not	levied upon  the profits  determined or	 computed in
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the
Income-tax	Act
.
Section 4  of the  Surtax Act  read with  the definition  of
"chargeable  profits"	and  the  First	 Schedule  make	 the
position abundantly clear.
We may  mention that all the High Courts in the country
except the  Gauhati High  Court have taken the view which we
have taken  herein. Only  the Gauhati High Court has taken a
contrary view  in the decisions in Makum Tea company [
India]
Limited	 & Anr.V. Commissioner of Income Tax [178 I.T.R.453]
and Doom Dooma Tea Company Limited V. Commissioner of Income
Tax
[180  I.T.R.126]. tax.  The decision of the Gauhati High
Court in  Mukum Tea  Company [India] Limited is under appeal
before us  in Civil  Appeal Nos.  3976-77 of 1995. Similarly
Civil Appeal  No.3246  of  1995	 is  preferred	against	 the
decision of the Gauhati High Court following the decision in
Doom Dooma  Tea Company	 Limited. (On enuiry, the office has
informed that  no Special  Leave petition/Civil	 Appeal	 has
been filed  against the	 decision in  Doom Dooma Tea Company
Limited.) For  the aforesaid  reasons, we can not agree with
the view  taken by  the Gauhati	 High Court in the aforesaid
decisions.
We agree with view taken by the High Courts of Calcutta
(
Molins [India]	 Limited V. Commissioner of Income Tax, West
Bengal-III
[
144	 I.T.R.317]) and Brooke Bond [India] Limited
V.  Commissioner  of  Income  Tax
[193	 I.T.R.390),  Bombay
(
Lubrizol [India] Limited V. Commissioner of Income Tax
[187
I.T.R. 25]  followed in	 several  other	 decisions  of	that
Court), Karnataka  (
Commissioner of Income Tax, Karnataka V.
International Instruments  Private Limited
[144 I.T.R.936),
Madras	(
Sundaram  Industries  Limited	V.  Commissioner  of
Income Tax
[159 I.T.R.646]),  Andhra Pradesh  (
Vazir Sultan
Tobacco Company	 Limited V.  Commissioner of Income Tax
[169
I.T.R.35]), Rajasthan  (
Associated Stone  Industries Company
Limited V.  Commissioner of  Income  Tax
[170	I.T.R.653]),
Gujarat (
S.L.M.Maniklal	 Industries Limited  V. Commissioner
of Income  Tax
[172  I.T.R.176] followed  in  several  cases
thereafter),  Allahabad	  (
Himalyan  Drug   Company  Private
Limited V.  Commissioner of Income  Tax
[218 I.T.R.346]) and
Punjab Haryana	High Court (
Hiqhway Cycle Industries Limited
V. Commissioner of Income Tax
[178 I.T.R.601])
     Accordingly, the appeals preferred by the assessees are
dismissed with costs assessed at Rupees two thousand in each
appeal, while  the two	appeals preferred by the Revenue are
allowed with costs of Rupees two thousand in each appeal.
Before parting with this case, it may be mentioned that
when this batch of appeals was posted before us, it included
an appeal preferred against a judgment of the Andhra Pradesh
High  Court  rendered  by  a  Bench  comprising	 one  of  us
(B.P.Jeevan Reddy,J.).	The said decision merely followed an
early decision	of that	 Court. Accordingly with the consent
of the	counsel for the parties, the said appeal was deleted
from the  batch and the remaining appeals in the batch taken
up for hearing.