[Cites
25
, Cited by
32
]
Supreme Court of India
Madhu Kishwar & Ors vs State Of Bihar & Ors on 17 April, 1996
Equivalent citations: 1996 AIR 1864, 1996 SCC (5) 125, AIR 1996 SUPREME COURT 1864, 1996 (5) SCC 125, 1996 AIR SCW 2178, (1996) 4 JT 379 (SC), (1996) 1 HINDULR 610, (1996) 2 PAT LJR 133, (1996) 2 BLJ 327
Author:
K. Ramaswamy
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
,
Kuldip Singh
,
M.M. Punchhi
PETITIONER:
MADHU KISHWAR & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF BIHAR & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	17/04/1996

BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
KULDIP SINGH (J)
PUNCHHI, M.M.

CITATION:
 1996 AIR 1864		  1996 SCC  (5) 125
 JT 1996 (4)   379	  1996 SCALE  (3)640


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
WITH
	     WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 219 OF 1986
Juliana Lakra.
V.
State of Bihar.
J U D G M E N T
Punchhi, J.
In	 these	 two  petitions	 under
Article	 32
of	 the
Constitution, challenge is made to certain provisions of the
Chota Nagpur  Tenancy Act,  1908
, (hereafter  referred to as
`the Act')  which go  to provide  in  favour  of  the  male,
succession to property in the male line, on the premise that
the provisions	are discriminatory  and unfair against women
and therefore,	ultra  vires  the  equality  clause  in	 the
Constitution. A	 two-member Bench  hearing these  matters at
one point of time on soliciting was conveyed the information
that the  State of  Bihar had set up a Committee to consider
the feasibility of appropriate amendments to the legislation
and to	examine the  matter in detail. It was later  brought
to its notice that the Committee ultimately had	 come to the
opinion that  the people  of the  area,	 who	were  really
concerned  with	  the  question	  of  succession,  were	 not
interested in having the law changed, and that if the law be
changed or so interpreted, letting estates go into the hands
of female  heirs, there	 would be great agitation and unrest
in the	area among  the	 scheduled  tribe  people  who	have
custom-based living.  The two-member  Bench then  ordered as
follows:
"Scheduled tribe people are as much
     citizens as  others  and  they  are
     entitled	to    the   benefit   of
     guarantees of  the	   Constitution.
     It may  be that the law can provide
     reasonable	  regulation	in   the
     matter of	succession  to	property
     with  a	 view	to   maintaining
     cohesiveness in regard to Scheduled
     Tribes and	 their	properties.  But
     exclusion	from  inheritance  would
     not  be   appropriate.  Since  this
     aspect of	the matter  has not been
     examined by  the State of Bihar and
     the   feasibility	 of   permitting
     inheritance   and	  simultaneously
     regulating such inheritance for the
     purpose  of   ensuring    that  the
     property does  not go  out	 of  the
     family  by	  way  of   transfer  or
     otherwise we  are of  the view that
     in the  peculiar facts  of the case
     the  State	  of  Bihar   should  re
     examine  the   matter.   In   these
     circumstances, instead of disposing
     of the  two  writ	petitions  by  a
     final  order,     we   adjourn  the
     hearing thereof  for  three  months
     and direct	 the State  of Bihar  to
     immediately take into consideration
     our    order  and	under  take  the
     exercise indicated	 and  report  to
     the court	by way	of an  affidavit
     and along	with that  a copy of the
     report  may  be  furnished	 by  the
     Committee to be set up by the State
     of Bihar."
In pursuance  thereof, the State of Bihar has furnished
an affidavit  to the  effect that  a meeting  of   the Bihar
Tribal Consultative  Council was held on 31-7-1992, presided
over by	 the Chief  Minister and  attended   to by M.P.s and
M.L.A.s of the tribal areas, besides various other Ministers
and officers  of the  State,  who    on	 deliberations	have
expressed the view that they were not in favour of effecting
any change  in the provisions of the Act, as the land of the
tribals may  be alienated, which will not be in the interest
of the	tribal community  at present.  The  matter  was	 not
closed, however,  because the  Council recommended  that the
proposal may  widely be	 publicized in	the tribal community
and their  various sub-castes  may be prompted to give their
opinion if  they would	like any change in the existing law.
It is  in this	backdrop that  these petitions	were  placed
before this three-member Bench for disposal.
We have  read with	 great admiration the opinion of our
learned brother	 K, Ramaswamy,J.  prepared  after  deep	 and
tremendous research  made on  the conditions  of the  tribal
societies in  India, leave  alone the State of Bihar, and in
drawing a  vivid picture  of the distortions which appear in
the  regulation	  of  succession   to  property	  in  tribal
societies, when	 tested on  the touchstone  of the  codified
Hindu law  now existing	 in the form of
The Hindu Succession
Act, 1956
etc.
     It is  worth-while to  account some  legislation on the
subject.
The  Hindu Succession	Act
governs  and  prescribes
rules of  succession  applicable  to  a	 large	majority  of
Indians	 being	 Hindus,  Sikhs,   Buddhists,	Jains	etc.
whereunder since  1956, if  not earlier,  the female heir is
put at	par with a male heir. Next in the line of numbers is
the Shariat  Law,  applicable  to  Muslims,  whereunder	 the
female heir  has an unequal share in the inheritance, by and
large half  of what  a male  gets.  Then  comes	 the
Indian
Succession Act
which applies to Christians and by and large
to  people   not  covered  under  the  aforesaid  two  laws,
conferring in  a certain  manner heirship on females as also
males. Certain	chapters thereof  are not made applicable to
certain communities.  Sub-section (2)  of
section  2
of	 the
Hindu Succession  Act significantly  provides  that  nothing
contained in  the Act  shall apply  to the  members  of	 any
Scheduled tribe within the meaning of clause (25) of
Article
366
of	the Constitution,  unless otherwise  directed by the
Central	 Government  by	 means	of  a  notification  in	 the
official gazette.
Section 3(2)
further provides that in the
Act, unless  the context otherwise requires, words importing
the masculine  gender shall not be taken to include females.
(Emphasis   supplied). General	rule of legislative practice
is that unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or
context,  words	 importing  the	 masculine  gender  used  in
statutes are  to be  taken to  include females. Attention be
drawn to
Section 13
of the  General Clauses  Act.  But  in
matters of  succession the  general rule  of plurality would
have to	 be applied with circumspection. The afore provision
thus appears  to have  been inserted  ex abundantl  cautela.
Even under
Section 3
of the Indian Succession Act the State
Government is  empowered to  exempt any	 race, sect or tribe
from the  operation of	the Act	 and the  tribes of  Mundas,
Oraons, Santals etc. in the State of Bihar, who are included
in our	concern, have  been so	exempted. Thus	neither	 the
Hindu Succession  Act
, nor  the
Indian	Succession Act
,	 nor
even the  Shariat Law  is applicable  to the custom governed
tribals. And  custom, as  is well  recognized,	varies	from
people to people and region to region.
In face  of these	divisions and visible barricades put
up by the sensitive tribal people valuing their own customs,
traditions and	usages, judicially  enforcing  on  them	 the
principles of  personal laws  K applicable  to others, on an
elitist approach  or  on  equality  principle,	by  judicial
activism, is  a difficult  and mind-boggling effort. Brother
K. Ramaswamy,  J. seems	 to have  taken the view that Indian
legislatures  (and   governments  too)	 would	not   prompt
themselves  to	 activate  in	this  direction	 because  of
political reasons  and in this situation, an activist Court,
apolitical as  it avowedly  is, could  get into	 action	 and
legislate  broadly   on	 the   lines  as  suggested  by	 the
petitioners in their written submissions. However, laudable,
desirable and attractive the result may seem, it has happily
been viewed   by  our learned brother that an activist court
is  not	  fully	 equipped  to  cope  with  the	details	 and
intricacies of	the legislative	 subject  and  can  at	best
advise and  focus attention  on	 the  State  polity  on	 the
problem and shake it from its slumber, goading it to awaken,
march and  reach the  goal. for	 in whatever  measure be the
concern of  the court,	it compulsively	   needs  to  apply,
somewhere  and	at  sometime,  brakes  to  its	self-motion,
described in  judicial parlance	 as self restraint. We agree
therefore with	brother K. Ramaswamy, J. as summed up by him
in the	paragraph ending  on page  36 of  his judgment	that
under the  circumstances it  is not desirable to declare the
customs of  tribal inhabitants	as offending
Articles 14
, 15
and
21
of the Constitution v  and each case must be examined
when full facts are placed before the Court.
With regard to the statutory provisions of the Act, he
has proposed to the reading down of
section 7
and
8
in order
to  preserve   their  constitutionality.  This	approach  is
available from	page 36	 onwards of  his judgment. The words
"male  descendants"	wherever  occurring,  would  include
"female descendants".  It is  also proposed that even though
the provisions	of the
Hindu Succession  Act, 1956
and the
Indian Succession  Act, 1925
in terms would not apply to the
Scheduled Tribes,  their  general  principles  composing  of
justice, equity	 and fairplay  would apply  to them. On this
basis it  has been  proposed  to  take	the  view  that	 the
Scheduled  Tribe  women	 would	succeed	 to  the  estate  of
paternal parent,  brother or  husband as  heirs by intestate
succession and inherit the property in equal shares with the
male heir  with absolute  rights as  per the  principles  of
Hindu Succession  Act
as  also the
Indian  Succession	Act
.
However much  we may  like the	law to	be so  we regret our
inability to  subscribe	 to  the  means	 in  achieving	such
objective. If  this be	the route  of return  on the Court's
entering the  thichet, it  is for better that the court kept
out of	it. It is not far to imagine that there would follow
a bee-line  for similar	 claims in  diverse situations,	 not
stopping at  tribal definitions,   and a deafening uproar to
bring other systems of law in line with the
Hindu Succession
Act and	 the Indian  Succession	 Act
as  models.  Rules  of
succession are	indeed susceptible of providing differential
treatment, not	necessarily equal. Nonuniformities would not
in all	events violate
Article 14.
Judge-made amendments to
provisionary  over  and	 above	the  available	legislature,
should normally	 be avoided. We are thus constrained to take
this view, even though it may appear to be conservative, for
adopting a  cautious approach,	and  the  one  proposed	 our
learned brother is, regretfully not acceptable to us.
The Chota Nagpur Tenancy Act
was enacted in 1908. It's
preamble suggests that it was a law to amend and consolidate
certain enactments  relating to	 the  law  of  landlord	 and
tenant and  the settlement  of	rent  in  Chota	 Nagpur.  It
extends	 to  North  Chota  Nagpur  and	South  Chota  Nagpur
divisions, except  areas  which	 have  been  constituted  as
municipalities under  the Bihar and Orissa Municipality Act,
1922. Chapter  II,  thereof  providing	classes	 of  tenants
containing
Sections 4
to
8
is reproduced hereafter:
CHAPTER II
Section 4
:
CLASSES OF	 TENANTS -  There  shall
     be, for  the purposes  of this Act,
     the following  classes of	tenants,
     namely :
(1) tenure-holder, including under-
     tenure-holders,
     (2) raiyats, namely :
(a) occupancy-raiyats,  that is  to
     say,  raiyats  having  a  right  of
     occupancy in the land held by them,
(b) non-occupancy	raiyats, that is
     to say,  raiyats not  having such a
     right of occupancy, and
(c)  raiyats   having   khunt-Katti
     rights.
(3) under	raiyats, that is to say,
     tenants	  holding,	 whether
     immediately or  immediately,  under
     raiyats, and
     (4) Hundar Khunt-kattidars."
Section 5
:
"MEANING	OF   'TENURE-HOLDER'   -
     Tenure-holder  means   primarily  a
     person who	 has acquired  from  the
     proprietors or from another tenure-
     holder, a	right to  hold land  for
     the purpose  of collecting rents or
     bringing At  under	 cultivation  by
     establishing  tenants  on	it,  and
     includes
(a) the  successors-in-interest  of
     persons who  have Acquired	 such  a
     right,  and
(b) the  holders of tenures entered
     in	 any   register	  prepared   and
     confirmed under  the
Chota  Nagpur
     Tenures Act, 1861
,
     but  does	not  include  a	 Mundari
     khuntkattidar.
Section 6
:
"MEANING OF  RAIYAT  -(1)	'Raiyat'
     means primarily  a person	who  has
     acquired a	 right to  hold land for
     the purpose  of cultivating  it  by
     himself,  or   by	members	 of  his
     family, or	 by hired  servants,  or
     with  the	 aid  of  partners;  and
     includes the successors-in-interest
     of persons	 who have  acquired such
     a right,  but does	 not  include  a
     Mundari khunt-kattidar.
     Explanation- Where a tenant of land
     has the  right to	bring  it  under
     cultivation, he  shall be deemed to
     have acquired  a right  to hold  it
     for  the  purpose	of  cultivation,
     notwithstanding that he uses it for
     the  purpose   of	 gathering   the
     produce of	 it or of grazing cattle
     on it.
(2) A person shall not be deemed to
     be a  raiyat unless  he  holds  and
     either    immediately    under    a
     proprietor or  immediately under  3
     tenure-holder or  immediately under
     a mundari khunt-kattidar.
     (3) In determining whether a tenant
     is a tenure-holder or a raiyat, the
     court shall have regard to
(a) local custom, and
(b) the  purpose for which the
     right  of	tenancy	 was  originally
     acquired.
Section 7
:
"(1)  MEANING   OF	 'RAIYAT  HAVING
     KHUNT-KHATTI   RIGHTS'   "	  Raiyat
     having--khunt katti rights' means a
     raiyat in	occupation of, or having
     any  subsisting   title  to,   land
     reclaimed	from   jungle	by   the
     original founders of the village or
     their descendants in the male line,
     when such raiyat is a member of the
     family which founded the village or
     a descendant  in the  male line  of
     any member of such family:
Provided that	 no raiyat shall
     be	 deemed	  to  have  khunt  katti
     rights in	any land  unless he  and
     all his  predecessors-in-title have
     held such	land or obtained a title
     thereto by	 virtue	 of  inheritance
     from the  original founders  of the
     village.
(2)  Nothing   in	this  Act  shall
     prejudicially affect  the rights of
     any   person   who	  has	lawfully
     acquired  a   title  to   a   khunt
     kattidari	 tenancy    before   the
     commencement of this Act.
Section 8
:
"MEANING OF  MUNDARI KHUNT-KATTIDAR
     'Mundari  khunt-kattidar'	means  a
     Mundari who has acquired a right to
     hold jungle land for the purpose of
     bringing suitable	portions thereof
     under cultivation	by himself or by
     male members  of  his  family,  and
     includes -
3. (a)  the heirs	male in the line
     of any  such Mundari, when they are
     in possession  of such land or have
     any subsisting title thereto; and
(b) as regards any portions of such
     land    which     have	remained
     continuously in  the possession  of
     any   such	  Mundari   and	     his
     descendants in  the male line, such
     descendants.
At this  place, Section  76 alongwith its illustrations
would also need reproduction:
"76. SAVING  OF CUSTOM - Nothing in
     this Act  shall affect  any custom,
     usage  or	 customary   right   not
     inconsistent with, or not expressly
     or	  by	necessary    implication
     modified  or   abolished  by,   its
     provisions.
ILLUSTRATIONS
     I. A  custom  or  usage  whereby  a
     raiyat obtains a right of occupancy
     as soon	as  he	is  admitted  to
     occupation of  the tenancy, whether
     he	 is  a	settled	 raiyat	 of  the
     village  or  not,	is  inconsistent
     with, and	is not	expressly or  by
     necessary implication  modified  or
     abolished	by,  the  provisions  of
     this Act.	This  custom  or  usage,
     accordingly,  wherever  it	 exists,
     will not be affected by this Act.
II. A  custom or  usage by which an
     under  raiyat   can  obtain  rights
     similar to	 those of  an  occupancy
     raiyat    is,     similarly,    not
     inconsistent  with,   and	is   not
     expressly	  or	 by    necessary
     implication modified  or  abolished
     by, the provisions of this Act, and
     will not be affected by this Act.
III. A  custom or	usage whereby  a
     raiyat   is    entitled   to   make
     improvements on  his tenancy and to
     receive  compensation  therefor  on
     ejectment is not inconsistent with,
     and  is   not   expressly	 or   by
     necessary implication  modified  or
     abolished by the provisions of this
     Act.   That    custom   or	   usage
     accordingly, where	 it exists, will
     not be affected by this Act.
     IV.  A   custom  or  usage	 whereby
     korkar is held, -
(a)    during    preparation    for
     cultivation, rent-free, or
(b) after preparation, at a rate of
     rent less than the rate payable for
     ordinary raiyati  land in	the same
     village, tenure or estate,
     is not  inconsistent with,	 and  is
     not  expressly   or  by   necessary
     implication   modified or abolished
     by, the  provisions  of  this  Act.
That custom  or usage  accordingly,
     wherever it  exists,  will	 not  by
     affected by this Act,"
A bare  outline of	 these provisions  goes to show that
these have  been enacted  to identify  classes	of  tenants.
These provisions  have no  connection with  the ownership of
land.
Section  3(XXVI)
defines 'tenant' to mean a person who
holds land  under another  and is,  or	but  for  a  special
contract would	be. liable to pay rent for that land to that
other person.  Sub-section (1)	of
Section 4
is plainly tied
up with	 Section S.  Subsection (2)(d) & (b) of
Section 4
is
tied up	 with
Section  6
and sequally with Section 76. Local
customs, as the illustrations under Section 76 show, are for
the purpose of streamlining the tenancy rights and landlord-
tenant relationship.  Sub-section (2)(c) of
Section 4
in the
same pattern  is tied  up with
Section 7
. Lastly sub-section
(4) of
Section 4
is tied  up with
Section 8
relating  to
"Mundari Khunt-kattidhar".  All these tenants as classified,
do not	own the	 tenanted lands, but hold land under others.
Their tenancy  rights are  identified and  regulated through
these provisions.  The personal	 laws of the tenants nowhere
figure in the set up.
The solitary  decided case available under
section 8
of
the Act and where personal law of the Mundari was allowed to
intrude is  Jitmohan  Singh  Munda  v.	Ramratan  Singh	 and
Another [1958  Bihar Journal Reports 373], There the learned
Judges of the High a Court comprising the Bench seem to have
differed on  the applicability	of
section  8
but not on its
scope. The case there established was that the Mundari Khunt
Kattidar deceased  was of  Hindu religion and on that  basis
it was	held that  his widow  could retain possession of the
tenancy rights of her deceased husband during her life time.
The right  of the  male collateral  to take  possession	 was
deferred by  the intervening  widow's life estate. This case
could, in a sense, be taken as stare decisis, when none else
is in  the field, in order to take the cue that personal law
of a  female descendant	 of a  Mundari	Khunt Kattidar could
steal  the   show  and	be
section  8
would  have  to/read
accordingly. But  this case  is	 decided  on  misreading  of
section 8
.  The earlier	 part of it providing the meaning of
Mundari Khunt  Kattidar has  been overlooked.  It  has	been
assumed, on the basis of the latter part that the expression
has an	inclusive definition  and thus would not exclude the
Mundari's widow	 governed by  Hindu Law.  The High  Court at
page 375 of its report observed as follows:-
"The contention  based on
section 8
also  terminologically   cannot  be
     accepted. In  the first  place,  in
     defining Khunt Kattidar interest as
     quoted above,  the 14  word used is
     'includes' whereaftar occur clauses
(a) and (b) containing reference to
     the male  line of	a  Mundari.  The
     word includes'  cannot be	taken to
     be exhaustive."
Jitmohan  Singh's	case  can  not	thus  be  a  guiding
precedent. It  is at best a decision on its own facts. There
is no scope thus in reading down the provisions of
section 8
and  even  that	 of
section  7
so  as	 to  include  female
descendants alongside the male descendants in the context of
section 7
and
8
. It is only in the larger perspective of the
Constitution can the answer to the problem be found.
Life is  a precious gift of nature to a being. Right to
life  as   a  fundamental  right  stands  enshrined  in	 the
Constitution. The right to livelihood is born of it. In
Olga
Tellis &  Ors. v.  Bombay Municipal  Corporation and  Others
[AIR 1986  SC 180]  this Court	defined it in this manner in
para 32 of the report:
".............The	sweep	of   the
     right to  life conferred by
Article
     21
is  wide  and  far-reaching.  It
     does  not	mean  merely  that  life
     cannot  be	 extinguished  or  taken
     away  as,	 for  example,	 by  the
     imposition	 and  execution	 of  the
     death sentence, except according to
     procedure established  by law. That
     is but  one aspect	 of the right to
     life. An  equally important fact of
     that  right   is	the   right   to
     livelihood because,  no person  can
     live without  the means  of living,
     that is,  the means  of livelihood.
If the  right to  livelihood is not
     treated  as   a  part   of	     the
     constitutional right  to life,  the
     easiest way  of depriving	a person
     of his   right  to life would be to
     deprive  him   of	his   means   of
     livelihood	  to	the   point   of
     abrogation. Such  deprivation would
     not only  denude the  life	 of  its
     effective	      content	     and
     meaningfulness but	 it  would  make
     life impossible  to live.	And yet,
     such deprivation  would not have to
     be in accordance with the procedure
     established by law, if the right to
     livelihood is  not	 regarded  as  a
     part of  the right	 to life.  That,
     which alone  makes it  possible  to
     live, leave  aside what  makes life
     liable, must  be deemed  to  be  an
     integral component	 of the right to
     life. Deprive a person of his right
     to livelihood  and you  shall  have
     deprived him  of his  life. Indeed,
     that explains the massive migration
     of	 the  rural  population	 to  big
     cities. They  migrate because  they
     have no means of  livelihood in the
     villages. The  motive  force  which
     propels their  desertion  of  their
     hearths and homes in the village is
     the struggle for survival, that is,
     the   struggle    for   life.    So
     unimpeachable is  the  evidence  of
     the  nexus	 between  life	and  the
     means of	livelihood. They have to
     eat to  live:   Only a  handful can
     afford the	 luxury of    living  to
     eat. That they can do, namely, eat,
     only if  they  have  the  means  of
     livelihood. That  is the context in
     which it  was said by Douglas J. in
     Baksey, (1954)  347 M.D.  442  that
     the right	to   work  is  the  most
     precious	 liberty     that    man
     possesses. It  is the most precious
     liberty because,  it  sustains  and
     enables   a man  to  live	and  the
     right  to	 life  is   a	precious
     freedom.  "Life",	as  observed  by
     Field,  J.	 in  Munn  v.  Illinois,
     (1877) 94	US 113,	 means something
     more than mere animal existence and
     the    inhibition	  against    the
     deprivation of life extends  to all
     those limits and faculties by which
     life is  enjoyed.
This  observation
     was quoted	 with approval	by  this
     Court in
Kharak Singh v. State of
     UP
[1964(1) SCR 332].
And then in para 33:
"
Article 39(a)
of the Constitution,
     which is  a Directive  Principle of
     State  Policy,  provides  that  the
     State shall, in  particular, direct
     its policy	 towards   securing that
     the   citizens,   men   and   women
     equally,  have   the  right  to  an
     adequate	  means	 of  livelihood.
Article  41
,   which   is	 another
     Directive	 Principle,    provides,
     inter alia,  that the  State shall,
     within the	 limits of  its economic
     capacity  and    development,  make
     effective	provision  for	securing
     the  right	 to  work  in  cases  of
     unemployment  and	 of   undeserved
     want.
Article 37
provides that the
     Directive	Principles,  though  not
     enforceable  by   any  Court,   are
     nevertheless  fundamental	 in  the
     governance	 of   the  country.  The
     Principles contained  in Arts.39(a)
     and 41  must be regarded as equally
     fundamental   in the  understanding
     and interpretation	 of the	 meaning
     and content  of fundamental rights.
     If there  is an obligation upon the
     State to  secure to the citizens an
     adequate means  of	 livelihood  and
     the right	to  work,  it  would  be
     sheer pedantry to exclude the right
     to livelihood  from the  content of
     the right	to life.  The State  may
     not. by  affirmative action,  be  v
     compellable  to   provide	adequate
     means of  livelihood or work to the
     citizens. But,  any person,  who is
     deprived of his right to livelihood
     except according  to just	and fair
     procedure established  by law,  can
     challenge	 the	deprivation   as
     offending	the   right,   to   life
     conferred by
Article 21."
Agriculture is  not a  singular vocation.	It is,	more
often than  not, a  joint venture,  mainly of	the tiller's
family members.	 Some of  them have  to work   hard  and the
ethers harder  still. Everybody,  young or    old,  male  or
female, has  chores allotted  to perform;  a   share in	 the
burden	of   toil.  Traditionally   and	 historically,	 the
agricultural family  is identified by the male head and this
is what
Section 7
and
8
recognize. But  on his death, his
dependent  family   females,  such  as	his  mother,  widow,
daughter, daughter-in-law,  grand-daughter, and others joint
with him  have, under
Section 7
and
8
, to make way to a male
relatives within  and outside  the family  of  the  deceased
entitled thereunder,  disconnecting them  from the  land and
their means of livelihood. Their right to livelihood in that
instance gets affected, a right constitutionally recognized,
a right	 which the  female enjoyed  in common  with the last
male holder  of the  tenancy. It  is in	 protection of	that
right to  livelihood, that the immediate female relatives of
the last  male tenant have the constitutional remedy to stay
on holding  the land  so long as they remain dependent on it
for earning  their livelihood, for otherwise it would render
them destitute.	 It is	on the exhaustion of, or abandonment
of land	 by, such  female descendants  can the	males in the
line of	 descent take over the holding exclusively. In other
words, the  exclusive right  of male succession conceived of
in
section 7
and
8
has to remain suspended animation so long
as the right of livelihood of the female descendant's of the
last male  holder remains  valid and in vogue. It is in this
way only  that the  constitutional right  to livelihood of a
female can  interject in  the provisions.  to be  read as  a
burden to  the statutory right of mala succession, entitling
her   to    the	  status    of	 an    intervening   limited
dependent/descendents under
section 7
and
8
. In this manner
alone,	  and	  upto	  this	   extent     can     female
dependents/descendents be given some succour so that they do
not become  vagrant and	 destitutes. To this extent, it must
be so held. We would rather, on the other hand, refrain from
striking down  the provisions  as such	on the touchstone of
Article 14
as this would bring about a chaos in the existing
state	of    law.   The   intervening	 right	 of   female
dependents/descendents under
section 7
and
8
of the Act are
carved out to this extent, by suspending the exclusive right
of the	male succession till the female dependent/descendent
chooses other  means of livelihood manifested by abandonment
or release of the holding kept for the purpose.
For the  afore-going reasons,  disposal of	 these	writ
petitions is  ordered with  the above  relief to  the female
dependents/descendents. At the same time direction is issued
to  the	 State	of  Bihar  to  comprehensively	examine	 the
question on  the premise of our constitutional ethos and the
need voiced to amend the law. It is also directed to examine
the question  of  recommending	to  the	 Central  Government
whether the  later would  consider it  just and necessary to
withdraw the exemptions given under the
Hindu Succession Act
and the	 a
Indian Succession Act
at this point of time in so
far  as	  the  applicability  of  these	 provisions  to	 the
Scheduled Tribes  in the  State of Bihar is concerned. These
writ petitions	would on  these directions stand disposed of
making absolute the interim directions in favour of the writ
petitioners for their protection. No Costs.