[Cites
0
, Cited by
235
]
Supreme Court of India
Surjeet Singh Chhabra vs Union Of India & Ors on 25 October, 1996
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 2560, 1997 AIR SCW 2507, 1997 (1) SCC 508, 1997 SCC(CRI) 272, (1996) 10 JT 239 (SC), (1997) 89 ELT 646, (1997) 34 ALLCRIC 154, (1997) SC CR R 279
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
,
S.P. Kurdukar
PETITIONER:
SURJEET SINGH CHHABRA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	25/10/1996

BENCH:
K. RAMASWAMY, S.P. KURDUKAR




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
O R D E R
     We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner. We do
not think  that it is a case warranting interference for the
reason that  the appellate  authority had initially referred
back the  matter to  the primary authority to reconsider the
matter in  the light of the directions issued in that order.
After  reconsideration,	 the  confiscation  order  has	been
passed in  respect of  the gold and in respect of two items,
i.e. FAX  machine and  video camera  and compounding fee was
ordered. On  appeal, it was confirmed and on revision it was
also confirmed.	 The petitioner filed a writ petition in the
High Court.  The High  Court in	 the  impugned	order  dated
January 30,  1996 summarily  dismissed	the  writ  petition.
Thus, this special leave petition.
It is  contended by  learned counsel for the petitioner
that the  petitioner is	 entitled to cross-examine the Panch
witnesses and  the Seizing  Officer for	 the goods seized in
contravention of  the FERA  & Customs  Duty Act and that the
opportunity has	 not been  given. Therefore, it is violative
of natural justice.
It is  true that  the petitioner  had confessed that he
purchased the  gold had	 brought it.  He  admitted  that  he
purchased the  gold and	 converted it  as a  Kara.  In	this
situation, bringing  the  gold	without	 permission  of	 the
authority is  in contravention	of the	Customs Duty Act and
also FERA.  When the  petitioner seeks for cross-examination
of the	witnesses who  have said  that the recovery was made
from the  petitioner, necessarily an opportunity requires to
be given  for the  cross-examination  of  the  witnesses  as
regards the  place at  which   recovery was  made. Since the
dispute concerns the  confiscation of the jewellery, whether
at conveyor  belt or  at  the  green  channel,	perhaps	 the
witnesses were	required  to  be  called.  But	in  view  of
confession made by him, it binds him and, therefore,  in the
facts and circumstances of this case the failure to give him
the opportunity	 to cross-examine  the	  witnesses  is	 not
violative of  principle of  natural justice. It is contended
that the  petitioner had  retracted within six days from the
confession. Therefore,	he is  entitled to cross-examine the
panch witnesses	 before the  authority takes  a decision  on
proof of  the offence.	We find no force in this contention.
The  Customs   officials  are	not  police   officers.	 The
confession, though  retracted, is an admission and binds the
petitioner. So	there is no need to call panch witnesses for
examination and	 cross-examination by the petitioner.
It is  contended that  under  the	Rules  jewellery  is
exempted articles. Kara being a symbol of the religious wear
by the	Sikh community,	 it is a jewellery exempted from the
Act and	 it cannot  be confiscated. In view of the admission
that he had purchased gold, converted as Kara and brought as
such, he  necessarily used it. Therefore, he is not entitled
to the	benefit of  exemption. Under these circumstances, we
do not	find any  illegality in	 the  order  passed  by	 the
authority warranting interference.
The Special Leave Petition is accordingly dismissed.