[Cites
0
, Cited by
63
]
Supreme Court of India
Ramanand Prasad Singh & Anr vs Union Of India & Ors on 27 March, 1996
Equivalent citations: 1996 SCC (4) 64, JT 1996 (4) 39, AIRONLINE 1996 SC 1060
Author:
A.M Ahmadi
Bench:
A.M Ahmadi
PETITIONER:
RAMANAND PRASAD SINGH & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	27/03/1996

BENCH:
MANOHAR SUJATA V. (J)
BENCH:
MANOHAR SUJATA V. (J)
AHMADI A.M. (CJ)

CITATION:
 1996 SCC  (4)	64	  JT 1996 (4)	 39
 1996 SCALE  (3)231


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
WITH
	    CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 5126-5128 OF 1996
-----------------------------------
  (Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) Nos. 23418-23420 OF 1995)
Union Public Service
Commission & Anr.
V.
Surendra Prasad Sinha & Ors.
J U D G M E N T
Mrs. Sujata V. Manohar J.
Leave granted.
The appellant have challenged the judgment and order of
the Central  Administrative  Tribunal,	Patna  Bench,  Patna
dated 28th  of July,  1995 as a result of which the Tribunal
has set aside the selections made by the Selection Committee
on  30th   of  March,	1994  of   officers  of	  the  Bihar
Administrative	Service	  for  promotion   to	the   Indian
Administrative Service.
The Tribunal by its impugned order set aside the entire
selection made	at the meeting of the Selection Committee on
30th of	 March, 1994  on an  interpretation  of	 the  Indian
Administrative	 Service    (Appointment    by	  Promotion)
Regulations, 1955,  holding that only three times the number
of anticipated	vacancies for  the year	 plus 20% could have
been considered	 as within  the zone of consideration before
the Selection Committee. The consideration of other officers
under Regulation  5(3) was contrary to the said Regulations.
It also said that the proceedings of the Selection Committee
were vitiated  on account  of the  participation of one Shri
S.N. Dubey  as a  member of  the Selection Committee because
his brother  was within	 the zone  of consideration although
the brother  has not  been selected. And lastly the Tribunal
has said  that there  was non-application  of  mind  by	 the
Selection Committee  in considering  264 names	on a  single
day.
The  Indian   Administrative  Service  (Appointment  by
Promotion)  Regulations,  1955,	 have  been  framed  by	 the
Central	 Government   in   consultation	  with	 the   State
Governments and the Union Public Service Commission
under sub-rule	(1) of	Rule 8	of the Indian Administrative
Service (Recruitment)  Rules, 1954.  The relevant Regulation
which requires	consideration is  Regulation 5. The material
provisions of Regulation 5 are as follows:
"Regulation 5:
Preparation of  a list  of suitable
     Officers -
(1) Each Committee shall ordinarily
     meet at intervals not exceeding one
     year and  prepare a  list	of  such
     members of	 the State Civil Service
     as are  held by them to be suitable
     for promotion  to the  service. The
     number  of	 members  of  the  State
     Civil Service to be included in the
     list shall	 be  calculated	 as  the
     number  of	  substantive  vacancies
     anticipated in  the course	 of  the
     period  of	 12  months,  commencing
     from the date of preparation of the
     list in  the  posts  available  for
     them   under    rule   9	of   the
     Recruitment   Rules   plus	  twenty
     percent  of   such	 number	 or  two
     whichever is greater.
Explanation - In case of joint
     cadres a separate select list shall
     be	 prepared  in  respect	of  each
     State Civil  Service, the	size  of
     each select  list being  determined
     in the manner indicated above.
(2) The  Committee	 shall	consider
     for inclusion in the said list, the
     cases of members of the State Civil
     Services in  the order of seniority
     in that  service of  a number which
     is equal  to three times the number
     referred to in sub-regulation  (1).
...................................
Provided   further   that   in
     computing the  number for inclusion
     in the  field of consideration, the
     number of	officers referred  to in
     sub-regulation   (3)    shall    be
     excluded:
...................................
     (3)   The	 Committee   shall   not
     consider the  cases of  the members
     of the State Civil Service who have
     attained the age of 54 years on the
     first day	of the	year in which it
     meets.
Provided that	 a member of the
     State  Civil   Service  whose  name
     appears in the select list in force
     immediately before	 the date of the
     meeting of	 the Committee	shall be
     considered	 for  inclusion	 in  the
     fresh list,  to be	 prepared by the
     Committee even  if he  has	 in  the
     meanwhile attained	 the age  of  54
     years.
Provided further that a member
     of the  State Civil Service who has
     attained  the  age	 of  fifty  four
     years on  the first day of April of
     the year  in  which  the  Committee
     meets shall  be considered	 by  the
     Committee, if  he was  eligible for
     consideration on  the first  day of
     April of  the year or of any of the
     years  immediately	  preceding  the
     year in  which such meeting is held
     but could	not be	as no meeting of
     the Committee  was held during such
     preceding year or years."
Under Regulation  5 (1)  the number of officers who are
to be  included in the list of suitable officers prepared by
the Selection  Committee  is  specified	 as  the  number  of
substantive vacancies  anticipated  in	the  course  of	 the
period of  12 months  plus 20%.	 Under Regulation  5(2), the
number of officers required to be considered are three times
the number  which is to be finally included in the list. The
number	of   officers  required	  to  be   considered  under
Regulation 5(2) for selection in the list may be referred to
as officers within the zone of consideration.
Persons above  the age  of 54 years on the first day of
April of the year in which the Selection Committee meets are
not eligible  for being	 considered. Therefore, they are not
within the  zone of  consideration. This  is set  out in the
first  part   of  Regulation  5(3).  The  first	 proviso  to
Regulation 5(3),  however, states that a member of the State
Civil  Service	 whose	name   appears	in  the	 immediately
preceding Select  List in  force  shall	 be  considered	 for
inclusion in  the  fresh  list,	 even  if  he  has,  in	 the
meanwhile, attained  the age of 54 years. The second proviso
to Regulation  5(3) states  that  if  during  any  immediate
preceding   year/years,	   a   person	was   eligible	 for
consideration but could not be considered because no meeting
of the Selection Committee was held that year, such a person
will also  be considered  by the  Selection  Committee	even
though he may have, in the meanwhile, attained the age of 54
years. In other words. candidates who would have been within
the zone of consideration if the Selection Committee had met
during	the  year  but	who  lost  the	chance	because	 the
Selection Committee  did not  meet are	given a chance to be
considered at  the first  available opportunity	 even though
they may have in the meanwhile attained the age of 54 years.
The  Tribunal  has	 held  that  the  two  provisoes  to
Regulation 5(3)	 which require	the Selection  Committee  to
consider certain  candidates who  may be above the age of 54
years, has  to	be  interpreted	 as  applying  only  to	 the
candidates who	are within  the	 zone  of  consideration  as
defined under  Regulation 5(2) but who may have attained the
age of	54 years.  These candidates, if they fall within the
proviso to  Regulation 5(3),  will have	 to be considered by
the Committee. We have to consider whether this is a correct
interpretation of Regulations 5(2) and 5(3).
In	 the   present	case,	the  number  of	 anticipated
vacancies for  which selection	was held,  were 43.  As	 per
Regulation 5(2)	 the zone  of consideration was fixed at 153
(i.e. 43  vacancies plus  20% x	 3). In	 addition  to  this,
officers (a)  whose names were on the earlier Selection List
in force  [one such  officer] (first  proviso to  Regulation
5(3) and  (b) officers	who though above the age of 54, were
eligible under the second proviso to Regulation 5(3) because
there were  no selections  in the  years 1991-92 and 1999-93
[110 such  officers] were  included.  The  total  number  of
officer, therefore,  considered by  the Selection  Committee
were 153+1+110, that is to say, 264 officers.
According to  the Tribunal,  the zone  of consideration
should	have  been  confined  to  only	153  officers.	This
interpretation is  in the teeth of the express provisions of
Regulation 5(2).  While Regulation  5(2) provides  that	 the
number of officers required to be considered are three times
the number of anticipated vacancies plus 20%. the proviso to
Regulation 5(2)	 lays down  that in  computing the number of
officers who  should be	 in the field of consideration under
Regulation 5(2),  the number of officers referred to in sub-
regulation (3)	shall be  excluded. In	other words,  in the
present case,  153 officers  who are  to be  included in the
zone of	 consideration will  be after excluding officers who
qualify under  Regulation 5(3).	 Therefore, 153 officers who
are to be considered are other than those falling under sub-
regulation (3).
Sub-regulation (3)	 of Regulation	5  which  confers  a
right to  be considered	 on certain State Civil Servants who
may have  attained the	age of 54 also does not qualify this
right to be considered by adding that such a person shall be
considered only	 if he	is within  the zone of consideration
under Regulation 5(2).
Clearly, therefore.  the persons who are required to be
considered  for	 selection  under  Regulation  5(3)  are  in
addition to  the persons  who are  required to be considered
under  Regulation   5(2).  In	fact,  this   is  how  these
recruitment regulations	 have been interpreted over a number
of years.  The Union  Public Service Commission which issues
instructions regarding	the manner in which list of officers
is  to	be  prepared  for  consideration  by  the  Selection
Committee  and	the  documents	and  information  which	 are
required  to  be  submitted  to	 the  Union  Public  Service
Commission for	selection of such officers clearly sets this
out in clause 3(d) of the Instructions:
Clause 3(d):
"Officers who  are over 54 years as
     on	 1.4.1993   are	 ordinarily  not
     considered. However,  (i) if  their
     names appear in the previous Select
     List  or	(ii)  if   no  Selection
     Committee Meeting	was held  in the
     previous  year(s)	 when	he   was
     eligible, then  his  case	will  be
     considered by the current selection
     committee Meeting. For this purpose
     his  name	 should	 figure	 in  the
     proper  place  in	the  Eligibility
     List   and	  his	case   will   he
     considered only  if his  name falls
     within   the   required   zone   of
     consideration calculated  according
     to vacancies. However, the names of
     such officers  will not  be counted
     in the normal zone and they will be
     taken as  extra,  to  the	required
     number of	3 times	 the size of the
     Select List."
The zone  of  selection	 therefore.  under  the	 Regulations
consists of  three  parts;  (1)	 officers  who	fall  within
Regulation 5(2) after excluding all officers falling   under
(2)and (3):  (2) officers  above  the  age  of	54  who	 are
"carried forward"  from the  earlier Selection List in force
and: (3) officers above the age of 54 who have been deprived
of their  chance of  being considered  due to non-holding of
meetings of  the Selection  Committee. All  these are  to be
considered by  the Selection  Committee. The  Tribunal	was,
therefore. not right in holding that only persons covered by
Regulation 5(2) without any exclusion are eligible for being
considered by the. Selection Committee.
The second ground of challenge to the selection is that
one S.N.Dubey should not have been a member of the Selection
Committee because  his brother was one of the 264 candidates
being considered  for selection.  The brother  has. in fact,
not been selected by the Selection Committee. We fail to see
how the selection of all other candidates is vitiated in any
manner by this factor.
The last  contention relates to non-application of mind
by the	Selection Committee to the task before it because it
is contended that the Committee considered 264 candidates in
one day	 in order  to prepare  a list  of 51 candidates. The
State of  Bihar and  the Union	Public Service Commission in
their affidavits/written  statements have  clearly  set	 out
that the  confidential service records of all the candidates
in the	zone of	 consideration are scrutinized long prior to
the  holding  of  the  selection  Committee's  meeting.	 The
Committee applies  its mind to the service records and makes
its own	 assessment of the service records of the candidates
marking them  as outstanding, very good. good and so on. The
Selection Committee  does not  necessarily  adopt  the	same
grading which is given by the Reporting/Reviewing Officer in
respect of  each of  the candidates.  In fact  the Selection
Committee  makes  an  overall  relative	 assessment  of	 the
confidential report  dossiers of the officers in the zone of
consideration. It  thus does  not evaluate  the confidential
report dossier	of an  individual in  isolation. It is after
this comparative assessment that the best candidates are put
in the Select List. In view of the affidavit so filed, there
is no  merit in	 the contention that the Selection Committee
did not	 apply its  mind while	preparing  the	list  of  51
officers. The  Tribunal, therefore, was not right in setting
aside the  selection made  by the Selection Committee at its
meeting of 30th of March, 1994.
The appeals  are, therefore,  allowed. The judgment and
order of  the Tribunal	is set	aside and  the	Select	list
prepared by  the Selection  Committee at its meeting held On
30th of	 March. 1994  is  upheld  as  a	 valid	Select	list
prepared  in   accordance  with	 the  Indian  Administrative
Service (Appointment  by Promotion) Regulations. 1955 and in
accordance with law. There will be no order as to costs.