[Cites
7
, Cited by
65
]
Supreme Court of India
Shankar Lal And Others vs The State Of M.P on 26 April, 1996
Equivalent citations: JT 1996 (5), 523 1996 SCALE (3)780, AIR 2006 PATNA 339, AIRONLINE 1996 SC 398, 2006 (2) AIR BOM R 252, (1996) 2 CUR CRI R 164, (1996) 2 CRIMES 201, (1996) MAD LJ(CRI) 536, (1996) 3 ALL CRI LR 58, (1996) 2 REC CRI R 822, (1996) 20 ALL CRI R 752, 1996 CRI LR(SC MAH GUJ) 486, (1996) 2 CRI CJ 130, (1996) 5 JT 523, 1996 SCC (CRI) 740, (1996) 5 JT 523 (SC), 1996 CRI LR (SC&MP) 486, (1996) SC CR R 755
Author:
S.P Kurdukar
Bench:
S.P Kurdukar
,
M.K Mukherjee
PETITIONER:
SHANKAR LAL AND OTHERS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF M.P.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	26/04/1996

BENCH:
KURDUKAR S.P. (J)
BENCH:
KURDUKAR S.P. (J)
MUKHERJEE M.K. (J)

CITATION:
 JT 1996 (5)   523	  1996 SCALE  (3)780


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T.
S.P. KURDUKAR, J.
This  criminal   appeal  is  filed	 by  six  appellants
challenging the legality and correctness of the judgment and
order of  conviction date 24th July, 1986 passed by the High
Court of  Madhya Pradesh  at Jabalpur.	Under  the  impugned
orders the  High Court	set aside  the	order  of  acquittal
passed in  favour of  appellants on  7-12-1982 by  the Addl,
Sessions Judge, Hoshangabad.
2.   The appellants  were put  up for trial for the offences
punishable under sections 148, 302 and 324 read with
section
149
of the Indian Penal Code for committee murders of Lakhan
Pal and	 Ramvati and  also causing  injuries to Girdhari Lal
(PW2), Omkar  (PW3), Satish  Kumar (PW4)  and Rajender Kumar
(Pw6).
3.   One Gopi  Lal had	two sons namely Lakhan(deceased) and
Girdhari    Lal(PW2).	  They	  were	  living    jointly.
Ramvati(deceased)  was	 the   wife   of   Lakhan(deceased).
Mayabai(PW1) is	 the wife of Girdhari Lal(PW2). Satish Kumar
(PW4) and  Rajender Kumar (PW6) are the sons of Lakhan while
Omkar (PW3) is brother-in-law of Girdhari Lal.
4.   Appellants 1  to 3	 and 6	namely Shanker Lal, Girdhari
Lal, Lakhan  and Chhote	 Lal are  the sons  of	one  Manbodh
Singh. Appellant  Nos. 4  and 5	 are their  nephews.  It  is
alleged by  the prosecution  that Gopi Lal had mortgaged his
field with  Suman Bai wife of appellant No.4 Kalu Ram and it
was agreed  that the  loan would  be repaid within two years
and thereupon  the said field would be returned to Gopi Lal.
However, the  said Kalu	 Ram instead of keeping his word got
the said  field mutated in the name of Suman Bai, It is this
act of	Kalu Ram, the appellant No.4, had led to ill-feeling
between the  parties and it is stated that on report of Gopi
Lal proceedings	 against the  mutation were  innitiated	 and
Lakhan (deceased) was looking after the said litigation.
5.   It is  alleged by	the prosecution	 that on 14-11-1981,
the women  folk from  both the	sides had  some quarrel.  At
about 5,00  p.m., Ramvati  (deceased), Maya  Bai  (PW1)	 and
their mother-in-law  Dipya Bai	were sitting  in their court
yard  in  front	 of  their  house.  All	 of  a	sudden,	 the
appellants who were armed with deadly weapons, came to their
court yard.  It is  the case of the prosecution that Shanker
Lal, appellant No.1 was armed with Farsa, Kalu Ram appellant
No.4 was  armed with  an axe and rest of the appellants were
carrying lathis.  At about  the same  time, Lakhan(deceased)
was in	the court yard and he was unloading his bullock cart
in Khalian.  Seeing all	 the appellants	 in the	 court yard,
Lakhan(deceased) went to them. He was then surrounded by the
appellants and	suddenly the appellant No.1 Shanker Lal gave
a blow	of Farsa  on his  head. Kalu  Ram the appellant No.4
gave an axe blow on the waist of Lakhan. Lakhan fell down on
the ground  and all  the accused  thereafter started beating
with lathis. Seeing this ghastly assault on Lakhan, Ramvati,
the wife  of Lakhan  rushed towards him to save him from the
said assault.  She was also assaulted by the appellants with
lathis. In  the mean-times  Girdhari Lal(PW2),	Omkar (FW3),
Satish Kumar  (PW4) and	 Rajender Kumar (PW6) also rushed to
the scene  of incident	to save	 Lakhan and Ramvati from the
said assault.  It is  the case	of the	prosecution that the
appellants have	 also assaulted these witnesses with weapons
in their hands.
6.   At about  the same	 time, a Bus was passing by the said
road and  the conductor	 of the	 said bus Faquir Mohd.(PW13)
seeing a crowd rushed to the Police Station Piparia which is
about two  and	half  kilometers  away	from  the  place  of
incident and  gave a  sanaha report Ex.14 at about 5.15 p.m,
He only	 referred to  the quarrel but no details were given.
P.S.I. Pateria	(PW17) on  receipt of the said sanaha report
reached the  place of  incident with  his staff and recorded
the Dehati  Nalishi(Ex.P1) on  the information given by Maya
Bai (PW1).  P.S I.  Pateria  (PW  17)  during  investigation
recorded the  statements of  some witnesses  On	 15-11-1981,
P.S.I. Pateria	(PW17) prepared	 an inquest Panchnama on the
dead bodies  of Lakhan	and Ramvati  and sent  them for post
mortem examination, During investigation, PSI Pateria (PW17)
recovered  some	  incriminating	 articles  pursuant  to	 the
statements  made   by  the  accused.  After  completing	 the
investigation, all  the appellants were put up for trial for
the offence  of committing  murders of Lakhan (deceased) and
Ramvati (deceased)  and causing	 injuries to the prosecution
witnesses punishable  under
sections  148
,
302
and
324
read
with
sections 149
of Indian Penal Code.
7.   The prosecution in support of its case examined as many
as seventeen witnesses out of which Maya Bai (PW1), Girdhari
Lal (PW2),  Omkar (PW3),  Satish Kumar	(PW4)  and  Rajender
Kumar (PW  6) were  the eye  witnesses. The  prosecution  in
order to  prove various	 Panchanamas including	recovery  of
weapons examined  five witnesses.  Dr. Devender	 Kumar	Jain
(PW15)	was   also  examined   to  prove   the	post  mortem
examination report  Ex.P22, on	the dead body of Lakhan. Dr.
R.O. Maheshwari	 (PW14) held  post mortem examination on the
dead body of Ramvati and the said report is Ex.P-20.
8.   The defence  of the  appellants(accused) was  of  total
denial. According  to them,  they were falsely implicated in
the case.  The evidence	 of the eye witness is totally false
and they  have implicated them (accused) out of enmity. They
also denied  to have  caused any  injury to  the prosecution
witnesses, The	appellant, therefore,  prayed that  they are
innocent and they be acquitted .
9.   The learned  Addl, Sessions  judge on  appraisal of the
evidence  on   record  disbelieved  all	 the  eye  witnesses
principally on	the ground  that they are close relatives of
the deceased  and are  on inimical terms with the appellants
(accused). The	medical evidence  adduced by the prosecution
does not  lend support	to the evidence of the eye witnesses
in as  much as	there are  various  discrepancies  in  their
evidence. The learned Addl. Sessions Judge has enumerated as
many as 13 circumstances which in his opinion go against the
prosecution case  and consistent  with these  findings,	 the
Addl. Sessions Judge acquitted all the appellants.
10.  The State	of Madhya  Pradesh aggrieved by the order of
acquittal preferred  an	 appeal	 to  the  High	Court  under
Section 378(1)
and (3)	 of  the
Criminal  Procedure  Code
s
challenging the	 legality and  correctness of  the order  of
acquittal. The	High Court  in its  judgment dated  July 24,
1986 on re-appraisal of the evidence on record did not agree
with the  reasons given	 by the learned Addl. Sessions Judge
for the	 order of  acquittal. The  High Court  held that the
view taken  by the  Addl. Sessions  Judge  is  perverse	 and
cannot be  sustained. The  High Court consequently set aside
the order  of acquittal and convicted the appellants Shanker
Lal and	 Kalu Ram  for the  offence punishable under
section
302
or	in the	alternative 302 read with
section 149
of the
Indian	Penal	Code  for  committing  the  murder    Lalhan
(deceased)  and	  Ramvati(deceased)  The   High	 Court	also
convicted Girdhari  Lal	 the  appellant	 No.2,	Lakhan	Pal-
appellant No.3	and appellant  No.5 Phool  Chand for offence
punishable under
section 302
read with
section 149
of the
Indian Penal  Code  and	 sentenced  each  of  them  to	life
imprisonment.  The  appellants	were  also  convictod  under
section 323
read with
section 149
of the Indian Penal Code
and each  one of them was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment
for  six   months.  All	  sentences  were  directed  to	 run
concurrently. It  is against  this  judgment  and  order  of
conviction passed  by  the  High  Court	 on  24-7-1986,	 the
appellants have preferred this appeal.
11.  Sh.  S.K.	Mehta,	the  learned  counsel  appearing  in
support of  this appeal	 assailed the  impugned judgment and
order on  various grounds.  He firstly	urged that  the High
Court has committed an illegality while interfering with the
reasoned order	of  acquittal  passed  by  the	trial  Court
Counsel urged  that the	 trial court has assigned as many as
thirteen good, reasons for acquitting all the appellants and
each one  of them  is supported	 by evidence  on record. The
High Court on reappraisal of the. evidence on record was not
justified in  reversing	 the  order  of	 acquittal.  Learned
counsel contended  that it  is well  settled that  the	High
Court although	 got the power to re-appreciate the evidence
on record  but unless  three   are 'compelling	reasons	  to
differ with order of   acquittal, the High Court  ought	 not
to have	 interfered with  the  order  of  acquittal  Counsel
further urged  that if	two views  are possible	 and the one
which is  in favour  of the  accused if	 taken by  the trial
court the  High Court  had committed  an error	while taking
contrary view  and consequently	 setting aside	the order of
acquittal. Learned counsel for the appellants then contended
that the  trial court  had refused  to believe	the evidence
given by  the eye  witnesses principally  on the ground that
they are close relatives of the deceased and the prosecution
has not	 examined any  independent eye witness who were said
to be  present at  the time  of incident. Supplementing this
argument, learned  counsel for the appellants urged that the
evidence of  the eye  witnesses is full of discrepancies and
material omissions  and the  High  Court  has  totally	over
looked this  lacuna in the prosecution case. Learned counsel
for the	 appellant then	 urged	that  the  medical  evidence
totally belies	the prosecution	 story narrated	 by the	 eye
witnesses and  therefore, the  High Court  has committed  an
error in setting aside the order of acquittal.
12.  Sh,   T.C.	   Sharma,   learned	counsel	  for	 the
respondent/State of  Madhya Pradesh  supported the  impugned
judgment and order,
13.  We have   carefuly gone through the evidence of the eye
witnesses and  have perused  the judgment of the trail court
as also	 the  judgment	of  the	 High  Court  we  have	also
considered the	above submissions of learned counsel for the
appellants with reference to the evidence on record.
14.  It is  well settled  proposition that  the	 High  Court
while interfering  with the  order of acquittal must bear in
mind the  reasons given by the trial court for acquittal. It
is also	 well settled that if two views are possible and the
one in	fovour of the acquittal if taken by the trial court,
the  High   Court  will	 not  interfere	 in  such  order  of
acquittal. there is catena of judgments of this Court on the
aforesaid proposition  and  it	is  not	 necessary  to	make
reference to  these decisions. From the judgment of the High
Court, it  is clear  that the High Court was very much aware
of this settled position of law and had also referred to all
these decisions. The High Court has given reasons as how the
order of acquittal passed by the trial court unsustainable.
15.  He are  in agreement with the reasons given by the High
Court while  setting aside  the order of acquittal passed by
the trial court.
16.  Coming to	the next  submission of	 the learned counsel
for the appellants that the evidence of the eye witnesses be
discarded on the ground that they are close relatives of the
deceased and  the prosecution  has  failed  to	examine	 the
independent witnesses  although they  were  available,	here
again, we  are unable to agree with this contention. It is a
well settled  proposition that evidence of the eye witnesses
who are said to be close relatives, cannot be discarded only
on the	ground that  they are  the close  relatives  of	 the
deceased. This	Court has time and again held that in such a
Situation all  that is	needed is  that the  Court must	 put
itself on  guard and  the evidence  of such eye witnesses be
appreciated  with   close  scrutiny.   The  High  Court	 has
considered this	 aspect in  its judgment and has come to the
conclusion that	 the evidence  of the  eye witnesses  namely
Maya Bai  (PW1), Girdhari  Lal (PW2), Satish Kumar (PW4) and
Rajender Kumar	(PW6) suffer from no infirmity. We have also
carefully gone	through the  evidence of  four eye witnesses
and we	find that  the evidence	 of these four witnesses can
safely be  relied upon	despite the  act that  they are	 the
close  relatives   of  deceased	 Lakhan	 and  Ramvati.	Maya
Bai(PW.1) in  her evidence  before the	Court has  given all
details of  the incident.  According to this witness, on 14-
11-1981 at  about 4,00	p.m., she  was sitting	in the court
yard alongwith	Ramvati(deceased)  and	their  mother-in-law
Dipya Bai.  They were  chit-chatting. At  that times Shanker
Lal armed with Farsa, Kalu Ram armed with an axe and rest of
the appellants	armed with  lathis came to their court-yard.
At that time, deceased Lakhan was unloading his bullock-cart
in the	Khalian, Seeing	 all  these  appellants	 around	 the
women-folk, Lakhan  (deceased) rushed  to the court yard and
thereupon all the appellants surrounded him. The witness has
further stated	that Shanker  Lal gave a blow with his Farsa
on the	head of Lakhan and then Kalu Ram gave an axe blow on
his waist  Lakhan fell	down and then rest of the appellants
started assaulting him with lathis. The witness then started
that, Ramvati,	who was	 the wife of Lakhan immediately went
to him and in order to save him from the assault fell on his
body.	The   appellants   thereafter	started	  assaulting
Ramvati(since  deceased).  When	 hue  and  cry	was  raised,
Girdhari Lal (PW2), Satish Kumar (PW4), Rajender Kumar (PW6)
and  other   persons  came  at	the  scene  of	offence	 and
thereafter the	appellants fled away. This is the substratum
of the	prosecution case  deposed to  by Maya Bai (PW1). The
appellants have	 cross-examined this witness at great length
but there  is nothing  in the  cross-examination which would
make her  evidence unreliable. Having regard to the time and
place of  the incident, it would be quite natural to believe
that the  witness was present at the time of incident at her
house. There  are some	minor contradictions which have been
brought on record by the appellants but these contradictions
have been rightly ignored by the High Court. The evidence of
Maya  Bai   (PW1)  finds   corroboration  in   all  material
particulars  from  the	evidence  of  other  eye  witnesses,
namely, Girdhari Lal (PW2), Satish Kumar (PW4), and Rajender
Kumar (PW6).  We have carefully gone through the evidence of
all these  eye witnesses  and in our opinion, the High Court
has committed  no error	 in accepting  the evidence of these
eye witnesses	      High  Court has  rightly held that the
evidence of  these eye witnesses cannot be discounted on the
ground that  they are close relatives of Lakhan deceased and
Ramvati.
17.  There is  also evidence  on record	 to  show  that	 the
appellants bore	 a grudge  against the family of complainant
and in	particular Lakhan(since	 deceased) who	was  looking
after the  litigation pending against Suman Bai, the wife of
Kalu Ram  (appellant No.4)  who had  managed to get the land
mutated in  the name  of his  wife(Suman Bai). It is come on
record that  the appellants  who are closely related to each
other and  had an  ill-feeling against	the  family  of	 the
deceased Lakhan on that count. The High Court in our opinion
was right  in accepting	 the  evidence	of  the	 prosecution
witnesses as  regards the  enmity held out by the appellants
against Lakhan(deceased).
18.  Coming  to	 the  arguments	 raised	 on  behalf  of	 the
appellants  as	 regards  the  discrepancy  in	the  medical
evidence and  the evidence of eye witnesses, we have perused
the evidence  of Dr.  Jain (PW15)  and Dr. Maheshwari (PW14)
and the	 post mortem  reports Ex.P-22  and Ex.P-20 of Lakhan
and Ramvati  respectively.  There  are	number	of  injuries
caused by sharp edged weapons like Farsa and Kulhari as well
as by  lathis. There  is, therefore,  no  substance  in	 the
contentions raised  on behalf  of the  appellants  that	 the
medical evidence  does not support the evidence given by the
prosecution witnesses.
19.  After hearing  arguments of  both the parties and after
going through  the record of the case, we are satisfied that
there is  no substance	in the appeal. The impugned order of
the High  Court does  not  suffer  from	 any  illegality  or
infirmity. The	appeal, thus,  stands dismissed. Appellants,
who are on bail shall surrender to their bailbonds forthwith
to serve  out the  remainder  of  the  respective  sentences
awarded to  each one of them under the impugned order passed
by the High Court.