[Cites
0
, Cited by
72
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India & Anr vs Shri Baljit Singh on 11 October, 1996
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 1996 SC 400, 1996 (11) SCC 315, 1997 SCC (L&S) 476, (1997) 1 CUR LR 24, (1997) 1 SCT 386, (1997) 1 SERV LJ 147, (1997) 1 SERV LR 98
Author:
K. Ramaswamy
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
PETITIONER:
UNION OF INDIA & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SHRI BALJIT SINGH

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	11/10/1996

BENCH:
K. RAMASWAMY, G.B. PATTANAIK




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
O R D E R
     Delay condoned.
Leave granted.
We have heard learned counsel on both sides.
     The respondent  was enrolled  in the Army as Apprentice
on March  30, 1975  and was  appointed	in  the	 service  on
regular basis w.e.f. March 27,1977 in the EME 177 Battalion.
While he  was in  service he had sustained moderately severe
injury Abductor	 Strain [R]  Thigh internal  Derangement [R]
Knee  on  April	 17,  1979  and	 was  admitted	to  Military
Hospital, Babina where he was downgraded to medical category
CEE  [temporary]   w.e.f.  August   11,	 1979,	 by  a	duly
constituted Medical Board of doctors. He was discharged from
the Military  Hospital, Babina	on August  12, 1979.  On May
10, 1981,  the Medical Board of doctors found him physically
incapacitated and  reported in	February 1980 in Psychiatric
OPD  where he was diagnosed to have a "Neurosis Superimposed
on an  immature histrionic  persouabity". He was recommended
to be  invalidated   out of  service. He was discharged from
service by consent as an invalidated man on May 31, 1981. He
filed W.P.No.738  of 1995  in the  High	 Court	of  Himachal
Pradesh at Shimla and in the impugned judgment dated October
31, 1995,  the High Court directed the appellants to pay him
disability pension.. Thus this appeal by special leave.
Shri P.P.	Malhotra, learned  senior counsel  appearing
for the	 appellants, contended	that under  Rule 173  of the
primary conditions  for grant  of disability pension, as per
the Pension  Regulations of  the Army, 1961, [for short, the
"Pension   Regulations],   unless   otherwise	specifically
provided,  a   disability  from	 service  on  account  of  a
disability  which   is	attributable  to  or  aggravated  by
military service  and is  assessed at  20% or  over. In this
case, after  examination of  the respondent  by the Board of
Doctors, as per Col. 2 [iii] it was reported that the injury
was not connected with the service and as a result he cannot
be declared  to have suffered injury due to the service. Mr.
Naresh	K.  Sharma,  learned  counsel  for  the	 respondent,
contends that  the respondent  had joined  the	service	 and
while he  was in  service, he  sustained  injury  and  that,
therefore, he  is entitled  to disability pension. He places
reliance on  para 2 [ii] of the Entitlement Rules, [Appendix
II at  page 53	of the	paper book].  At page  55, Col. [ii]
indicates that	the disablement is due to a wound, injury or
disease which  [i] is  attributable to	military service; or
[ii] existed before or arose during military service and has
been and remains aggravated thereby;
He further	 contends that as per the medical report the
injury was  sustained by  him while  he was  in service	 and
that, therefore,  it has  been presumed	 that it  was during
service and  accordingly must  bee attributable	 to military
service. On  a consideration of the rules, we think that the
contention of  Shri Malhotra  merits acceptance.  It is seen
that various criteria have been prescribed in the guidelines
under the  Rules  as  to  when	the  disease  or  injury  is
attributable to	 the military service. It is seen that under
Rule 173  disability pension  would be	computed  only	when
disability has	occurred due  to a  wound, injury or disease
which is  attributable to military service or existed before
or arose  during military  service and	has been and remains
aggravated during  the military service. If these conditions
are satisfied,	necessarily the incumbent is entitled to the
disability pension.  This is  made amply  clear from clauses
[a] to [d] of paragraph 7 which contemplates that in respect
of a  disease the  Rules enumerated thereunder require to be
observed. C1.  [c] provides that if a disease is accepted as
having arisen  in service,  it must  also be  established or
contributed the onset of the disease and that the conditions
were due  to the  circumstances of duty in military service.
Unless these  conditions are  satisfied, it  cannot be	said
that the  sustenance of	 injury per  se	 is  on	 account  of
military service. In view of the report of the Medical Board
of  doctors,   it  is  not  due	 to  military  service.	 The
conclusion may not have been satisfactorily reached that the
injury though  sustained while	in service,  it was  not  on
account of military service. In each case, when a disability
pension	 is  sought  for  and  made  a	claim,	it  must  be
affirmatively established,  as a  fact, as  to	whether	 the
injury sustained  was to  military service or was aggravated
which contributed  to invalidation for the military service.
Accordingly, we	 are of the view that the High Court was not
totally correct in reaching that conclusion. However, having
regard to  the facts  and circumstances	 of this case, we do
not think that it is an appropriate case for interference.
The appeal is accordingly dismissed with the above
findings. No costs.