[Cites
2
, Cited by
98
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Cheema Engineering Services vs Rajan Singh on 1 November, 1996
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 1996 SC 599, (1996) 23 CORLA 336, (1997) 1 COMLJ 70, (1997) 1 CPR 30, (1997) 1 CTC 170 (SC), (1997) 1 CURCC 6, 1997 (1) SCC 131, (1997) 1 SUPREME 51, (1997) 2 CIVLJ 171, (1997) 2 MAD LW 546, (1997) 3 BOM CR 36, 1997 ALL CJ 1 256, 1997 CCJ 568
Author:
K. Ramaswamy
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
PETITIONER:
M/S. CHEEMA ENGINEERING SERVICES

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
RAJAN SINGH

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	01/11/1996

BENCH:
K. RAMASWAMY, G.B. PATTANAIK




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
Present:
Hon'ble Mr. Justice K.Ramaswamy
	      Hon'ble Mr. Justice G.B. Pattanaik
     C.S. Vaidyanathan,	 Sr. Adv.,  Rajesh K. Sharma, Rakesh
K.  Sharma,  Ms.  Shalu	 Sharma,  Advs.	 with  him  for	 the
appellant
     B.Parthasarthy, Adv. for the Respondent
			 O R D E R
     The following order of the Court was delivered:
Leave granted.
We have heard learned counsel on both sides.
     The only  question for  consideration is  : whether the
respondent has	been using  the machine	 "Brickman" for clay
preparation, brick moulding, brick drying and brick burning,
after purchasing the same from the appellant for evening his
livelihood within  the meaning	of  Explanation	 to  section
2(1)(d)	 of  the  consumer
Protection	Act,  1986
?
Section
2(1)(d)
reads as under:
"Consumer" means any person who:-
(i)   buys	   any	 goods	 for   a
     consideration which  has been  paid
     or promised  or partly promised, or
     under  any	  system   of	deferred
     payment and  includes any	user  of
     such goods	 other then  the  person
     who    buys    such    goods    for
     consideration paid	 or promised  or
     partly  promised,	 or  under   any
     system  of	 deferred  payment  when
     such use  is made with the approval
     of	 such	person,	 but   does  not
     include a	person who  obtains such
     goods  for	  resale   or	for   ay
     commercial purpose; or
(ii)  hires   any	services  for  a
     consideration which  has been  paid
     or	 promised  or  partly  paid  and
     partly  promised,	 or  under   any
     system  of	  deferred  payment  and
     includes any  beneficiary	of  such
     services other  than the person who
     hires     the	services     for
     consideration paid	 or promised, or
     partly paid and partly promised, or
     under  any	  system   of	deferred
     payment,  when  such  services  are
     availed of with the approval of the
     first mentioned person."
If any  goods are	purchased for consideration, paid or
promised or  partly paid  or under  any system	of  deferred
payment including  any user  of such  goods other  than	 the
person who  by such  goods for	the  consideration  paid  or
promised or  partly paid  or partly  promised, or  under any
system of  deferred payment  when such	use is made with the
approval of  such person,  the purchaser  is the  'consumer'
within the  meaning of	the Act.
But the  Act
provides	 for
certain exceptions,  namely, "does  not include a person who
obtains such goods for resale or for any commercial purpose;
or..."
The Explanation  to the  definition of  'consumer'	 has
been added  by way  of an  amendment in	 1993 which reads as
under:-
"Explanation,--For the  purpose  of
     sub-clause	    (i),     "Commercial
     purpose" does  not include use by a
     consumer of  goods bought	and used
     by him  exclusively for the purpose
     of earning his livelihood, by means
     of self-employment."
In other words, the Explanation excludes from the ambit
of commercial  purpose in sub-clause (i) if
section 2(1)(d)
,
any  goods   purchased	by   a	consumer  and  used  by	 him
exclusively for	 the purpose  of earning  his livelihood  by
means of  self-employment. Such	 purchase of  goods is not a
commercial purpose.  The question,  therefore, is  : whether
the respondent	has been  using the  aforesaid	machine	 for
self-employment? The  word 'self-employment 'is not defined.
Therefore, it  is a  matter of	evidence.  Unless  there  is
evidence and  on consideration	thereof it  is included that
the machine   was  used only for self-employment to earn his
livelihood  without   a	 sense	 of  commercial	 purpose  by
employing o  regular basis the employee or workmen for trade
in the manufacture and sale of bricks, it would be for self-
employment. Manufacture	 and sale  of bricks in a commercial
way may	 also be  to earn  livelihood, but  "merely  earning
livelihood in commercial business", does not mean that it is
not  for   commercial  purpose.	  Self-employment   connotes
altogether a  different concept,  namely, he  alone uses the
machinery  purchased  for  the	purpose	 of  manufacture  by
employing himself  in working out or producing the goods for
earning his  livelihood. 'He'  includes the  members of	 his
family.	 Whether   the	respondent   is	 using	the  machine
exclusively by	himself and  the members  of his  family for
preparation, manufacture  and sale  of bricks  or whether he
employed any  workmen and  if so,  how many,  are matters of
evidence. The  burden is  on the  respondent to	 prove them.
Therefore, the	Tribunals were	not right in concluding that
the respondent is using the machine only for self-employment
and that,  therefore, it  is not  a commercial	purpose. The
orders of  all the  Tribunals stand set aside. The matter is
remitted to  the  District  forum.  The	 District  Forum  is
directed to record evidence of the parties and dispose it of
in accordance  with law	 within a  period of six months from
the date of receipt order.
The appeal is accordingly allowed. No costs.