[Cites
3
, Cited by
42
]
Supreme Court of India
Common Cause A Regd. Society vs Union Of India And Ors on 4 November, 1996
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 1886, 1997 AIR SCW 1636, 1997 (1) COM LJ 30 SC, 1997 UP CRIR 96, (1996) 10 JT 349 (SC), (1997) 1 COMLJ 30, (1997) 2 LS 4, 1996 (6) SCC 593, (1997) 1 PAT LJR 9, (1997) 1 ICC 555, (1997) SC CR R 318
Author:
Kuldip Singh
Bench:
Kuldip Singh
PETITIONER:
COMMON CAUSE A REGD. SOCIETY

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	04/11/1996

BENCH:
KULDIP SINGH, FAIZAN UDDIN




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
O R D E R
     The question  before this	Court in  Common  Cause	 Vs.
Union of  India and  Ors. Writ	Petition (C)  No. 26/95	 was
whether the  allotments	 of  retail  outlets  for  petroleum
products (Petrol  Pumps) were  illegal and as such liable to
the quashed.  This Court by the judgment dated September 25,
1996 came  to the  conclusion that  the allotments  made  by
Capt. Satish  Sharma were  arbitrary, discriminatory,	mala
fide, wholly  illegal and as such were liable to be quashed.
This Court  reached  the  said	findings  on  the  following
reasoning :
"All the  15 allotments - discussed
     above  -  have  been  made	 by  the
     Minister in  a stereotyped	 manner.
     The Petroleum   Ministry.	There is
     no receipt	 - entry  on any  of the
     applications. The	applicants  seem
     to have  approached dealt	with  in
     any  of   the   branches	of   the
     Ministry. There  is nothing  on the
     record   to   indicate   that   the
     Minister kept  any criteria in view
     while making  the allotments.   How
     the applicants  came  to know about
     the  availability	 of  the  petrol
     pumps    is     not    known.    No
     advertisement was	made  to  invite
     the applications.	There is nothing
     on the  record  to	 show  that  any
     other  method   of	  the	inviting
     applications was  adopted. There is
     no	 indication  in	 the  allotment-
     orders or	any where  in the record
     to show  that the Minister kept any
     guidelines	 in  view  while  making
     these  allotments.	 The  allotments
     have  been	 made  in  a  cloistered
     manner. The  petrol pumps	- public
     property - have been doled out in a
     wholly arbitrary manner." .....
"All these	 allotments  are  wholly
     arbitrary	 nepotistic    and   are
     motivated	     by	      extraneous
     consideration."
...................................
"We have  no hesitation  in holding
     that Capt.	 Satish	 Sharma	 in  his
     capacity	as    a	  Minister   for
     Petroleum	  and	  Natural    Gas
     deliberately acted	   in  a  wholly
     arbitrary and   unjust  manner.  We
     have no  doubt in	 our  mind  that
     Capt. Satish  Sharma knew	that the
     allottees	were  relations	 of  his
     personal staff,  sons of Ministers,
     Selection Boards and the members of
     the    Oil	    Selection	  Boards
     themselves. The allotments	 made by
     him were  wholly mala  fide and  as
     such cannot be sustained.
We are  further of	 the  view  that
     Capt.  Satish  Sharma  acted  in  a
     wholly biased manner inasmuch as he
     unfairly regarded	with favour  the
     cases of  15 allottee  before  him.
The     relevant	   circumstances
     available from record and discussed
     by us  leave no  manner of doubt in
     our mind  that Capt.  Satish Sharma
     deliberately  acted   in  a  biased
     manner to	favour	these  allottees
     and as  such the  allotment  orders
     are wholly	 vitiated and are liable
     to be set aside."
"Mr. Satish  Sharma  has  acted  in
     utter violation  of the  law  laid-
     down by  this Court  and  has  also
     infarcted
Article   14
of   the
     Constitution of  India. As	 already
     stated  in	  a  minister  in    the
     Central Government is in a position
     of a  trustee  in	respect	 of  the
     public property  under his agencies
     are a  kind  of  wealth  which  the
     Government	 must  distribute  in  a
     bona fide	manner and in conformity
     with law.	Capt. Satish  Sharma has
     betrayed the  trust reposed  in him
     by	   the	  people    under    the
     Constitution."
One of  the  directions  issued  by
     this Court was an under :
"5. Capt. Satish Sharma shall show-
cause  within  two	 weeks	  why  a
     direction	be  not	 issued	 to  the
     appropriate  police   authority  to
     register  a   case	  and	initiate
     prosecution   against    him    for
     criminal breach  of  trust	 or  any
     other offence  under law.	He shall
     further show-cause	 within the said
     period  why   he  should	not,  in
     addition, be  made	 liable	 to  pay
     damages for his mala fide action in
     allotting petrol pumps to the above
     mentioned fifteen persons."
Pursuant to  the above  quoted direction,	a show cause
notice was  issued   to Capt.  Satish Sharma.  He has  filed
affidavit in reply to the show cause notice.
We have  heard Mr. Salve, learned counsel appearing for
Capt. Satish  Sharma. There  are two parts of the directions
quoted above. This Court has called upon Capt. Satish Sharma
to  show  cause	 why  a	 direction  be	not  issued  to	 the
appropriate police authority to register a case and initiate
prosecution against  him for criminal breach of trust or any
other offence under law.
The findings  of this  Court, quoted  above, and	 the
conclusion reached in the Common Cause case, leave no manner
of doubt  that	an investigation by an independent authority
is called  for in  this	 case.	We,  therefore,	 direct	 the
Central Bureau	of Investigation  (CBI) to  register a	case
against Capt.  Satish Sharma  in respect  of the  allegation
dealt with  and the  findings reached  by this	Court in the
Common Cause  case. The	 CBI shall  hold investigation	 and
proceed in  accordance with  law. There shall be no limit on
the power,   scope  and sphere of investigation by the	CBI.
We, however,  make it  clear  that  the	 CBI  shall  not  be
influenced by  any observations	 made by  this Court  or the
findings reached  in Common  Cause case,  for  reaching	 the
conclusion  as	 to    whether	any  prima  facie  case	 for
prosecution/trial is made out against Capt. Sharma. It shall
have to	 be   decided on the basis of the material collected
and  made  available  with  the	 CBI  as  a  result  of	 the
investigation.	We   direct  the   CBI	 to   complete	 the
investigation within  three months  of the   receipt of this
order. The  CBI shall  file interim  report to	indicate the
compliance of	this  order. This  shall be to	indicate the
compliance of this order. This shall be done  by January 20,
1997 and  this matter  shall be	 listed on  January 22, 1997
before a  Bench of  which   Mr. Justice	 Faizan Uddin  is  a
member.
Mr. Harish	 Salve has  addressed elaborate arguments on
the question of damages. We place on record our appreciation
for Mr. Harish Salve for assisting this Court in a very fair
and independent manner.
According	 to Mr.	 Salve this  is	 not  a	 case  where
compensatory  or   exemplary  damages	should	be  imposed.
According   to him  nominal damages  would meet	 the ends of
justice.
This Court	 has authoritatively  laid  down in
Nilabati
Behera (Smt.)  Alias Lalita  Behera Vs.	 State of Orissa and
Ors.
1993  (2) SCC  746 that  damages can be awarded by this
Court in  proceedings	under
Article 32
of the Constitution
of India.
Mr. Salve has taken	us through the Privy Council
judgment in  Rookes Vs.	 Barnard and  Ors. 1964 Appeal Cases
1129. Lord  Devlin in  his opinion  has held  that exemplary
damages	 can  be  awarded  for	"oppressive,  arbitrary	 and
unconstitutional action	 by the servants of the Government".
Mr. Salve  has also  taken   us through	 the judgment of the
Court of  Appeal in  A.B. and  Ors.  Vs.  South	 West  Water
Services  Ltd.	 1993  Queen's	 Bench	507.  Broome's	case
elaborately discussed  and relied upon	in this judgment. It
would be useful to quote the relevant part of the opinion by
Stuart-Smith L.J.
     "This  first  category  is	 "oppressive,  arbitrary  or
unconstitutional action	 by the servants of the government."
It is  common ground  that this	 category of  persons is not
limited to  the servants of central government, but includes
servants of local government and the police.
In Broome v. Cassell & Co. Ltd. (1972) A.C. 1027, 1077-
1078,  Lord Hailsham of St. Marylebone L.C. said :
"... I would be surprised if  it included only servants
of the Government if the strict sense of the word. It would,
in my view, obviously apply to the police ... and  almost as
certainly  to	local  and   other     officials  exercising
improperly rights  of search  or arrest without warrant, and
it may	be that	 in   the future  it will be held to include
other abuses  of power without warrant by persons purporting
to exercise legal authority."
Lord Reid said, at pp. 1087-88 :
"With regard  to the  first I  think that	the  context
shows that  the category was never intended to be limited to
Crown servants.	 the   contrast is  between "the Government"
and  private   individuals.  Local  government	is  as	much
government as  national government,  and the police and many
other persons  are exercising governmental functions. It was
unnecessary in Rookes v. Barnard to define the	exact limits
of  the category. I should certainly read it as extending to
all those  who by  common  law	or  statute  are  exercising
functions of a governmental character."
Lord Wilberforce said at p.1120 :
"There is	not perhaps much difficulty about category 1
: it is well based on the cases and on a principle stated in
1703 -	'if public officers will infringe men's rights, they
ought to  pay greater  damages than  other men	to deter and
hinder others from the like offences:' Ashby v. White (1703)
2 Id.  Raym. 938, 956, per  Holt C.J. Excessive and insolent
use of	power is  certainly something against which citizens
require as much which I understand your Lordships to endorse
would correspond  with Holt  C.J.'s  'public  officers'	 and
would partly correspond with modern needs."
Lord Diplock said of the first category, at p.1130 :
"It would	embrace all  persons purporting	 to exercise
powers of  government, central or local, conferred upon them
by statute or at common law by virtue of the official status
or employment which they held."
In the said case Thomas Bingham M.R. further elaborated
the concept in the following  words :
"In the  first category  there  had
     been what he variously described as
     an "arbitrary and outrageous use of
     executive power:' (see p. 1223) and
     "	 oppressive,	  arbitrary   or
     unconstitutional  action	by   the
     servants of the government:" see p.
     1226. Minute  textual analysis   of
     these expressions is inappropriate.
     This was a judgment, not a statute.
But there	can be	no doubt    What
     Lord Devlin was speaking  about. It
     was gross misuse of power,involving
     tortious  conduct,	  by  agents  of
     government.   According	to   the
     traditional classification	  of the
     law of  tort, such	 misuse of power
     could give	 rise to  any one  of  a
     number of	causes of  action, which
     Lord Devlin   was	not at	pains to
     identify."
The Court	of Appeal  also relied	upon the judgment of
the House  of Lords  in Broome	Vs. Cassell  & Co. Ltd. 1972
Appeal Cases 1027.
We are  of view  that the legal position that exemplary
damages can  be awarded	 in a  case where  the action  of  a
public servant	is oppressive, arbitrary or unconstitutional
is unexceptionable. The question for consideration, however,
is whether  the action	of Capt.  Satish  Sharma  makes	 him
liable to  pay exemplary damages. In view of the findings of
this Court  in Common Cause Case - quoted above - the answer
has to	be in  the affirmative. Satish Sharma's actions were
wholly arbitrary, mala fide and unconstitutional. This Court
has given   clear  findings to	 this  effect in  the Common
Cause case. We, therefore, hold	 that Capt. Satish Sharma is
liable to pay exemplary	 damages.
We have  heard Mr. HN Salve on the question of quantum.
Mr. Salve  has vehemently  contended that Capt. Sharma was a
part of the system which was operating before his joining as
a Minister. According  to him the types of wrongs were being
committed  even	  earlier  on	the  assumption	  subjective
satisfaction. He  has further  contended  that	since	 the
concept	 of   absolute	liability  of  public  servants	 for
misfeasance has	 been of  recent origin in this country even
while awarding	exemplary damages  leniency should be shown.
There is some plausibility in the  contentions raised by Mr.
Salve. After  examining all  the facts	and circumstances of
this  case  and	 giving	 thoughtful  consideration  to	this
aspect, we  direct Capt.  Satish Sharma	 to pay a sum of Rs.
50 lac	as exemplary  damages to  the Government  Exchequer.
Since the  property with  which Capt. Sharma was dealing was
public property, the Government which is "by the people" has
to be compensated. We further direct Capt. Sharma to deposit
the  amount   with  the	  Secretary,  Ministry	of  Finance,
Government of  India within  nine  months  from	 today.	 The
amount if  not paid, shall be recoverable as arrears of land
revenue.