[Cites
27
, Cited by
67
]
Supreme Court of India
Election Commission Of India & Another vs Dr. Subramanian Swamy & Another on 23 April, 1996
Equivalent citations: 1996 AIR 1810, 1996 SCC (4) 104, AIR 1996 SUPREME COURT 1810, 1996 (4) SCC 104, 1996 AIR SCW 2100, (1997) 1 MAD LW 452, (1997) 3 LANDLR 28, (1996) 4 JT 463 (SC), 1996 (4) JT 463, (1997) 2 SUPREME 748, (1997) 3 RECCIVR 153, (1997) 2 ICC 428, (1997) 2 SCALE 534, (1997) 2 CURCC 21, (1997) 2 SCJ 681, (1997) 1 LJR 600, (1996) 2 CURCC 132, (1996) 2 MAD LJ 65, (1996) 2 RRR 572, 1997 (9) SCC 252, (1997) 1 ARBILR 419, 1997 ADSC 3 449, (1997) 2 SCR 770 (SC), (1997) 3 JT 390 (SC)
Author:
A.M Ahmadi
Bench:
A.M Ahmadi
,
N.P Singh
,
B.N Kirpal
PETITIONER:
ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA & ANOTHER

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DR. SUBRAMANIAN SWAMY & ANOTHER

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	23/04/1996

BENCH:
AHMADI A.M. (CJ)
BENCH:
AHMADI A.M. (CJ)
SINGH N.P. (J)
KIRPAL B.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1996 AIR 1810		  1996 SCC  (4) 104
 JT 1996 (4)   463	  1996 SCALE  (3)734


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
AHMADI, CJI.
This is  an appeal preferred by the Election Commission
of  India   and	 Shri	T.N.  Seshan,	the  Chief  Election
Commissioner,  (when   the  former   was   a   single-member
commission) against  the decision  of the  Division Bench of
the  High   Court  of  Madras  dated  15.11.1993  by  which,
reversing the  view taken by the learned single Judge of the
High Court  dated 2.7.1993,  it held  that in  view  of	 the
promulgation of	 Ordinance (Ordinance  No.32  of  1993)	 the
doctrine of  necessity was  no more attracted and applicable
in the	facts and  circumstances of  the case.	The question
raised in  this appeal	arises	in    the  backdrop  of	 the
following facts:
Ms. J.  Jayalalitha  was  elected	to  the	 Legislative
Assembly of  Tamil Nadu	 on or,	 the AIADMK  ticket  in	 the
General Elections  held in June 1991 and on being elected as
the leader  of the  party she  was  sworn-in  as  the  Chief
Minister of  the State.	 On 2.10.1992, Dr. Subramanian Swamy
preferred a petition to the State Governor under
Article 192
of  the	 Constitution  of  India  alleging  that  the  Chief
Minister had  incurred a  disqualification of being a member
of the Legislative Assembly of the State, in that, she being
a partner  in the partnership firm run in the name and style
of Messrs Jaya Publications had entered into a contract with
the State  Government and  which contract  was subsisting on
the date  of the  petition, in	view of	 sub-clause  (e)  of
clause (1)  of
Article	191
of	the Constitution  read	with
Section 9A
of the  Representation of  the People  Act, 1951
(hereinafter  called   'the
R.P.   Act
').   It	  would	  be
advantageous to	 reproduce the	said two  provisions at this
stage:
"191(1)   A    person   Shall    be
     disqualified for  being chosen  as,
     and for  being,  a	 member	 of  the
     Legislative Assembly or Legislative
     Council of 9 State-
(a) ......
(b) ......
(c) ......
(d) ......
(e) if  he is so disqualified by or
     under any law made by Parliament.
Explanation--- For	 the purposes of
     this clause,  a person shall not be
     deemed to hold an office  of profit
     under the	government of  India  of
     the   Government	of   any   state
     specified in  the first Schedule by
     reason only  that	he  is	Minister
     either for	 the Union  or for  such
     State."
"9A. Disqualification of Government
     contracts, etc. - A person shall be
     disqualified if,  and for	so  long
     as,  there	  subsists  a	contract
     entered into  by him  in the course
     of his  trade or  business with the
     appropriate  Government   for   the
     supply of	goods  to,  or	for  the
     execution of  any works  undertaken
     by, that Government.
Explanation--For  the  purposes  of
     this section,  where a contract has
     been fully	 performed by the person
     by whom  it has  been entered  into
     with 'the	appropriate  Government,
     the contract shall be deemed not to
     subsist by	 reason only of the fact
     that   the	  Government   has   not
     performed its  part of the contract
     either wholly or in part."
Since the  Governor did	 not forward  the  petition  to	 the
Election Commission,  Dr. Swamy moved a Writ Petition No.942
of 1992	 against  the  Governor	 for  a	 direction  that  he
forthwith forward  the same  to the  Election Commission  as
required by
Article 192(2)
of	 the  Constitution  for	 its
opinion. While	the said  writ petition	 was pending  in the
High Court,  the Governor  forwarded  the  petition  to	 the
Election Commission  on 27.3.1943 for its opinion. Thereupon
M,. J.Jayalalitha moved two Writ Petitions Nos.6094 and 6095
of 1993,  the first  for a  writ of prohibition against Shri
Seshan not to deal with the petition forwarded to him by the
Governor as  she had  a reasonable  apprehension that he was
biased	in    favour  of  Dr.Swamy  and	 the  second  for  a
declaration that  she had  not incurred the disqualification
as alleged by Dr.Swamy.
Both these writ petitions came up for disposal before a
learned Single Judge of the High Court. He allowed the first
writ petition  holding that  the evidence  placed on  record
clearly established  that Ms.  J.Jayalalitha's	apprehension
that Shri  Seshan may  not be able to take an impartial view
because of  his strong	bias in favour of Dr.Swamy could not
be said	 to be	misplaced or  unreasonable and	it would  be
just, fair  and	 proper	 to  issue  a  writ  of	 prohibition
directing Shri Seshan to refrain from expressing any opinion
on Dr.Swamy's  petition alleging  disqualification, since at
the relevant  time the	Election Commission was a one-member
body. On  the plea  based on  the doctrine of necessity, the
learned Judge  observed that  while the principle of natural
justice may  have to  yield in	favour of  the	doctrine  of
necessity, it was not obligatory to invoke the said doctrine
in all	cases, in  particular in  the case on hand, since it
was permissible	 under
Article	324
of	the Constitution  to
appoint	 an   additional  Election   Commissioner,  who,  if
appointed, would constitute an alternative forum for dealing
with the  matter. So  far as  the second  writ	petition  is
concerned, while the learned Single Judge held that the
decision on  the issue	raised by  Dr. Swamy  lay within the
exclusives domain  of  the  Governor,  he  opined  that	 Ms.
J.Jayalalitha had not incurred the alleged disqualification.
Therefore, while  dismissing the  second writ  petition,  he
virtually allowed  it, in  that, the Governor while taking a
decision under
Article 192(2)
would feel  inhibited by the
said decision.
Dr.Swamy filed two Special leave Petitions Nos.10189-90
of 1993 in this Court under 'Article 136 of the Constitution
questioning the correctness of the view taken by the learned
Single Judge in the said two petitions. This Court, however,
did not	 entertain the	said two  petitions and by its order
dated 20.8.1993 directed the petitioner to move the Division
Bench in  appeal. Consequently Dr.Swamy preferred an appeal,
being Writ  Appeal No.956  of 1993,  in the  High  Court  of
Madras.
At this  stage  we	 may  notice  one  development.	 The
President of  India promulgated an Ordinance (No.32 of 1993)
entitled the  Chief Election Commissioner and other Election
Commissioners (Condition  of Service)  Amendment  Ordinance,
1993  which  was  published  in	 the  Gazette  of  India  on
1.10.1993. (This  Ordinance was	 converted into	 an Act (Act
No.4 of	 1994) with  the same title on 4.1.1994).
Sections 9
and
10
introduced in  the Chief  Election Commissioner	 and
other Election	Commissioners (Conditions  of Service)	Act,
1991 (hereinafter called 'the 1999 Act') provided as under:
"9. The  business of  the	Election
     Commission shall  be transacted  in
     accordance with  the provisions  of
     this Act."
10.(1) The Election Commission may,
     by unanimous decision, regulate the
     procedure for  transaction	 of  its
     business as  also allocation of its
     business amongst the Chief Election
     Commissioner  and	 other	Election
     Commissioners.
(2) Save as provided in sub-section
     (1), all  business of  the Election
     Commission	  shall,   as	far   as
     possible,	     be	      transacted
     unanimously.
(3) Subject  to the  provisions  of
     sub-  section  (2),  if  the  chief
     Election  Commissioner   and  other
     Election  commissioners  differ  in
     opinion on	 any matter, such matter
     shall be  decided according  to the
     opinion of the majority."
It may be mentioned that the provisions in the Act. were the
same as in the Ordinance.
The Division Bench of the Madras High Court which heard
the appeal raised three points for determination namely, (i)
whether the  learned Judge was justified in examining if Ms.
J. Jayalalitha	had incurred the disqualification set out in
Article 191(1)
of the	constitution read  with
Section	 9A
,
R.P.. Act, (ii) whether the doctrine basis and (iii) whether
the  doctrine  of  necessarily	stood  attracted  after	 the
enactment of  ordinance No.32 of thereof. The Decision bench
by its	judgment and  order dated  15311.1993 held  that the
question whether  Ms. J.Jayalalitha  had of had not incurred
the disqualification  read with
Section 9A
of the R.P. Act
ought to  have	been  left  for	 decision  by  the  Election
Commission under
Article 192(2)
of the Constitution and the
learned Single Judge should not have gone into it as it felt
within the  exclusive domain  of the Election Commission. On
the second  question the  Division Bench  held that  on	 the
facts and  in the circumstances of the case Ms.J.Jayalalitha
would be justified in entertaining a reasonable apprehension
of bias	 or atleast  the likelihood  of bias  on the part of
Shri  Seshan  in  favour  of  Dr.Swamy	and  consequently  a
reasonable doubt  that she would not get a fair hearing from
Shri Seshan.  Insofar as  the third  point is concerned, the
Division Bench	held that  in view of the appointment of two
Election  Commissioner	 after	the   promulgation  of	 the
Ordinance and  in  view	 of
Sections  9
and
10
extracted
earlier, the  doctrine of  necessity cannot be applied since
the decision  could be	taken by  the Election Commission if
need be	 by majority.  On this	line of	 reasoning,  on	 the
question of relief to be granted, the Division Bench allowed
the Writ  Appeal and modified 'he order in writ petition No.
6094 of 1993 by giving the following direction:
"A writ of prohibition is issued to
     the  first	  respondent  (Mr.  T.N.
     Seshan) from  in any manner dealing
     with, hearing, adjudicating upon or
     disposing of  the memorandum  dated
     2.10.1992	filed	by  the	  second
     respondent (Dr.  Subramanian Swamy)
     and forwarded  by the  Governor  of
     Tamil Nadu to the first respondent.
     We make  it clear	that it	 is open
     to the  Election Commission,  While
     regulating	  the	 procedure   for
     transaction  of   its  business  or
     allocation of its business to allot
     it to  by	one  of	 the  other  two
     members or	 to both,  as  it  deems
     necessary and proper."
However, insofar  as Writ  Petition  No.  4095	of  1993  is
concerned, Division  Bench allowed  the Writ  Appeal and set
aside the order and decision of the learned Single Judge and
dismissed  Writ	 Petition  No.4095  of	1993.  The  Election
Commission of  India  as  well	as  Shri  T.N.	Seshan	felt
aggrieved by  the decision  of the  Division  Bench  in	 the
appeal	arising	  out  of  Writ	 Petition  No.6094  of	1993
extracted earlier.  This  Court	 granted  Special  Leave  to
Appeal and  hence we have before us this Civil Appeal No.504
of 1994.  So in	 this appeal  this Court  is called  upon to
decide the  limited question  regarding the participation of
Shri  Seshan   in  decision-making   having  regard  to	 the
allegation of bias made against him.
We have  extracted the  relevant part of
Article 191(1)
of the Constitution. That article plainly says that a person
shall be  disqualified for being a member of the Legislative
Assembly of  the State if he is disqualified by or under any
law made  by Parliament.
Section 9A
of the R.P. Act provides
that a	person shall  be disqualified  if there	 subsists  a
contract entered  into by  him in the course of his trade or
business with  the appropriate	government for the supply of
goods to,  or for  the execution  of any  work undertaken by
that government.  The duration	of the	disqualification  is
limited, namely,  so long  as  the  contract  subsists.	 The
allegation of  Dr.Swami is  that Ms.  J.Jayalilitha being  a
partner of  the firm  carrying on  business in	the State of
Tamil Nadu  under the  name and style of 'Jaya Publications'
had incurred  the disqualification  since that	firm  had  a
subsisting contract  with the  State Government	 which was a
business enterprise  to make  profit. According to Dr. Swamy
she has	 incurred the  disqualification under
Section 9A
of
the R.P. Act, which being a law made by Parliament, attracts
the application	 of
Article  191(1)(e)
of  the Constitution.
Article 192(1)
provides that  if any  question arises as to
whether a  member of  a House  of the Legislature has become
subject to any disqualification mentioned in
Article 191(1)
,
of the	Constitution shall  be referred	 for the decision of
the Governor whose decision 'shall be final'. Thus it is the
Governor who  has, to  take a  decision and such decision is
made final.  Then we turn to clause (2) of
Article 192
which
reads as under :
"192(2)   -   Before   giving   any
     decision on  any such question, the
     Governor shall  obtain the	 opinion
     of	 the   Election	 Commission  and
     shall   act   according   to   such
     opinion."
It is  clear from  the use  of the  wards shall	 obtain' the
opinion of the Election Commission, that it is obligatory to
obtain the  opinion  of	 the  Election	Commission  and	 the
further stipulation  that the Governor "shall act" according
to such	 opinion leaves	 no room for doubt that the Governor
is bound  to act  according to that opinion. The position in
law is well settled by this Court's decision in
Brundaban v.
Election Commission
(1965) 3SCR 53 where in this court held
that it	 is the	 obligation of the Governor to take decision
in accordance  with the	 opinion of the Election Commission.
It is  thus clear  on conjoint	reading of the two clause of
article 192
that once	a question  of the type mentioned in
the first  clause  is  referred	 to  the  governor,  meaning
thereby is raised before the Governor, the Governor, meaning
thereby is  raised before the Governor, the Governor and the
Gover alone  must decide  it but this decision must be taken
after obtaining	 the opinion  of the Election Commission and
the decision  which is	made file is that decision which the
Governor  has  taken  in  accordance  with  the	 opinion  of
Election Commission. In effect and substance the decision of
the Governor  must dependent  of the opinion of the Election
Commission and none else, not even the council of Ministers.
Thus the  opinion of  the election  Commission	is  decisive
since the final order would be based solely on that opinion.
The same  view came  to be	 expressed in  the  case  of
Election Commission  of India  v. N.G.	Ranga
, (1979)  1 SCR
210, while  interpreting
Article 103	(2)
, that instead of
the Government	in
Article  192(2)
, here the decision has to
be made	 by the	 President. So also the language of
Articles
192 (1)
and
103(1)
is identical except for the same change.
The Constitution  Bench of  this Court	reiterated that	 the
President was  hound to	 seek and  obtain the opinion of the
Election Commission  and only thereafter decide the issue in
accordance therewith.  In other	 words, it  is the  Election
Commission's opinion which is decisive.
Having  realised  that  the  opinion  of  the  Election
Commission  is	a  sine-qua-non	 for  the  Governor  or	 the
President, as  the case	 may be,  to give  a decision on the
question whether or not the concerned member of the House of
the Legislature	 of the	 State or either House of Parliament
has incurred  a disqualification,  the next question is, can
the Election  Commission take  a  decision  if	one  of	 its
members	 is  disqualification.	from  participating  in	 the
decision-making?
Article  324(1)
of the Constitution invests
in the	Election Commission the function of superintendence,
direction and  control of  elections and  clause (2) of that
Article provides  that the Election Commission shall consist
of the	Chief Election Commissioner and such number of other
Election Commissioners,	 if any,  as the  President may from
time to	 time fix.  Thus,
Article  324(2)
envisages a multi-
member	Election   Commission  with   the   Chief   Election
Commissioner as	 its Chairman,	[see
Article 324(3)].
In the
instant case,  to begin	 with the  Election Commission was a
single-member body  with Shri  Seshan as  the Chief Election
Commissioner when the learned Single Judge devided the write
petition on  2.7.1993. On the question of  Ms. J.Jayalalitha
entertaining a	reasonable apprehension of bias, the learned
Judge, on  a scrutiny  of the facts and circumstances of the
case, came to the conclusion that having regard to the close
association of	Dr. Swamy with Shri Seshan, besides the fact
that Dr.  Swamy's wife	was the lawyer of Shri Seshan in the
suit filed  by him  at Bombay,	the apprehension of bias was
real and  not imaginary	 and if	 Shri Seshan  has to  take a
decision on  Dr. Swamy's  complaint, the decision may not be
impartial and  will atleast  not be seen to be impartial and
therefore the  learned	Single	Judge  restrained  him	from
deciding  the  issue  and  communicating  the  same  to	 the
Governor. However,  on the  application of  the doctrine  of
necessity, the	learned Judge held that since
Article 324(2)
of the	Constitution permitted	appointment of	one or	more
Election commissioners,	 it was	 not necessary to invoke the
doctrine of  necessity and  allow  Shri	 Seshan	 to  make  a
decision, the  apprehension of	bias,  notwithstanding.	 The
Division Bench	of the High Court has upheld the view of the
learned	 Single	 Judge	on  the	 question  of  existence  of
circumstances which  go to  show that  the' apprehension  of
bias entertained  by Ms.  J. Jayalalitha  was reasonable and
the possibility	 of her not getting an impartial hearing and
decision was real and not imaginary merely an excuse trotted
out  to	  avoid	  a   decision	 on   the   issue   of	 her
disqualification. Thus,	 there is  a concurrent	 finding  of
fact  that   having  regard   to  the	close  and  intimate
relationship between  Dr. Swamy	 and Shri T.N. Seshan, apart
from the  fact that the former's wife is the latter's lawyer
in the rupees one crore damages suit filed by him in Bombay,
the apprehension  of bias  in the  mind of Ms. J.Jayalalitha
cannot be said to be misplaced and her fear that she may not
get justice  if the  decision is taken by Shri Seshan cannot
be brushed  aside as  imaginary. Shri  Sanghl,	the  learned
counsel for Shri Seshan, very frankly stated that his client
is not	in the	least keen  to participate  in the decision-
making in  view of  the findings  recorded  by	the  learned
Single Judge as well as the Division Bench of the High Court
but he	contested the  litigation because  in  his  view  he
cannot excuse  himself from  the process of decision-making.
He contended  that when	 the matter  was before	 the learned
Single Judge, he had invoked the doctrine of necessity as he
honesely believed that he was duty bound to decide the issue
referred to  him and  if he  refused to	 do so	he would  be
failing tn  discharge his constitutional obligation. This is
not to	say, contended	Shri Sanghi,  that he  admitted that
allegation of  bias made  against his  client hut  merely to
emphasise that	he was	under a constitutional obligation to
decide the issue and communicate his opinion to the Governor
to enable him to discharge his function under
Article 192(2)
of the Constitution. Shri Sanghi further contended that even
after the  Election Commission	was converted  into a multi-
member body  with effect  from 1.10.1993,  on which date the
other two  Election Commissioners  came to be appointed, the
position in  law remained unaltered because the Constitution
does not  conceive of an Election Commission without a Chief
Election Commissioner.	According to  him, the	structure of
Articles 324(2)
and
324(3)
and the  use of  the word 'and'
after the  words 'Chief	 Election Commissioner' and the word
'other' preceding  the words 'Election Commissioners' leaves
no room	 for doubt  that the  Constitution-makers visualised
the existence  of the  Chief Election  Commissioner  at	 all
times and  safeguarded the  said office by providing for the
removal of  the incumbent  occupying the  said office in the
same manner  as a  Judge of  the Supreme  Court. Shri Sanghi
reiterated that	 assuming without admitting that the finding
of bias	 is correct,  Shri Seshan  was not at all anxious to
participate in	the decision-making  process if	 lt  is	 not
obligatory under  the extant  constitutional scheme  on	 his
part to	 participate in	 the decision-making.  Stated  in  a
nutshell the  line of  reasoning adopted  by Shri  Sanghi is
that the  decision of  the 'Election Commission' is a 'must'
for the	 Governor to  decide the  issue; the constitution of
the Election  Commission under	the scheme of
Article 324
of
the Constitution clearly is that it must comprise the Chief-
Election Commissioner  as its  Chairman if  it is  a  multi-
member body  ,	other  words  there  cannot  be	 a  properly
constituted Election  Commission without  its  Chairman	 and
hence his  participation in  the decision-making  cannot  be
excused and  must be permitted on the doctrine of necessity.
Thus, according to Shri Sanghi, the constitution of a multi-
member Election	 Commission and	 the insertion	of
Section 9
and
10
in the 1991 Act would make no difference because they
do not speak of exclusion of the Chief Election Commissioner
from the  decision-making process.  These provisions  merely
set out	 the procedure	to be  followed in  the event  of  a
difference of opinion.
On the  other hand,  the learned  Counsel	for  Ms.  J.
Jayalalitha reiterated	the contention of bias on the ground
that the  facts on  record revealed that there was unity and
identity of  interest between  Dr. Swamy,  his wife and Shri
Seshan since  it was  established beyond any manner of doubt
that they  had developed family friendship which went beyond
mere professional  relationship and it would be embarrassing
both for  Shri Seshan  and Ms.	J. Jayalalitha if the former
sat in	judgment over the complaint of disqualification made
by Dr.	Swamy. It  was further	pointed out  that after	 the
learned Single	Judge repelled	the contention	based on the
doctrine of necessity, Shri Seshan did not prefer any appeal
against
the  said  decision
but  has	now  preferred,	 the
pleasant appeal	 on that  the realizing	 that  the  Election
Commission has	been converted	into a multi-member body and
the  view  taken  by  the  learned  Single  Judge  would  be
translated into	 a reality if the two Election Commissioners
decide the  issue of  disqualification	arising	 before	 the
Election  Commission.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  contended
counsel, that  the function which the Election Commission is
expected to perform under
Article 192(2)
of the Constitution
can be said to be quasi-judicial in character and once it is
shown that  the	 apprehension  of  bias	 is  reasonable	 and
genuine,   the	 participation	 of   the   Chief   Election
Commissioner in	 the decision-making  process  would  be  in
breach of the principles of natural justice and unless it is
shown that  there is  no alternative  but for  him to sit in
judgment, the  rule of	natural justice must prevail because
justice must  not only	be done	 but must  also appear to be
done. It  was, therefore,  submitted  by  counsel  that	 the
doctrine of  necessity can  have no play because in the case
of a multi-member body, the person, be he the Chief Election
Commissioner or	 an Election  Commissioner, against whom the
charge of  bias is  established ought to excuse himself from
the proceedings	 so that  the decision taken is not rendered
vulnerable and	the apprehension  of  prejudice	 is  totally
removed. In  short, Ms. J. Jayalalitha supports the decision
of both	 the learned  Single Judge and the Division Bench on
the question  of bias  and applicability  of the doctrine of
necessity.
We must  at once  state that we have carefully examined
the facts and circumstances laid on record in support of the
finding of bias recorded by the learned Single Judge as well
as the	Division Bench	and in	our view the said finding is
unassailable. Conscious	 of the	 fact that  Shri  Seshan  is
occupying a  high constitutional  office we  have given	 our
anxious consideration to this aspect of the matter. While we
are  inclined	to  think   that  Shri	 Seshan	 as  a	high
constitutional functionary  may	 not  carry  any  grudge  or
malice against Ms. J.Jayalalitha, there can be no doubt that
his close  association	with  Dr.  Swamy's  family  and	 the
professional relationship  with his wife who is representing
him in	the suit  at Bombay and the other circumstances, all
of which  have	been  summarized  in  paragraph	 39  of	 the
Division  Bench	  judgment,  are   sufficient  to   raise  a
reasonable apprehension	 in the	 mind of  Ms.  J.Jayalalitha
that he may be biased in favour of Dr. Suamy even if he does
not entertain any ill-will towards her. Realizing this, Shri
Sanghi submitted  that his  client is  not at all anxious to
participate in	deciding the  issue referred to the Election
Commission  unless   it	 is  in	 the  constitutional  scheme
imperative for	him to do so. He further stated that if this
court comes to the conclusion that without his participation
the other  two election. Commissioners can decide the issue,
his client  will recuse	 himself.  That	 takes	us  to,	 the
question whether  Shri Seshan  is bound	 to  participate  in
expressing his view on the issue referred for the opinion of
the Election Commission?
It is  true that
Article 192(2)
of  the	Constitution
expects that the Governor 'shall obtain' the opinion of 'the
Election Commission'  and  'shall  act'	 according  to	such
opinion	 in   giving  his   decision  on   the	question  of
disqualification raised before him. Obtaining the opinion of
the Election  Commission is,  therefore, imperative.  It  is
equally imperative for the Governor to act according to such
opinion. Thus,	the opinion  of the  Election Commission  is
decisive of  the decision  to  be  taken  by  the  Governor.
obviously, the	Election. Commission  referred to in
Article
192(2)
of  the Constitution would he the one appointed under
Article 324(2)
of the	Constitution. This  Article in terms
provides that  the Election  Commission shall consist of the
Chief  Election	  Commissioner	and  such  number  of  other
Election Commissioners as the President may fix from time to
time. Therefore,  the Chief  Election Commissioner is a must
whether it  is a single-member- or multi-member body. In the
case of	 a multi-member	 body,
Article 324(3)
expects him to
act as	the Chairman  of that  body.
Section 146
of the R.P.
Act cutlines  the procedure  to be  followed in deciding the
question arising  under
Article	 192.
That  procedure is the
one a civil court follows in deciding matters brought before
it.
Section 9A
was introduced in the
R.P. Act
to empower the
Election Commission to delegate some of its functions to the
Secretary or  Deputy Election  Commissioner, subject to such
direction as the Election Commission may choose to give. But
it  was	 pointed  out  that  only  routine  matters  can  be
delegated under this provision.
At this  stage it	may  be	 advantageous  to  refer  to
certain other  provisions which	 have a bearing on the point
under consideration.
Article  124(1)
of  the	Constitution
provides that  there shall  be	a  Supreme  Court  of  India
consisting of  the Chief Justice of India and such number of
other judges as may from time to time be prescribed.
Article
214
provides that every State shall have a High Court and as
provided by
Article 216
every High Court shall consist of a
Chief Justice  and such	 other Judges  as may  be considered
necessary to  appoint. Similarly,
Article  324(2)
and
(3)
provide that  the Election Commissioner shall consist of the
Chief  Election	  Commissioner	and  such  number  of  other
Election Commissioners,	 if any,  as the  President may from
time to	 time fix.  When the Election Commission is a multi-
member body, the Chief Election Commissioner will act as its
Chairman.  These  provisions,  therefore,  provide  for	 the
constitution of	 the Supreme  Court,  High  courts  and	 the
Election Commission.  In the  case of  the first  two, it is
well-settled that they need not sit en banc and can transact
business in  benches. Is there any distinguishing feature in
the case of the Election Commission to take the view that it
must sit  en banc  or not  at all? In other words, can it be
said  that  the	 provisions  of	 the  Constitution  make  it
imperative  for	  the	Chief	Election   Commissioner	  to
participate in	each and  every decision  that the  Election
Commission is required to make under the Constitution?
True it  is that  under
Article  192
if  any  question
arises in  regard to disqualification referred to in
Article
191(1)
, the  question has  to be  referred to  the  Election
Commission for	its opinion and the Governor has to give his
decision in  accordance with  that opinion.
Article  324(2)
provides for  the constitution of Election Commission; if it
is a  single-member body  it  will  comprise  of  the  Chief
Election Commissioner  only, if it is a multi-member body he
will be joined by the other Election Commissioner(s). In the
case of	 a single-member  body, if  the Governor  seeks	 his
opinion, he perhaps can invoke the doctrine of necessity but
that question which arose before the learned Single Judge is
no more	 germane because  during the  pendency of the appeal
two more  Election Commissioners  were appointed making it a
multi-member body.  Shri Sanghi's  reading of  the aforesaid
constitutional provisions  is that  since the opinion has to
he of 'the Election Commission', it must be of all those who
constitute that	 body or  not at  all. This in our view is a
narrow reading	of the	said provisions.  If Shri  Sanghi is
right it must necessarily follow that ail decisions taken by
the Election  Commission  must	be  unanimous  and  majority
decisions would	 be of	no avail. More or less the same line
of reasoning  was canvassed before this Court in
T.N. Seshan
v. The Union of India
(1995) 4 SCC 611, but without suecess.
In that	 case this Court held that the scheme of
Article 324
is that	 there shall  be a  permanent body  to be called the
Election Commission, which shall discharge public functions,
essentially administrative  in character  but at  times even
adjudicative and  legislative. It  was further	pointed	 out
that the  Constitution-makers preferred	 to remain silent as
to  the	  manner  in  which  the  Election  Commission	will
'cransact its  business presumably  because they  thought it
unnecessary and	 perhaps even  improper to  provide for	 the
same having  regard to the level of personnel it had in mind
to man	the  Commission.  Naturally  they  depended  on	 the
sagacity and  the wisdom  of the Chief Election Commissioner
and his	 colleagues. That,  however, does  not mean that the
Parliament could  not enact
Sections 9
and
10
introduced by
the amending Ordinance/Act. The submission that the said two
provisions were	 inconsistent with the scheme of
Article 324
was rejected.  Implied in this contention was the submission
that  in   the	case  of  multi-member	Election  Commission
decisions have	to be  taken by	 one voice or not at all and
any provision  which introduces	 the concept  of decision by
majority must  be held to be inconsistent with the scheme of
Article 394.
Rejecting this contention this Court held that
Parliament  was	  competent  to	 enact
Sections  9
and
10
introduced by  the  amending  Ordinance/Act  and  there	 was
nothing in  the scheme	of
Article  324
to  conclude	that
decision by  majority would  be an  illegality. In that case
this Court  quoted with	 approval, the	following  principle
found in  footnote 6  at  page	657  of	 Halsbury's  Law  of
England, 4th Edition (Re-issue), Volume 7(1):
"The  principle   has  long   beer,
     established  that	the  will  of  a
     Corporation or  body  can	only  be
     expressed	by   the  whole	  or   a
     majority of  its members,	and  the
     act of  a majority	 is regarded  as
     the act of the whole."
The same principle was reiterated in Grindley . Baker 126 ER
875, 879  and 882.  It is, therefore, obvious that after the
decision of  the Constitution  Bench reiteration of the same
argument, albeit in a different shade, can be of no avail to
the appellant.
The  next	question  then	is  if	the  Chief  Election
Commissioner, for  reason of  possible bias, is disqualified
from  expressing   an  opinion,	  how  should  the  Election
Commission conduct  itself?  As	 pointed  out  earlier	Shri
Sanghi, the  learned counsel  for the  appellant,  has	very
frankly and  with his  usual fairness  stated that the Chief
Election Commissioner  preferred this appeal only because he
genuinely believed  that the  scheme of
Article 324
did not
conceive of  a decision	 by majority, but if the Court comes
to the conclusion that a decision can be reached without the
Chief Election Commissioner participating in decision-making
in the	special circumstances of the case, the latter is not
at all	keen or	 anxious to  hear and  adjudicate  upon	 the
matter at issue before the Election Commission. We are quite
conscious of the high office the Chief Election Commissioner
occupies.  Ordinarily  we  would  be  loath  to	 uphold	 the
submission  of	 bias  but   having  regard   to  the	wide
ramification the  opinion of the Election Commissioner would
have on	 the future  of Ms. J.Jayalalitha, we think that the
opinion, whatever  it be,  should  not	be  vulnerable.	 The
participation of  the Chief  Election  Commissioner  in	 the
backdrop of  the findings  recorded by	the  learned  Single
Judge as  well as the Division Bench of the High Court would
certainly  permit  an  argument	 of  prejudice,	 should	 the
opinion be  adverse to	Ms. J.Jayalalitha.  Therefore, apart
from the  legal aspect, even prudence demands that the Chief
Election Commissioner  should recuse himself from expressing
any opinion  in the matter. However, the situation is not so
simple, it  is indeed complex, in that, what would happen if
the two	 Election Commissioners	 do not agree and there is a
conflict of  opinion between  them? That  would	 lead  to  a
stalemate situation and the Governor would find it difficult
to take	 a decision  based on  any such	 opinion. In  such a
situation, can	the doctrine  of  necessity  be	 invoked  in
favour of the Chief Election Commissioner?
We must  have a clear conception of the doctrine. It is
well settled  that the law permits certain things to be done
as a  matter of	 necessity  which  it  would  otherwise	 not
countenance on	the touchstone of judicial propriety. Stated
differently, the  doctrine of  necessity makes it imperative
for the	 authority to  decide and considerations of judicial
propriety must	yield. It  is often invoked in cases of bias
where there  is no  other authority  or Judge  to decide the
issue. If the doctrine of necessity is not allowed full play
in certain  unavoidable	 situations,  it  would	 impede	 the
course of  justice itself  and the  defaulting	party  would
benefit therefrom. Take the case of a certain taxing statute
which taxes  certain perquisites  allowed to  Judges. If the
validity of  such a  provision is  challenged  who  but	 the
members of  the judiciary  must decide it. If all the Judges
are disqualified  on the  plea that  striking down of such a
legislation would  benefit them,  a stalemate  situation may
develop. In  such cases the doctrine of necessity comes into
play. If  the choice  is between  allowing biased  person to
act or to stifle the action altogether, the choice must fall
in favour  of the  former as  it is  the only way to promote
decision-making.  In  the  present  case  also	if  the	 two
Election  Commissioners	  are  able  to	 reach	a  unanimous
decision,  there   is  no   need  for  the  Chief.  Election
Commissioner  to   participate,	 if   not  the	doctrine  of
necessity may have to be he invoked.
We think  that is	the only  alternative	 in  such  a
situation. We are, therefore. of the opinion that the proper
course to  follow is  that the	Chief Election	Commissioner
should	call  a	 meeting  of  the  selection  Commission  to
adjudicate  on	 the  issue   of  disqualification   of	 Ms.
J.Jayalalitha on  the groands  alleged	by  Dr.Swamy.  After
callinq the  meeting he	 should act as the Chairman but then
he may	recuse himself	by  announcing	that  he  would	 not
participate in the formation of opinion. If the two Election
Commissioners reach  a unanimous opinion, the Chief Election
Commissioner will  have	 the  opinion  communicited  to	 the
Governor. If  the two  Election Commissioners do not reach a
unanimous decision in the Matter of expressing their opinion
on the	issue referred	to the Election Commission, it would
be necessary  for the Chief Election Commissioner to express
his opinion  on the  doctrine of necessity. We think that in
the special circumstanees of this case this course of action
would he  the most  dppropriate one  to follow beause if the
two Election  Commissioners do	not agree,  we have no doubt
that the  doctrine  of	necessity  would  compel  the  Chief
Election Commissioner  to express  his	views  so  that	 the
majority opinion  could be  communicated to  the Governor to
enable him  to take  a decision	 in accordance	therewith as
required by
Article 192(1)
of the Constitution.
In the  result, while  we largely	agree with  the view
expressed by  the Division Bench, we modify the order of the
Division Bench	of the	High  Court  to	 the  aforementioned
limited extent regarding the procedure to be followed by the
Election Commission in reaching a decision and communicating
its opinion  to the  Governor to enable the latter to decide
the issue  in accordanee  with the  opinion. The appeal will
stand  disposed	  of   accordingly.   In   the	 facts	 and
circumstances of the case we make no order as to costs.