[Cites
41
, Cited by
98
]
Supreme Court of India
P.Kannadasan Etc. Etc vs State Of Tamil Nadu & Ors. Etc. Etc on 26 July, 1996
Equivalent citations: AIR 1996 SUPREME COURT 2560, 1996 (5) SCC 670, 1996 AIR SCW 3189, (1996) 2 APLJ 85, (1996) 7 JT 16 (SC)
Author:
B.P. Jeevan Reddy
Bench:
B.P. Jeevan Reddy
,
Suhas C. Sen
PETITIONER:
P.KANNADASAN ETC. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF TAMIL NADU & ORS. ETC. ETC

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	26/07/1996

BENCH:
B.P. JEEVAN REDDY, SUHAS C. SEN




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
THE 26TH DAY OF JULY, 1996
Presents:
Hon'ble Mr.Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy
	    Hon'ble Mr.Justice Suhas C.Sen
M.  Chandrasekharan,   Additional  Solicitor   General	A.K.
Ganguli, K.N.  Shkula, T.  Thiagarajan, K.  Parasaran,	V.A.
Bobde, Dr.  A.M. Singhvi,  P.S. Nair,  B. Sen,	Gulab Gupta,
G.L. Sanghi, R.N. Sachthey, Sr. Advs., V. Ramasubamaniam, V.
Krishnamurthy, (Manish	Mishra,) Adv.  for M/s. Fox Mandal &
Co., V.A.  Subba Rao,  A.D.N. Rao,  Arvind Kumar  Sharma, T.
Harish Kumar, Krishnamurthi Swami, K.K. Mani, Nikhil Nayyar,
T.V.S.N. Chari,	 B.B. Singh,  Mahabir Singh,  Praveen Kumar,
Suman J.  Khaitan, Shahid  Rizvi,  T.G.N.  Nair,  satish  K.
Agnihotri, Ashok  Mathur,  Anip	 Sachthey,  C.D.  Singh,  M.
Munshi, B.B.  Singh,  Adhay  Sapore,  Vivek  Gambir,  Neeraj
Sharma, Ajit  Kumar Sinha, P.R. Seetharaman. Advs. With them
for the appearing parties.
J U D G M E N T
     The following Judgment of the Court was delivered:
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
		CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
		CIVIL APPEAL NO 9847 OF 1996
       (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 177812 of 1994)
			    WITH
C.A. NOS.		      ARISING OUT OF S.L.P NOS.
9849, 9780-81/96	       11922-24/96
9905/96,		      1761/96
9851/96			      19147/94
9906,9907/96		      25020,25076/95
9777/96 26137/95
W. P. (C) NOS.269/95, 270/94
9908, 9909/96		       28062,28064/95
9850, 9778/96		       3315/95,3351/96
9910/96			       3513/96
W.P. (C) NO.408/96
9911-12/96		       4198-99/96
9913/96			       4885/95
W.P.(C) No. 518/95
9914/15/96		       5339,5362/96
9848, 9774-76/96	       8109,8814-16/95
9916/96			       9749/96
9917/96			       15012/96 (D.No 11144/96)
	       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
		CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
		 CIVIL APPEAL NO.   OF 1996
[ARISING OUT OF S.L.P.(C) NO.17721 OF 1994]
			    WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NOS.  OF 1996
[ARISING OUT  OF S.L.P.(C)  NOS.11922-24/96,1761/96,  19147/
94, 25020/95,  25076/95,26137/95,W.P.(C)  NOS.269/95,270/94,
S.L.P.(C)   NO.28062/95,28064/95,   3315/95,3351/96,3513/96,
W.P. (C) NO.408/96, S.L.P.(C) NOS.4198-99/96,4885/96,W.P.(C)
NO.518/95, S.L.P.(C) NOS.5339/96,5362/96,W.P.(C) NO. 688/92,
S.L.P.(C) NOS.	8109/95, 8814-16/95,  9749/96 AND  S.L.P.(C)
NO._____________ /96 [D.NO.11144/96] WITH I.As.
J U D G M E N T
B.P. JEEVAN REDDY, J.
Leave granted in the Special Leave petitions.
The appellants-writ petitioners are challenging the
validity  of
The  Cess   and	Other	Taxes  on   Minerals
(Validation) Act, 1992
[being Act 16 of 1992] enacted by
Parliament. The High Courts have repelled the attack.
It is renewed here.
FACTUAL CONSPECTUS:
Section 115
of the  Tamil Nadu  Panchayats  Acts	1958
levied in  every Panchayat  Development lock  a local cess @
0.45p  on  every  rupee	 of  land  revenue  payable  to	 the
Government in  respect of  any land  for  every	 fasli.	 The
explanation to the section defined "land revenue" to include
inter alia  royalty and	 lease amount  payable in respect of
the land.  The validity	 of the	 levy was  challenged in the
Madras High Court. A learned Single Judge dismissed the writ
petition-holding that  being a tax on land, it is within the
Legislative competence of the State Legislature. The learned
Judge followed	the decision  of this Court in
H.R.S. Murthy
v. Collector  Chittoor
[1964  (6) S.C.R. 666]. A writ appeal
against	 the  decision	of  the	 learned  Single  Judge	 was
dismissed, again  following the	 decision in  H.R.S. Murthy.
The  matter   was  brought  to	this  Court.
It  was  heard
ultimately by a seven-Judge Bench [ India, Cement Limited v.
State of Tamil Nadu (1989 Suppl.(1) S.C.R. 692)] which held,
the said  levy to  be outside  the legislative competence of
the Tamil  Nadu Legislature.  This Court  held that  (1) the
levy cannot  be sustained  under and with reference to Entry
49 of List-Il of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of
India as  a tax	 on land; (2) the levy is a levy on minerals
and is relatable to Entries 23 and 50 of List-II (3) that on
account of  the declaration  made by Parliament contained in
Section 2
of -	 the Mines  and	 Minerals  [Development	 and
Regulation]   Act,   1957,   [M.M.R.D.	 Act],	 the   State
legislatures have  been denuded	 of the power to levy tax on
minerals. Regulation  of mines and mineral development takes
within its purview the levy of tax on minerals. Section 9 of
the M.M.R.D.  Act, this	 Court held,  provides for  levy  of
royalty/dead  rent   on	 minerals.  The	 State	legislatures
cannot, therefore, impose any tax on minerals. H.R.S. Murthy
was  wrongly   decided.	 Having	 so  declared,	this  Court,
however, directed  that the  said decision  shall only	have
prospective effect.  This was for the reason that the States
have been  levying and collecting the said cess on the basis
of the decision of this Court in H.R.S. Murthy. The decision
in India Cement was rendered on 25th October, 1989.
Following the  decision in	 India Cement, a three-Judge
Bench declared	identical levies  imposed by  the States  of
Orissa, Bihar  and Madhya  Pradesh as  incompetent and	void
[Orissa Cement	Limited v.  State of Orissa (1991 (2) S.C.R.
105)]. Having  regard to the fact that decisions of the High
Courts in  Orissa, Bihar  and Madhya Pradesh [which were the
subject-matter of  appeals before  this Court] were rendered
on  different  dates,  the  Bench  directed  that  the	said
decision shall	be operative  prospectively with effect from
the date  of the said judgment, i.e., 4th April, 1991 in the
case of	 State of  Bihar, with effect from December 22, 1989
in the case of Orissa and with effect from march 28, 1989 in
the case of Madhya Pradesh.
The aforesaid  decisions  of  this	 Court	had  serious
impact on  the revenues	 of several  State Governments.	 Not
only were they barred from collecting the said cess, quite a
few of them were obliged to refund substantial amounts which
has already  been collected. It is well known that the state
Governments in	this country  are perpetually  strapped	 for
funds. the  decisions made  their situation  more acute. The
Parliament then	 came to  their rescue	and promulgated	 The
Cess and  other Taxes  on Minerals  (Validation)  ordinance,
1992 on	 February 15,  1992. The Ordinance has been replaced
by Act	16 of 1992, published in the Gazette of India on 4th
April, 1992.  the Act  contains only  three sections. Having
regard to  the several	submissions made with respect to its
validity, it  is appropriate  to read all the three sections
including the schedule appended thereto:
"
An Act
to validate the imposition
     and  collection   of   cesses   and
     certain  other  taxes  on	minerals
     under certain State laws
     Be it  enacted by Parliament in the
     Forty-third Year of the Republic of
     India as follows:-
Prefatory  Note  Statement  of
     Objects and  Reasons.  ---	 Certain
     State    Acts  imposing  cesses  or
     other taxes  on minerals  had  been
     struck down by Courts including the
     Supreme Court of India in different
     cases. As	result of  judgments  in
     these   cease,   State   Government
     became liable  to refund cesses and
     other  taxes   collected  by  them.
Since refund  was likely  to have a
     serious impact on State revenues of
     the   concerned  State  Governments
     and having	 regard to the fact that
     it is extremely difficult to ensure
     that  the	 levies	 collected   are
     refunded to the large number of end
     users of minerals who have actually
     borne the	burden of  such	 levies,
     the  Cess	 and  Other   Taxes   on
     Minerals  (Validation)   Ordinance,
     1992,  to	validate  collection  of
     such levies by State Governments up
     to the 4th day of April, 1991.
2.	  The Bill  seeks to replace the
     aforesaid Ordinance.
1.	  Short	  title,    extent   and
     commencement---(1)
This  Act
May be
     called the
Cess and Other Taxes on
     Minerals (Validation) Act, 1992
.
(2)  It extends to the whole of the
     India.
(3)  It shall  be	deemed	to  have
     come into	force on the 15th day of
     February, 1992.
2.	  Validation  of  certain  State
     laws and  actions taken  and things
     done  thereunder.-	  (1)  The  laws
     specified in  the Schedule	 to this
     Act shall	be, and	 shall be deemed
     always to have been, as valid as if
     the  provisions  contained	 therein
     relating to  cesses or  other taxes
     on Minerals  had  been  enacted  by
     parliament	 and   such   provisions
     shall be deemed to have remained in
     force up to the 4th April, 1991.
(2)  Notwithstanding	     any
     judgment,	decree	 order	of   nay
     court, all	 actions  taken,  things
     done,  rules   made,  notifications
     issued or	purported to  have  been
     taken,  done  made	 or  issued  and
     cesses or	other taxes  on minerals
     realised under  any such laws shall
     be	 deemed	 to  have  been	 validly
     taken,  done,   made,   issued   or
     realised, as the case may be, as if
     this section  had been  in force at
     all  material   times   when   such
     actions  were  taken,  Things  were
     done,     rules	  were	   made,
     notifications   were   issued.   or
     cesses or	other taxes were issued,
     and no  suit  or  other  proceeding
     shall be maintained or continued in
     any court	for the	 refund	 of  the
     cesses  or	  other	 taxes	realised
     under any such laws.
(3) For the removal of doubts,
     it is  hereby declared that nothing
     in	  sub-section	(2)   shall   be
     construed as  preventing any person
     from claiming  refund of any person
     from claiming refund of any cess of
     tax paid  by him  in  excess of the
     amount due	 from him under any such
     laws.
3.	  Repeals and  savings. -----(1)
     The  Cess	 and  other   Taxes   on
     Minerals  (Validation)   Ordinance,
     1992 (Ord.	 7 of  1992 )  is hereby
     repealed.
(2)  Notwithstanding	    such
     repeal, anything done or any action
     taken  under   the	 said  Ordinance
     shall be  deemed to  have been done
     or taken  under  the  corresponding
     provisions of this Act.
THE SCHEDULE
	      (See
Section 2
)
1.	  The  Andhra  Pradesh	(mineral
     Rights) Tax  Act, 1975 (A.P. Act 14
     of 1975).
2.	  The Andhra Pradesh (Andhra
     Area) District Boards Act, 1920.
3.	  The Andhra  Pradesh (Telengana
     Area) District Boards Act, 1955.
4.
The Cess Act, 1880
(Bengal Act
     9 of  1880) as  applicable	 in  the
     State of Bihar.
5.	  Karnataka   Zilla   Parishads,
     Taluk  Panchayat	Samitis,  Mandal
     Panchayat and Nyaya Panchayats Act,
     1983
(Karnataka Act
20 of 1985).
6.	  The Karnataka (Mineral Rights)
     Tax Act,  1984 (karnataka Act 32 of
     1984).
7.	  The  Madhya  Pradesh	karadhan
     Adhiniyam, 1982  (M.P.  Act  15  of
     1982)
8.	  The	Madhya	 Pradesh   Upkar
     Adhiniyam,	 1982  (M.P.  Act  1  of
     1982).
9.	  The	  Maharashtra	   Zilla
     Parishads	 and  panchayat	 Samitis
     (amendment and  Validation	 )  Act,
     1981 (
Maharashtra Act
46 of 1981).
10.
The	  Orissa  Cess Act, 1962
(Orissa Act II of 1962).
11.  The Tamil  Nadu Panchayat Act,
     1958 (Tamil Nadu Act     xxxv of
     1958).
The Statement  of Objects	and Reasons  appended to the
bill states  that cesses and other taxes on minerals imposed
by certain State governments were struck down by this Courts
on account of which they have become liable to refund cesses
and other  taxes collected  by them.  Since such  refund  is
likely to  have serious	 impact-  on  the  revenues  of	 the
concerned State Governments and also because it is extremely
difficult to  ensure that  the levies collected are refunded
to the	large number  of end  users  of	 minerals  who	have
actually borne	the burden  of such levies, the said Act was
being made  by Parliament.  The Preamble  to the  Act states
that  it   was	an  Act	 "to  validate	the  imposition	 and
collection of  cesses and  certain other  taxes on  minerals
under certain  State laws".
The Act
is deemed to have come
into force  on February	 15, 1992,  the date  on  which	 the
Ordinance of 1992 was promulgated by the President. Section
which contains three sub-sections the main provisions in the
Act. Sub-section  (1) says  that the provisions contained in
the laws  specified in	the
Schedule  to the Act
relating to
cesses anc  other taxes	 on minerals,  shall be and shall be
deemed always  to have	been as	 valid as  if the provisions
contained therein  had been  enacted by	 Parliament and that
such provisions	 shall be  deemed to  have remained in force
upto the  4th day  of Aprils  Sub-section (2) elaborates and
elucidates the content of sub-section ( Having regard to the
decisions of  this Court and the High Courts on the question
of validity  of cesses	and taxes on minerals imposed by the
States, the  sub-section opens	with a	non-obstante  clause
"notwithstanding  any  judgments  decree  or  order  of	 any
court".	 The  sub-section  then	 provide  three	 things.  It
firstly says  that "all	 actions taken,	 things done,  rules
made, notifications  issued or purported to have been taken,
done made  or issued  shall be	deemed to  have been validly
taken done, made or issued. as the case may be, as if this
section had  been in  force at	all material times when such
actions were  taken, things  were done,	 rules were made and
notifications were  issued". Secondly,	it says that "cesses
and other  taxes on  minerals realised	under any  such laws
shall be deemed to have been validly..... realised....... as
if this section had been in force at all material times when
such...... cesses  or other  taxes were realised". The third
thing provided	by the	sub-section is	the declaration that
"no  suit   or	other  proceeding  shall  be  maintained  or
continued in any court for the refund of the cesses or other
taxes realised	under any  such laws".	sub-section  (3)  is
clarificatory in  nature. It  starts with the words "for the
removal of doubts" and declares that nothing in, sub-section
(2)  shall  be	construed  as  preventing  any	person	from
claiming refund	 of any cess or tax paid by him in excess of
the amount  due from  him under any of the laws mentioned in
the Schedule.  It is a case of stating the obvious by way of
abundant caution.
The object	 and purpose  of the Validation Act is self-
evident. Since	it was	declared by  this Court	 [ and other
High Courts] that the State legislatures were not  competent
to levy	 cesses and  taxes on  minerals by  virtue   of	 the
declaration contained in Section 2 of the M.M.R.D. Act [made
in terms  of Entry  54 in  List-I of the Seventh Schedule to
the Constitution ] the Parliament stepped in and enacted the
relevant provisions  of the  State enactments  [mentioned in
the Schedule  ] with  retrospective effect  from the date of
the levy under each of the said enactments. The power of the
Parliament to  levy such taxes cannot really be disputed. If
the States  have no  power to levy such cesses or  taxes, it
follows that  Parliament does  have such power. By virtue of
the deeming  clause contained  in sub-section  of
Section 2
,
the relevant  provisions of  the State	enactments  must  be
deemed to have been enacted on the date they were enacted by
the respective State Legislatures and they must be deemed to
have remained  in force upto the 4th day of April, 1991. The
device adopted	by Parliament is a well-known one. It may be
called legislation  by incorporation.  The effect  is as the
relevant provisions  of 'Scheduled Acts are individually and
specifically enacted  by Parliament;  all  those  provisions
must be	 read into
Section 2 (1)
. The necessary and logical
consequence flowing therefrom is the creation of levy of all
the  cesses  and  taxes,  levied  by  the  respective  State
enactments, by	Parliament itself. The provisions so enacted
are, however,	declared  to be in force upto the 4th day of
April 1991.
CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES:
S/Sri K.  Parasaran, G.L. Sanghi, A.K. Ganguli, B. Sen,
V.A. Bobde,  Abhishek Singhvi,	Rohinton F. Nariman and Ajit
Kumar Sinha  urged the	following contentions  in support of
their attack upon the validity of the Act:
1.   The impugned  Act is  a clear  case of  the  Parliament
seeking to  over turn  the decisions  rendered by this Court
and the	 High Courts  in exercise  of  their  constitutional
power and are, therefore, incompetent and ineffective.
2.   The language  in
Section 2
does not achieve the purpose
set out	 in the	 Preamble. The	Parliament must first make a
law creating  the levy	before it  can create a fiction that
the law	 must be  deemed to  have been	made do	 on anterior
date, i.e.,  before  giving  it	 retrospective	effect.	 The
Parliament cannot  relegate even  the law making function to
the realm  of fiction.	In words,  without making a laws the
Parliament cannot  declare that	 the law  shall be deemed to
have been   made  by it	 on an anterior date.
Section 2
does
not bring  into existence  any levy/imposition. the language
employed in
Section 2
is wholly inadequate for the purpose.
The section is mere exercise in futility.
3.   Even if  it is  held by  this Court for any reason that
Section 2
has indeed  created the  levy the creation of the
said levy  is for  the limited purpose of enabling the State
Governments to	retain what  they  have	 already  collected.
Section 2
does not empower the Parliament or its agencies to
collect taxes  which were not collected on or before the 4th
day of	Aprils 1991.  In other word, after 4th day of April,
1991, any tax or cess levied under the Act [ which means the
scheduled   enactments]	  remaining   uncollected/unrealised
cannot be  collected or	 realised. The idea was to close the
chapter on  4th day  of April,	1991: whatever	is collected
shall not  be refunded	and whatever  is not collected shall
not be collected thereafter.
4.   The effect of
Section 2
is that cesses and minerals are
levied in  different States  at	 different  rates.  This  is
because the rate of tax/cess in each of the concerned States
was different.	A Parliamentary	 enactment cannot  levy	 the
same tax/cess  at different rates in different States of the
country. It would be discriminatory and violative of
Article
14
of  the  Constitutions  No  justification  has  been	 put
forward	 by   the  Union   of  India   in  support  of	such
discriminatory	treatment.   This  discriminatory   levy  is
antithetical to	 the basic  object underling  M.M.R.D.	Act,
viz., levy  of uniform	royalties-taxes. Indeed the Act does
not extend  to the entire country but only to certain States
in the country.
5.   The declaration  made by Parliament in Section 2 of the
M.M.R.D. Act  is not  an absolute  and	unlimited  one.	 The
denudation of  the State  legislatures is only to the extent
provided in the said Act.
Section 9
is one of the provisions
of the	M.M.R.D. Act  defining the extent of denudation. The
impugned levy created by
Section 2
f the impugned Act is in
addition to  the levy  under
section  9
. In  other word, the
extent of denudation has been enhanced by the impugned levy.
It so, such levy/denudation could have been effected only by
making a fresh declaration in term of Entry 54 list-I of the
Seventh Schedule  to the  Constitution. No  such declaration
has been  made by  Parliament and.  therefore, the  levy  is
incompetent and ineffective.
6.   The levy in question can be related only to Entry 54 of
List-I. It  cannot be  related to  Entry 97 of List-I If so,
the  levy   of	cess/tax  should  be  for  the	purposes  of
regulating the	mines or  mineral development. Absolutely no
material is placed before the Court to show that the levy of
the impugned cess/tax is for the said purpose.
7.   The impugned  enactment is	 a  temporary  statute.	 Its
effect is  only upto  4th day  of April, 1991. On that date,
the purpose  of the Act comes to an end. Thereafter, it is a
dead-letter. Since
Section 6
of the General Clauses Act does
not apply  in the case of a temporary statute, no action can
be taken  and no  recoveries can  be made  after 4th  day of
April,	1991.	Indeed,	 the   relevant	 provision   of	 the
enactments mentioned  in the
Schedule to the Act
are enacted
and kept  alive only upto 4th day of April, 1991 which means
that even  the provisions relating to recovery also cease to
have any  force after  the said	 date.	Since  the  recovers
machinery is not available and is not in existence after the
Said date,  no recoveries  can be  made after the said date.
The sequence of events, the statement of objects and reasons
and the	 language in  sub-section (2)  all bear but the fact
that the  Act was  intended merely  to save  the collections
already made  and not  to enable  the union  of India or its
agencies to  recover the  taxes of  cesses not	realised  or
recovered on  or before	 4th  day  of  April,  1991.  It  is
significant to	note that  the impugned Act does not contain
any provision  corresponding to any of the clause in
Section
6
of the General Clauses Act.
Sri  Chandrasekharan,   learned  additional   Solicitor
General, Sri  Gulab C.	Gupta and Sri K.N. Shukla, appearing
for the	 Governments of	 Tamil Nadu,  Madhya Pradesh and the
Government of India respectively disputed the correctness of
the several  contentions  urged	 on  behalf  of	 appellants-
petitioners and	 submitted that
section 2
of the  impugned
enactment is  perfectly adequate and effective to create the
levy [by  Parliament] of cesses and taxes which were earlier
imposed by  the State  enactments but  which enactments were
declared to  be incompetent  by	 this  Court  and  the	High
Courts. They  submitted that parliament was competent to and
did create  a new levy with retrospective effect but limited
its operation  upto 4th	 day of	 April,	 1991.	The  learned
counsel submitted  that the  impugned enactment	 is not	 and
cannot be described as a temporary statute. the impugned Act
has not	 expired. It  is very much alive and continues to be
on  the	 statute  book.	 Merely	 because  the  levy  created
thereunder is  confined to  a particular period, it does not
mean either  that the  Act has	expired	 or  that  it  is  a
temporary statute.  Learned counsel  also submitted that the
different rates	 of levy  created by
Section  2
cannot  be
described as discriminatory. Having regard to the context in
which the impugned Act came to be enacted historical factors
it could not have been otherwise. Levy of a tax at different
rates in different States of the country is not an unknown
feature. Such  a practice  already exists. The Parliament is
competent to  enact a  law applicable  only to	part of	 the
country.  Classification  on  the  grounds  of	geographical
division is  a well-known  and well-accepted one. It is also
not necessary,	they submitted, that there should be a fresh
declaration in terms of Entry 54 of List-I whenever the rate
of tax	or royalty  is enhanced	 or any of the provisions of
the M.M.R.D.  Act are  amended. The impugned enactment is in
the nature of addition or a proviso to the M.M.R.D. Act. The
States have  already been  denuded of  the power to levy any
tax or	cess on	 minerals. There is no fresh denudation now.
The Parliament	is only	 adding to  the	 tax  which  it	 has
already imposed	 and that  too for a limited period. Learned
counsel submitted  that identical  provisions  have  already
been upheld  by this  Court and	 that there  is no reason to
take a different view.
THE RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE
	     CONSTITUTION AND THE M.M.R.D. ACT:
For a  proper appreciation	 of  the  questions  arising
herein,	 it   is  necessary   to  notice   certain  relevant
provisions of the Constitution and the M.M.R.D. Act.
Entries 23 and 50 of List-II of the Seventh Schedule to
the Constitution read thus:
"23. Regulation   of    Mines   and
     mineral development  subject to the
     provisions of  List I  with respect
     to regulation and development under
     the control of the Union.
50.  Taxes	  on	mineral	  rights
     subject to	 any limitations imposed
     by Parliament  by law  relating  to
     mineral development.
These entries  which empower  the States  to make	laws
with respect  to regulation of mines and mineral development
and to levy taxes on mineral rights ares however, subject to
the provisions	of List-I  with respect	 to  regulation	 and
development under  the control	of the	Union. Entry  54  of
List-I empowers	 the Union to make laws regulating the mines
and mineral  development to  the extent	 such regulation and
development under  the	control	 of  Union  is	declared  by
Parliament by  law to  be expedient  in the public interest.
Entry 54 of List-I reads:
"54. Regulation   of    mines   and
     mineral development  the extent  to
     which    such     regulation    and
     development under	the  control  of
     Union is  declared by Parliament by
     law to  be expedient  in the public
     interest."
Entry   97	 List-I	 may also be set
     out:
97.  Any	 other	   matter    not
     enumerated in  List II  or List-III
     including any  tax not mentioned in
     either of those Lists"
The  Parliament   enacted	the   mines   and   minerals
[Regulation and	 development] Act,  1957,
Section  2
whereof
contains the  declaration in terms of Entry 54 of List-I. It
reads:
"2. Declaration as to expediency of
     Union  control:---	  It  is  hereby
     declared that  it is  expedient  in
     the public	 interest that the Union
     should take  under its  control the
     regulation	  of   mines   and   the
     development  of   minerals	 to  the
     extent hereinafter provided. "
The  Act
regulates   the	  prospecting	and   mining
operations, prescribes the royalties payable in respect
of mining  leases provides  for development  of minerals and
certain	 other	 miscellaneous	and  incidental	 provisions.
Section 9
read with  second
Schedule  to the Act
prescribed
the rates  of royalty  payable by  the lessees in respect of
each mineral.  Section 9-A provides for payment of dead-rent
which is  in the  nature of  A minimum	royalty. We need not
refer to the other provisions in the Act for the purposes of
this case.
P A R T = II
     We may  now proceed  to deal with the contentions urged
by the	learned counsel	 for appellants-petitioners,  in the
order set out hereinabove.
The  first	  submission  of  the  learned	counsel	 for
appellants-petitioners is that by enacting the impugned Act,
the Parliament	has  sought  to	 annul	and  invalidate	 the
decisions of  this Court  in India  Cement and Orissa cement
But which  it is  not competent	 to do. lt is submitted that
this Court  had issued	a mandamus  directing certain  State
Governments to refund the taxes and cesses collected by them
under the  invalid laws,  Some of  the States had also given
undertakings to	 this Court  to -  refund  the	taxes/cesses
collected  in  the  event  of  the  success  of	 appellants-
petitioners. The mandamus so issued cannot be invalidated by
making a  law. The undertaking given by the State is binding
upon it.  Strong reliance  is placed  upon the	decisions of
this   Court in
Madan Mohan  Pathak v. Union of India
[1978
(
3) S.C.R.  334 ]  and A.V.  Nachane v. Union of India
[1582
(2) S.C.R.  246]. It  is not  possible to  agree. It must be
remembered that our Constitution recognises and incorporates
the doctrine  of separation  of	 powers	 between  the  three
organs of  the State  viz., Legislatures  Executive and	 the
Judiciary. Even	 though the  Constitution  has	adopted	 the
parliamentary form of Government where dividing line between
the Legislature and the Executive becomes thins the theory
of separation  of powers still valid. Ours is also a federal
form of	 government. The  subjects in  respect of  Which the
Union and the States can make laws are separately set out in
List-I	and   List-II  of   the	 Seventh   Schedule  to	 the
Constitution  respectively  [  List-III	 is,  of  courses  a
concurrent list.]  The Constitution has invested the Supreme
Court and High Courts with the power to invalidate laws made
by Parliament  and the	State legislatures transgressing the
constitutional limitations.  Where an  Act made	 by a  State
legislature invalidated by the Courts on the ground that the
State  legislature  was	 not  competent	 to  enact  it,	 the
judgment of  the court shall not operate it cannot over-rule
or annul  the decision	of the court. But this does not mean
that the  other legislature which is competent to enact that
law. It	 can.
Similarly,  it is open to legislature to alter
the basis  of the  judgment as	pointed out by this Court in
Shri Prithvi  Cotton Mills  v. Broach  Borough	Municipality
[1970 (1)  S.C.R. 388  ] -  all the  while adhering  to	 the
constitutional limitations;  in such  case, the	 decision of
the court  becomes ineffective	in the	sense that the basis
upon which  it is  rendered, is	 changed. The new low or the
amended low  so made  can be challenged on other grounds put
not  on	  the  ground  that  it	 seeks	to  ineffectuate  or
circumvent the	decision of the court. This what is meant by
"checks and  balances" inherent	 in a  system of  government
incorporating the  concept of  separation  of  powers.	This
aspect has  been repeatedly  emphasised	 by  this  Court  in
numerous  decisions  commencing	 from  Shri  Prithvi  Cotton
Mills. Under  our constitution,	 neither wing is superior to
the other.  Each  wing	derives	 its  power  its  power	 and
jurisdiction from  the Constitution.  Each must operate with
the sphere  allotted to it. Trying to make one wing superior
to other  would be  to introduce  an imbalance in the system
and a  negation of the basic concept of separation of powers
inherent in  our system	 of government. Take this very case.
The   state    legislatures   enacted	provisions   levying
cesses/taxes  on  minerals.  They  thought  that  they	were
entitled to  do so  by virtue  of Entry 50 of List-II of the
Seventh Schedule  and that the enactment of the M.M.R.D. Act
by the parliament and the declaration contained in
Section 2
thereof did  not  deprive  them	 of  the  legislative  power
conferred by  the said	entry. A  Constitution Bench of this
Court in H.R.S. Murthy upheld their stand and affirmed their
belief. Several	 years later,  a larger	 Bench of this Court
overruled   H.R.S. Murthy  in India Cement and ruled that by
virtue of  the declaration  contained in  Section 2  of	 the
M.M.R.D. Act  and the  provisions of the said Act, the State
legislatures are  denuded of  their power to levy and tax on
minerals. Entry	 50 in	List-II became	practically  a	dead
letter.	 Provisions  in	 several  State	 enactments  levying
cess/tax  on  minerals	were  accordingly  invalidated	with
effect from  different dates.  The decisions  of this  Court
clearly meant  that the	 power to  levy cess/tax on minerals
vested exclusively  with the parliament. Since this Court is
the final arbiter on the interpretation of the Constitution,
everybody was  bound by	 the said declaration of law. In the
circumstances, the  Parliament stepped	in and	enacted	 the
impugned law, avowedly to bail out States of the predicament
aforementioned; the  impugned enactment makes this objective
clear beyond any doubt. At the same time, it should be noted
that  Parliament  does	not  purport  to  clothe  the  State
legislatures with  the power  which they do not possess. The
Parliament had	already deprived  the State  legislatures of
the power  to levy tax on minerals by making the declaration
contained in  Section 2	 of the	 M.M.R.D. Act as far back as
1957. The   said declaration remains intact which means that
the States have no power to levy any tax or cess on minerals
so long	 as the	 said  declaration  remains  in	 force.	 The
parliament, therefore,	adopted the  only legislative course
open to	 it in	the circumstances.  It	created	 those	very
levies with  retrospective effect  by enacting	the impugned
law.
Section  2 (1)
say that the relevant provisions of the
enactment mentioned  in the  schedule to  the Act  shall  be
deemed to  have been  enacted by Parliament on the date they
were enacted  by the  respective legislatures  and that such
provisions shall  be deemed  to have  remained in force upto
4th day	 of April, 1991. It is not suggested that Parliament
is not	competent o  levy a  tax or  cess with retrospective
effect. It  is, however,  suggested that  the tax  so levied
must also  be  operative  and  effective  on  the  date	 the
enactment is  made. There cannot be levy which is wholly and
exclusively retrospective,  it is  argued, We see no warrant
for  reading   such  restriction   upon	 the  power  of	 the
Parliament. It	the parliament	is empowered  to make is law
with retrospective  effect, it	is entitled  to make the law
effective for  such anterior period as it think appropriate.
It  cannot  be	said  that  unless  the	 levy  created	with
retrospective effect  is also kept alive on the date the law
is enacted  by Parliament, such a levy would be incompetent.
This would amount to evolving a principle unknown to law and
would also  amount to  creating a  fetter on  parliament for
which there is not basis in principle. We are also unable to
see any	 substance in  the submission  that by virtue of the
impugned enactment,  the Parliament  has tried to annual the
judgments of this Court. On the contrary, the parliament has
accepted the  law declared by this Court and has accordingly
enacted the  law itself,  about whose legislative competence
there can be no serious question.
The decisions  in Madan  Mohan Pathak  and Nachane,  we
must say , have no bearing on this question. Even so, having
regard to  the strong  reliance placed	thereon by  Sri G.L.
Sanghi, it  would be  appropriate to deal with the facts and
principle of  the said decisions, to illustrate how the said
decisions are  wholly irrelevant  to the questions concerned
therein, First, the decision in Madan Mohan Pathak.
In June  1974, a  settlement was arrived at between the
life insurance Corporation and its employees relating to the
terms and  conditions of  service of  Class III and Class IV
employees including  the bonus payable to them. Clause 8(ii)
provided for  payment of  annual cash  bonus, arrived  at by
applying a  particular formula. The settlement was valid for
a period  of four  years and  was to  continue until  a	 new
settlement was	arrived at.  After the	coming into force of
the payment  of Bonus  (Amendment) Act,	 1976,	the  Central
Government decided  that the employees of establishments not
covered by  the payment	 of
Bonus  Act
would not be eligible
for payment  of bonus  but an  ex gratia  payment in lieu of
bonus would  be made to them. Life Insurance Corporation was
one of	the establishments  to whom the payment of
Bonus Act
did not apply. Pursuant to
the said decision
, the Government
of India  advised the  Corporation to  stop paying  bonus in
accordance with	 clause 8(ii)  of the  aforesaid settlement.
The Corporation	 stopped the payment whereupon the employees
approached the	High Court  of Calcutta	 by way	 of  a	writ
petition, A  learned Single  Judge allowed the writ petition
and issued a mandamus directing the corporation to pay bonus
in accordance  wit  clause  8(ii)  of  the  Settlement.	 The
Corporation preferred  a Letters  Patent Appeal	 against
the
said decision
. While the said appeal was pending, Parliament
enacted the  Life  Insurance  Corporation  (Modification  of
Settlement) Act,  1976. When  the Letters  Patent Appeal was
taken up,  the Corporation  represented that  in view of the
said act  there was  no necessity  for proceeding  with	 the
appeal. The Division Bench accordingly dismissed the Letters
Patent Appeal  with the	 result that  the mandamus issued by
the learned  Single Judge  continued  to  be  operative	 and
effective. The employees of the Corporation filed fresh writ
petitions  in  this  Court  challenging	 the  constitutional
validity of  the Life Insurance Corporation (Modification of
settlement )  Act,   1976 which were allowed. Three opinions
were rendered  by the learned judges, Bhagwati, Krishna Iyer
and Desai,  JJ. rendered one opinion, Chandrachud, Fazal Ali
and Singhal,  JJ. A  separate short  opinion and  Beg,	C.J.
Another opinion.  We may  notice the  ratio of each of these
three opinions.	 Bhagwati, J. held that the impugned Act did
not refer to and did not purport to supersede or nullify the
settlement between the Corporation and its employees. In the
words of  Bhagwati, J.,	 "unfortunately the  judgment of the
Calcutta  High	 Court	remains	 almost	 unnoticed  and	 the
impugned Act  was passed  in  ignorance	 of  that  judgment.
Section 3
of the  impugned Act provided that the provisions
of the	settlement insofar  as they  relate  to	 payment  of
annual cash  bonus to Class III and Class IV employees shall
not have  any force or effect from Ist April, 1975..... This
right under  the judgment was not sought to be taken away by
the impugned  Act. The judgment continued to subsist and the
Life Insurance	Corporation was	 bound to  pay	annual	cash
bonus....". the	 learned Judge remarked that the Corporation
committed a  grave error  in withdrawing  the Letters Patent
Appeal in view of the impugned enactment. Had they persisted
with the  appeal and brought the aforesaid Act to the notice
of the Court, the Letters Patent Appeal would certainly have
been allowed.  But as  a  result  of  the  erroneous  course
adopted by  the Corporation. the learned Judge remarked, the
mandamus  issued   by  the  learned  Single  Judge  remained
effective  and	became	final.	The  learned  Judge,  it  is
relevant to  note, cited  with approval the law
laid down by
this Court in Shri Prithvi Cotton Mills but distinguished it
by pointing  out that the 1976 Act concerned before them [in
Madan Mohan  Pathak] purported to merely deny the benefit of
settlement to the employees which settlement was directed to
be implemented by means of a mandamus issued by the Calcutta
High Court  and hence,	the principle in Shri Prithvi Cotton
Mills did  not help  the Life Insurance Corporation. This is
what the learned Judge said:
"It is  difficult to  see how  this
     decision given  in the context of a
     validating statute	 can be	 of  any
     help   to	  the	Life   Insurance
     Corporation.  Here,   the	judgment
     given by  the Calcutta  High Court,
     which  is	 relied	 upon	by   the
     petitioners,   is	  not	a   mere
     declaratory  judgment   holding  an
     impost or	tax to	be  invalid,  so
     that  a   validation  statute   can
     remove the	 defect pointed	 out  by
     the judgment  amending the law with
     retrospective effect  and	validate
     such impost or tax."
The  learned   Judge  then	 proceeded  to	examine	 the
validity of  enactment on  the footing that it did take away
the benefit  of	 bonus	vesting	 in  the  employees  of	 the
Corporation by	virtue of clause 8(ii) to the Settlement and
held  it   to  be   violative  of
Article  31	(2)
of	 the
Constitution. He  declared it void that ground. Chandrachud,
Fazal Ali  and	Singhal,  JJ.  delivered  a  two-line  order
agreeing with  the opinion of Bhagwati, J. that the impugned
enactment was  violative of
Article 31(2)
and saying further
that they  do not  think it necessary to express any opinion
on the	effect of  the judgment	 of the	 Calcutta High Court
aforementioned. Beg,  C.J. observed,  in the first instance,
that though
Section 11(2)
of the Life Insurance Corporation
Act empowered the Central Government to alter the conditions
of service of the employees, the Central Government. did
not  choose   to  resort   to  that  provision	but  instead
parliament  chose   to	enact	the  Act  impugned  therein,
depriving the employees of their bonus. The impugned Act
took away  the benefit	conferred by  the mandamus issued by
the Calcutta  High Court upon the employees. This amounts to
exercise of judicial power by Parliament which has been held
to be  bad in
Indira Nehru  Gandhi v.	Raj Narain
(1976 (2)
S.C.R.347). The learned Chief Justice then held the impugned
enactment to  be violative  of
Article	 19(1)	(f)
of	 the
Constitution and not saved by
Article 19 (6).
While appreciating	 the ratio  of the said opinions, it
is necessary  to bear  in mind	that it was not a case where
the High  Court either struck down a statutory provision was
it a  case where  a statutory provision was interpreted in a
particular manner or directed to be implemented. It was also
not a  case where  the	statutory  provision  on  which	 the
judgment was based, was amended or altered to remove/rectify
the defect.
Now of  the seven learned Judges, only Beg, C.J. put as
forward as one of the grounds for allowing the writ petition
the theory  that the  mandamus issued  by the learned Single
Judge of  the Calcutta	High Court having become final could
not be	nullified by  Parliament.  No  other  learned  Judge
adopted that  reasoning. As  pointed out  hereinabove, three
learned Judges	for whom  Bhagwati, J.	spoke, held that the
settlement remained  untouched	by  the	 impugned  Act	and,
therefore settlement  continued to  be in forces and that if
the Act	 is taken  as nullifying  the settlement, the Act is
bad being  violative of
Article 31(2).
Three other learned
Judges, Chandrachud,  Fazal Ali and Singhal, JJ. agreed with
Bhagwati, J.  only to  the extent that the Act was violative
of
article 31(2).
The observations  of Bhagwati, J. extracted hereinabove
- upon	which Sri  Sanghi places  strong reliance  -  indeed
emphasise the fact that the 1976 Act was passed in ignorance
of the	mandamus issued	 by High  Court and that the Act did
not touch  the decision	 of the	 High Court  in any  manner.
These observations  cannot be read to support the contention
that where a mandamus issued is premised on the footing that
State legislatives have no legislative power to impose the
disputed  levy	   the	 Parliament  [which  is	 undoubtedly
competent to  impose the  said levies]	cannot	make  a	 law
imposing the  said  levies.  As	 pointed  out  earlier,	 the
majority Judgment  of Bhagwati,	 J. did	 indeed	 affirm	 the
statement of  law in Shri Prithvi Cotton Mills, which we may
quote here  only with  a view  to emphasise  the  principle.
Hidayatullah, C.J.,  speaking  for  the	 Constitution  Bench
held:
"When a  legislature  sets	 out  to
     validate a	 tax declared by a court
     to be  illegally collected under an
     ineffective or  invalid   laws  the
     cause   for    ineffectiveness   or
     invalidity must  be removed  before
     validation	 can  be  said	to  take
     place   effectively.    The    most
     important	condition  is  that  the
     legislature must  possess the power
     to impose	the tax,  for if it does
     not, the  action must  ever  remain
     ineffective  and  illegal.	 Granted
     legislative competence  it	 is  not
     sufficient to  declare merely  that
     the decision of the court shall not
     bind, for	that  is  tantamount  to
     reversing the  decision in exercise
     of	  judicial   power   which   the
     legislature  does	not  possess  or
     exercise, A  Court's decision  must
     always bind  unless the  conditions
     on	 which	 it  is	  based	 are  so
     fundamentally  altered   that   the
     decision could  not have been given
     in the altered circumstance."
The mandamus  issued by  this  Court  was	against	 the
States and  not against	 the Union  or the  Parliament. This
Court did not say that Parliament had no power to impose the
said levies. We are also of the opinion that the decision in
Madan Mohan  Pathak must  be  read  and	 understood  in	 the
particular facts  of that  case and  that it  would  not  be
reasonable to  read that  decision as militating against, or
as over-turning	 the series  of decisions  of this  court on
the subject including
Rai Ramakrishna v. State of Bihar
1964
(1) S.C.R.  897), Shri	Prithvi Cotton Mills and Joara Sugar
Mills, v. state of Madhya Pradesh (1966 (1) S.C.R.523).
Now, coming  to the decision in Nachane, it is indeed a
sequel to  the decisions  in
Madan  Mohan   Pathak  and Life
Insurance Corporation  v. D.J.	Bahadur
(1981 (1) S.C.C.315)
and its	 ratio has  to be  understood in  the right  of	 the
background facts  set out  in Paras  1	to  5  of
the	said
judgment
. Having  regard to  the identity  of  the  subject-
matter, it was held in Nachane that  the  decisions in Madan
Mohan Pathak  and D.J.	Bahadur being  decisions between the
same parties  their ratio is binding upon them. It cannot be
said that any new principle was enunciated.
We may  mention that we have dealt with the decision in
Madan Mohan Pathak at some length because we find that it is
being frequently  relied upon  as laying down a principle at
variance with  Shri Prithvi  Cotton Mills  and the  host  of
decisions affirming  it. In  our opinion  the	effort is  a
futile one,  as demonstrated  hereinabove. Another  decision
rendered by  one of  us, Suhas	C. Sen, J. sitting with N.P.
Singh, J.  has also  understood the  decision in Madan Mohan
Pathak in  precisely the  same manner.	[See
Comorin  Match
Industries (P)	Limited v.  State of  Tamil Nadu [J.T.
1996)
(5) S.C.  167]. We respectfully agree with all that has been
said in
the said  judgment
with respect to the decisions in
Madan	Mohan Pathak  and Nachane.  It is  needless  to	 re-
produce those observations over again here.
We must  also say that the fact-situation and the ratio
of Madan  Mohan Pathak	and Nachane  is totally	 at variance
with the  fact-situation in  the case  before us.  They	 are
worlds	apart	in  every  sense  of  the  term.  The  first
contention of the appellants is accordingly rejected.
The  second  contention  of  the  learned	counsel	 for
appellants- petitioners	 is that
Section 2
of the impugned
enactment   does not  achieve the  purpose set	out  in	 the
Preamble and  that the language employed in
Section 2
is not
adequate to  create any	 fresh levies.	It is submitted that
the Parliament	must first  create the levy and then give it
retrospective effect. But it cannot relegate both the making
of law	and giving  it retrospective  effect to the realm of
fiction, it  is argued.	 The Parliament	 cannot say  that it
must be	 deemed to  have made  a law without actually making
it. It	is submitted  that in  sub-section (1) of
Section 2
,
there are no words saying that the Parliament is levying the
various taxes/cesses  mentioned in  the said subsection read
with the  Schedule. By	way of	contrast, our  attention  is
invited to  the language  of
Section 3
of the Sugarcane Cess
(Validation) Act,  1961 which  was enacted  by Parliament in
view of	 the decision  of this	Court in
Diamond Sugar Mills
Limited v.  State of  Uttar Pradesh
[1961 (3) S.C.R.243] and
the decision  of the  Madhya Pradesh High Court following it
and declaring  that the	 levy of cess on sugarcane under the
provisions of  the Madhya  Pradesh sugarcane  (Regulation of
Supply and  Purchase) Act,  1958 was  beyond the legislative
competence of the Madhya Pradesh legislature. Several States
had levied similar cesses. To meet the situation To meet the
situation     arising  from  the  decisions  aforesaid,	 the
parliament enacted  the	 Sugarcane  Cess  (validation)	Act,
Section 3
whereof reads:
"3.  Validation of	 imposition  and
     collection of  cesses  under  state
     acts.
(1)  Notwithstanding any judgments,
     decree or	order of  any court, all
     cesses   imposed,	  assessed    or
     collected	or  purporting	to  have
     been imposed, assessed or collected
     under  any	 State	act  before  the
     commencement of  this Act	shall be
     deemed   to   have	  been	 validly
     imposed, assessed or collected in a
     accordance	 with  law,  as	 if  the
     provisions of the State Acts and of
     all notifications, orders and rules
     issued or	made thereunder,  in  so
     far as  such provisions  relate  to
     the    imposition,	 assessment  and
     collection of  such cess  had  been
     included in and formed part of this
     section and  this section	had been
     in force at all material times when
     such cess	was imposed. assessed or
     collected; and accordingly,--
(a)  no    suit    or	   other
     proceeding shall  be maintained  or
     continued	in  any	 court	for  the
     refund of	any cess  paid under any
     State Act;
(b)  no court	 shall enforce a
     decree  or	  order	 directing   the
     refund of	any cess  paid under any
     State Act; and
(c)  any   cess   imposed   or
     assessed under any State Act before
     the commencement  of this	act  but
     not    collected	  before    such
     commencement   may	  be   recovered
     (after  assessment	  of  the  cess,
     where  necessary)	 in  the  manner
     provided under that Act.
(2)  For the  removal of  doubts it
     is hereby	declared that nothing in
     subsection (1)  shall be  construed
     as preventing any person-
(a)  from    questioning    in
     accordance with  the provisions  of
     any  State	  Act  and   rules  made
     thereunder the  assessment	 of  any
     cess for any period; or
(b)  from claiming  refund  of
     any cess	paid by him in excess of
     the amount	 due from  him under any
     State  Act	 and  the    rules  made
     thereunder.
(Emphasis added)
     The validity  of Sugarcane	 Cess (validation)  Act	 was
questioned in  this  Court  in	Joara  Sugar  Mills  Private
Limited but  was  upheld.  The	contention  of	the  learned
counsel for appellants-petitioners is that if the parliament
wanted to  impose  the	levies	which  levies  were  earlier
imposed by  State enactments  but declared  incompetent, the
Parliament must	 impose the  levy as  has been done by it in
Section 3
of the  Sugarcane Cess  (Validation)	 Act,  1961.
Section 2(1)
.  it is  contended. does  not impose the levies
and, therefore	there is no levy and there is no imposition.
It is not possible to agree with this contention either. The
State enactments  mentioned in	the Schedule to the impugned
enactment did  contain provisions   creating the levy. It is
he very	 provisions which  are enacted	by  Parliament	now.
section 2(1)
says that the said provisions must be deemed to
have been  enacted and	must be	 deemed always	to have been
enacted by  Parliament. In  such a  situation, it is idle to
contend that
Section 2(1)
does not  create the levy or the
impost. It does. We are also unable to	find any qualitative
difference  between
Section  3
of  the   Sugarcane	Cess
(Validation) Act
Section 2
of the impugned Act. The relevant
words are  the same, viz., "shall be deemed to have been....
". With necessary adaptations, both the provisions are quite
alike. We  need not, however, dilate upon this contention of
appellants-petitioners for  the	 reason	 that  an  identical
provision enacted to meet an identical situation has already
been upheld by this Court in
Krishnachandra Gangopadhyaya v.
Union of  India
[1975  Suppl. S.C.R. 151].
In
Baijnath Kedia
v. State  of Bihar
[1970 (2)  S.C.R. 100],  this Court	 had
declared the  second proviso  to
Section  10(2)
of the Bihar
Land Reforms  Act, 1950	 unconstitutional on the ground that
Bihar legislature  had no legislative competence to enact it
and that Parliament alone was competent to legislate in that
behalf. It was also held that Rule 20(2) framed by the
Bihar Government as delegate of the Parliament under Section
15 of  the M.M.R.D. Act was unconstitutional since the rule-
making power  conferred by  Section 15	did not	 contemplate
alteration of  terms of	 leases already	 in existence before
the Act was passed. In view of the judgment of this Court in
Baijnath Kedia, the Parliament enacted the Validation Act in
the year  1969. The  Preamble to the said Act stated that it
was "an	 act to validate certain provisions contained in the
Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950
, and the Bihar Minor Mineral
Concession Rules, 1964, and action taken and thing done
in connection  therewith."
Section  2
of  the said  Act read
thus:
"2.  Validation  of  certain  Bihar
     State laws	 and  action  taken  and
     things done connected therein.
     (1)  The  laws   specified	 in  the
     Schedule  shall  be  and  shall  be
     deemed always to have been as valid
     as	 if   the  provisions  contained
     therein   had   been   enacted   by
     Parliament.
(2)  Notwithstanding any  judgment,
     decree or	order of  any court, all
     actions taken  things  done,  rules
     made   notifications    issued   or
     purported to have been taken, done,
     made  or	issued	and   rents   or
     royalties realised	 under any  such
     laws shall	 be deemed  to have been
     validly taken,  done, made,  issued
     or realised, as the case may be, as
     if this  section had  been in force
     at all  material  times  when  such
     action  were   taken,  things  were
     done, rules were made, notification
     were  issued   or	royalties   were
     realised,	and  no	 suit  or  other
     continued	in  any	 court	for  the
     refund  of	  rents	  or   royalties
     realised under any such laws.
(3)  For the  removal of doubts, it
     is hereby	declared that nothing in
     subsection (2)  shall be  construed
     as	 preventing   any  person   from
     claiming refund  of  any  rents  or
     royalties paid  by him in excess of
     the amount	 due from  him under any
     such laws."
lt was  contended before  this Court  that language  of
Section 2
is not  sufficient to  bring about a levy. It was
contended that	no liability  to levy rent or royalty can be
created retroactively  without two  clear stages   or steps:
firstly, a  law must   be  enacted creating  the  liability;
next, such provision should be made retrospective. This two-
stage procedure	 is absent  in the  statute under attack and
therefore the purpose, whatever it be, has misfired". lt may
be noticed  that this  is  precisely  the  contention  urged
before us now. The said contention was, however, rejected by
this Court.  It observed:  "the Bihar  Legislature is not is
not legislating	 into validity	by a deeming provision, what
has been declared ultra vires by the Court. It is Parliament
whose competency  to legislate	on the	topic in question is
beyond doubt, that is enacting the 'deeming' provision". The
Court held  further that the  language of
Section 2
is clear
and unmistakable  and that   by	 enacting the said provision
the "Parliament desired to validate retrospectively what the
Bihar legislation  had ineffectually  attempted. It has used
words plain enough to implement its object and therefore the
validating Act	as well. as the consequential levy are good.
A perusal of
Section 2
of the impugned enactment and
Section
2
of  the 1969	validation Act	considered in Krishnachandra
Gangopadhyaya would  show that
Section 2
of  the  impugned
enactment is  a faithful  re-production	 and  repetition  of
Section 2
of the 1969 Validation Act, word to word. The only
additional words  are  in
Section  2(l)
,  viz.,"  and	such
provisions shall  be deemed  to have  remained in force upto
the 4th day of April, 1991."
Sri Parasaran  contended that these additional words in
Section	 2(i)
do  make   a  qualitative   difference	 and
distinguish the	 present case  from the	 one  considered  in
Krishanchandra Gangopadhyaya.  We  cannot  agree.  The	said
words merely  limit the levy upto 4th day of April, 1991 and
in no  manner detract  from the	 content and  effect of	 the
preceding words employed in sub-section (1) of
Section 2
.
So far  as	 reliance  upon	 the  language	employed  in
Section	 3
of	 the  Sugarcane	 Cess  (Validation)  Act  is
concerned, all	that we	 need say  is, there  is no  set  or
standard  formula   to	which  all  Validation	Acts  should
conform. The  Parliament is  not bound	to  adopt  identical
language every	time it	 enacts a Validation Act. It is open
to it  to employ such 1 language as it chooses. All that the
court should  see is  whether the language employed achieves
the purpose  which the	Parliament set	out to	achieve. The
language employed  in
Section  2
of the impugned enactments,
we are	satisfied, does achieve the purpose and we are fully
fortified,   in	  our	opinions,   by	 the   decision	  in
Krishnachandra	Gangopadhyaya.	The  second  contention	 too
accordingly  fails.
The third	contention which  has been  urged  by  every
counsel	 appearing  for	 appellants-petitioners	 with  great
vehemence is  this: the	 impugned Act  is  designed  to	 and
provides only  for validating  the taxes  and cesses already
recovered under	 the relevant  provisions of  the  enactment
mentioned in  the  Schedule.  The  impugned  Act  does	not,
however, empower or authorise the Parliament or its agencies
to recover taxes and cesses which are payable under the said
provisions but	have not been recovered on or before 4th day
Aprils, 1991.  The Statement  of Objects and Reasons and the
language in  sub-section (2) of
Section 2
are relied upon in
support of  this contention.  It is  also pointed  out	that
Section 2
does not  contain a clause or words corresponding
to clause  (c) in  sub-section (1)  of
Sections  3
of	 the
Sugarcane  Cess	  (Validation)	Act,   1961,   referred	  to
hereinbefore.  It   is	not   possible	to  accede  to	this
contention, either.
Section 2
enacts the relevant provisions
of  the	  enactments  mentioned	  in   the   Schedule	with
retrospective effect.  The provisions  so enacted  do create
the levy.  Indeed, unless  the levy  is validated recoveries
already made cannot be validated. It is for this reason that
the Preamble  to the Act says that it is an Act "to validate
the imposition and collection of cesses and certain other on
minerals under	certain state  laws". Once  the	 provisions,
which create  the Ievy,	 are deemed  to have been enacted by
Parliament, the	 levy is  very much there with retrospective
effect. Once  there is	a valid	 levy, not  only  the  taxes
already collected  need not  be refunded  but the  taxes and
cesses which  have not	already been  collected can  also be
collected. It  is  impossible  to  see	any  distinction  in
principle between  both. Merely	 because  sub-section	 (2)
inter alia  state that	 "cesses  or other taxes on minerals
realised under	any such  laws shall  be deemed to have been
validly...realised....as if  this section  had been in force
at all	material times	when such....cesses   or other taxes
were realised",	 it does  not mean  that the axes which were
levied but not collected cannot be collected. The said words
in sub-section	(2) are	 not words  of limitation;  they are
words of validation and put in by way of abundant caution in
view of	 the Judgments	and orders  of the  Courts.  On	 the
language  of
Section  2
which	 enacts	 with  retrospective
effect, the  relevant provisions levying cesses and taxes on
minerals   and also  validates the  rules and  notifications
issued thereunder,  we find  it impossible  to say  that the
levy is validated only for the limited purpose of saving the
taxes already  collected, i.e.,	 to sty	 the refund of taxes
already collected. Indeed, if the section were so construed,
it would  lead	to  discriminatory  consequences.  Take	 two
persons 'A'  and 'B'.  Both are equal liable to pay the cess
on minerals  levied by	say the Madras legislature. One pays
the tax	 according to  law and	the other  does not.  If the
argument of  appellants petitioners  is to  be accepted, the
man who	 paid will  be worse off than the person who did not
pay because  no tax can now be collected from the person who
did  not   pay.	 No   such  unreasonable  intention  can  be
attributed to	Parliament.  It would  not be  reasonable to
assume that  the  Parliament  intended	such  discriminatory
treatment between  two similarly  placed persons  and for no
reason.	 Some  of  the	counsel	 for  appellants-petitioners
sought to  that the  above situation  cannot be described as
discriminatory. According  to them,  there is  a  reasonable
classification between the person who does not pay, comes to
the court  and succeeds	 in his challenge and the person who
does not come to the court but quietly pays the tax and sits
at home.  This illustration  proceeds on the assumption that
only a	person not  paying the	tax comes to the court. That
may not	 always be  true. A  person may pay the tax demanded
and  then   come  to   court  challenging   the	 demand	 and
collection. There  may also  be a  situation, where  tax  is
collected from	him even  before he  comes to	court. It is
also possible  that in	a given case, stay is not granted by
the court  and he  is obliged  to pay.	There may  also be a
situation where	 both 'A'  and 'B' in the above illustration
may not	 come to  court. We  are, therefore,  of  the  clear
opinion that  once the	levy is	 created or validated as the
case may be, distinction can be drawn between the person who
has paid and the person who has not paid. We are also unable
to find	 any words  in
Section	2
or  anywhere else  in	 the
impugned enactment  limiting the  levy only to the extent of
the taxes/cesses  already collected  on or before 4th day of
April,	 1991. Nor are we satisfied that absence of a clause
or words  corresponding to clause (c) in
Section 3(1)
of the
Sugarcane Cess	(Validation) Act  makes any  difference. The
said clause  merely sets out the consequence flowing from he
validation contained  in the  main limb	 of
Section 3(1)
, by
way  of	  abundant  caution.  It  cannot  be  treated  as  a
substantive provision.	Sri K. Parasaran then submitted that
the words  "imposition and  collection" in  the Preamble  do
evidence the  intention to confine the imposition to amounts
already collected.  It is  not possible to agree. By reading
them conjunctively, their meaning cannot be cut down. On the
contrary, the said words indicate the intention to  validate
the imposition	as well as collection. "Collection" does not
mean what  is a	 already collected  alone. It  means  future
collection as  well. Neither  the Preamble nor
Section 2
say
that what  is already  collected alone	is  validated.	This
contention too accordingly fails.
The  fourth  contention  of  the  learned	counsel	 for
appellants  petitioners	 is  unsustainable  in	law  and  is
misconceived. The  Parliament is  competent to	enact a	 law
applicable only	 to a  part of the country or to some States
in the country, as the case may be. It is not necessary that
every law  made by  Parliament must necessarily apply to the
entire country	as such.  Not only  this the  Parliament  is
equally entitled  to prescribe	different rates	 of  tax  in
different States  if such  different rates are called for in
the given  circumstances. This	is not unknown to law. Take,
for instance,  sub-section (2A)	 of Section B of the Central
Sales Tax Act. Sub-sections (1) and (2) of the said Act levy
tax at uniform rates throughout the country. But sub-section
(2A) brings  about a distinction between state and State. It
says that notwithstanding the provisions in Section 6 (A) or
Section 8(1)  or Section  8(2)(b), so  much turn-over  of  a
dealer as  pertains to	goods, the sale or purchase of which
is under  the Sales tax law of the appropriate State, exempt
from tax  generally or	subject to  tax generally  at a rate
which is  lower than  four percent  Central Sales  tax shall
also be	 charged on such turn-over either at the nil rate or
at such	 lower rate,  as the  case may	be.  This  provision
clearly recognizes  and gives  effect to  different rates of
tax  in	  different  States  of	 the  country  on  identical
transactions of	 sale.
In
State of  Madras v.	N.K. Nataraj
Mudaliar
[1968	(3) S.C.R.829],	 this difference in rates of
tax   between	 different   States    was   challenged	  as
discriminatory and  hence, violative  of
Articles  301
, 302
,
303
and
304
of the Constitution of India. The challenge was
repelled by  a Constitution  Bench of this. It was held that
the said  provision does  not bring about any discrimination
between one  State and	other within  the meaning of Article
303. This Court quoted with approval the observations of the
Australian High	 Court in King v. Barger [1908 (6) C.L.R.41]
with   respect	  to   the   meaning   of   the	  expression
"discrimination between	 States or  part of  States" used in
Section 51 of the Australian Constitution:
"......the pervading  idea	 is  the
     preference	  of   locality	  merely
     because it	 is particular part of a
     particular	 State.	  It  does   not
     include a	differentiation based on
     other  considerations,   which  are
     dependent on  natural  or	business
     circumstances, and may operate with
     more or  less  force  in  different
     localities; and there is nothing in
     my	  opinion,    to   prevent   the
     Australian	  Parliaments,	 charged
     with the welfare of the people as a
     whole, from  doing what every State
     in the Commonwealth has power to do
     for its  own citizens,  that is  to
     say,  from	  basing  its	taxation
     measures	on   considerations   of
     fairness	and    justice,	  always
     observing	   the	    constitution
     injunction not  to prefer States or
     parts of States."
At the  same time	we must	 say that  where  Parliament
imposes different  rates of  tax in  different States, lt is
under an obligation to justify the same. It must satisfy the
court  that   such  a	distinction  does   not	 amount	  to
discrimination	and   that   it	  is   reasonable   in	 the
circumstances and  has a  purpose behind it. Now, let us see
us see	whether there  is  any	justification  for  imposing
different rates	 in different States in the present case. We
think there is. If one only remembers the background and the
context	 in   which  the  impugned  enactment  was  made  by
Parliaments the	 reason behind	such different	rates  would
immediately become  clear. Each	 State had  imposed its	 own
rate. The  challenge in	 India	Cement and Orissa cement was
not to	different rates	 being	levied	by  different  State
legislatures but  to the  very legislative competence of the
State  legislatures  to	 impose	 the  said  levy.  When	 the
parliament is re-enacting those very provisions it could not
but  adopt   those  very   rates.  This	 is  the  historical
justifications if  we can describe it that way. It is really
not a case where the Parliamentary enactment is creating the
distinction  or	  different   treatment.   Distinction	 and
different treatment  was already there over several decades;
each State was prescribing its own rate on the same mineral;
nobody ever questioned it as discriminatory; indeed it could
not be	so questioned;	the  decisions	of  the	 courts	 had
declared the  levy by  the State  legislatures as competent;
the Parliament	has intervened	and by enacting the impugned
law in	exercise of  its undoubted power, validated the levy
and all that flows from it. In such circumstances, there was
no other  way except  to do what has actually been done. The
question is  one of  power and	legality of the exercise and
not its	 desirability -	 apart from  the fact  that test  of
desirability may vary form person to person. In our opinion,
the exercise cannot be faulted on the ground of violation of
Article 14
of the Constitution.
It is  then argued	 that the  very idea behind enacting
the M.M.R.D.  Act was to bring about uniformity in taxes and
royalties through  the country.	 True it  is. But  does that
mean that  Parliament cannot create an exception to the rule
it itself  has created. uniformity in the rates of tax is an
objective set  out by  Parliament in the M.M.R.D Act It is a
pre-condition to  a law made by Parliament under Entry 54 in
List-I nor  it a  limitation upon  Principle,  it  can	also
create an  exception thereto in appropriate circumstances or
to meet an exigency. This is precisely what has been done in
the instant case. The impugned enactment is both an addition
and an exception to Section 9 of the M.M.R.D Act.
The  fifth	  contention  of  the  learned	counsel	 for
appellants-petitioners	 is    equally	 misconceived.	 The
Parliament has	already denuded	 the State  legislatures  of
their power  to levy  tax on  minerals inhering	 in them  by
making the declaration contained in Section 2 of the
M.M.R.D. Act. Sri Sanghi argued that the denudation is | not
absolute but  only to  the extent  provided in	the M.M.R.D.
Act. Section  9, learned  counsel submitted,  is one  of the
facets of  the	extent	of  denudation.	 Section  9,  it  is
submitted, sets	 out the rates of royalty levied states that
such rates  of royalty	can be	revised only  once in  three
years. If  Section  9  is  sought  to  be  amended,  whether
directly or  indirectly, the  learned counsel  says, a fresh
declaration in	terms of  Entry 54  of List-I is called for.
This   contention    assumes   that    notwithstanding	 the
declaration. contained in Section 2 of the M.M.R.D. Act, the
States still  retain the  power to  levy taxes upon minerals
over and above those prescribed by the M.M.R.D. Act and that
a fresh	 declaration is	 called for whenever such subsisting
power of  the State is sought to be further encroached upon.
This  suppositions   however.  flies  in  the  face  of	 the
decisions of  this Court  in India Cement and Orissa Cement.
The said  decisions are premised upon the assumption that by
virtue of  the said  declaration,  the	States	are  totally
denuded of  the power  to levy	any taxes on minerals. rt is
for this  reason that  the State  enactments  were  declared
incompetent insofar  as they  purported to levy taxes/cesses
on minerals. The denudation of the States is not partial. It
is total.  They cannot	levy any  tax or cess on minerals so
long  ac   the	declaration  in	 Section  stands.  Once	 the
denudation is  totals there  is no occasion or necessity for
any further  declaration of  denudation or, for that matters
for repeated  declarations of  denotations.  Indeed  if	 Sri
Sanghi's arguments  were to  be accepted a fresh declaration
would be  required every  time the  Parliament increases the
rate af	 royalties. No	such requirement can be deduced from
the relevant  constitutional provisions	 as  interpreted  by
this Court. This contention also accordingly fails.
The  Sixth	  contention  of  the  learned	counsel	 for
appellants-petitioners is premised upon the supposition that
the Parliament	is bound to utilise the taxes realised under
the impugned Act only for the purpose of regulation of mines
and mineral  development. It  is on  this suppositions it is
argued that  inasmuch as the Union. has not established that
the impugned  levy is  required for  the purpose of the said
regulation and	developments the  imposition is incompetent.
In our	opinion, the  very supposition is misplaced. What is
under the  impugned enactment  is a  tax/cess and not a fee.
Even in the matter of fees, it is not necessary that element
of quid	 pro quo  should be  established in  each and  every
cases  for   it	 is  well-settled  that	 fees  can  be	both
regulatory  and	  compensatory	and  that  in  the  case  of
regulatory fees	 the element  of quid  pro  quo	 is  totally
irrelevant. [See
Corporation of  Calcutta v. Liberty Cinema
(A.I.R.1965 S.C.1107
)].	 Taxes are raised for augmenting the
general revenues  of the  State and  not for  any particular
purpose - much less for rendering a particular service.
We may now deal with the last contention urged by
appellants-petitioner, It  has several	facets. We may first
deal  with  the	 submission  that  the	impugned  act  is  a
temporary statute  and that  it has  come to an end with the
4th day	 of April,  1991. Since
Section 6
of	the  General
Clauses Act  does not  apply to a temporary statute and also
because the impugned act does not contain a saving clause in
terms of  said Section	6 it  is argued	 no proceedings	 for
recovery of  unrecovered taxes/cesses can be taken after the
4th day	 of April,  1991  our  opinion,	 the  submission  is
totally misconceived. temporary statute is one which expires
on the	expiry of the specified period. The impugned act was
indeed enacted and published in April, 1992 and
Section 1
(30
says that the Act shall be deemed to have come into force on
February 15, 1992. It is, therefore, meaningless to say that
it has	expired or  it ceased  to have any effect on the 4th
day of	April, 1991.  There are	 no words  anywhere  in	 the
impugned Act  indicating that  it expires on the expiry of a
particular period  or on  a particular	date. Merely because
the cesses and taxes imposed by it are made effective upto a
particular date (4th April, 1991), it does not mean that the
statute	 itself	 expires  on  that  date.  We  may  in	this
connection refer  to the  decision of  this Court in Maganti
Subrahmanyam (dead)  by L.Rs. v. The State of Andhra Pradesh
[ 1969 (2) S.C.C.96]. The Madras legislature had enacted the
Madras	Estates	  Communal,   Forest   and   Private   Lands
(Prohibition  of  Alienation)  Act,  1947  with	 a  view  to
prohibit the  alienation of  Communal,	Forest	and  Private
Lands in the estates in the province of Madras. The Preamble
to the	Act stated that it was enacted to prevent alienation
of the	several lands  in the  estates in  the	Province  of
Madras Pending	enactment of  legislation for  acquiring the
interests of  land holders  in such  estates and introducing
Ryotwari Settlement therein. In 1984, the Madras legislature
enacted the  Madras Estates  [Abolition and  Conversion into
Ryotwari] Act  providing for  acquisition of  the rights  of
land  holders	in  permanently	  settled  estates.  It	 was
contended before this Court that in view of the statement in
the Preamble to the 1947 Act, the said Act must be deemed to
have come  to an  and with the enactment of the 1948 Act. On
this basis,  it was  contended that  the 1947  Act  must  be
deemed to be a temporary statute. The contention was roundly
rejected  by  this  Court  observing  that  since  no  fixed
duration of  the Act  was specified,  it cannot	 be called a
temporary statute.  Indeed, the	 decision of  this Court  in
Madurai	 Distt.
Central  Cooperative  Bank  Ltd.  v.  Third
Income-Tax Officer,  Madurai
[1976  (1) S.C.R.135] indicates
that even  the Finance Acts which are passed every year, are
not transitional or temporary enactments.
It is  also necessary  to say  that merely	 because the
levy created  by an  enactment is  limited to  a  particular
period, the  Act itself	 cannot be  said to  be a  temporary
statute. The duration of the levy created by the Act and the
life of	 the Act  are two  different things;  they  are	 not
necessarily co-extensive. We, therefore, reject the argument
that merely  because the  levies created  by
Section 2(1)
of
the impugned Act are to remain in force only upto 4th April,
1991, the  impugned Act	 very much  continues in  force even
today and  will remain	in force till the Parliament chooses
to repeal  it. In  the circumstances, the argument regarding
the inapplicability  of
Section	 6
of General Clauses Act or
the alleged absence of a saving clause in terms of Section 6
are misplaced.
The next  facet of	 this contention is that inasmuch as
the provisions	validated under	 the impugned  Act not	only
pertain to  levy but  also to  collection and  recovery	 and
because all  those provisions  cease to	 have effect  on and
with the  4th day of April, 1991, it must be held that there
is no  machinery in  existence	after  April  4,  1991,	 for
realising   and	   collecting	the   uncollected\unrealised
taxes\cesses. There  is no levy and there is no machinery to
realise the  levy after April 4, 1991, it is contended. This
argument is  urged in support of the contention that the Act
merely purports	 to validate the recoveries already made but
does  not   empower  or	 authorise  realisation\recovery  of
taxes\cesses not  already collected. This submission ignores
the crucial  circumstance that	the levy  is created  by the
impugned Act  continues in force. Sub-section (3) of
Section
2
is a firm indication that notwithstanding the cessation of
levy after the 4th day or April, 1991, the machinery created
to recover  and refund	the said cesses\taxes is kept alive.
Sub-Section (3) of
Section 2
reads:
" (3) For the removal of doubts, it
     is hereby	declared that nothing in
     sub-section (2)  shall be construed
     as	 preventing   any  person   from
     claiming refund  of any cess or tax
     paid by him in excess of the amount
     due from him under any such laws.
Take a case where excessive collection is made sometime
before April  4, 1991.	What is	 the remedy  of	 the  person
concerned. If  the appellants  argument were to be accepted,
the person would be helpless; there would be no machinery to
examine his  claim.  But then what does sub-section (3) mean
and   signify?	  It   must,   therefore,   be	 held	that
notwithstanding the  cessation of  levy created	 by
Section
2(1)
with  April  4,  1991,  the  machinery  requisite	 for
realising and refunding the taxes\cesses yet to be collected
or wrongly  collected, as the case may be, is kept alive. It
cannot also  be suggested  with any  reasonableness that the
said machinery	is kept	 alive	only  for  the	purposes  of
refunding  the	excessively  collected	taxes  but  not	 for
collecting\recovering the  uncollected\unrecovered taxes and
cesses. The  last contention  of the  appellants-petitioners
also fails accordingly.
Sri G.L.  Sanghi addressed a separate argument specific
to the	petitioners from  the State of Madhya Pradesh. It is
submitted that,	 in the first instance, cess on minerals was
levied by the Madhya Pradesh Karadhan Adhiniyam, 1982 [being
M.P. Act  15 of 1982]. The levy was declared incompetent and
void by	 the Courts,  whereupon, it  is stated,	 the  Madhya
Pradesh Legislature  amended in	 1987,	the  Madhya  Pradesh
Upkar Adhiniyam, 1981, levying the same cess. Even this levy
was invalidated by the Courts, it is submitted. Sri Sanghi's
apprehension is	 that the  impugned parliamentary  enactment
validates the  relevant provisions of  both the	 1982 Madhya
Pradesh Act  as well  as the  1981 Madhya  Pradesh  Act	 (as
amended	 in   1987),  with   the  result   that	 appellants-
petitioners may	 be called  upon to pay the cess on minerals
twice over i.e., under both the 1982 Act as ell as under the
1981 Act  [as amended  in 1987]	 simultaneously. We  see  no
basis for such an apprehension. Be that as it may, Sri Gulab
C. Gupta,  learned counsel appearing for the State of Madhya
Pradesh, stated	 clearly that  no such double levy will take
place and  that there  would be	 only one  levy of  cess  on
minerals in  any given	year or	 any given quantity removed.
The said statement should allay any aprehensions on the part
of appellants-petitioners from Madhya Pradesh.
For the  above reasons, the appeals  and writ petitions
are dismissed  with  costs.  Advocate's	 fee  quantitied  at
Rs.2,500/- in each appeal and writ petition.
No orders are necessary in Interlocutory Applications.