[Cites
4
, Cited by
81
]
Supreme Court of India
New Shorrock Mills vs Maheshbhai T. Rao on 25 October, 1996
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 252, 1996 (6) SCC 590, 1996 AIR SCW 4427, 1997 LAB. I. C. 158, (1996) 9 JT 635 (SC), 1996 LAB LR 1129, 1997 (1) SERVLJ 125 SC, 1996 (9) JT 635, (1997) 90 FJR 1, (1997) 2 GUJ LR 1053, (1996) 74 FACLR 2749, (1997) 1 LABLJ 1212, (1997) 1 LAB LN 69, (1997) 2 MAHLR 663, (1997) 1 SCT 338, (1997) 1 CURLR 13, 1996 SCC (L&S) 1484
Bench:
J.S. Verma
,
B.N. Kirpal
PETITIONER:
NEW SHORROCK MILLS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MAHESHBHAI T. RAO

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	25/10/1996

BENCH:
J.S. VERMA, B.N. KIRPAL




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
KIRPAL, J.
The only  question which  arises for  consideration  in
this appeal  is whether	 the Labour Court, having found that
the employee  was guilty of misconduct in an inquiry held in
accordance with	 law and  in compliance	 with principles  of
natural justice,  can set  aside the  order of his discharge
and substitute	the same with an order of reinstatement with
forty per cent back wages.
The respondent  was engaged  as a Badli workman, by the
appellant,  some   time	 in   October,	1971.	   On	29th
December,1976 the  respondent  entered	the  office  of	 the
Deputy Manager	and started  abusing him and threatened that
the mill  officers   will not  be safe	outside the mill and
that he	 did not  care if he had to go to jail for murder of
four to five officers.
In view  of  the  aforesaid  abusive  behavior  of	 the
respondent a  show cause  notice under	Clause 22(1)  of the
Standing Orders was served on him.  This notice was based on
the complaint  dated 31st  December, 1976  which was made by
the said  Deputy Manager  to the management of the appellant
mill.
Thereafter, a domestic inquiry was held, witnesses were
examined and full opportunity was given to the respondent to
defend himself.	 After the inquiry proceedings concluded the
respondent was	served with  a notice by the Inquiry Officer
to show	 cause why  he should  not be  discharged  from	 the
service of  the mill.	A  reply dated	30th July,  1977 was
filed  by  the	respondent.    The  Inquiry  Officer,  after
considering the	 entire material  on record  and also  after
taking into  account the explanation offered by the workman,
came to	 the conclusion	 that the  respondent  was  in	fact
guilty of  misconduct.	 By order dated 2nd August, 1977 the
respondent was	discharged from	 the service as Badli worker
with immediate	effect.	  He, however, was given thirty days
salary in lieu of the notice period.
The  respondent  then  moved  the	Labour	Court  under
Section 79
of The  Bombay Industrial  Relations Act,  1946,
inter alia,  praying that  the order  of discharge dated 2nd
August, 1977  be  declared  as	illegal	 and  he  should  be
reinstated with	 continuity in	service and be paid the back
wages.	 No oral  or documentary evidence was Led before the
Labour Court  which considered	the entire material relating
to the matter as had been placed before the Inquiry Officer.
The labour	 Court passed an order dated 22nd June, 1980
and, inter alia, held as follows:-
(a) That  the  charge  against  the
     respondent was  neither  vague  nor
     unclear:
(b)  That	 the  finding	 of  the
     Departmental Enquiry  was legal and
     proper;
(c) That the order of discharge was
     not passed by way of victimisation;
(d) That  the Departmental	 Enquiry
     had  been	 conducted  legally  and
     properly  and  the	 respondent  was
     offered reasonable	 opportunity  of
     hearing;
(e) That  in passing  the order  of
     discharge, the appellant management
     had not  acted outside the scope of
     the enquiry;
(f) That the respondent workman had
     seriously	 misbehaved   with   his
     superior  officers	  and  was  thus
     guilty of misconduct;
(g) That  the finding of misconduct
     reached in	 the enquiry was neither
     perverse  nor   baseless  but   was
     proved on	the basis of evidence on
     record.
Notwithstanding	 the   fact  that  it  had  arrived  at	 the
aforesaid conclusion  the Labour  Court interfered  with the
punishment which was awarded by observing as follows:-
"	  Looking to  the facts	 of this
     case and  the facts of the evidence
     of the  witnesses produced	 in this
     case,   on	  the	basis	of   the
     departmental  inquiry  against  the
     applicant, the allegations levelled
     against the  applicant are	 proved.
But as discussed hereinabove having
     regard  to	  the	decisions,   the
     punishment	  of   discharging   the
     applicant from  the service imposed
     by the  opponent mills  company  is
     excessive and  harsh and  it  leads
     the    applicant	  to	economic
     destruction.   On account	of  this
     the family members of the applicant
     may  also	have  to  suffer.    The
     punishment	 of   discharging   from
     service may  only be  imposed  when
     there is  no alternative  except to
     discharge	 the	applicant.   The
     Hon'ble High  Court and the Hon'ble
     Supreme Court  have in  many  cases
     adopted the  course hat in cases of
     such a  nature, harsh punishment of
     dismissal of  the applicant  should
     not be  imposed.	The applicant of
     this matter  also on  the basis  of
     the decisions  stated  hereinabove,
     the applicant  is	entitled  to  be
     reinstated	 in  the  opponent  mill
     company in	 his original  post with
     continuity of service.
The appellant  filed a writ petition before the Gujarat
High Court but the same was dismissed in limine by observing
that the  impugned judgment  was just and proper and did not
require to  be interfered with under
Articles 226
and
227
of
the Constitution.   This  appeal arises on the special leave
having been  granted against  the said	decision of the High
Court.
It appears	 to us	that  the  Labour  Court  completely
misdirected   itself	in   ordering	 the	respondent's
reinstatement with  forty per  cent back  wages.  The Labour
Court was  exercising jurisdiction  under
Section  78
of the
The Bombay  Industrial Relations  Act, 1946.	It  had	 the
jurisdiction, inter  alia, to  decide the disputes regarding
the propriety and legality of an order passed by an employer
acting or  purporting to act under the Standing Orders.	 The
Labour Court,  in the  present	case,  having  come  to	 the
conclusion that	 the finding of the departmental inquiry was
legal, and  proper, respondent's  order of discharge was not
by way	of victimisation and that the respondent workman had
seriously misbehaved  and was  thus  guilty  of	 misconduct,
ought not  to have  interfered with the punishment which was
awarded, in the manner it did.	This is not a case where the
court could come to the conclusion that the punishment which
was  awarded   was  shockingly	 disproportionate   to	 the
employee's conduct  and his  past record.   The Labour Court
completely overlooked  the  fact  that	even  prior  to	 the
incident in question the respondent had misconducted himself
on several  occasions and  had been  punished.	According to
the appellant there were atleast three other instances where
the respondent	had misconducted  himself and  that  he	 had
failed to  improve his	conduct despite	 his assurances from
time to	 time.	 An other aspect which was overlooked by the
Labour Court  was that on the finding of the Inquiry officer
that the respondent had misbehaved with his superior officer
and was	 guilty of  misconduct,	 the  appellant	 could	have
dismissed the  respondent from service.	 The appellant chose
not to do so.  Instead it passed on order of discharging the
respondent from	  service.   Lesser  punishment having	been
given by the management itself there was, in our opinion, no
justifiable reason  for the  Labour Court  to have set aside
the punishment so awarded.  We are unable to accept that the
punishment  imposed   by  the  management  was	in  any	 way
disproportionate  to  warrant  interference  by	 the  Labour
Court.	   The	direction   of	the  Labour  Court  ordering
reinstatement of  the respondent  with forty  per cent	back
wages was clearly unwarranted.
For the  aforesaid reasons	 while allowing	 this appeal
the order dated 22nd June, 1990 of the Labour Court, Nadiad,
in so far as the order of reinstatement of the respondent is
concerned, is  set aside.   There  will be  no order  as  to
costs.