[Cites
0
, Cited by
41
]
Supreme Court of India
Tamil Nadu Electricity Board & Anr vs N. Raju Reddiar & Anr on 20 December, 1996
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 1005, 1997 (1) SCALE 286, 1997 (9) SCC 736, 1997 (1) CRIMES 182, (1997) 1 JT 486 (SC), (1998) 1 MAD LJ 16, (1997) 1 SCJ 160, (1997) 1 SUPREME 517, (1997) 1 SCALE 286
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
,
G.T. Nanavati
PETITIONER:
TAMIL NADU ELECTRICITY BOARD & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
N. RAJU REDDIAR & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	20/12/1996

BENCH:
K. RAMASWAMY, G.T. NANAVATI




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
O R D E R
     It is  a sad  spectacle that new practice unbecoming of
worthy and  conducive to  the profession  is croppingup. Mr.
Mariaputham, Advocate-on-Record	 had filed  vakalatnama	 for
the petitioner-respondent  when the  special leave  petition
was  filed.  After  the	 matter	 was  disposed	of,  Mr.  V.
Balachandran, Advocate had filed a petition for review. That
was also  dismissed by	this Court  on April  24, 1996.	 Yet
another advocate,  Mr. S.U.K. Sagar, has now been engaged to
file the  present application  styled  as  "application	 for
clarification", on  the specious  plea that the order is not
clear and unambiguous. When an appeal/special leave petition
is dismissed,  except in  rare cases  where error  of law or
fact is apparent on the record, no review can be filed; that
too by	the advocate  on record who neither appeared nor was
party in  the main  case. It  is salutary  to not that court
spends valuable	 time in deciding a case. Review petition is
not, and  should not  be, an  attempt for hearing the matter
again on  merits. Unfortunately,  it has  become, in  recent
time, a practice to file such review petitions as a routine;
that too,  with change of counsel, without obtaining consent
of the	advocate on  record at	earlier stage.	This is	 not
conducive to  healthy practice	of the	Bar  which  has	 the
responsibility	to   maintain  the   salutary  practice	  of
profession. In	Review Petition No.2670/96 in CA No.1867/92,
a Bench of three Judges to which one of us, K. Ramaswamy,J.,
was a member, has held as under:
"The record of the appeal indicates
     that Shri	Sudarsh Menon  was heard
     and decided  on merits.  The Review
     Petition has  been	 filed	by  Shri
     Prabir Chowdhury who was neither an
     arguing counsel when the appeal was
     heard nor	was he	present	 at  the
     time of  arguments. It  is	 unknown
     on what  basis he	has written  the
     grounds in	 the Review  Petition as
     if it  is a  rehearing of an appeal
     against  our   order.  He	did  not
     confine to	 the scope of review. It
     would be not in the interest of the
     profession to permit such practice.
     That part, he has not obtained " No
     Objection	Certificate"   from  the
     Advocate-on-Record in  the	 appeal,
     in spite  of the fact that Registry
     had informed him of the requirement
     for doing	so. Filing  of	the  "No
     Objection Certificate" would be the
     basis for	him to	come on	 record.
     Otherwise,	 the  Advocate-on-Record
     is answerable  to	the  Court.  The
     failure to obtain the "No Objection
     Certificate"  from	  the  erstwhile
     counsel has disentitled him to file
     the    Review     Petition.    Even
     otherwise, the  Review Petition has
     no merits,	 It  is	 an  attempt  to
     reargue the matter on merits.
	  On these  grounds, we	 dismiss
     the Review Petition".
Once  the	 petition  for	 review	 is   dismissed,  no
application for	 clarification should  be filed,  much	less
with the  change of the advocate-on-record. This practice of
changing the  advocates and filing repeated petitions should
be deprecated with heavy had for purity of administration of
law and salutary and healthy practice.
The application  is dismissed  with exemplary  costs of
Rs.20,000/- as	it is  an abuse	 of the	 process of court in
derogation of healthy practice. The amount should be paid to
the Supreme  Court Legal  Aid Services Committee within four
months from  today. If	the amount is not paid, it should be
recovered treating  this direction as decree of the Court by
the Supreme  Court Legal Services Committee. The Registry is
directed to  communicate this  order to	 the  Supreme  Court
Legal Service Committee.