[Cites
12
, Cited by
72
]
Supreme Court of India
Ghantesher Ghosh vs Madan Mohan Ghosh & Ors on 18 September, 1996
Equivalent citations: AIR 1997 SUPREME COURT 471, 1996 (11) SCC 446, 1996 AIR SCW 3858, (1996) 8 JT 410 (SC), (1996) 4 ICC 819, (1997) 1 CALLT 26, (1996) 2 RENTLR 644, (1996) 2 LJR 506, (1997) 1 RECCIVR 89, (1997) 1 ALL WC 253
Author:
S.B Majmudar
Bench:
S.B Majmudar
,
N.P Singh
PETITIONER:
GHANTESHER GHOSH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MADAN MOHAN GHOSH & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	18/09/1996

BENCH:
MAJMUDAR S.B. (J)
BENCH:
MAJMUDAR S.B. (J)
SINGH N.P. (J)




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
     MAJMUDAR, J:
A short  question falls for determination of this Court
in this	 appeal by special leave against the decision of the
Division Bench	of the	High  Court  of	 Calcutta  in  Civil
Revision  Application  No.2250	of  1987.  The	question  is
whether
Section	 4
of  the Partition  Act, 1893 (hereinafter
referred to  as 'the  Act') can	 be pressed  in	 service  in
execution proceedings  arising out  of a  final	 decree	 for
partition, by  one of  the co-owners  of  a  dwelling  house
belonging  to	an  undivided	family	against	 a  stranger
transferee of a share therein belonging to another erstwhile
co-owner of  the said  dwelling house.	The  learned  Second
Assistant District  Judge,  Howrah,  before  whom  the	said
application was	 moved took  the view  that
Section 4
of the
Partition Act  could not  be pressed  in service against the
stranger purchaser  of such  share. The	 said view  was	 not
accepted by the Division Bench of the High Court of Calcutta
by the impugned judgment.
In order  to appreciate  the correct  contours  of	 the
controversy in	respect of  the aforesaid  question,  it  is
necessary to  glance through  a few background facts leading
to  the	  proceedings.	The   premises	in  question  are  a
residential house  situated at	No.6/1 Ghoshal	Bagan  Lane,
Howrah. It was originally owned by one Kalipada Ghosh and on
his death  his three  surviving sons,  namely, Pran Krishna,
Gour Mohan  and Kamal  Krishna became  owners of 1/3rd share
each. On 7.9.1948, Kamal Krishna died leaving behind him his
widow Smt.  Radha Rani.	 Thus, she inherited 1/3rd undivided
share of  her husband  in the  said dwelling  house. On	 the
coming into  operation of  the
Hindu  Succession Act,  1956
,
Smt. Radha  Rani became	 full owner  of 1/3rd  share of	 her
deceased husband  in the  said house.  She filed  a suit for
partition on 5.9.1960 claiming separation or her 1/3rd share
in the	said house  amongst other properties. In the present
proceedings, we are concerned only with the aforesaid family
dwelling house. The suit was filed against the other two co-
owners, namely,	 Pran Krishna  and Gaur	 Mohan.	 Ultimately,
after the  preliminary decree  a final	decree	came  to  be
passed	in   favour  of	  Smt.	Radha	Rani  on  31.8.1971.
Accordingly, she became entitled to partition and separation
of her	1/3rd share  in the said dwelling house. She made an
abortive attempt  to  get  the	final  decree  executed	 but
therein she  did not get any relief of actual possession for
number of years. In the meanwhile, on 8.10.1979 she executed
and got	 registered a deed of gift in favour of her brother,
the present  appellant, gifting her 1/3rd undivided interest
in the said dwelling house as decreed to her pursuant to the
final decree  for partition.  Armed with that gift deed, the
appellant-donee who  obviously was  a stranger	tc the joint
family, filed execution petition on 14.12.1981 for executing
the final  decree obtained  by his  predecessor in interest,
namely, the  donor Smt.	 Radha Rani.  Pending the  execution
proceedings taken  out by  the appellant  donee, one  of the
judgment-debtors Pran  Krishna,	 original  first  defendant,
died in	 July 1982. In his place, his son present Respondent
No.1, Madan  Mohan Ghosh  was brought on record as his legal
heir in	 the execution	proceedings. The  executing court by
its order  dated 17.1  1985 issued  a writ  of possession by
appointing a  Pleader Commissioner  to undertake the task of
suggesting partition  of the suit house by metes and bounds.
Then in	 September 1985,  pending the  execution proceedings
original judgment  debtor Defendant  No.2  Gaur	 Mohan	also
died. It  appears that	thereafter the real contest remained
between the appellant on the one hand and Respondent No.1 on
the  other.   Respondent  No.1	 filed	an   application  on
12.12.1986 before the executing court under
Section 4
of the
Act for	 enforcing his	claim  of  pre-emption	against	 the
appellant stranger transferee of 1/3rd undivided interest of
the original  title-holder Smt.	 Radha Rani.  The  executing
court by  its  order  dated  13.8.1981	dismissed  the	said
application of	Respondent No.1	 on the ground that the said
application was	 not maintainable after the final decree was
passed in  the partition  suit. As  stated earlier, the said
view of the executing court was not approved by the Division
Bench  of   the	 Calcutta   High  Court	  in  the   revision
application. It	 took the  view that the said petition under
the Act	 was maintainable  as still the final decree had not
got fully executed and satisfied by actual division of the
property  by   metes  and  bounds  and	delivery  of  actual
possession to  the stranger transferee who had taken out the
execution proceedings.	By its	order dated  17.12.1990, the
High Court  directed the  executing court  to dispose of the
application of Respondent No.1 under
Section 4
of the Act on
merits	with  a	 further  direction  to	 complete  the	said
proceedings within  six months. It is the aforesaid order of
the High  Court which is challenged in the present appeal by
special leave, as noted earlier.
RIVAL CONTENTIONS :
Dr. Ghosh,	 learned senior	 counsel for  the appellant,
vehemently contended that on the express language of
Section
4
of  the Act,	the application moved by Respondent No.1 was
not  maintainable.   Dr.  Ghosh	 relied	 upon  a  number  of
decisions which	 had taken  the view  canvassed by  him. His
submission in  short was  that
Section	4
of  the Act can be
availed of  by any  of the  parties to the litigation in the
partition suit	till its culmination into a final decree for
partition. That	 even during  the appeal  against the  final
decree
Section	4
can  be pressed  in service. That once the
final decree  comes to	be passed and gets finally confirmed
by the	ultimate court	of appeal  the suit comes to an end.
Thareafter, when  execution proceedings	 are taken  out	 for
executing such	final decree,
Section 4
of the Act would be
out of	picture and cannot be pressed in service against the
stranger transferee of the decretal rights of one of the co-
owners	in   the  family   dwelling  house.  Dr	 Ghosh	also
vehemently tried  to submit that the finding reached by both
the courts  below that	the suit  property  consisted  of  a
family dwelling house and was not an open land, was also not
sustainable. On	 the other  hand, learned  counsel  for	 the
respondents  submitted	 that
Section	4
is  a  beneficial
provision which	 seeks to  avoid  the  interference  by	 the
stranger transferee  of co-owner's  right in  a joint family
dwelling house	and if	such strangers are permitted to come
into possession	 of any	 part of  such dwelling	 house,	 the
peace and tranquility of the rest of the occupant members of
the joint  family would be order to avoid such a contingency
and possible  strife the  legislature in  its	 wisdom	 had
enacted this  provision which  has stood  the test  of	time
spread over  more than	a century and there was no reason to
restrict the  application of  such a benevolent section only
upto the  stage of  final  decree  and	not  during  further
proceedings in	execution  of  such  final  decree.  It	 was
submitted that beneficial provision of
Section 4
can rightly
be made	 applicable during  execution proceedings  till	 the
final decree gets fully satisfied by division of property by
metes and  bounds and  by actual  delivery of  possession of
respective portions  of the  joint family  dwelling house to
the concerned  shares. It  is only  at that  stage that	 the
executing court would become functus officio. That till that
stage is  reached
Section  4
of	 the Act can be legitimately
pressed	 in  service  by  any  of  the	remaining  co-owners
claiming pre-emptive  right to	purchase the  share  of	 the
stranger transferee  from  one	of  the	 co-owners.  Learned
counsel also  in his  turn relied  upon a  decision  of	 the
Division Bench	of the	Patna High  Court in
Harendra	Nath
Mukharjee vs.  Shyam Sunder  Kuer &  Ors. (A.I.R.
1973 Patna
142). He  also submitted  that in  a partition suit till the
decree gets  fully satisfied  and executed  each  contesting
party remains  as good	as a  plaintiff and consequently the
beneficial provision  of
Section 4
can be pressed in service
by any	of the contesting co-owners till the final decree in
such  a	  suit	for   partition	 gets	fully  executed	 and
implemented and	 consequently curtain drops on the partition
proceedings between the parties for ever.
It is in the background of these rival contentions that
we address  ourselves to the consideration of this question.
Before we  refer to the cleavage of judicial opinion amongst
different High Courts on the scope and ambit of
Section 4
of
the Act,  it would  be profitable  to have  a  look  at	 the
provision itself.  The Statement  of Objects and Reasons for
enacting the
Partition Act, 1893
amongst others, provided as
under :
"It is also proposed in the Bill to
     give  the	 Court	the   power   of
     compelling	 a   stranger,	who  has
     acquired by  purchase a  share in a
     family dwelling-house when he seeks
     for a  partition, to sell his share
     to the  members of	 the family  who
     are the  owners of	 the rest of the
     house  at	 a   valuation	 to   be
     determined	 by   the  Court.   This
     provision is  only an  extension of
     the privilege  given to  such share
     holders by	 section 44, paragraph 2
     of the
Transfer of  Property  Act
,
     and is  an application  of a  well-
known  rule   which  obtains  among
     Muhammadans   everywhere	and   by
     custom also  among Hindus	in  some
     parts of the country."
It is  obvious that  the Act  intended  to	 extend	 the
privilege already  available to	 a  co-sharer  in  a  family
dwelling house as per
Section 44
of the Transfer of Property
Act, 1882  (hereinafter	 referred  to  as  the
T.P.  Act
').
Section 44 of the T P. Act dealing with cases of transfer by
one of the co-owners of immoveable property, reads as under:
"44. Transfer  by	one  co-owner  -
Where one	of two or more co-owners
     of the  immoveable property legally
     competent in  that behalf transfers
     his share	of such	 property or any
     interest  therein,	 the  transferee
     acquires,	as   to	 such  share  or
     interest,	and   so   far	 as   is
     necessary to  give	 effect	 to  the
     transfer, the transferor's right to
     joint possession or other common or
     part enjoyment of the property, and
     to enforce a partition of the same,
     but subject  to the  conditions and
     liabilities affecting,  at the date
     of	 the   transfer,  the  share  or
     interest so transferred.
Where the	transferee of a share of
     a dwelling	 house belonging  to  an
     undivided family is not a member of
     the family, nothing in this section
     shall be  deemed to  entitle him to
     joint possession or other common or
     part  enjoyment   of  the	 house".
It is  obvious that  by the  time the  Act came  to  be
enacted,    the legislature had in view the aforesaid parent
provision engrafted  in
section	 44
of	the T.P.  Act to the
effect that  a	stranger  to  the  family  who	becomes	 the
transferee of  an undivided share of one of the co owners in
a dwelling  house belonging  to undivided  family could	 not
claim  a  right	 of  joint  possession	or  common  or	part
enjoyment of  the house with other co-owners of the dwelling
house. Implicit	 in the provision was the legislative intent
that such  stranger should  be kept  away  from	 the  common
dwelling house	occupied by other co-sharers. It was enacted
with the  avowed object	 of ensuring  peaceful enjoyment of,
the common  dwelling house  by the remaining co-owners being
members of  the same  family sharing  a common hearth and or
home. It  is in	 the light  of	the  aforesaid	pre-existing
statutory background  encompassing the	subject that we have
to see	what
Section  4
of the Act purports to do.
Section 4
of the Act provides as under :-
"4.  Partition suit  by  transferee
     of	 share	 in  dwelling-house.-(1)
     Where a  share or	a dwelling-house
     belonging to  an  undivided  family
     has been  transferred to  a  person
     who is  not a member of such family
     and  such	 transferee   sues   for
     partition, the  Court shall, if any
     member  of	  the  family	being  a
     shareholder shall	undertake to buy
     the share	of such transferee, make
     a valuation  of such  share in such
     manner as	it thinks fit and direct
     the sale  of  such	 share	to  such
     shareholder,  and	 may  give   all
     necessary and  proper directions in
     that behalf.
(2)  If in	 any case  described  in
     sub section (1) two or more members
     of	  the	 family	   being    such
     shareholders severally undertake to
     buy such  share,  the  Court  shall
     follow the	 procedure prescribed by
     sub-section (2)  of last  foregoing
     section."
A mere  look at  the aforesaid provision shows that for
its applicability  at any  stage of  the proceedings between
the contesting	parties, the  following conditions  must  be
satisfied:
(1)  A  co-owner  having  undivided
     share in  the family dwelling house
     should  effect   transfer	of   his
     undivided interest therein;
     (2)  The	transferee    of    such
     undivided interest	 of the co-owner
     should be	an outsider  or stranger
     to he family;
(3)  Such transferee  must sue  for
     partition and  separate  possession
     of the  undivided share transferred
     to him by the concerned co-owner;
     (4)  As against such a claim of the
     stranger transferee,  any member of
     the family	 having undivided  share
     in the  dwelling house  should  put
     forward his claim of pre-emption by
     undertaking to buy out the share of
     such transferee; and
     (5)  While accepting  such a  claim
     for pre-emption by the existing co-
owner   of	  the	dwelling   house
     belonging to  the undivided family,
     the court	should make  a valuation
     of the  transferred share belonging
     to the stranger transferee and make
     the claimant co-owner pay the value
     of the  share of  the transferee so
     as to  enable the claimant co-owner
     to purchase  by way  of pre-emption
     the said  transferred share  of the
     stranger transferee in the dwelling
     house belonging  to  the  undivided
     family   so   that	  the	stranger
     transferee can  have no  more claim
     left  for	partition  and	separate
     possession	 of  his  share	 in  the
     dwelling house and acccordingly can
     be effectively  denied entry in any
     part of such family dwelling house
     The aforesaid analysis of
Section 4
of the Act makes it
clear that  there is  no express  provision  indicating	 the
stage at  which such  application can  be moved	 against the
stranger transferee of the share of an erstwhile co-owner of
dwelling house	of undivided  family. Consequently,  on	 the
language of
Section 4
, it cannot be urged that it cannot be
pressed in  service after  the final decree for partition is
passed and  before such.  final	 decree	 is  fully  executed
whereby the  court becomes  functus officio.  It is trite to
observe that  in the  present  case  out  of  the  aforesaid
conditions for	applicability of
Section 4
, save and except
the condition  regarding the  stranger transferee  suing for
partition which	 is the subject-matter of fierce controversy
between	 the  parties,	all  the  remaining  conditions	 are
satisfied. In  other words, there is well established on the
record of  the case that the suit house was a dwelling house
belonging to  undivided family	of three  erstwhile brothers
and which  later on came to belong to two undivided brothers
along with  the widow of their deceased brother and thus the
suit house  was a  dwelling  house  belonging  to  undivided
family. Dr. Ghosh, learned senior counsel for the appellant,
faintly tried  to submit  that both the courts below were in
error in  holding that	the suit  property  consisted  of  a
dwelling house	and  not  open	land.  As  both	 the  courts
concurrently found  it to  be a	 dwelling house belonging to
undivided family,  this contention  is no  longer  open	 for
adjudication at	 this stage.  We, therefore,  proceed on the
basis that  the suit  house is a dwelling house belonging to
undivided family.  It is  also not  in dispute	between	 the
parties that 1/3rd interest of one of the co-owners, namely,
Smt. Radha  Rani, who  had got final decree for partition in
her favour,  was  transferred  by  gift	 in  favour  of	 the
appellant after	 the  final  decree  and  that	such  donee-
tranferee was  a stranger  to the  family as  he was  not  a
member of  the said  family. It	 is also not in dispute that
Respondent No.1 by way of application under
Section 4
of the
Act undertook to buy out the share of the appellant stranger
transferee being 1/3rd undivided share which belonged to his
predecessor in title decree-holder Smt. Radha Rani. However,
the real  controversy between  the parties  is	whether	 the
appellant who  is a  stranger transferee  of 1/3rd undivided
interest cf Smt Radha Rani in the suit property ?can be said
to have	 sued for  partition so	 as to satisfy the remaining
condition of the said provision.
In order  to answer  this moot  question, it  has to be
kept in	 view what  the legislature  intended while enacting
the Act	 and specially
Section 4
thereof. The	 legislative
intent as reflected by the Statement of Objects and Reasons,
as noted  earlier,  makes  it  clear  that  the	 restriction
imposed on  a stranger	transferee of a share-of one or more
of the	co-owners in  a dwelling  house by
Section 44
of the
T.P. Act is tried to be further extended by
Section 4
of the
Partition Act  with a  view to	seeing that  such transferee
washes his  hands off  such a family dwelling house and gets
satisfied with	the proper valuation of his share which will
be paid	 to him	 by the pre-empting co-sharer or co-sharers,
as the	case may  be. This right cf pre-emption available to
other co-owners	 under
Section	4
is  obviously	 in  further
fructification of  the restriction  on such  a transferee as
imposed by
Section 44
of the	T.P. Act.  It is  true	that
amongst	 other	 conditions,
Section  4
requires  for	 its
applicability that  such stranger  transferee must  sue	 for
partition and  only in	that eventuality  the right  of pre-
emption envisaged  by
Section 4
can be made available to the
other  contesting   Co-owners.	In  this  connection,  great
emphasis  was	placed	by  Dr.	 Ghosh	on  the	 words	such
transferee sues	 for partition	as employed  by
Section  4
.
However, it  has to  be noted  that this  section  does	 not
provide as  a condition	 for  its  applicability  that	such
stranger transferee  must file	a suit	for  partition.	 The
words transferee sues for partition are wider than the words
transferee  filing   a	suit  for  partition  .	 The  latter
phraseology is	conspicuously absent  in  the  section.
The
Partition  Act
does  not   define  the  words	 "suing	 for
partition". The	 connotation of the term "sue" can be better
appreciated by	looking at  certain standard  works defining
such a	phrase. In Black's Law Dictionary, Sixth Edition, at
page 1432 the meaning of the word "sue is mentioned as under
:-
"To commence  or to  continue legal
     proceedings  for	recovery  of   a
     right;  to	  proceed  with	  as  an
     action, and  follow it  up	 to  its
     proper  termination;   to	gain  by
     legal process".
In Collins	 English Dictionary,  1979 Edition,  at page
1452, one of the meaning of the word "sue" has been shown as
under:
"to  institute   legal  proceedings
     against".	 In   Aiyar's	Judicial
     Dictionary, 10th Edition (1988), at
     page 980, the word 'sue" is said to
     have the following meaning :-
"To  take	only  legal  proceedings
     against one".
It is  further observed  that the	word  is  used	most
exclusively to prosecute a civil action against one.
In Concise	 Oxford Dictionary, Seventh Edition, at page
1066, the  following meanings are ascribed to the word "sue"
:-
"1.  institute  legal   proceedings
     against (person);	make application
     to or  to law  court  for	redress;
make petition  in law court for and
     obtain (writ pardon etc.);
2.	  entreat     (person);	    make
     entreaty to (person) for a favour".
In Stroud's Judicial Dictionary, Fifth Edition, at page
2540, the  words "to  sue"  is	said  to  have	the  meaning
generally speaking, or bringing action.
It is, therefore, well-established that the terminology
"suing for partition" would not necessarily mean filing of a
suit  in   the	first  instance	 by  the  transferee.  If  a
transferee seeks  to execute  any final decree for partition
in favour of his transferor co-owner, he can be said to have
initiated a legal action for redressal of his decretal right
as a  stranger transferee.  Any legal action taken by anyone
for getting  redressal from  a law court and for vindicating
his legal right on which such action is based can be said to
have sued  in a	 court of law. It cannot, therefore, be said
that a	purchaser of  decretal rights  flowing from  a final
decree	for   partition	 while	initiating  proceedings	 for
execution of  that decree  against the	judgment-debtors who
are co-sharers	in the	property sought to be partitioned by
metes and  bounds, is not suing for partition by getting the
said decree  executed through  a Court	of law. If the words
"transferee suing  for partition  are  given  a	 restrictive
meaning, namely,  that he  can	be  said  to  be  suing	 for
partition only upto the stage of final decree in such a suit
for partition  then the	 wide phraseology advisedly employed
by the	legislature in	the section would be deprived of its
real laudable  object and  content .  It is trite to observe
that till  the final  decree for partition of a co-ownership
property   culminates	 into	its   full   discharge	 and
satisfaction, the  lis between the contesting parties cannot
be said	 to have  come to  a final end. It is also axiomatic
that once  the partition  decree becomes  final,  the  court
which passed  the decree does not become functus officio for
all purposes.  On the  contrary, its  role remains effective
till the  decree  passed  by  it  gets	fully  executed	 and
implemented.  It   is  for   this  very	  purpose  that	 the
legislature has	 provided as  per
Section  38
of  the  Civil
Procedure Code	that a	decree may  be executed by the court
which passed  it, or  by the  court to	which it is sent for
execution. Therefore,  it is  the duty	of the	court  which
passes the  decree to get it executed when called upon to do
so with	 a view	 to seeing  that the  rights and obligations
flowing from  such decree  get	finally	 complied  with	 and
translated into	 reality. Till	that stage  is	reached	 the
court which  passes  the  decree  does	not  become  totally
functus officio and the litigation between parties cannot be
said to	 have ended  finally. Under  these circumstances, it
cannot be  said that  a decree-holder in a partition suit or
his transferee	who is	armed with  the	 plaintiff's  rights
pending such  suit or  even after  the passing	of the final
decree as  transferee  of  decretal  rights  when  he  seeks
execution is  not suing	 for partition	or is not entreating
the  court  for	 its  assistance  to  get  his	right  fully
vindicated as  per the claim in the suit and decree therein.
In this	 connection, it	 is also  profitable to keep in view
the legislative intent underlying various provisions
of the
Code  of   Civil  Procedure
which  shows   that  in  given
circumstances the  proceedings in the suit can be treated to
include	 even  execution  proceedings.	Explanation  VII  to
Section ll  of the  Civil Procedure  Code dealing  with	 res
judicata lays down as under :-
"Explanation VII.-The provisions of
     this  section   shall  apply  to  a
     proceeding for  the execution  of a
     decree  and   references  in   this
     section  to   any	suit,  issue  or
     former suit  shall be  construed as
     references,  respectively,	  to   a
     proceeding for the execution of the
     decree, question  arising	in  such
     proceeding and  a former proceeding
     for the execution of that decree."
As per  Order 22  Rule 10,	 in cases  of an assignment,
creation or  devolution of  any interest during the pendency
of a  suit, the suit may by leave of the court, be continued
by or  against the  person to or upon whom such interest has
come or	 devolved. As per Order 22 Rule 12, nothing in Rules
3, 4  and 8  shall apply  to proceedings  in execution	of a
decree or   order meaning thereby that Order 22 Rule 10 will
apply to  execution  proceedings  whereby  the	same  scheme
regarding devolution of interest of either party in the suit
is made applicable even to execution proceedings.
Section 52
of the	 Transfer of Property Act is another
illustration on	 the point dealing with the principle of lis
pendens. The  explanation to the said section indicates that
the pendency  of a  suit would encompass the stage after the
final decree  till complete  satisfaction and  discharge  of
such  decree  or  order.  It  is,  therefore,  obvious	that
legislature for	 different contingencies  has thought it fit
to extend the scope and ambit of the terminology "suit" even
for covering  the execution  proceedings in  connection with
decrees passed	in such	 suits. As  we	have  seen  earlier,
Section 4
of the Act has also advisedly used the terminology
"sues for partition" and has not confined it only to suits
filed by  stranger transferee for applicability of
Section 4
of the Act.
We have  also to  keep in	view the  avowed  beneficial
object underlying  the said  provision.
Section  4
of	 the
Partition  Act	 read  with
Section  44
of  the  T.P.	 Act
represents a well knit legislative scheme for insulating the
domestic peace	of members  of undivided  family occupying a
common dwelling	 house from  the encroachment  of a stranger
transferee of  the share  of one  undivided co-owner  as the
remaining  co-owners   are  presumed   to   follow   similar
traditions  and	 mode  of  life	 and  to  be  accustomed  to
identical  likes   and	 dislikes   and	  identical   family
traditions. This  legislative scheme  seeks to	protect them
from the  onslaught on	their peaceful	joint family life by
stranger-outsider to  the family who may obviously be having
different outlook and mode of life including food habits and
other social  and religious  customs. Entry of such outsider
in the	joint family  dwelling house  is  likely  to  create
unnecessary  disturbances  not	germane	 to  the  peace	 and
tranquility not	 only of the occupants of the dwelling house
but also  of neighbours	 residing in the locality and in the
near vicinity.	With a	view to seeing that such homogenious
life of	 co-owners belonging  to the  same joint  family and
residing in the joint family dwelling house is not adversely
affected by  the entry	of a  stranger to  the family,	this
statutory right	 of pre-emption is made available to the co-
owners who  undertake to buy out such undivided share of the
stranger co-owner. If such a right flowing from
Section 4
of
the Act	 is restricted	in its operation only upto the final
decree for  partition, the  very benevolent  object  of	 the
section would get frustrated as upto final decree stage, the
court would only crystalise the shares of the contesting co-
owners but  the separation  and partition  of the  shares of
respective parties  get really	affected  on  spot  only  by
actual	division   by  metes  and  bounds  and	delivery  of
Possession of respective shares to respective share-holders.
This can be achieved only at the stage when the execution of
the final  decree takes place and the litigation reaches its
terminus for the contesting parties and the curtain drops on
the litigation.	 Only then the court which passed the decree
becomes finally	 functus officio.  It is  also	well-settled
rule of interpretation of statute that the court should lean
in  favour  of	that  interpretation  which  fructifies	 the
beneficial purpose for which the provision is enacted by the
legislature and	 should not  adopt an  interpretation  which
frustrates or  unnecessarily truncates	it. Maxwell  on	 The
Interoretation of statutes, Twelfth Edition, has observed in
Chapter 4 pertaining to beneficial construction as under :-
"The fact that a section is clearly
     designed  to   afford  relief   may
     incline the  court to  construe  it
     more benevolently	than it	 might a
     less	obviously	remedial
     enactment..."
Similarly it has been observed at page 96 as under :-
"It is  said to  he the duty of the
     judge to  make such construction of
     a statute	as  shall  suppress  the
     mischief and advance the remedy. To
     this end,	a certain  extension  of
     the letter	 is not unknown, even in
     criminal statutes".
Consequently, on  the express  language of
Section 4
of
the Partition Act which is a benevolent provision enacted by
the legislature	 for the  welfare  and	tranquility  of	 the
members of  a joint  family occupying s e dwelling House, we
must so	 construe the  provision as  to make it available at
all the	 relevant  stages  of  the  litigation	between	 the
contesting  co-owners	till  the   litigation	reaches	 its
terminus by way of full and final discharge and satisfaction
of the	final decree for partition. If a stranger transferee
enters the  arena of  contest at  any stage and seeks to get
his share  separated as	 far as	 the subject-matter  of	 the
litigation, namely, the dwelling house, is concerned, he can
be said to be suing for partition and separate possession of
his undivided  share to which he has become entitled because
of transfer by one of the co-owners. Such a transferee might
come on	 the scene  prior to  the final	 decree via Order 22
Rule 10	 or he	may come  on the  arena of  contest  seeking
redressal of  his right	 of partition  and separation of his
undivided  share   even	 tn   execution	 proceedings   as  a
transferee of  the decree right of erstwhile plaintiff under
the final  decree either  by himself  filing  the  execution
proceedings as per Order 21 Rule 16 or may subsequently step
in the	shoes of the decree-holder who has already filed the
execution proceedings  via Order  22 Rule 10 read with Order
22  Rule   12.	In   either  eventuality,  such	 a  stranger
transferee who	emerges on  the scene  of litigation between
the contesting	co-owners which	 has not  stilt reached	 its
terminus and  who seeks vindication of his transferee-rights
in the	dwelling house can certainly be said to be suing for
partition even	at the	stage of  execution  of	 such  final
decree for partition.
In our  view, therefore,  on the  express	language  of
Section 4
of the  Partition Act,  the Division Bench of the
High Court  reached a  correct conclusion  in  the  impugned
judgment.
Now is  time for  us  to  have  a	quick  look  at	 the
different decisions of the High Courts on this question. Dr.
Ghosh, learned	senior counsel	for the	 appellant,  heavily
relied upon  some of  the decisions  of the  Patna  and	 the
Calcutta High  Courts as  well as the decision of the Madras
High Court  in support	of his	contention  that
Section  4
cannot be  applied at  the stage  of execution	of  a  final
decree for partition. On the other hand, learned counsel for
the respondents,  relied upon  the latter  decisions of	 the
Patna High  Court as  well as  the Calcutta  High  Court  in
support of  his	 rival	contention  seeking  application  of
Section 4
of the  Act even during execution proceedings and
which contention, as we have seen above, meets our approval.
We shall  first deal  with the	decisions relied upon by Dr.
Ghosh in support of his contention. In Sheodhar Prasad Singh
& Ors. vs Kishun Prasad Singh & Ors. (A.I.R. 1941 Patna 4)),
Dhavle, J. took the view that an application under
Section 4
could be made in appeal against final decree. Now it must be
kept in	 view  that  the  learned  Judge  was  not  directly
concerned with a situation which arises in the present case.
In the	case before  the learned  Judge of  the	 Patna	High
Court, the question of applicability of
Section 4
of the Act
fell for  consideration at  the stage  when the final decree
reached the  second appellate  stage before  the High Court.
According to the learned Single Judge,
Section 4
could apply
even at that stage. The learned Single Judge, therefore, had
no occasion  to consider  the further question with which we
are concerned.	The view propounded by him cannot be said to
have ruled  out the  applicability of
Section 4
beyond the
stage of  final decree	in a  suit for	partition.
Dr. Ghosh
invited	 our  attention	 to  a	decision  in
Birendra	Nath
Banerjee vs.  Smt.
snehalata Devi Anr. (A.I.R. 1968 Calcutta
380). Even
in that case
the Division Bench of the High Court
was concerned  with the	 applicability of
Section 4
pending
appeal against	the final decree for partition. The Division
Bench observed therein as under :-
"The  right  of  pre-emption  under
Section 4
of the Partition Act is a
     right given  by the  statute and on
     its wording, it subsists so long as
     the suit  remains pending,	 or,  in
     other words,  so long  as the  suit
     has   not	  been	 concluded    or
     terminated by  an	effective  final
     decree for partition. Therefore, an
     application  claiming,  pre-emption
     at a  time when  the appeal against
     final partition  decree is	 pending
     cannot be held barred by limitation
     on the  ground  that  it  has  been
     filed beyond  three  years	 of  the
     passing	of    the    preliminary
     partition decree."
The aforesaid observation makes it clear that the court
was concerned  with the question of limitation in connection
with application  under
Section	 4
of  the Act	pending	 the
appeal against	the final  decree and  whether it  should be
treated as  time barred	 considering the  starting point  of
preliminary decree.  It is  true that the Division Bench, in
this connection,  observed that	 the  right  of	 pre-emption
under
Section  4
subsists  so long as the suit is pending or
has not been concluded or terminated by the final decree for
partition. But	the said  observation cannot be construed to
have excluded  the possibility of applicability of
Section 4
to a  post final  decree stage	as such	 a situation had not
arisen for  consideration of the court. However the decision
of the	Madras High  Court is  on the point. Strong reliance
was placed  by Dr.  Ghosh on the judgment of the Madras High
Court in Abdul Sathar vs. AL Nawab (A.I.R. 1980 Madras 225),
In that	 case a	 learned Single	 Judge, Ratnam, J., took the
view dissenting	 from the  decisions of	 the Patna  and	 the
Calcutta High  Courts to  which we  shall make	a  reference
presently that
Section 4
of the  Act cannot  be pressed in
service after  the final  decree for partition is passed. In
other words,  in execution  proceedings
Section 4
of the Act
cannot apply.  As already  discussed by us earlier
Section 4
on its	express language  cannot be read in such a truncated
fashion. Therefore, the decision of the learned Single Judge
Cannot be  Considered to  ba laying  down good	law. On	 the
other hand, the decisions of the Patna and the Calcutta High
Courts to which we shall now make a reference.
In Satya  Narayan Chakravarty vs. Biswanath Paul & Ors.
(1974 Calcutta	Weekly Notes  871), a  Division Bench of the
Calcutta High  Court observed  that so	long as the stranger
purchaser of decretal rights of one of the co-owners has not
taken possession  of his  allotted share by execution of the
said decree,  application under
Section 4
of the partition
Act is	maintainable In	 this connection, it was observed by
the Division Bench, speaking through Laik, J., as under :-
"Having considered	 the  scheme  of
     the
Partition  Act
including  its
     object  which  is	to  prevent  the
     introduction of any foreign element
     into the  group of	 family	 members
     and its  aim which	 is to	maintain
     homogeneity  in   respect	of   the
     entire family  and particularly the
     provisions of
section  4
thereof,
     which does	 not indicate a contrary
     intention and  after giving anxious
     consideration  to	 the  principles
     laid   down   but	 following   the
     principle that  the residence  in a
     dwelling  house   of  an  undivided
     family should not, if possible (but
     not contrary  to  law),  be  thrown
     open to  a stranger  to the  family
     and remembering  that the	terms of
section 4
of  the	 Act  are  quite
     general and  distinct from a decree
     passed  in	 a  partition  suit  and
     holding further  the rule	that the
     executing	court	should	not   go
     behind the	 decree, is inapplicable
     in an  application under
section 4
of	 the   Partition  Act	and  not
     ignoring the  provisions of
section
     44
of  the Transfer of Property Act
     and  the	rules  of  pre-	 emption
     governing	   the	   Muhammandans,
     Buddhists, Jews,  Romans and others
     and agreeing  with respect	 to  the
     dictum of the judicial committee in
     42 IA  10-ILR 37  AM 129 (141) R.C.
     that the  right of pre-emption is a
     "valuable right"  - the  object  of
     such a right being the avoidance of
     a	disagreeable   stranger	 (though
     some may think it an archaism and a
     clog on  freedom of  contract)  the
     court  held   that	 an  application
     under
Section  4
of  the  Partition
     Act is  maintainable even after the
     final decree is passed...."
In
Boto  Krishna Ghose  vs. Akhoy	Kumar Ghose  &	Ors.
(A.I.R.
(37)  1950 Calcutta  111), it  was held	 by  another
Division Bench	of the	Calcutta High  Court that a dwelling
house of an undivided family has a linkage with the dwelling
house which  belongs to	 the family and which is not divided
and that such dwelling house may be owned by members of such
family who  need not  be joint in mess and that house itself
should be  undivided amongst  the members  of the family who
are its	 owners. The  emphasis is  really on  the  undivided
character of  the house,  and it  is this  attribute of	 the
house which  imparts to	 the  family  its  character  of  an
undivided family.  For the  members of	the family  may have
partitioned all	 their other  joint properties	and may have
separated in  mess and	worship, but  they would still be an
undivided family  in relation  to the dwelling house so long
as they	 have not  divided it  amongst themselves.  In	this
connection, it has been further observed as follows :-
"If  in  this  state  of  things  a
     member of	the family transfers his
     share in  the dwelling  house to  a
     stranger, the  position that arises
     that para 2 of
section 44
, T.P. Act
     comes  into   operation   and   the
     transferee does not become entitled
     to joint possession or other common
     or part  enjoyment	 of  the  house,
     although he would have the right to
     enforce a	partition of  his share.
     The object	 of this provision is to
     prevent the  intrusion of strangers
     into the  family residence which is
     allowed to be possessed and enjoyed
     by the  members of the family alone
     in spite of the transfer of a share
     to	 a   stranger  .   The	 factual
     position then  is that  it is still
     an undivided  dwelling  house,  the
     possession and  enjoyment of  which
     are confined  to the members of the
     family,  the   stranger  transferee
     being   debarred	 by   law   from
     exercising	 his   right  to   joint
     possession which is one of the main
     incidents	 of    co-ownership   of
     property. Such a dwelling house can
     in our opinion still be looked upon
     as a dwelling house belonging to an
     undivided	 family,   because   the
     members  of  the  family  have  not
     divided it	 amongst themselves  and
     are   in	 sole	enjoyment    and
     possession of  it to  the exclusion
     of the  stranger transferee who has
     only a  right to  partition. And so
     long as  the dwelling house has not
     been  completely	  alienated   to
     strangers as  was the case in Vaman
     Vishnu vs. Vasudeo Norbhat, 23 Bom.
     73, successive  transfers by  other
     co-sharer members	of the family do
     not alter	the factual  position in
     this respect, because the remaining
     member or	members	 of  the  family
     have the  right to	 hold  exclusive
     possession to  the exclusion of the
     stranger alienees.	 So long as that
     situation	 lasts,	  the	dwelling
     house, in our opinion, continues to
     be a dwelling house belonging to an
     undivided family."
The aforesaid  decision also  shows  that	so  long  as
decree for partition of a family dwelling house does not get
fully executed	and the	 shares	 of  co-owners	do  not	 get
separated by  metes and bounds and the co-owners are not put
in  actual   possession	 of  their  respective	shares,	 the
dwelling house	remains to be common dwelling house of joint
family and  so long  as that  attribute remains,
section  4
would continue	to ba  attracted. We  may now  deal with the
decision of the Division Bench of the Patna High Court which
has also  directly spoken  on the  point.
In
Harendra	Nath
Mukharjee vs. Shyam Sunder Kuer & Ors. (Supra) Mukharji, J.
,
speaking for the court had to consider this very question in
the light  of the  scheme of
Section 4
of the Partition Act.
It was	held that  application under
Section 4
could be made
at any	stage of the suit. Simply because an application had
been filed  after the  passing of the final decree, it could
not be	said that it was not maintainable on the ground that
the executing  court could  not go behind the decree. It was
not a  case of	going behind  the  decree.  It	was  further
observed that  family continued to be undivided qua dwelling
house till  possession was  delivered to  the members of the
family in execution of the final decree for partition and as
such, the application under
Section 4
was maintainable after
passing of the final decree and before the possession of the
dwelling house	in question  was delivered  to the  stranger
transferee.
The	 aforesaid decisions  of the  Calcutta	High
Court in  the cases of Satya Narayan Chakravarty (supra) and
Boto Krishna  Ghose
(supra)  as well  as the decision of the
Division Bench	of the	Patna High  Court  in  the  case  of
Harendra Nath  Mukharjee
(supra)  lay down the correct legal
position.
At this  stage, we	 may note one apprehension voiced by
Dr. Ghosh.  It was  submitted that  if this  view  regarding
applicability of
Section 4
is upheld, then it may very well
happen that  even after the decree for partition is executed
by one of the erstwhile co-owners and his transferee and the
stranger transferee  is actually  put in  possession of	 his
share  by   division  on  spot	by  metes  and	bounds,	 and
thereafter if such a transferee transfers his separate share
in the dwelling house which has been actually handed over to
him, the  co-owner  may	 still	file  an  application  under
Section	 4
of	 the   Act.  This  apprehension	 is  totally
misconceived.
Section  4
in  its applicability, as discussed
above, will  cover all	stages of  litigation in a partition
suit from its inception till its termination not only by the
final  decree	for  partition	but  also  by  its  complete
satisfaction and  discharge through  the assistance  of	 the
executing court;  once that happens the court itself becomes
functus officio	 and the  litigation will come to an end and
the concerned  parties thereafter will occupy the respective
portions of  the erstwhile  dwelling house as full owners of
their portions.	 The separated part of the dwelling house in
possession  of	such  stranger	transferee  cannot  then  be
treated as a part and parcel of the dwelling house belonging
to an  undivided family and at that stage the dwelling house
qua such  a stranger  would cease  to belong  to  any  joint
family and  it would  belong to	 different owners  occupying
their respective  portions in  a composite  building. Momemt
the  integrity	 of  common   dwelling	house  belonging  to
undivided family  is broken  by the  execution of  the final
partition decree  through the  intervention of the court and
the proceedings	 are ended,  there would remain no scope for
play of
Section 4
of the Act as there would be no subject-
matter of  a common dwelling house belonging to an undivided
family on which it could operate.
As a  result of  the aforesaid  discussion, it  must be
held that
Section 4
of the  Act can  validly be pressed in
service by  any of  the	 co-owners  of	the  dwelling  house
belonging to undivided family pending the suit for partition
till final decree is passed and thereafter even at the stage
of execution  of the  final decree  for partition so long as
the execution proceedings have not effectively ended and the
decree	for  partition	has  not  been	fully  executed	 and
satisfied by  putting the share-holders in actual possession
of their  respective shares.  Beyond  that  stage,  however,
Section 4
will go out of commission.
That leaves  out the  question as	to what	 final order
should be passed in these proceedings. As we have upheld the
applicability of
Section 4
to the  present proceedings the
application filed  by Respondent  No.1 is  held maintainable
and is	required to  be processed further. At this stage, on
the aforesaid  conclusion to which we have reached, it would
be necessary,  as directed  by the High Court, to remand the
proceedings under
Section 4
of the Act for being processed
further. However,  as the  proceedings are  very old and are
lingering on  since so	many years  in	the  court,  learned
counsel for  the respondents fairly suggested with a view to
putting an  end to  this litigation that Respondent No.1 who
had moved  the application  under
Section  4
of	 the Act  in
1986, is  prepared to pay Rs. four lakhs to the appellant in
full and  final satisfaction  of his Claim as a donee of the
share belonging	 to Smt. Radha Rani. This amount was offered
in the	light of the valuation of the share of the appellant
in the dwelling house as on 12.12.1985 when that application
was moved.
This  offer   was	made  by  learned  counsel  for	 the
respondents in	consultation with  Respondent No  1 who	 was
present in  the Court. Dr. Ghosh, learned senior counsel for
the appellant,	was also  agreeable to the said course being
adopted. In  our view this is a fair stand taken by both the
parties to put an end to this litigation which was triggered
off as early as on 5.9.1960. It is high time that it reaches
its final  terminus at	least after 36 years. We, therefore,
grant application  of Respondent No.1 under
Section 4
of the
Partition Act  and direct  him to  pay Rs.four	lakhs to the
appellant in full and final satisfaction of his claim and on
payment	 of   Rs.four  lakhs   by  Respondent  No.1  to	 the
appellant, the	appellant shall	 convey his right, title and
interest in the suit house to Respondent No.1 as per
Section
4
of  the Partition  Act. Rupees four lakhs shall be paid by
Respondent. No.1 to the appellant by instalments as under :-
1.	  Rupees two  lakhs will be paid
     by Respondent No.1 to the appellant
     on or before 31 .12.1996.
2.	  The  balance	 of  Rupees  two
     lakhs shall  be paid  by Respondent
     No.1 to  the appellant on or before
     31.3.1997.
It is  further directed  that in case of default of any
of these  instalments, the  amount  remaining  due  on	such
default shall  become payable  by  Respondent  No.1  to	 the
appellant with	18% interest  thereon from  the date cf this
judgment till the payment of such default amount. On payment
of the aforesaid amount of Rs.four lakhs and also subject to
payment of  interest on	 the requisite	amount, in  case  of
default, if any, as eforesaid, the right, title and interest
of the	appellant in  the suit	dwelling house	shall  stand
transferred  in	 full  ownership  Of  Respondent  No.1,	 the
applicant of
Section 4
of the	 Act and such share shall be
treated to  have been  sold by	the appellant  to Respondent
No.1. On  receipt of  the aforesaid  sale consideration, the
appellant shall	 also execute  necessary  sale	document  in
favour of  Respondent No.1. The cost of registration of such
sale document  shall be borne by Respondent No.1. Thereupon,
the application	 for execution	moved by the appellant shall
be treated as closed and the decratal claim of the appellant
qua the judgment-debtors will be treated as fully satisfied.
It is  further directed that the concerned parties shall not
alienate or  encumber in  any manner their respective shares
in the joint family dwelling house till the present order is
fully complied	with. The  concerned parties are directed to
carry out the aforesaid directions punctually. The appeal is
accordingly disposed  of with  no order	 as to	costs in the
facts and circumstances of the case.