[Cites
7
, Cited by
99
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Punjab vs National Organic Chemical Industries ... on 25 October, 1996
Equivalent citations: (1997) 1 BLJ 411, AIRONLINE 1996 SC 596, (1996) 10 JT 480 (SC), 1996 (11) SCC 613, (1996) 2 FAC 328, (1996) 4 CRIMES 169, (1997) 1 ALLCRILR 353, (1997) 1 CRICJ 60, (1997) 1 CURCRIR 55, (1997) 1 EASTCRIC 187, (1997) 1 EFR 52, (1997) 34 ALLCRIC 155, 1997 CALCRILR 33, 1997 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 1, 1997 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 246, 1997 CRILR(SC&MP) 246, 1997 FAJ 100, 1997 SCC (CRI) 312, (1997) SC CR R 296, (1998) 4 RECCRIR 578
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
,
S.P. Kurdukar
PETITIONER:
THE STATE OF PUNJAB

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
NATIONAL ORGANIC CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES LTD.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	25/10/1996

BENCH:
K. RAMASWAMY, S.P. KURDUKAR




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
O R D E R
     Leave granted.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
     This appeal  by special  leave arises against the order
of the	High Court of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh made on
March 13,  1992 in  Criminal Miscellaneous  No.6835-M(A)  of
1991.
The admitted  position is	that  the  respondent  is  a
manufacturer  of   Monocil,  an	  Insecticide.	 Insecticide
Inspector visited  the factory	of the	respondent on August
18, 1988  and had  taken two  samples of  Monocil from batch
No.0319, manufactured  in March,  1988	when  the  same	 was
exposed for  sale in  August, 1989. Admittedly, he had taken
two samples  thereof and  sent one  of the  samples  to	 the
Public Analyst.	 The Public  Analyst  in  his  report  dated
October 12,1988	 reported that	the  ingredients  used	were
33.02%	E.C.   as  against   the   specification   of	36%.
Accordingly,  it   was	not   in  conformity  with  the	 ISI
specifications.	 Consequently,	 he  opined   that  it	 was
adulterated. On	 receipt  thereof,  show  cause	 notice	 was
issued on  October 21,	1988 as to why the respondent should
not  be	  proceeded  against  for  sale	 of  an	 adulterated
insecticide. On	 receipt thereof, the respondent had given a
reply on  November 7,  1988 requesting the appellant to send
the second  sample to  Central Insecticides Laboratory so as
to enable  them "to  adduce evidence in controversion of the
allegations  made   against  us	 you  may  please  have	 the
retained/refer sample  analysed by  CIL", that was not done.
The complaint  was lad	on March 25, 1989 for prosecution of
the respondent in the Court of the Chef Judicial Magistrate,
Kapurthala.  The  respondent  challenged  the  same  in	 the
proceedings under
Section  482
of  the  Code	of  Criminal
Procedure. In  the impugned  order, the	 High Court has held
that the appellant had delayed in taking action; nor was the
sample in  the custody	of the appellant sent to the Central
Insecticides Laboratory;  the  appellant  had  deprived	 the
respondent of its valuable defence due to delay. Under these
circumstances,	the   proceedings  for	prosecution  of	 the
respondent is  a  waste	 of  public  time;  accordingly,  it
quashed the  proceedings. Though,  prima facie,	 we are	 not
impressed with	the reasoning  given by	 the High  Court, on
perusal and  conjoint reading of Section 21,22 and 24 of the
Act, we	 are of	 the view  that ultimate conclusion to quash
the complaint, in the circumstances, is right. The substance
of the	question is: whether the appellant has complied with
the statutory  requirements envisaged  under
Section 22
read
with
Section  24(3)
and	 (4) of	 the Act?
Section 21
of the
Insecticides Act, 1968 (for short, the 'Act') gives power to
the Insecticide	 Inspector  to	enter  and  search,  at	 all
reasonable times  and with  such assistance,  if any,  as he
considers necessary,  any premises in which he has reason to
believe that  an offence  under the  Act or  the rules	made
thereunder has been or is being or is about to be committed,
for the purpose of satisfying himself that the provisions of
the Act	 or the	 rules made  thereunder or the conditions of
any certificate of registration or licence issued thereunder
are being  complied with  etc. He  shall have power to enter
and search  the premises  and take  action, as	contemplated
under the  Act including to take samples of any insecticides
and send  such	samples	 for  analysis	to  the	 Insecticide
Analyst for its test in the prescribed manner. The procedure
has been  prescribed under
Section 22
of the Act. The manner
n which	 Insecticide Inspector	is empowered  to  seize	 the
record etc. and also to send such analysis to the Analyst is
provided therein. Subsection (5) & (6) provide the manner in
which the  samples of an insecticide for the purpose of test
or analysis, shall be taken; it reads as under:
"(5) Where an Insecticide Inspector
     takes a  sample of	 an  insecticide
     for  the	purpose	  of   test   or
     analysis, he  shall  intimate  such
     purpose   in    writing   in    the
     prescribed form  to the person from
     whom  he	takes  it  and,	 in  the
     presence of  such person  unless he
     willfully	absents	 himself,  shall
     divide  the   sample   into   three
     portions and  effectively seal  and
     suitably mark  the same  and permit
     such person to add his own seal and
     mark to  all or any of the portions
     so sealed and marked:
Provided that where the insecticide
     is made  up in  containers of small
     volume,  instead	of  dividing   a
     sample    as     aforesaid,     the
     Insecticide Inspector  may, and  if
     the insecticide  be such  that t is
     likely   to   deteriorate	 or   be
     otherwise	 damaged   by	exposure
     shall,  take   three  of  the  said
     containers after  suitably	 marking
     the  same	 and,  where  necessary,
     sealing them."
"(6)  The	 Insecticide   Inspector
     shall  restore  one  portion  of  a
     sample so divided or one container,
     as the  case may  be, to the person
     from whom	he takes  it  and  shall
     retain the remainder and dispose of
     the same as follows:
(i) one  portion or  container,  he
     shall   forthwith	 send	to   the
     Insecticide  Analyst  for	test  or
     analysis; and
(ii) the  second, he  shall produce
     to	  the	 court	 before	   which
     proceedings, f  any, are instituted
     in respect of the insecticide."
A	reading	 thereof  would	 indicate  that	 Insecticide
Inspector is  empowered to  take samples of insecticides for
the purpose  of test or analysis, as contemplated and in the
manner laid  down in  the Act and the rules. He shall divide
the sample  into three	portions and  effectively  seal	 and
suitably mark the same and permit such person to add his own
seal and  mark to  all or  any of the portions so sealed and
marked. Under  the proviso, where the insecticide is made up
in containers  of small	 volume instead of dividing a sample
as specified,  the Insecticide	Inspector may,	and  if	 the
insecticide be	such that  it is likely to deteriorate or be
otherwise damaged by exposure, shall, take three of the said
containers  after  suitably  marking  the  same	 and,  where
necessary,  sealing   them.  Under   sub-section  (6),	 the
Insecticide Inspector  thereafter shall	 restore one portion
of a sample so divided or one container, as the case may be,
to the	person from whom he takes it and he shall retain the
remainder and  dispose of  the same  as envisaged in clauses
(i) and	 (ii). After  the receipt  of the report, subsection
(3) of
Section 24
declares that "any document purporting to
be a  report signed  by an  Insecticide	 Analyst,  shall  be
evidence of  the facts	stated therein,	 and  such  evidence
shall be  conclusive unless  the person from whom the sample
was taken  has within  twenty-eight days of the receipt of a
copy of	 the report,  notified in  writing, the	 Insecticide
Inspector or  the Court	 before	 which	any  proceedings  in
respect of  the same  are pending, that he intends to adduce
evidence in  controversion of the report." Subsection (4) of
Section 24
envisages that  "unless the	 sample has  already
been  tested   or  analysed   in  the  Central	Insecticides
Laboratory,  where   a	person	has  under  sub-section	 (3)
notified   his	  intention   of    adducing   evidence	  in
controversion, the  Insecticide Analyst's  report, the court
may, of	 its own  motion or  n its discretion at the request
either of  the complainant  or of  the	accused,  cause	 the
sample of  the insecticide  produced before  the  magistrate
under Subsection  (6) of
Section 32
to be sent for test or
analysis to  the said  laboratory, which shall make the test
or analysis  and report	 in writing  signed by, or under the
authority, of  the  Director  of  the  Central	Insecticides
Laboratory, under  Subsection  (4)  shall  be  paid  by	 the
complainant or the accused, as the court shall direct. Thus,
it would  be clear  that after the inspection and seizure of
the insecticide,  the Insecticide Inspector shall divide the
insecticide into  three portions, as contemplated and in the
manner	prescribed  and	 deliver  one  such  sample  to	 the
manufacturer or	 person from whom insecticide was taken. One
should be sent to the Insecticide Analyst. After the receipt
of the	report, the  accused would be notified of the result
of the	report. Thereafter,  the complaint is required to be
lodged n  the Court.  At that stage, two options are open to
the accused.  The accused s entitled to have one copy of the
sample entrusted to him to have it notified to the Court for
proving to  be contrary	 to the	 conclusive evidence  of the
report of the analyst; after such a notification having been
given to  the Court,  he is  entitled to  have it  tested by
Central Insecticide  Laboratory and  adduce evidence  of the
report so  given. That	such certificate  by the Director of
the CIL	  has  a  proof	 of  his  defence  to  dislodge	 the
conclusiveness attached	 to the	 report of  the	 Insecticide
Analyst under  sub-section (3)	of
Section  24
.  The  other
option is,  after the  complaint is  laid in  the Court, the
copy of	 the sample  that is  lodged with  the Court  by the
Insecticides Inspector, would be requested to be sent by the
Court to  the CIL  and the report thus given by the Director
of CIL	shall be  conclusive evidence  as  to  the  quality,
consent and  facts stated therein. The cost thereof is to be
borne either by the complainant or by the accused, as may be
directed by this Court.
Unfortunately, in	this case,  the	 appellant  did	 not
adopt	the course as was required under the Act. Of course,
the respondent,	 without availing of the remedy of report by
Director of CIL, may not be entitled to plead deprivation of
the statutory  defence. But  the complaint  should be lodged
with utmost  dispatch so  that the  accused may opt to avail
the statutory  defence. The  appellant had  not given  third
sample to  the respondent.  As a  result, the respondent has
been deprived  of his  statutory  opportunity  to  have	 the
sample tested  by the  CIL. Resultantly,  the respondent has
been deprived of a valuable defence statutorily available to
him.  Under  these  circumstances,  we	think  that  further
proceedings in	the Court  of the  Chief Judicial Magistrate
would  be   rendered  fruitless.  Consequently,	 though	 for
different reasons  the complaint quashed by the Court may be
justified warranting no interference.
The appeal is accordingly dismissed.