[Cites
13
, Cited by
9
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Commissioner Of Income-Tax vs Veerabhadra Industries on 15 June, 1999
Equivalent citations: [1999]240ITR5(AP)
JUDGMENT
 

 S.V. Maruthi, J.
1. The Income-tax Appellate Tribunal referred the following question under
Section 256(1)
of the Income-tax Act, 1961, for the opinion of this court at the instance of the Revenue ;
"Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal is justified in holding that the assessee firm is entitled to the benefit of registration under the
Income-tax Act
, notwithstanding that the main activity of the assessee was letting out of godowns constructed by it and receiving rental income therefrom, for the assessment years 1979-80 and 1980-81 ?"
2. The facts in brief are that the godowns constructed by the assessee have been let out to Aries Agro Vet Industries (P.) Ltd., the rental income from the godowns has been shown as business income and deductions like depreciation and miscellaneous expenses are claimed. The Income-tax Officer assessed the rental income under the head "business" after allowing deductions claimed by the assessee for the assessment years 1979-80 and 1980-81. He also granted registration for the two assessment years. The Commissioner of Income-tax initiated proceedings under
Section 263
of the Income-tax Act. After considering the submissions of the assessee,

he cancelled the registration granted by the Income-tax Officer under
Section 185(1)
of the Act. He directed the Income-tax Officer to recompute the income from letting out of the godown as income from the property in accordance with
Sections 22
to
27
of the Act. Against that the assessee filed appeal. The Tribunal held that the rent received from letting out of the godown was income from property, however, it held that letting out of the godowns can be considered as business for the purpose of partnership and on this issue, the assessee is entitled for continuation of registration, in other words, notwithstanding the fact of the income of the assessee, the assessee is still entitled for registration under
Section 185(1)(a)
of the Act At the instance of the Revenue, the question extracted in the earlier paragraph was referred for the opinion of this court.
3. The main argument of learned counsel for the Revenue is that this court in
CIT v. Phabiomal and Sons
, has held that letting out of the building and realising the rents therefrom did not amount to carrying on of business and it was incidental to the ownership. In view of the judgment of this court, the order of the Tribunal having held that the income is to be taxed as income from property, ought not to have held that the assessee is entitled for registration under
Section 185(1)(a)
of the Act.
4. The assessee contended that he has entered into partnership for the purpose of carrying on construction and letting out the godowns and therefore its income is income from business and when once it is income from business, it is entitled for registration under
Section 185(1)(a)
of the Act.
In support of his contention he relied upon the following decisions :
Nauharchand Chananram v. CIT
;
CIT v. Vinod Bhargava
[1988] 169 ITR 549 (AP) ;
Prem Trading Co. v. CIT
; and
CIT v. Shaan Finance (P
.) Ltd. .
5. He vehemently contended that income from letting out of the godowns is business income and therefore they are entitled for registration under
Section 185(1)(a)
of the Act. It is difficult to accept the contention of learned counsel for the assessee because a single act of constructing a godown and letting it out cannot be treated as a business. The expression "business" contemplates continuous activity from year to year. There is no evidence that the assessee is continuing the activity of constructing godowns and letting them out from year to year. There is no material that he has constructed a godown in this year.
Therefore, the income from a simple letting out of the godown cannot be treated as business income for the purpose of the
Income-tax Act
. When once it is not business income the question of availing of benefit under
Section 185(1)(a)
of the Act does not arise. The income has to be assessed as income from property in accordance with
Sections 22
to
27
of the Income-tax Act. We are fortified in

our view by a judgment of this court in
Phabiomal and Sons
' case , wherein it was held that letting out a building and realising rents therefrom did not amount to carrying on of business.
It is true that the Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Nauharchand Chananram
's case , took the view that letting out of a factory amounts to carrying on business. With respect we disagree with the view expressed by the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
The judgment in
Ldkshmi Company
's case , is distinguishable from the facts of the case. It is a case where the assessee went on putting up additional constructions and letting it out to various tenants which was in the nature of business activity, because, as pointed out in the earlier paragraph, it is a case where there is continuous activity and therefore that judgment is distinguishable on facts.
6. The judgment of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in
Prem Trading Co.
's case , is also similar to the judgment of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Nauharchand Chananram
's case .
The judgment of this court in
Vinod Bhargava
's case [1988] 169 ITR 549 is a case where the assessee continued his building activity and had not leased out the entire building but only leased out the plant and machinery. Therefore, it was held that the assessee is entitled to the benefit under
Section 33
of the Act. The said judgment was confirmed by the Supreme Court.
7. The judgment in
First Leasing Co. of India Ltd.
's case  is also distinguishable on the facts. This is a case where the assessee claimed investment allowance under
Section 32A
of the Act. The scope and interpretation of
Section 32A
is settled and it was held that the assessee would be entitled for investment allowance under
Section 32A
of the Act. The scope of the judgment is entirely different and it has no application to the facts of this case.
8. In view of the above, we answer the question referred by the Tribunal in the negative and in favour of the Revenue. Reference is answered accordingly.