[Cites
24
, Cited by
7
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Janarasupally Kotiratnamma And Ors. on 27 August, 1999
Equivalent citations: 1999(6)ALT745
JUDGMENT
 

A. Gopal Reddy, J.
1. All these appeals by the Insurance Company arise out of the common orders and decrees dated 22-10-1994 in three batches of petitions i.e., (1) O.P.Nos.10/93, 11/93, 12/93 and 14/93; (2) O.P.Nos. 13/93 and 65/93; and (3) O.P.Nos. 15/93 and 16/93 on the file of I Additional District Judge-cum-Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, Karimnagar. As the question of law involved in all these appeals is one and the same, 1 propose to dispose them of by this common judgment.
2. C.M.A.Nos. 30, 32, 31 and 34 of 1995 which arise out of O.P. Nos. 10/93, 12/93, 11/93 and 14/93 respectively are filed by the same claimants. O.P.No. 10/93 is filed Under
Section 166
of the Motor Vehicles Act (for short 'the Act') and O.P.Nos. 12/93 is filed Under
Section 140
of the Act for the death of Seenu, s/o claimant No. 1 in the above O.Ps. O.P.Nos. 11/93 and 14/93 are filed Under
Sections 166
and
140
of the Act by the husband of the first respondent herein and father of respondents 2 and 3 herein. C.M.A. Nos. 33/95 and 37/95 arise out of O.P.Nos. 13/93 and 65/93 filed Under
Sections 166
and
140
of the Act, by the wife and two sons and a daughter, for the death of Subba Rao. Similarly, C.M.A.Nos. 35/95 and 36/95 which arise out of O.P.Nos. 15/93 and 16/93 filed Under
Sections 166
and
140
of the Act respectively by the husband and daughter for the death of Marthamma, w/o respondent No. 1 herein.
3. The facts leading to the filing of the O.Ps. are as follows: On 14-12-1991 the deceased Janarasupalli Veeraiah and his son Sreenu along with Subba Rao and Marthamma went for cooli work to the respondents 1 and 2 in all the O.Ps. to cut the tobacco in the fields. After cutting the tobacco, they loaded the same in the trailer bearing registration No. AP TV 739 which was attached to tractor bearing No. AP 15 T 8685. The deceased travelled in the same tractor-cum-trailer for the purpose of unloading and processing the tobacco in the house of R-1 and R-2. The first respondent is the driver and the second respondent is the owner of the tractor. The tractor is insured with the third respondent-Insurance Company. While proceeding to the house around 11 A.M. the driver drove the tractor in rash and negligent manner through the fields. Due to that the trailer came into contact with live electrical line and the deceased died on the spot. Thus, the accident occurred due to the negligence of the driver of the tractor. The legal representatives of the deceased filed the above O.Ps claiming compensation both Under
Sections 166
and
140
of the Act.
4. The driver and owner of the vehicle remained ex parte.
5. The third respondent-Insurance Company filed separate counters denying all the allegations. It is pleaded that the trailer was not at all insured with it and as the deceased who were sitting in the trailer came into contact with live electrical wires and died, the Insurance Company is not liable to pay any compensation.
6. To prove the claims, the claimant No. 1 in O.P.Nos. 10/93, 11/93, 12/93 and 14/93 examined herself as P.W. 1 and got marked Exs. A-1 to A-4. No witness was examined on behalf of the Insurance Company, but, Ex.B-1, policy, was marked on behalf of the Insurance Company. Similarly, the first claimant in O.P.Nos. 13/93 and 65/93 examined herself as P.W. 1 and got marked Exs. A-1 and A-2. No witness was examined on behalf of respondent But Ex. B-1 was marked on behalf of the Insurance Company. The claimant No. 1 in O.P.Nos. 15/93 and 16/93 himself examined as P.W. 1 and got marked Exs. A-1 and A-2. No witness was examined on behalf of the Insurance Company, but Ex.B-1 policy was marked.
7. The learned Tribunal after analysing the evidence, oral and documentary, adduced by both parties, came to the conclusion that the accident was occurred due to the negligence of the driver of the tractor, and awarded a sum of Rs. 40,000/- for the death of Sreenu in O.P.Nos. 10/93 and 12/93 including the compensation awarded under No-fault liability and the Tribunal awarded a sum of Rs. 68,000/-, including the compensation awarded under No-fault liability, for the death of Veeraiah in O.P.Nos. 11/93 and 14/93. Similarly, in O.P.Nos. 13/93 and 65/93 which were filed for the death of Subba Rao, the Tribunal awarded Rs. 80,000/- including the compensation awarded under No-fault liability and Rs. 50,000/- in O.P.Nos. 15/93 and 16/93 which were filed for the death of deceased Marthamma.
8. Sri K.L.N. Rao, learned Standing Counsel appearing for the Insurance Company contended that admittedly the tractor was insured, but the trailer in which the deceased were travelling was not insured along with the tractor, therefore, tine Insurance Company is not liable to pay the compensation including under No-fault liability. He further contended that unless the Insurance Company undertakes to indemnify the owner by insuring the trailer, no liability can be fastened on the Insurance Company merely because the trailer was pulled by the tractor. He further contended that the trailer is also a motor vehicle as defined Under
Section 2(28)
of the Act and the same is liable to be insured as per
Sections 146
and
147
of the Act.
In support of his contentions, he relies upon the judgments in
Oriental Insurance Company Limited v. N. Chandrashekara
, 1997 ACJ 512 (Karnataka) and Parsottambhai Kanbhai and Ors. v. Panchiben Lias Ratanben and Ors., 1977 ACJ 441 (SC) On the other hand, learned Counsel for the respondents-claimants contends that the tractor which is attached to the trailer and which is pulled by the tractor constitutes a goods vehicle and once the tractor is insured, it is immaterial whether the trailer is insured or not and if any accident occurred dueto the use of the said tractor-cum-trailer, the insurance company cannot escape from its liability.
In support of his contentions, he relied upon judgments in
New India Insurance Company Limited v. Anasurya
, 1990 (
2) ALT 667 and Divisional Manager, New India Assurance Co. Ltd v. T. Gurava Reddy
, . He further contended that no separate insurance is required for the trailer as it is pulled by the tractor which was insured with the Insurance Company. Learned Counsel further submits that admittedly the accident was occurred on account of the rash and negligent driving of the driver of the tractor and the coolies who were travelling in the trailer came into contact with the live electrical wire and died on the spot. Hence, the Insurance Company is liable to pay the compensation in view of the policy insuring the tractor.
9. In view of the rival contentions of the parties, the point that arises for consideration is whether the trailer is also a motor vehicle, if only both are insured the Insurance Company would be liable against claims arising out of the use of tractor and trailer or not.
10. It is relevant to refer to the definitions of the words 'motor vehicle', 'tractor' and 'trailer' as given in Sub-
sections 28
, 44 and
46
of
Section 2
of the Act.
"2(28)'motor vehicle means any mechanically propelled vehicle adapted for use upon roads whether the power of propulsion is transmitted thereto from an external or internal source and includes a chassis to which a body has not been attached and a trailer; but does not include a vehicle running upon fixed rails or a vehicle of a special type adapted for use only in factory or in any other enclosed premises or a vehicle having less than four wheels fitted with engine capacity of not exceeding thirty five cubic centimetres."
"2(44) 'tractor' means a motor vehicle which is not itself constructed to carry and load 'other than equipment used for the purpose of propulsion; but excludes a road-roller."
"2(46) 'trailer' means any vehicle other than a semi-trailer and a side car, drawn or intended to be drawn by a motor vehicle."
11. The Karnataka High Court in the case of
N. Chandrashekara
(supra) set aside the order passed by the Tribunal in which the Tribunal held that as the trailer cannot move itself, the non-insurance of the trailer would not take away the liability of the insurer of the tractor. While setting aside the order passed by the Tribunal, the Karnataka High Court held thus:
"It is patent that in view of the definition of a 'motor vehicle' even a trailer must be deemed to be a motor vehicle.
Section 94
lays down that no person shall use except as a passenger or cause or allow any other person to use a motor vehicle in a public place unless there is in force in relation to the use of the vehicle by that person or that other person, as the case may be, a policy of insurance complying with requirements of this Chapter. As a trailer is also a motor vehicle, the statute requires that it should also be insured before it can be used in a public place. As a trailer can move only if it is drawn by a tractor and if it is to be held that the insurer of the tractor is liable to indemnify the owner of the tractor as well as the trailer for any compensation payable on account of an accident arising out of the use of both tractor and trailer, even if the trailer is not insured, then the statutory provisions requiring even a trailer to be insured becomes redundant. An interpretation which would render some provisions of the statute redundant should be avoided."
12. In Parsottambhai Kanbhai's case (supra), their Lordships Justice D.A. Desai and Justice A.M. Ahmadi (as he then was) held that as the trailer is included in the expression 'motor vehicle', it was required to be insured and the law imposes an obligation for taking out insurance against the third party risks in respect of a motor vehicle, it became necessary to take insurance in respect of the tractor and trailer. Refusing the contention of the Insurance Company that the trailer being not a prime-mover, not having locomotion, the Insurance Company of the trailer would not be liable as the accident occurred when the trailer was being pulled by the tractor and the driver of the tractor was shown to be negligent. It is a very interesting argument for this reason that if Mr. Chhatrapati is wholly right, then the trailer need not be insured at all. A trailer can never be driven by itself. It has no locomotion. It can be attached to a tractor. It can be attached to something which can pull it. The driver would always be on that part of the vehicle which provides motion to the trailer. Therefore, the trailer by itself cannot be used in a public place and by its use, no accident can occur and if some accident occurs, it would not be on account of the fault of the driver because the trailer would have no driver of its own. We fail to follow and where to go. Therefore, it is not possible to accept the contention of Mr. Chhatrapati and it must be negatived.
13.
In
Oriental Insurance Company Ltd., v. Hanumantappa
, 1992 ACJ 1083 (Karnataka) the Division Bench of Karnataka High Court after considering the
Sections 2(18)
,
2(30)
and
2(32)
and
Section 95
of Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (
Sections 2(14)
,
2(44)
,
2(46)
and
147
of 1988 Act) held that when a tractor-trailer together constitute a transport vehicle i.e., a goods vehicle covering of tractor-trailer under commercial vehicle tariffs support this conclusion. The Division
Bench further held
that the Insurance Company with which tractor and trailer attached thereto are insured is liable to pay compensation inrespect of death of or bodily injury to the employees travelling in the tractor-trailer.
Similar view was taken by this Court in
Anasurya
's case (supra).
14. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Skandia Insurance Company Limited v. Kokilaben Chandravadan
, AIR 1987 SC 1184 while interpreting
Section 96
of Motor Vehicles Act (4 of 1939) (
Section 149
of 1988 Act) observed that the Legislature has insisted and made it incumbent on the user of a motor vehicle to be armed with an insurance policy covering third party risks which is in conformity with the provisions enacted by the Legislature.
Section 146
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 makes it obligatory on the part of the owner of a motor vehicle that unless he insures the vehicle, the same cannot be used in public places. Admittedly, in the present cases, the labourers who were travelling in the trailer sitting on the tobacco contacted with live electrical wire and said trailer was not insured with the Insurance Company as per Ex. B-1, policy. The Tribunal in O.P.Nos. 10/93 and batch held that though the trailer appears to have not been insured, it is attached to the tractor which was insured with the Insurance Company and it was the tractor which moves and drags the trailer and therefore the accident caused for the tractor must be deemed that it included the trailer also.
In the case of
Anasurya
(supra) this Court has not considered the effect of not insuring the trailer with the Insurance Company. But in fact the question which fell for consideration was whether the tractor was used for agricultural purpose or not and when the tractor-cum-trailer i.e., goods vehicle is insured for the purpose of agricultural operations, carrying the coolies for loading and unloading is incidental to the purpose of agricultural operations. This Hon'ble Court held that carrying coolies engaged for agricultural operations in a goods vehicle and there is admittedly a contract of insurance the Insurance Company is liable.
The Curava Reddy
's case (supra) cited by the learned Counsel for the respondents-claimants has no relevancy to the facts of the present cases.
In fact
the said judgment
is contrary to the-law declared by the Apex Court in
Shankarayya and Anr. v. United India Insurance Company Ltd.
, 1998 (8) Supreme 579
15. In view of the foregoing discussion, it must be held that once tine trailer which is not insured with the Insurance Company and the deceased who were travelling in the said trailer met with an accident and died, the Insurance Company to whom the tractor is insured is not liable as the accident would not be caused by tractor but a goods vehicle i.e., trailer. If both the tractor and trailer are insured, the insurer would be liable to indemnify the owner against the claims arising out of use of tractor and trailer. This view of mine is in conformity with the other statutory provisions which require the trailer to be insured Under
Sections 146
,
147
and
148
of the Act. Admittedly, under Ex.B-1 policy, the Insurance Company has not undertook any liability for the trailer attached to the tractor. Therefore, the Insurance Company cannot be fastened with any liability.
16. In the result, all the appeals are allowed and the judgments and awards of the Tribunal are modified by setting aside that portion by which the appellant/Insurance Company is also made liable to pay the compensation. The rest of the Judgments and Awards against the owner and driver are not disturbed.