[Cites
21
, Cited by
18
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
The Revenue Divisional Officer, Guntur vs Vasireddy Rama Bhanu Bhupal And Ors. on 27 December, 1967
Equivalent citations: AIR1970AP262, AIR 1970 ANDHRA PRADESH 262, (1968) 2 ANDH WR 491, (1968) 2 ANDHLT 179, ILR (1969) ANDHRA PRA 983
Author:
P. Jaganmohan Reddy
Bench:
P. Jaganmohan Reddy
JUDGMENT

 

 Kuppuswami, J.
1. This  appeal  arises out of  proceedings for the acquisition of  10,900  Sq.  feet of land in T.  S.  No.  79  of   Guntur town.   The said land was required by the Guntur  Municipality for  the  High  level  Service   Reservoir for Guntur Water  Supply  Scheme.   The  Commissioner  of the Guntur  Municipality by his letter  D/- 16-9-1953  applied  for the acquisition  of that land for the above purpose.  Even  prior to the request by the Commissioner the Municipality seems to have taken possession of the land  on  30-11-1950.  In  response to the Commissioner's  request,  proceedings for the acquisition of the land  were started under the
Land  Acquisition  Act
(hereinafter referred to as "the  Act")  and  notification under
Section  4(1)
of the Act was published on  12-4-1956.   The  Land  Acquisition Officer gave his award on  31-3-1958,  whereby he assessed the  value of the land  at  Rs.  8  per sq yard.  he  awarded 15  per cent solatium on the said  amount and awarded interest on the  compensation  at 6  per cent from  30-11-1950   when the land was taken possession of by the Municipality till  31-3-1958,  the date of award.  The total  compensation  awarded  was  Rs.  16,044-80  .  As the respondents  herein requested that a reference be made  under
S.  18
of the Act as they claimed  compensation at the rate of  Rs.  18 per Sq. yard  and also disputed the extent of the  site acquired the Land  Acquisition  Officer made a reference  to the Court of the Subordinate  Judge.  Guntur  and that reference was numbered as  O.  P.  No.  33/59.
2.     The  learned Subordinate Judge  after considering the evidence oral  and documentary,  in the case came to the conclusion that the reasonable price payable for the site was Rs.  8  per sq. yard for a small  triangular bit of  an extent of  208  sq  yards  and  Rs.  15  per sq.  yard for the remaining area.
3.    The contention regarding the difference in extent was given   up before the learned subordinate Judge.  On the above valuation he held that the  enhanced compensation payable was Rs.  7021-78  and  solatium on this amount was Rs.  1053-25.   He awarded interest at  6  per cent per annum  on the enhanced compensation  from  30-11-1950  till the date of payment.  The referring officer,  namely the Revenue  Divisional  Officer   Guntur  has preferred the above appeal  against the judgment of the learned Subordinate Judge.  Three contentions are raised in the   appeal,  namely.
1.  that the rate awarded by the court is excessive and it should have adopted the rate of  Rs.  8  per sq.  yard as given in the award;
2.  interest ought to have been granted on the enhanced compensation  from the date of award only and not from  30-11-1950,  and
3.  the rate of interest should have  been 4  per cent and not 6  per cent per annum.
4.     The appeal first came up before our learned brother Krishna  Rao  J.   It was  contended before him by the learned  Government Pleader that the Government   had not taken possession in pursuance of the acquisition though the award  was passed on  31-3-1958  and therefore  there is no liability at all on the part of the Government to pay interest.  He  agreed with that contention but his attention was drawn to an  unreported decision of a bench  of this  Court in  F.  A.  No.  78/1/1958  D/-  23-8-1966   (Andh  Pra)  dealing with a case under the Hyderabad  Land  Acquisition  Act where it was held    that the claimant  was entitled to interest  at least from the date of notification  under
section  4(1)
of the Act.  As it was contended  that this ruling  is opposed to the plain language of the Act and requires reconsideration he referred this case for decision  by a Division Bench.  The appeal,  thereupon came up for hearing before a Division Bench  consisting of Mr.  Justices  Barasimham  and  Mr.  Justice Vaidya.
5.     As they felt  that the question regarding  interest requires consideration by a Full Bench  they formulated the following  points for decision by the Full Bench:
"Whether the claimants are entitled to interest under the Act from  30-11-1950  when the Municipality is said to have taken possession  "not  under  the Act but  by private negotiation"   (vide  the Reference to  Court)  or from the date of  Notification under
section  4(1)
of the  Act,  Viz.,  12-4-1956  or from the  date of making the award  viz.,  31-3-1958  or from any subsequent date  under the  Act?"
6.    They  however added that as  the main question  is being referred to the Full  Bench  it was  expedient to refer the entire case for decision by the  Full  Bench.  In the above circumstances the entire appeal is before us.
7.     The first contention that is ruged by the learned government pleader is that the proper value   of  the land on the date of acquisition is  Rs.  8  per sq.  yard  as  stated in the award and thatthe granting  of  Rs.  15  per sq.  yard for a major portion  of the site is not warranted by the evidence on record.   The learned Subordinate Judge made  an inspection of the acquired site.  He found that the land was  attractive as a house site and there was  possibility of the property being used as  such site and several buildings were  likely to be constructed upon it in the near  future.  He,  therefore,  held that the land  was not to be valued merely by reference  to the use to which it was being put to  at the time of acquisition but also by  reference to the uses to which it was  capable  of being put in the near future.  The site in  question abuts two  roads running north and south and is very  near the ring road which  is a very important  road running round Guntur.   The value  of the land has naturally to be ascertained  with reference to the sale deeds of sites  situate near the locality and executed at or about the time of the acquisition.  Ex.  A-1 is a sale -deed dated  16-10-1950  in respect of a site about one furlong to the north  of the acquired site,  the value of which works out at  Rs.  13-8-0  per sq.  yard.  The Court below felt  that on this  basis,  the rate of Rs.  15  per  sq.  yard on 12-4-1956,  the date of acquisition for the  site acquired would not be unreasonable.  In this connection  it has to be noticed that  the  High  Court    of Andhra  was located in Guntur  in July, 1954,  and the value of the sites at Guntur began to raise very much  by about that time.  Even subsequently  the town of Guntur  has been extending  year by year and the value of the sites has been increasing steadily.
8.     Another sale-deed  relied on by the claimants was Ex.  A-3,  dated  22-4-1956.  The rate according to this sale-deed is  Rs.  30 per  sq.  yard.   Though this sale-deed is nearer in date to the date in question,  the court below did not take this  as a basis  as these is related to shopping locality though only one furlong from the acquired site.   The learned Government  pleader's    main objection to the judgment  of the court  below on this aspect  of the matter is that the court below ignored Exs.  B-1  &  B-2  dated  30-11-1953  and 15-4-1954  respectively which are much nearer  in date to the date  of acquisition than Ex.  A-1  dated  16-10-1950.
9.      We do not agree that these two  sale-deeds relied on by the learned Government Pleader were not considered by the Court below.   The court below referred  to Ex.  B-2  and stated that this is a vacant site and low-lying area and that on the site under  Ex.  B-1  there are  small huts.  The  rate for the site  under  Ex.  B-2  is Rs.  8-6-0 per sq.  yard and  B-1  is Rs.  8.
10.     The Court  below pointed out that the locality  of the site in question is a neat one unlike the locality of the sites  covered by  Exs.  B-1  and B-2.  The learned Judge was therefore right in not proceeding on the basis of Ex.  B-1  and  B-2.
In considering the adequacy of the amount that has been awarded by a court or tribunal which has got to assess the exact amount,  it is a well settled principle that  an appellate court ought not to interfere except on the basis of a fundamental or  radical  error of principle made by the  trial court  (Vide decision in
Venkamma  v.  Collector  West  Godavari
,  .
This decision was followed by this court in
Revenue  Divisional  Officer  v.  Appalaswami
,  ).
11.      We are not satisfied that there has been any error on principle justifying any interference  by the appellate Court.  On the other hand,  we are of the opinion that the compensation awarded by the court below is just and reasonable in the circumstances of the case.
12.   The next contention which  as has already been observed necessitated the reference  to a Full bench is that interest can be awarded on the enhanced amount of the compensation awarded by the Court  only form the date of the award.   Though  it seems to have been argued before Mr.  Justice Krishnarao that  as the possession was taken only by the Municipality under private negotiations and that the Government  has not taken  possession under the Act,  no interest at all was payable by the Government for any period.   The argument before us it that interest  should have been awarded from the date of the award.  To appreciate this contention it is necessary to set out the relevant provisions  of the Act.
Section  16
.
"When the Collector has made an award  under
Section  11
he may take possession of the land,  which shall thereupon  vest absolutely in the Government free from all encumbrances."
Section  28
:
"If the sum which in the opinion of the court,  the Collector ought to have awarded as compensation is in excess  of the sum which the Collector did award  as compensation the award of the court may direct that the  Collector shall pay  interest  on such excess  at the rate of four per cent per annum  from the date on which he took  possession of the land to the date of payment of such  excess into court.'

 

It is therefore argued that
Section  28
directs the award of interest  of the enhanced compensation  only from the date  when the Collector took possession of the land to the date   of payment of such excess into court.  It is argued that taking possession of the land under  this section could only mean taking possession of the land in pursuance of or under  the Act  and it is only from the date of taking such possession that interest becomes payable under this section.  Even tough the  Government according to the Government  pleader  did not take possession of the land under the act at any time  it was  submitted that having   regard   to
Section  16
of the Act it must be deemed that the  Government took possession of the land  only immediately after the Collector made  the award  i.e.  on  31-3-1958.  We do not see any force in this submission.
Section  28
of the Act states that the collector  shall pay interest  from the date on which he took possession of the land.  It does not say that the collector should pay interest only from the date on which he takes  possession under the Act.  On  a plain  reading of the section it appears to us that the interest is payable from the  date when the Collector takes possession,  whether he takes possession under any of the provisions of the Act or by private  negotiations or otherwise in anticipation of valid proceedings under the Act for the acquisition of the land  in question.  That
section  28
of the Act has been so understood is also clear form the  provision of Chapter  XXVI  of the Land  Acquisition Manual  relating to payment of interest on the compensation awarded.  Under paragraph  3  or the said  Chapter it is stated  as follows:
"  Independently of the Land  Acquisition Act,  it may become necessary to take possession of a  land urgently. . .     The  Officer entering upon   the  land should record a statement from the owner agreeing to his entry.  When he takes possession he should if possible  obtain a further statement that the owner will not claim interest form the date of taking possession.  In cases in which the owner declines to give such further statement  interest on the amount  of compensation should  be included in the award."
Even assuming that  the expression 'taking possession of the land'  under
Section  28
of the Act,  would only mean taking possession of the land under or in pursuance of  the Act we do not see any  reason why  the taking of  possession of the land prior  to the Land  Acquisition proceedings without any objection by the owner (in this  case by private negotiation with his consent)  followed by valid proceedings under the Act   should not  be held to be taking possession of the land under the  Act.
The  Act
does not prescribe when the Collector  representing the Government should take  possession of the land under the Act.
The  Act
does not prescribe when the Collector  representing the Government should take possession of the land.  Under
Section  16
of the Act he may take  possession after he has made an award,  but there is nothing in that section or in any  other provision of the Act,  which prevents the  collector form taking possession of the  land earlier with the consent of the owner.  On the other hand there are  provisions in the Act,  for instance,
S.  17
which authorises the Collector,  in case  of urgency to take possession of any waste  or arable land needed for public purposes,  after expiration of fifteen days from the publication of the notice mentioned in
Section  9(1)
of the Act.   The fact that on  30-1-1950  it was the Municipality that took  possession and not the Government would not make any difference as the acquisition  of the land by the  government was at the instance and for the purpose of the Municipality and it is also stated in the award that the cost of acquisition would be met from the amount deposited by the Municipality under Works  Deposit in the name of the Revenue  Divisional  Officer,  Guntur.   Therefore no distinction  can be made between the  possession of the Municipality and the possession of the  Government in the circumstnaces of this  case.
13.   At any  rate we are  of the opinion that interest is payable on equitable principles on the compensation amount form the date when the owner was deprived of his possession on  30-11-1950.   There is abundant authority which will be  refereed to  presently,  for the award of interest from the date of taking possession,  even  though the possession was taken long  prior to the date of notification for acquisition or of the award.  It is a well established principle that   on a contract for  sale and purchase of land,  the purchaser  has to pay interest on the purchase  money from the date of taking possession.   This principle is recognised by
S.  55  (4)
of the Transfer of   Property  Act,  which  states that where the ownership of the property has passed to the buyer he is  bound to pay interest  on the purchase  money or nay part thereof  remaining unpaid from the date  on which  the possession has been delivered.  Even  in cases to which
S.  55  (4)  (a)
of the  Transfer of Property Act is,  in terms not applicable it has been held that interest  in payable form the date  of taking possession on equitable principles.  This is State  v. A.  P.  Mills  Co.,  Air  1957  Andh  pra  34  where  in anticipation of the transfer of the property the prospective buyer was put in possession of the property  it was held  that
Section  55  (4)    (a)
of the T.  P.  Act has no  application as there  was no completed  transfer.  Nevertheless it was held that  the situation I governed by the equitable  principle which requires the buyer    to pay interest on his purchase money  from the date of taking possession and  which is based on an implied agreement  arising out of the fact of taking over possession without paying the consideration amount.   The Division Bench consisting of Subbarao, C.  J.,  (as  he then was)  and Bhimasankaram  J.,  pointed out that this  principle is quite independent of the provisions of the transfer of
Property Act
.  After referring to the English  decisions  on this subject,  they  pointed out that this  equitable principle was applied in India  under similar circumstances.  In particular,  they referred to the decision of the  Privy  Council in Ratanalal  Chunilal  v.  Municipal  Commissioner for the City of  Bombay,  ILR  43  Bom  181 =  (AIR  1918  PC  129 )  where the Judicial Committee observed as follows:
"The Board  is of opinion that the right to interest depends upon the following  broad and clear consideration.  unless there be something in the contract  of parties which necessarily imports the opposite,  the date when one party enters into  possession of the property of another is the property date from which interest on  the unpaid price should run.  On the one  hand the new  owner has possession,  use and fruits,  on the other the former  owner,  parting with these has interest on the  price.  This  is sound in principle and authority fully warrants  it.'

 

The same principle holds good in the case of compulsory purchase also.  In  Inglewood Publp  Co.  v.  New  Brunswick  Electric Power Commission.   AIR  1928  PC  287  possession was taken on  13-19-1920  in pursuance of the New  Brunswick  Electric  Power  Act,  1920.   The award  was  made on the  30th  October  1926,  and on appeal from the award the Supreme  Court of New  Brunswick  awarded interest from the date of taking possession i.e.,  from  13-10-1920.   The allowance of  interest from that date was  questioned before the privy  Council.  Lord  Warrington  of Clyffee  delivering the judgment of the Board stated as follows:
"it is true that the appropriation under the Act in question is not effected for  private gain, but for the good of the public at large,  but for all this the owner is deprived of his property n this case as much as in the other,  and the rule has  long been accepted in the interpretation of statutes that they are not to be held  to deprive individuals of property  without  compensation unless the intention to  do so is made quite clear.  The statute in the  present case contains nothing which  indicates such an intention.  The right to  receive interest takes the place of the  right to retain possession and is within the rule.
The  respondents in their case state that they expropriated the land on  13-10-1920,  the  date from which the appeal  division directed the interest to be calculated and that date may be taken as correct."
In Vallabhadas  v.  Development Officer,  Bandra,  AIR  1929  PC  163  the Government  took possession on  27-11-1919  and proceeded to erect certain  building  without  the necessary notification which was not  served until  4-11-1920  when the Government  notified under  S  6  of the Act,  a declaration that the land was required  for a public purpose.   The main question  for consideration before their Lordship  of the Privy  Council  was whether the appellant was entitled to have the building  erected by the Government included in the valuation.   The Assistant Judge held that the appellant was not so entitled but that he was entitled to compensation for the occupation of the lands by the officials  in  1919 before notification on  4-11-1920  and awarded such compensation in the form  of interest on the value of the land computed from  27-11-1919  when the Government took possession.   Their   Lordships of the Privy Council  held that under  the circumstances of this case the Government Officials were in possession 'not as mere trespassers'  but  under such a  colour of title that the buildings erected  by them on the land ought not to be included in the valuation  as having become the property of the landowner.  Regarding interest they observed as follows;
"the justice of the case was met by holding that the appellant was entitled to compensation for the occupation of the land by  the officials before the notification  on 4-11-1920  which as before stated, was awarded in the form of interest in the value of the land computed from   27-11-1919  when   the Government took possession."
14.     It is  therefore seen that even in the above case the Privy council  considered it just to award interest from the date of taking possession by the Government even though the award was passed much later.  it is no doubt true,  as submitted by the  Government  Pleader that there was no argument addressed on the  right to award such interest from that  date.  But  it is to be observed that their Lordships of the Privy  Council  did not consider  the award of interest from  the  date of taking possession as possession as opposed to the Provisions of the Act.
15.
In  revenue
Divisional  Officer v.   Venkatarama
.  AIR  1936  Mad  1999  the  Subordinate  Judge  granted  interest  at  6%  as compensation for the period of occupation by the Public  Works   Department Officers prior to the award,  that is,  from  16-1-1925  to  31-12-1927.  In that case as  urgent possession was required the consent of the  owner had been obtained.  it  was contended before their  Lordships  that the award of interest was contrary  to the revisions of the  Act.  After referring to the decision of the Privy  Council  in Air  1929  PC  163  their Lordships  stated---
"That  furnishes a precedent for the award of interest by way of compensation in the circumstances which are very  similar to the present case.'

 

They observed---
"As  pointed  out in  1928  A.  C.  492 =  (AIR  1928  PC  287)  the  right to receive interest takes the place of the right to retain possession.  We  think  that the principle of those cases can be applied to the present case.
Section  34
of the Act says  that the amount of compensation if knot  paid on or before taking possession of the  land,  shall carry interest at rate  of  6%  per annum from  the  time of taking possession until the compensation  money is paid."
Their  Lordships  added;
"No doubt
Section  34
contemplates an award having been made.   But  the foundation of the section is that when compensation is payable and has not been paid,  interest for on-payment must be  given  from the date of taking possession."
Though  this  decision is with respect to interest awarded by the Officer under
Section  34
with regard to compensation awarded by him.  we do not think that there is any difference in principle between the case of interest payable under
section  34
of the Act,  on the compensation awarded by the officer and the interest payable on the excess compensation awarded by the court under
S.  28
of the Act,  as in both cases the language is similar.
16.       In  Satinder Singh  v.  Umarao  Singh,   it was held that---
"Where the lands are acquired under the
Land Acquisition Act
and the claimants are awarded compensation, the claimants are entitled  to interest on the  amount of the  compensation for the period between the taking of the  possession of the land  by the  State and the payment of compensation by it to the claimants."
In that case a notification for the acquisition was made on  23rd  March,  1948  but no action was taken in pursuance of the notification.  Meanwhile the Punjab  legislature passed the East  Punjab  Requisition   of Immovable Property  (Temporary  Powers)  Act  48  of  1948.  Under  the provisions of that  Act the Government requisitioned the land in question for the  purpose of resettling the persons who  were likely to be evicted from their  lands  as a result of the construction of the new  Capital.  It was contended that under this act it was not permissible to award  interest on the compensation and this contention was rejected by the High Court.  Their Lordships of the Supreme  Court,  however  held that there was nothing in the act which excludes the  application of the general  rule in the matter of payment of interest.  Discussing the general  grounds  and principles regarding awarding  of interest, their Lordships stated as follows:
"What then is the contention raised by the claimants?  They  contend that their  immovable property has been acquired by the State and the State has taken possession of it.  Thus they have been deprived of the right to receive the income  from the property and there is a time lag between the taking of the possession by the State  and the payment of compensation by it to the claimants.  During this period they have been deprived of the income of the property and they have  not been able to receive  interest from the amount of compensation.   Stated broadly the act of taking possession of immovable property generally  implies an agreement to pay interest on the value of the property and it is on this  principle that a claim for  interest is made against the State."
Then they proceeded to refer to the decisions of the House of  Lords  and  the  Privy  Council  in Swift and  Co.  v.  Board of Trade,  1925  AC  520,  Birch  v.  Joy  (1852)  3  HLC  565  and  AIR  1928  PC  287  and  observed:
"it would thus   be noticed that the claim for interest proceeds on the assumption that when the owner of immovable  property loses possession of it he is entitled to claim interest in place of right  to retain possession."
In  province  of
Bengal  v.  Pawn  Kissen  Law  &  Co.
,   where the land was acquired under the
Defence of  India  Act
(1939)  it was held that the arbitrator can award  interest to the person whose  land has been acquired,  on the price of the land and the interest will urn  from  the date when the land is taken  possession of till  the date  on which  the  Land  Acquisition  Collector  draws up the award and makes an offer to the person.
17.       In  Smt.  Swarnamayi  v.  land  Acquisition Collector,   it was held that so far as interest is concerned,  it makes no difference whether   the possession is taken  under the land  Acquisition Act or independently  of it.  In either  case the owner becomes entitled to interest on the basis of deprivation of his property without immediate  payment of compensation.  After referring to several  of the decisions on this subject,  their  Lordships said---
"The  learned Advocate  General  argues  that  the State had taken possession of the acquired land in 1948  not under the  Act and as such the claim for interest is  not tenable.   This argument is not admissible and the matter is no longer res integra.  Authorities are one sided that  even if possession is taken prior  to the commencement of the  land acquisition  proceedings the owner is entitled to interest  from the date of taking possession on the theory that it comes within the meaning of compensation which is equivalent of what the owner had been deprived  of."
It is therefore clear from the catena  of decision discussed  above that the claimant  is entitled to interest on equitable  principles from the date he is deprived  of possession even if it be prior to the  land acquisition proceedings.  Reliance  however is placed by the learned Government Pleader on an unreported decision  of a bench of this court in F.  A.  78/1  of  1956  D/- 23-8-1965  Andh  Pra.  In  that case possession  was taken in 1337  F.  but proceedings under the Act were not however,  taken till  1351F.  when  the file was transferred to the Talukudar's  Office for that purpose.  A  declaration under Section  5  of  the  Hyderabad  Land Acquisition  Act  (Corresponding to
S.  4
of the Act0  was made  on  7-7-1956  F.  The learned District Judge  awarded interest at 6% per annum  on the total  compensation as found by him  from the date of notification till the date of final  payment.  it was argued that the  claimant was entitled to interest from the  date of taking possession.  it was held by this court that under
Section  29
of the  Hyderabad Act  (corresponding to
S.  34
of the Act)  the claimant would be entitled to  interest only from the time of taking possession under the Act,  that  though  the Military   authorities were already in possession,  they must be deemed to have taken possession under the  Act only on  the  date of notification but not earlier. Hence interest was awarded only from the date of notification.  No arguments  were addressed
in that case
that on equitable principles based upon  implied agreement the claimant is entitled to interest from the date of taking possession.  The various decision of the Privy  Council,  the Supreme Court and of number of High  Courts
referred to above
, in which  it has been uniformly held that the claimant is entitled to interest from the date  when the Government takes possession,  even  if it has been taken prior to initiation of land acquisition proceedings,  were  not placed before  this court.   Therefore this court had no occasion to consider whether interest should be  awarded from the  date of taking possession on principles of justice  and  equity.
18.    Another  decision relied on by the  learned  Government  Pleader  is
Hamberger  v.  R.  D.  O.  Bandar
,  .  In that case  the notification under  s.  4  of the  Act was published on  7-10-1955  in respect f certain lands and buildings.   They  were already in possession of the Government form  1941  as the  Mission Society  which was the owner had leased the  builds on rent to the Government for  a favourable rent of  Rs.  200/-  In that case it was held that the interest on enhanced compensation given by the Subordinate Judge was  payable  from the date  or award   inasmuch as the  possession as tenant must be deemed to have changed  into possession of the Government  as owner from that date,  till the date of deposit or realisation,  as  the  case   may be.  The  question of interest from the date  of compensation to the date of award was not considered or decided by this Court,  presumably because throughout that period the owner was getting rent from  the Government.  There was therefore no question  of deprivation of the possession by the land-owner  without being compensated for such deprivation.  This decision cannot be treated as authority for the proposition that no interest is payable from the date of deprivation of possession,  if possession is taken  prior to the proceedings under the Act.
19.    Having  regard to the series  of decisions referred to earlier to the effect that the claimant would be entitled  to interest from the date when he is deprived of this possession,  even if it be before the initiation of the proceedings under the Act we are of the opinion that the claimant in this case will be entitled to interest as and from  30-11-1950.
20.     It was next  argued that the rate of interest is  4%  and not  6%.  Under
Section  28
of the Central  act,  the rate of interest stipulated is  6%  but by reason of  Madras  Amendment  (Madras  Act  12/53)  the interest payable is  4%  and the argument that the  rate should be  4%  only is based on this amendment.  There is however a proviso  introduced by the same amending Act to the following Effect:
"Provided that  where  such  possession is taken before  the commencement of the Land  Acquisition  (Madras  Amendment)  Act  1953,  the  foregoing provision shall have effect as if for the rate of four percent per annum  specified therein,  the rate of six  per cent per  annum  had been substituted."
As  possession was taken in this case  on 30-11-1950,  that is before the commencement of the amending Act,  it follows that  the rate of  6%  awarded by the court below is correct.  In  any event as  we have held that the interest is payable under principles of equity from the date of  taking possession,  the rate  of  6%  which  has always been regarded as just and  equitable and has even been taken as the proper rate under the  Civil  Procedure Code  will in our opinion meet  the ends of justice.
21.     It was then argued that this interest should be calculated on the value of the property as on the date of taking  possession,  that is 30-11-1950.  We have  held that interest is payable on equitable principles by way of compensation for deprivation of possession without payment of the value    thereof.  In order to give  effect to that principle completely  perhaps  the logical  and  proper course would be  to calculate the value at the end of each  year and award interest thereon up to the date of payment.  That result is achieved in effect by the grant of interest on the value as on the date of acquisition,  that  is 1956  which is somewhere midway between  taking possession and the award of compensation,  and calculating interest at  6%  on that date.
22.       For  all the reasons stated above,  we are of the opinion that the judgment of the  court below is correct in every respect and the appeal is therefore dismissed with costs.
23. Appeal dismissed.