[Cites
35
, Cited by
4
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
A.M. Ansari And Ors. vs The Board Of Revenue, Andhra Pradesh And ... on 21 August, 1967
Equivalent citations: AIR1969AP399, AIR 1969 ANDHRA PRADESH 399, ILR (1969) ANDH PRA 642 (1969) 2 ANDH WR 171, (1969) 2 ANDH WR 171
Author:
P. Jaganmohan Reddy
Bench:
P. Jaganmohan Reddy
JUDGMENT
 

 P. Jaganmohan Reddy, C.J.
1.  The petitioners in these 50 writ petitions pray (1) that the respondents be directed not to demand, contrary to law, payment of stamp duty on the deeds to be executed by them in respect of the right to collect and take away beedi leaves, bamboo or standing timber, s the case may be; (2) that they be further directed not to demand sales-tax from those petitioners who have not paid the same or those who have paid on some instalments but not on the others; and (3) that they be further prohibited from demanding payment of stamp duty on the amount of security to be deposited as if it is a mortgage, under
Art. 35 (a)
of the
Stamp Act
or in respect of deposits already made for the current year or in respect of contracts to be entered into in future. Prayers (1) and (3)are common to all the petitions and prayer (2) is only in respect of some petitions while in other petitions the payments have not been challenged. In view of the legal implications, it is necessary to consider all the three objections upon which the respective orders are being challenged in so far as they are applicable to the respective petitioners who have raised some or all the objections.
2.  It may be stated that each year the Forest Department of the Government of Andhra Pradesh, after giving a sale notice in respect of the forest produce viz., timber, fuel, bamboo, minor forest produce, beedi leaves, tanning barks, parks mohwa, in the respective jurisdictions of the Divisional Forest Officers, holds an auction on the date and time specified in accordance with the terms and conditions of that notice. It is stated in cl.(1) of the said notice that the right to cut and collect any of the forest produce enumerated above, for which the auction is being held, in the Units mentioned in the schedule A attached, will be sold in open auction by the District Forest Officer of the particular division or any other officer duly authorised by him at the specified place beginning at the specified time on a specified date, and the day following if necessary commencing at the time on a specified date, and the day following if necessary commencing at the same hour. The earnest money deposits will be received from a particular time on all days of sales. In case the officer conducting the sales decides to continue the sales onthe subsequent day also, "he will announce it open" before concluding the sales of the first day.
Clause (2) specifies the period of contract Clause (3) gives a list of contracts to be sold; Clause (4) says that the intending bidders are advised to inspect on the spot the coupes or other units and the produce they intend to purchase with a view to satisfy themselves about their correctness, Clause (5) deals with earnest money deposited, according to which no person will be allowed to bid at the sale unless he or she makes an earnest money deposit of Rs. 1000/- in respect of each unit he/she bids except where the upset price is Rs. 1000/- or less, in which case the earnest money deposit shall be Rs. 200/- Under Cls. (5) and (15) the Divisional  Forest Officer conducting the sale has the power without assigning any reasons to refuse or to accept the deposit of any intending bidder, to prohibit anyone from bidding at any stage of the auction, to reject the highest or any bid, to accept the highest or any bid or to sell the units separately or club together more than one unit or sell them after so rearranging that he may consider necessary.
Clause (18) says that the sale shall be signed by the highest bidder and the second highest bidder for each unit immediately after the sale is knocked down, at the appropriate places, They must also give certificates on the sale notice. which will be attached to the bid list to the effect that they have read and understood the terms of the sale notice and supplementary conditions, if any, and that they have agreed to abide by them. Under Clause (20) where the sale amount is Rs. 1000/- or less, the full sale amount less earnest money deposit should be paid by the successful bidder immediately after the conclusion of the sale of the day, but if the bid amount exceeds Rs. 1000/- the highest bidder shall pay 1/4th auction amount or Rs. 10,000 less the earnest money deposit whichever is less at the close of the auctions of the date of sales. If the highest bidder fails to fulfill the above  conditions, the earnest money deposit paid by him shall be forfeited and he shall have no rights whatsoever on the coupes for which he was the highest bidder and such coupes will be resold at his risk and loss. Clause (21) says that the sales are subject to the confirmation of the Divisional Forest Officer or other officer as the case may be.
3.  Clause (23) which is the subject matter of challenge in these writ petitions is as follows:
"Within 10 days of the receipt of confirmation orders of the competent authority the contractor shall pay:
a.  the balance of the 1st instalment amount as may be fixed by the Divisional Forest Officer;
b. 6 1/4% of the bid amount as security deposit;
c.  sales-tax over the bid amount at the rate current at the time of sale;
d.  in respect of leases whose rental is below Rs. 10,000/- sales-tax onthe entire amount is to be paid before execution of the agreement. In respect of the leases of rentals above Rs. 10,000/- sales-tax  is to be paid along with each instalment proportionally."
Clause (24) provides that the contractor shall pay the other instalments amounts before the date fixed by the Divisional Forest Officer in the confirmation orders. The rest of the clauses deal with the procedure for bidding. solvency certificates to be produced, right to withdraw units from sale. conduct of sale etc. It would however be pertinent to notice a few of these clauses which will assist in the consideration of the contentions urged before us. Clause (26) says that the agreement should be executed within 10 days of the receipt of the confirmation orders after fulfilling conditions 21 and 23 of the sale notice. which we have already extracted above. There is of course power to extend this time. Clause (32) deals with taking charge of the coupes. The leases will be considered to be effective from the date of signing the agreement or from any other date whichever is later. The contractor shall be at liberty to enter, take possession and work the unit from that date after tendering a receipt signed by him/her or his/her accredited agent to the Range Officer concerned in the form appended. Clause (60) says that the contractor shall at all times comply with the provisions of the Indian Stamp (Andhra Pradesh Extension and Amendment) Act 1959 and the
Andhra Pradesh Court-fees and Suits Valuation Act
. 1956 and all rules form time to time in force thereunder and that the contractor shall pay the stamp duty fixed under the provisions of such Acts and Rules. The provisions of the sale notice shall be taken in all respects as subject to such Acts and Rules. Clause (64) applies the Abnus Leaves Act and Rules thereof to all Beedi leaves.
4.  In all these petitions, it appears that the petitioners are called upon to apply stamp duty on the agreements to be executed by them as if they are leases of immoveable property. But the petitioners contend that the right to pluck, cut and take away beedi leaves, bamboos standing timber. is not a right or interest in immovable property so as to attract any of the clauses in Art. 31. of the
Stamp Act
Sarvasri Lakshmayya Subbarayan, Ananda Reddy and Mangacharil, all contend that under the definition of the
Stamp Act
, lease means a lease of immoveable property and includes certain instruments specified in cls. (a) to (d) and since the right to pluck and cut any of the three varieties of the forest produce mentioned above is not a right in immoveable property, there can be no question of any lease. Since the agreement which is required to be executed by the petitioners is not a conveyance or deals with immoveable property, it is only chargeable with stamp duty as an agreement under
Art. 5 (c)
with Rs. 1-50.
5.  In the counter, the Assistant Chief Conservator of Forests while referring to Cl. (60) of the terms of sale, under which the petitioners had agreed to pay stamp duty, stated that prior to 1959, agreements of the Forest Department were exempt from Stamp Duty both in the Andhra and Telengana regions by virtue of Entry  10 and Cls (i)  and (xi) of entry  11 of the Revenue  Department Notification No. 13 dated 17-12-1938 of the Government of Madras and Rule  18 of  the  Executive  Instructions contained  in the Hyderabad Forest Contracts  Rules, But in view of  the extension of the
Indian Stamp  Act
to the whole of the State of Andhara Pradesh by the Indian Stamp  (Andhra Pradesh Extension  and Amendment) Act XIX of 1959, with effect from  1-4-1959 the government through G. O.  Ms. No. 1887 Revenue dated 17-10-1961 omitted entry 10 and Cls. (I) to (xi) of  Notification No. 13 dated 17-12-1938. Consequent upon  the extension  of the Indian Stamp (Andhra Pradesh Extension  and Amendment)Act, 1959 with effect from 1-4-1959, and repeal of the Hyderabad Stamp Act as from that date, all rules, notifications,  instructions,  etc., under the
Hyderabad Act
also stood repealed. Accordingly, the various contracts also became liable for stamp duty as in form No, 9 from  1961 onwards.
Ultimately, the matter was referred to the board  of Revenue  and the Board of Revenue through its reference No. B. P.  Rt. 820/66 dated 11-4-1966 gave its opinion that the agreements of the Forest Department came  within the meaning of  'leases' and that they should be stamped as leases. In support of this opinion, it was  contended in the counter that the contractors acquired a right not merely to the leaves already grown but also a right  to use, collect and sell beedi leaves  that would subsequently grow  taking nourishment from the land during  the period of lease. They thus acquire  an interest  in immovable property though for a limited period. Even if the  documents are construed as licenses coupled with a grant.  the right acquired by the  auction  purchaser would be in the nature of some profits  a prendre which being an interest in land is immovable property. As the term 'immoveable property' the definition in the
General Clauses Act,  1897
. which includes land, benefits  arising out of land and things  attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything attached to earth applies and the auction of forest produce amounts to creating an interest in immoveable  property. the leases being  for a period  less than one year, the instrument is rightly chargeable under
Art. 31  (c)
of Sch. 1 of the stamp Act. It was  further contended that under Cl.  (23) of the conditions of auction, the petitioner having agreed to pay the tax as a condition  of the contract, they cannot now question the same, it being a part to the consideration.
6. The question which we have to consider is what is the nature of the right which the petitioners have acquired under the auction held for the sale of beedi leaves, cutting of bamboo or other forest produce, all of which has to be  cut and  taken away within  a short period, i.e., in the case of beedi leaves  within about nine months and in other cases within a year or so. In so far as taking charge of coupes is concerned , the  right that is conferred upon the petitioners is stated  in cl.  32 viz., that they will be at liberty to enter, take possession and work the unit from the date of  signing of the agreement, and the right is one as per  Cl. (1) to cut and  collect beedi leaves, bamboo or timber. The agreement which the petitioner as are being asked to execute upon which stamp duty is required  to be paid as on a lease, is a standard one, the terms of which would show that it was an agreement for sale and purchase of forest produce. Cl. 1 of  the agreement, says that  the quantity of forest produce sold and purchases under the agreement is all the said forest produce  which may now exist or may come into existence in the contract area, which the forest contractor may remove  from the said area in accordance with  the terms of the agreement during the period specified  in the agreement and the forest  produce  may be extracted only during the aforesaid  period. Clause 4  sets out the consideration  payable by the contractor under the agreement and the mode of its payment as being specified in Sch. III which, it is  stated,  does not include payment of sales- tax or stamp duty.
7.  The agreement read with the conditions or sale shows that it is one for sale and purchase of forest produce and that it does not confer any right to the trees as such except  the right to cut  and take the bamboos and the standing timber and in the case of beedi leaves, to pluck them and take them away. No doubt the expression  " immovable property" has not been defined in the
Indian Stamp Act
, but it has been defined in the Transfer of Property Act, the Registration Act and the General Clauses Act. It is contended  by the learned advocates for the petitioners that the definition given in  the
Transfer of Property Act  and Registration Act
has to be taken into account. While Sri Madhav Reddy, the learned Government Pleader, contends that it is the definition  in the
General Clause Act
that should be applied. It may be  stated that under the
General Clauses Act
, benefits arising out of land and things attached  to the earth  are included  in "immovable Property". The question  still to be considered  even if  the learned Government Pleader's contention is accepted, is what is meant by benefits  arising  out of land? It appears to us on an examination of the several authorities to which we shall refer presently that where the produce  of trees  or shrubs growing  on land is sold, or where the right  to cut and take away standing  timber is conferred they are not benefits  arising out of  the land, but it would only be a sale of  the produce or the timber or bamboo simpliciter. But  where a right to the several classes of produce  referred to above is conferred for a long period, then  the produce is from trees  or plants attached to the earth from which sustenance is being drawn, and therefore, the right  to such produce is said to be a benefit arising out of  land.
8.
In
Mohanlal Hargovind v. I. T. Commissioner
AIR 1949 PC 311  the appellant obtained a short term contract from the forest  department of the Government, of collecting  and removing  tendu leaves  for a sum payable  in instamlent as the consideration for the grant with a permission to coppice and pollard the tendu trees.  It was held that under the contract it was  the tendu leaves and nothing but the tendu leaves that are acquired, that it is not the right to pick the leaves  or to go on to the land  for the purpose  - those rights  being merely ancillary to the real purpose  of the contracts and if not expressed  would be implied by law in the sale of growing crop. Similarly the small right of cultivation  given in the contracts is merely ancillary and is of no more significance than would be e. g.  a right  to spray a fruit  tree given to the person who has brought  the  crop of apples. The question  as to whether the expenditure incurred for acquiring  the raw material  or was it capital expenditure. Lord Greene, M. R.  after examining terms  of the contracts which are similar, if not identical, to the terms and conditions of sale in the draft agreement in the instant case referred to  cl (1) which identifies  the subject-matter of the  contract, which was described  as " the forest produce sold  and purchased under the agreement" as that specified in Sch. I of the "contract area" therein indicated. By cls the quantity of the forest  produce is defined  as all the said produce " which may now  exist  or may come in the  forest contractor  may remove from the said area ... during  the period form 5th day of September 1939 to the 30th June 1941.....Schedule  1-A
in that case
is also similar to Schedule 2 of  the  standard agreement, which  we had not extracted earlier. It provides that " the contractor  shall commence his work before the .. day of ..19.. and shall, to the satisfaction of the office empowered  to execute  the contract on behalf of the Government, make  continuous  and adequate progress throughout the term of  the contract". In  considering this clause, it was observed at page 312:
"The  contracts grant no interest in land and no interest in the trees or plats themselves. They  are simply and solely contrast giving to the grantees  the right  to pick and carry away leaves, which of course implies  the right  to appropriate them as their own property....The  contracts are short-term contracts. The picking of  the leaves under them has to start at once or practically at once  and to proceed continuously. It is true  that the rights under the contracts are exclusive  but in such a case as this that is a matter which  appears to their Lordships to be of no significance."
9.  It may be noticed from the above observations that emphasis is laid on two things. One is,  that the agreement is for sale of tendu leaves and the second,  that it is for a short-term and the work is to commence immediately and to proceed continuously . In those circumstances it was a contract for picking tendu leaves and tendu leaves alone and does not deal with any interest in land or the trees.
10.  In  firm C. J.  Patel & Co.  v. M. P . State, , their Lordships of the supreme Court  referred to the judgment of the privy Council. The question  which arose  for determination was whether the petitioners had acquired any rights in property under the several  agreements  entered into between them and the State of Madhya Pradesh  so that it can be said that their fundamental  rights  are affected  when  that State sought to take away their rights  under the Madhya Pradesh Abolition  of Proprietary Rights ( Estates, Mahals, Alienated Lands) Act 1951. The petitioners in those cases entered  into contracts and agreements with  the previous proprietors of certain estates and mahals  in the State under which it was said they acquired the rights  to pluck, collect and carry away tendu leaves to cultivate  culture and acquire lac, and to cut and  carry away teak and timber and miscellaneous species of trees called hardwood and bamboos. After examining the provisions of the Act, Chandrasekhara Aiyar, J, referred to the judgment  of the privy Council in AIR  1949 PC 311 (Supra). After stating that similar agreements  came up for consideration  before their Lordships of the Privy Council  and after noticing the observations made by them  said at page 110:
"There is nothing in  the Act to effect the validity of the several  contracts and agreements. The petitioners are neither proprietors within the meaning of the Act nor persons having any interest in the proprietary right through  the proprietors."
The  question , whether they are rights pertaining to land and hence immovable property, did not in that scene fall for consideration. In Shantabai v. State of Bombay, AIR 1953 SC 532, the document  was one executed  by a zamindar in favor of his wife, granting her a right to enter cut and appropriate  all kinds of  wood from his zamindari forest. The document purported to be a lease for a period of  twelve years and the consideration  was stated to be  Rs. 26,000/-. On  31-3-1951, the proprietary rights in the zamindari estate vested  in the state by virtue of  a notification issued  under
Section 3
of the Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights (Estates,  Mahals, Alienated Lands) Act 1950, and thereafter the petitioner  was stopped  from cutting any wood from  the forest. It was held by a  majority of Supreme Court (S. R. Das, C. J.,  Venkatarama Aiyar, S. K. Das and Sarkar, JJ) that the petitioner could not complain any infringement by the State  of any fundamental right for the enforcement of which alone a petition under
Art. 32
is maintainable Bose, J., however, considered  the interest as an interest in immoveable property an as the deed  dealt with property  of the value of  over Rs. 26,000/- it required  registration  and since it was not registered , the petitioner had no fundamental rights. After examining the definitions in
Sec. 3 (26)
of the General Clauses Act
S. 3
of the Transfer of  Property Act and
Section 2 (6)
of the Registration Act, he said at page 536:
"Now it will be observed that 'trees' are regarded as immovable property because  they are attached to or rooted in the earth..... Therefore trees  except standing  timber are immoveable property.
Now, what is the difference between standing timber and a tree? It is  clear that there must be a distinction because the
Transfer of Property Act
draws one in the definitions of 'immoveable property' and 'attached to the earth's and it seems to me that the distinction must lie in the difference between a tree and timber. It is to  be noted  that the exclusion  is only of 'standing timber' and not of 'timber trees'.
By reference to Webseters Collegiate Dictionary, he pointed out that timber is  well enough known to  be "wood suitable  for building trees or cut and seasoned". Therefore, Bose J.,  concluded that standing timber must be a tree that is in a state fit for those  purposes  an further a tree  that is meant to be converted into  timber so shortly that it can already be looked upon a timber for all practical purposed even though it is still standing. If not, it is still a tree, because unlike timber, it will continue to draw sustenance from the soil. He further  observed:
"Now, of course,  a tree will continue to draw sustenance from the soil so long as it continues to stand and live: and  that physical fact of life cannot be altered by giving it another name and calling it" standing timber" But the amount of  nourishment  early date is so negligible that it can be ignored  for all practical  purposes  and though,  theoretically there is no distinction  between one class of tree and another. If the drawing of nourishment from the soil is the basis of the rule as I hold  it to be, the law is grounded no so much on  logical abstractions as on sound and practical commonsense, It grew empirically from instances to instance  and decision to decision until a recognisable and workable pattern emerged; and here, this is the shape it has taken."
As we said earlier,  the emphasis is upon the length of the period  during which the right to cut the standing  trees is to be exercised and the amount of sustenance it would draw in order to determine whether it is a standing timber or  standing tree. If it is to be done in a short period as a timber, it is not a benefit arising out of the land and is therefore not an immovable property.
11.
In
Mahadeo v. State of Bombay
,  the supreme Court  was again considering long term agreements by which some of the properties in the former state of Madhya Pradesh granted to the petitioners the rights to take forest produce, mainly tendu leaves  from the forests included in zamindari and malguzari villages of the grantors, prior  to the vesting of their rights  in the State under the Madhya Pradesh (Abolition  of Proprietary Rights, Estates , Mahals, Alienated Lands) Act, 1950. Some of the documents  on which the claim was founded  were unregistered and the period during which the alleged  agreements were to operate had already expired. Other agreements were made by registered documents and the terms during  which they had to operate had yet to expire. In so far as rights were  claimed on foot of unregistered  agreements, it was  held that the petitions could not be entertained.  The document,  if it conferred a part of share  in the proprietary right, or even a right to profit a prendre need registration to convey the right. If it  created a bare license, the license came  to an end with the interest of the licensors in the forest. If  proprietary right was otherwise acquired, it vested  in the state, and lastly, if  the agreements created a purely personal right of contract, there was no deprivation of property, because the contract did not run with the land.
In considering these documents the Supreme Court  considered the nature of the right conferred by them, viz.,  whether the right  to leaves  can be regarded as a right  to a growing  crop or is it a grant which confers a benefit  arising out of land. It was  held that in all those cases, there was not a naked right to  take the leaves of tendu trees together with a right of ingress and of regress from the land that there were further benefits including the right  to occupy  the land, to erect buildings  and to take other forest produce not necessarily standing timber, growing  crop or grass. It was further held that the  right of   ingress and of regress over land  vesting in the State can only be exercised if  the State  as the owner  of the land allows it, and even apart from the essential  nature of the transaction, the State can prohibit  it as the owner of the land. In so far as the right to the leaves is concerned, it was observed: "Whether the right  to the leaves  can be regarded  as a right  to a growing  crop has,  however,  to be examined with reference to all the terms of the documents and all the rights  conveyed  thereunder. If the  right conveyed  comprise more than the leaves  of the trees, it may  not be correct to refer to it as being in respect of  'growing crop' simpliciter". The difficulties  cause by the definitions which exist in the  General Clauses Act, the Sale of Goods Act, the transfer of Property Act and the Registration  Act were noticed and it was said that they must be placed alongside one another to get their ambits.  At Page 740, Hidayatullah, J., speaking for the court observed:
"If the  definitions are viewed together, it is plain that they do not tell us  what "immoveable property" is. They tell us what is either included  or not included therein. One thing is clear, however, that things rooted  in the earth as in the case of trees  and shrubs, are immoveable property  both within the General Clauses Act and the Transfer of Property Act, but in the latter, ' Standing timber', growing crop'  and 'grass' though rooted in earth, are not included of these, 'growing crop' and  'grass' from the subject-matter of the sale of goods, and standing timber comes within the  last part of the definitions of 'goods' in the Indian Sale of Goods Act,  to be subject thereto if the conditions about severing mentioned in the definition of 'goods' exists.
"It has already been pointed out that the agreements conveyed more than the tendu leaves to the petitioners..... These rights were spread  over many years and were not so simple as buying  leaves so to speak in a shop...In these circumstances, the agreements cannot be said to be contracts of sale of 'goods' simpliciter."
This is yet another instances where the duration of the contracts and the nature  of the  right over the several subject-matters of the contracts have to be taken into consideration in determining whether it constitutes a pure sale of goods or deals with immoveable property.
12. There are two Bench decisions of this Court which have also taken a similar view.
In
Ramakrishnaiah v. State of  Andhra
1956 Andh WR 717 (AIR 1957 Andh Pra 28) Viswanatha Sastri and Krishna Rao JJ while dealing with the sales  Tax  Act had to consider whether the bamboos sold by the assessee can be said to be agricultural or horticulaural produce  grown on land and whether the assessee had an interest as a tenant or otherwise in the land. In so far as the last point is concerned, it was held that the contract conveys no interest in the land to the assessee. The property in question was a Government  forest and the assessee was granted the right to cut bamboos of a particular age  in lieu of  a lump sum payment. It was a short term contract for 11 months. The cutting of the bamboos by the assessee had to start at once and  had to be completed within that period.  Except to cut bamboos  found in the coupes specified in the contract, the  assessee had no right to the other produce of the forest. He had no right to  the possession , of the coupes  where the bamboo clusters lay.
The right to enter the forest with the permission of the officers of the Forest Departments in order to  the real purpose of the contract and did not create any interest in land in the assessee, and in the language of Lord Coleridge C. J. in Marshall v. Green (1875) 1 CPD 35 ' the land is to be considered  as a mere warehouse of the  thing sold, and  the contract is for goods.' Viswantha Sastri J observed at parte 718 ( of Andh WR) = (at p. 29 of AIR).
"The position is the same as if the bamboos had been stores by the Government in its godown and the assessee had bought  the bamboos for a price with the  implied or incidental right to go and fetch them and so reduce them into his possession and  ownership. Ex A-1  is in substance  a contract of sale of bamboos fit for  cutting  in certain coupes  in a Government Forest and an immediate severance and realisation of the trees by the  assessee was stipulated. By no stretch of language could the  assessee be regarded as having  acquired a leasehold or any other interest in the land or any right to the possession of the land. There mere  fact that Ex A-1  referred to the 'lease period' or 'leased area' is not of great significance for the use of these phrases  does not  affect the legal rights of parties which depend upon the real nature of the transaction. Venugopala Pillai v. Thiruvukarasu (1948) 2 Mad LJ 155: (AIR 1949 Mad 148)."
In another case
R. Deshpande v. Muttam Reddy,  another
Bench of this Court consisting of Chandra Reddy, C. J. and one of us ( the present Chief Justice) were considering the question whether plucking of beedi leaves  was a service rendered  coming within  the mischief of
Sec. 7 (d)
of the Representation  of the People act 27 of 1956). Even though the several decisions were not cited before the Bench, it was held  that the nature of  beedi leaves contract was such that no supply of  goods or execution of any works to or for the Government was envisaged. The Government for  a consideration, sells the beedi leaves  in forest areas specified in the contract to the  contractor who should  within  the period of contract pick the beedi leaves and remove them from the forest. At pages 182-183, it was observed.
"A perusal of the contract entered into with the 1st respondent clearly shows that the agreement is one for the sale of forest produce.
The preamble as well as  the various clause of the agreement make it clear.
XX    XX    XX   XX

 

 It is not  uncommon, in daily commercial transactions of purchase and sale of  goods, for parties to enter into agreements, where under one party agrees to buy and the other to sell produce or commodities which may be lying on some land or at some place from which the purchaser will have to  collect it  and for which purpose he is given certain  facilities such as to go on the land or to place some obstacles etc."
13. These decisions fully support the propositions which we have enunciated at the very  outset, namely,  that as long as the right  is only to pluck the beedi leaves or to cut and take away the beedi leaves, bamboo, or timber, the process to  commence immediately and completed within a short period, it  cannot be said that  that right is a right in immoveable property or a benefit arising out of land.  To create  such a right the right conferred by the agreement should be in respect of the trees  or the shrubs or in respect of anything  pertaining to the land and  where there is a sale of  the produce  it should be such as  would indicate  that the produce from the trees is relatable to the normal amount of  sustenance which that tree draws in order to live and grow  or what in the felicitous words of Lord Coleridge C. J., in (1875) 1 CPD 35 (supra) it derives from "nutriment afforded by the land."
14. While this is so, Mr. Madhava Reddy has cited the decision in (1948) 2 Mad LJ 155 = (AIR 1949 Mad 148) (supra) where Rajamannar O. C. J (as he then was) and  Yahaya Ali J., held that  an agreement of rent in respect of  the toddy yield of cocoanut trees  and the right to tap  the cocoanut trees and obtain   toddy and to enter upon   the land for that purpose, was in the nature of immoveable property because it was a benefit  which arise out of  the land, and consequently that right to  which  the defendant was entitled  was in the nature of a leasehold right.
Rajamannar O. C. J.  (as he then was) who delivered  the judgment of the Bench relied upon (1875) 1 CPD 35 (supra) which was also referred to by Viswanatha Sastri J., in 1956 Andh WR 717: (AIR 1957 Andh Pra 28) (supra),
Seeni Chettiar v. Santhanathan Chettiar
(1897) ILR 20 Mad 362) Not only in (1948)  2 Mad LJ 155; ( AIR 1949 Mad 148) (supra) but also in the cases referred  to by Rajamannar O. C. J.  (as  he then was) the documents  which conferred a right to cut and enjoy the trees was for a long period, such, for  instance in the first case viz.,
Seeni Chettiar
's case. (1897) ILR 20 Mad 58 (FB) they were a period of 4 years from the date of contracts and it was held that they conveyed an interest  in immoveable property because it was  contemplated that the assignee  should derive the benefit from the nutriment to be afforded by the land.
In Natesa Gramani's case. ILR 38 Mad 883 (AIR 1914 mad 362) (supra) it was held that under the document which they were considering the powers on who was entitled to take the toddy  was entitled  to an interest in the land because as oldfield, J., in that case said:
"No doubt in the present case, in which  plaintiff's right was to draw  palmyra juice, cut such leaves as his doing so involved  and take the fruits  of the trees his right to do so for two reasons entitles that he should benefit  to adopt an  expression from (1875) 1 CPD  35 (supra) by the nutriment afforded by the land". It is clear, therefore, that the facts which the Madras High Court were considering were clearly distinguishable.
It is unnecessary for us to go to the extent which Mr. Lakshmayya invites  us to go, to hold  that that decision  is in conflict with a Full Bench decision in
Commissioner of Income-tax v. Yagappa Nadar
AIR 1927 Mad 1038 (FB). It is apparent that that case was dealing  with the question whether revenue derived from the sale of toddy extracted from  cocoanut trees is agricultural income within the meaning  of
Section 2 (1)
of the Income-tax  Act and whether the income-tax Act applies  to profits  derived  from the sale of such toddy. Dealing with the contention that the petitioner as the lessee of the trees was entitled to treat the proceeds as income from agriculture and that he was the lessee of the trees, but not of the land on which  they stand, it was observed:
"It is very doubtful whether it is possible to have a lease of the trees without the land on which they stand.
Under the Transfer of Property Act
leases are only in respect of  immoveable property and no instances of a lease of  moveable property has been suggested to us. No interest in the land has been transferred here and that it would appear that what the petitioner has obtained is a mere license to tap the trees and draw the juice."
There is nothing in the judgment to show for what period the right to tap the trees was given and whether income from sale of such toddy trees was agricultural income or not. Further whether the income or not would not be germane to the question whether it is a benefit from immoveable property, because all agricultural income would be derived from lands. What has to be considered is whether it is a lease  of immoveable property, and that was not what was considered by the Full Bench case.
15.  r. Subbarayan has cited a judgment in Re Mahant Raj Balamgir, AIR 1931 All 392 (FB) which arose under the
Stamp Act
. The question  which fell for consideration  was whether the document executed  in that case for  purchasing standing  timber in certain  jungle for  a certain consideration, was a lease of immoveable property or whether it was an agreement. It was held that the transaction was one of the sale  of goods of merchandise and the deed was an agreement evidencing such sale, and  was exempt from Stamp duty under Sch. I
Article 5
and that the mere fact that beyond the stipulation for a sale of  goods there was however an agreement that in case  rival proprietor raised any objection in the cutting of timber and removal of the same the vendor was to  have the responsibility did not in any way detract from the charter of the agreement. Referring to the definition of immoveable property in
section  3 (25)
of the General Clauses Act Sulaiman Ag. C. J. observed at page 393:
"But  here there was no idea of conferring a right on the purchaser to retain possession of timber which would  remain attached  or fastened to the earth. It is therefore quite clear that the standing timber, which had to be cut down and removed was moveable property and  not immoveable property. The agreement in question  therefore cannot  be the counterpart of a lease of immoveable property within the meaning of
S. 2 (16)
of the Stamp Act."
16.  In the view  we have taken we reject the contention  of the learned Government Pleader that the agreements are  leases within the meaning of
Art. 31 (c)
of the
Stamp Act
and that Stamp duty is payable thereunder.
17.  The second question  whether sales tax is leviable on transactions entered into between the contractor and the Government either in respect of sald or beedi leaves, bamboos or standing timber. The contention  of Sri Lakshmaiah and the other learned advocates is that inasmuch as sale of these  produce is a sale by the Government of its own goods, it is not business, and therefore  the Government is  not a  dealer who is entitled to collect sales-tax, not  is sales-tax leviable on the  sale of agricultural  produce. According to the definition  in
Section 2 (e)
of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act (VI of 1957) "dealer" means " any person who carries on the business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods, directly  or otherwise, whether for case, or  for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration, and includes-
(I) a State Government local authority a company,  a Hindu undivided family or any society (including  a co-operative Society), club, firm or association  which carries  on such business (ii) (iii) etc. ..." The definition postulates that a person must carry on business of buying, selling  supplying or distributing  goods etc., all of which the State Government cannot be said to do or transact. The argument is that the State Government  is  not carrying  on business, much less a business of selling,  buying, supplying or distributing goods directly or otherwise. The  word "business" has been defined by the Amendment Act VII of 1966 in
section 2 (bbb)
as -
(i) any trade, commerce, or manufacture or any adventure or concern in the nature of trade,  commerce or manufacture whether or not such trade, commerce manufacture, adventure or concern is carried on or undertaken with a motive to make gain or profit and whether or not any gain or profit accrues therefrom and
(ii) any transaction in connection with or incidental or ancillary to such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern."
From this definition it is clear that it must be established that the Government is carrying  on trade or commerce in  respect of the subject-matter of the contract viz., beedi leaves, timber or bamboo. Sri Madhava Reddy says that the Government is carrying on an adventure. But even for that it must be  an adventure in the nature of trade, commerce or manufacture, irrespective of the fact whether it is carried on with a motive to make gain or profit or whether a gain or profit accrues. Even  the incidental or ancillary transactions must partake the nature of  trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern.  The question is whether the sale of one's own goods can be said to be buying or selling or carrying on trade or commerce. As observed by one of us (the present Chief Justice) in P. T. C. & S.  Merchants Union v. State of A. P.  9 S. T. C. 723 :(AIR 1958 Andh Pra 558) to which  Subba Rao C. J. as he then was, was a party, at page 746 (of STC) : (at p. 568 of AIR).
"Tax on the produce on a sale by him cannot obviously be intended to be levied as the person who grows  agricultural  products and has incidentally to sell the same,  cannot be called a person engaged in buying  selling or supplying or distributing  goods within the meaning of the definition of a dealer, that is, an agriculturist when selling the produce from his land can hardly be said to be a dealer. On the other hand, the income from the first sale of the produce  from his lands would be agricultural income, as opposed to business income, liable to  be taken in  exercise of the legislative power conferred by item 46 of List II of Schedule VII of the Constitution."
In
Raja Bhairabendra v. Superintendent of Taxes
, 9 S. T. C. 60: (AIR  1957 Assam 179) a Bench of  the Assam High Court consisting of Sarjoo Prosad, C. J.  and Deka J. held that the sale by zamindar by auction the standing sal trees grown spontaneously in his zamindari under which  the  purchases were permitted to fell the trees and sell them after sawing and other processes. does  not attract sales-tax as the zamindar cannot be said to be carrying  on business within  the meaning of Section 2 (3) of the Assam Sales Tax Act 1947 and cannot, therefore be said to be a dealer. Sarjoo Prosad C. J., said that  the words  "carrying on business" connote a continuous trade or occupation involving time and labour as also some investments. which may be regarded as an independent trade or occupation  by itself  capable of being sold or  transferred as such.
18.  The decision  cited by Mr. Madhava Reddy in AIR 1957 Andh Pra  28 (supra) - referred to already- does not  assist the respondents.  What was considered there was whether the agreement entered into  by the assessee with the Government for the collection and disposal of bamboos in the bamboo coupes in Boddagiri range at Amalapuram was in respect of  agriculture produce , exempt from sale tax under the proviso to S. 2 (1) of the Madras General Sales Tax Act, which was in these terms;
"Provided that the proceeds of the sale by a person of agricultural or horticultural produce grown on any land in which he has an interest whether as a owner,  usufructuary mortgages, tenant or otherwise, shall be excluded from  his turnover."
Viswanatha Sastri J., at page 718 (Andh WR); (at P. 29 of AIR )  said that what is exempted from the 'turnover' by the proviso is the produce of land resulting from the application of human effort  to the land in the shape of maturing, tilling, ploughing,  planting,  sowing, watering, weeding,  pruning, harvesting etc., and that forest trees of  spontaneous growth  cannot be regarded as ' agricultural or horticultural  produce grown on land' within the meaning of  the proviso. But on the  question  whether that produce was grown  on any land in which the assessee had an interest whether as owner,  usufructuary  mortgagee, tenant or otherwise, in the land, he held,  as we have already observed  that he is not  a tenant.  Ultimately however,  it was held that the Government was entitled  to collect sales tax under Section 8C of the Madras General Sales Tax Act as it then existed.
That section, which was inserted by
section 7
of the Madras General Sales tax (Amendment) Act, 1951 was deleted in 1954, was in  these terms:
"Notwithstanding anything contained  in this Act, the State Government shall, in respect of any sale of goods effected by them, be entitled to collect by way of tax any amount which  a  registered dealer effecting such sale would have been  entitled to  collect by way of tax under this Act."
Mr. Madhava Reddy says that though  this was deleted,  the amendment of the definition of dealer in
Section 2 (e) (i)
of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales tax Act with
section 2 (bbb)
which was inserted by Act 7 of 1966, supplies  the omission of Section  8C; but as we have shown already it does not because the requirement of these provisions are not fulfilled/
19.  Mr. Madhava Reddy then took shelter under clause 23 (e) of the conditions of sale, which under the proposed agreement would be deemed to have been incorporated. We have already seen what that condition is viz., that "Sales tax over the bid amount at the rate current at the time of sale" shall be paid by  the contractor. This  he says is a condition of  the contract, and faintly suggested  that it was  part of the consideration. But  insofar as the last contention  is concerned, he realised that it is untenable, because consideration  has been set out in paragraph 4 of the agreement to be the amount payable as specified in Sch III which does not in any way indicate the amount payable towards Sales-tax. If sales tax is to be collected the Government has to  collect it as a dealer, which argument again as has been shown already, is not  sustainable. What  is undertaken under  the agreement is that sales tax,  if any payable under the
Sales Tax Act
is to be paid. But if no sales tax is leviable at all, that clause does not bind the contractor for paying the amount as a condition of the contractor, because,  as we have  already said, it is neither a part  of the consideration nor is it a levy permissible under the
Sales Tax Act
. If the Government is  not liable  to pay Sales Tax under the Act, it cannot bind the contractor for paying it.
20.  Coming to the last question viz.,  whether  in respect of the security deposit, stamp duty is levaiable under
art. 35 (a)
of the
Stamp Act
as a mortgage the learned  Government Pleader was unable to  sustain the validity of this stand taken by the Forest Department, and in  our view, he is well justified  in taking this stand. As long ago as  in 1883 a Full Bench of 5 Judges  of the Madras High Court in Reference from the Board of Revenue under
Section 46
of the Indian Stamp Act, 1879 (1883) ILR 7 Mad 209 held that a contract  stipulating that the Executive Engineer for the time being  retain 10 per cent on the value of the work done to cover compensation for  default on the part of the contractor and as security  for the proper performance of the contracts was a contract chargeable with stamp duty under
Section  5 (c)
and not as a mortgage under
Art. 44 (a)
of Sch I of the Stamp Act. In reference under
Stamp Act
S.46 (1891)
ILR  15 Mad 134 another Full Bench in 1891 considered  one of the conditions of licence granted in a muchilika executed by an abkari licences viz., " As a  security for the due performance of the conditions of the contract the licensee shall deposit with the collector  in case, Government notes or stock notes a sum equal to three months rental", and the question was whether  that was an agreement under
Article 5 (c)
or a mortgage under
Article 4.
The Board of Revenue  had stated that  neither the license nor the muchilika taken separately  or together fulfills the conditions  of a mortgage as defined in the
Stamp Act
. I.e.,  neither thereby actually creates an interest in the deposit in favour of  Government. The Board of Revenue was of opinion that it was an agreement under
Article 5 (c )
and chargeable with Stamp duty of 8 annans. With this  the Full Bench agreed. In Rishidev Sondhi v. Dhampur Sugar Mills AIR 1947  All 190 a Full Bench  of the Allahabad High court held; "Money is not moveable property." In that case the Inspector of Stamps was of the opinion that an instrument in which specific sums have been offered as security is a mortgage deed, as the  amounts deposited with the other pray are "specified property" within the  meaning of
S. 2 (17)
of the Stamps Act. As observed  already Allsop J.,  said that the instruments which were the subject matter of that reference were not mortgage deeds.
21.  These decisions fully supported  the stand taken by the petitioners that the security  deposits are not chargeable with stamp duty as mortgage deeds. In W. P. No,. 1265/67 the National Savings Certificates were endorsed in favour of the Government  in the particular Department, but notwithstanding the effect that the department could sell and realise the moneys, the petitioner  was being subjected  to payment of stamp duty in asmuch  as the Department is demanding stamp as a mortgage deed. The Department is not only demanding for the previous years and the current year, but also in respect of future contracts. Stamp duty as mortgages in respect of security deposits. We find  that the stand taken by the department is wholly untenable and invalid  in law.
22.  For these reasons, all the writ petition are allowed. The respondents are directed not to demand  or collect stamp duty in respect of agreements under
Art. 31 (c)
as if they are leases, or on the security deposit under
Art. 35 (c)
as a mortgage. Further they are also directed not to demand or collect sales tax in those cases in which  sales-tax has not been paid. The petitioners in each of the petitions will have his costs. Advocate's fee Rs. 50/- in each.
23. Petitions allowed.