[Cites
5
, Cited by
12
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
S. Mange Naik vs State Of A.P. on 18 February, 2002
Equivalent citations: 2002(1)ALT(CRI)473, 2002CRILJ2892
ORDER
 

Gopalakrishna Tamada, J.
1. This revision is filed against the judgment of the learned Judicial I Class Magistrate, Koilkuntla in CC. No.13 of 1997, confirmed by the I Additional Sessions Judge, Kurnool, in Criminal Appeal No.72 of 1999 for the offence punishable under Section 25  (1-B) (a) of the
Arms Act
, convicting and sentencing the petitioner to undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- in default to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of  one month.
2. The case of the prosecution is that on 30-8-1995 at about 9.30 A.M., when the S.I. of Police of Banaganapalli, along with his staff members went to Banaganapalli-Peepalli cross roads and surrounded the petitioner on suspicion that he was in possession of illicit fire arms and countrymade bombs.  When the accused ran away, the S.I. of Police chased him and arrested him and found one countrymade six-chambered revolver from out of his possession and he seized the same.  After investigation, the police filed charge sheet.
3. The only contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the prosecution launched against the petitioner without proving the order of sanction obtained from the District Magistrate, as required under
Section 39
of the Arms Act, is not maintainable.
4. Heard the learned Public Prosecutor.
5.
Section 39
of the Arms Act reads as follows:
"39 Previous sanction of the District Magistrate necessary in certain cases:  No prosecution shall be instituted against any person in respect of any offence under
section 3
without the previous sanction of the District Magistrate."
6. Thus, as per
Section 39
, no prosecution can be instituted without the previous sanction of the District Magistrate.  The sanction as contemplated under
Section 39
of the Act is not an empty formality and it is introduced to safeguard the persons against any false or frivolous prosecution.  When once a sanction order is issued by the District Magistrate, somebody on behalf of the Department shall come before the Court and mark the same as an exhibit.  In the instant case, on a reading of the judgment of the trial court, it is clear that the sanction order, though obtained from the District Magistrate concerned, has not been marked as an exhibit and the same cannot, therefore, be used as evidence.  Without exhibiting the sanction order in court as per the provisions of
Evidence Act
, it is not safe to rely on the sanction order which is there in the record.  May be that the sanction order is inserted into the record.   This point was, however, not canvassed before the trial court.
7.   In appeal, though this point was argued, the learned Sessions Judge held that the sanction order is there in the record and observed that the court can look into the same and take a note of it.  The relevant portion of the judgment of the learned Sessions Judge is necessary to be extracted hereunder:
"12. The District Collector issued sanction order for prosecuting the accused.  But, it was not marked in the lower court.  It is only a mistake.
The case can be remanded to lower court for marking the same.  There cannot be any objection for marking the same in the lower court if the case is remanded.  It is only a procedural aspect.  If there is any benefit to the accused the case can be remanded.  For marking the sanction order, the case need not be remanded to the lower court.  Because, it is available in the record.  It can be taken note of. "
8. I do not think, the view adopted by the learned Sessions Judge in accepting the sanction order even though it is not marked in evidence, is correct.   Unless and until it is marked and proved in accordance with the provisions of the
Evidence Act
, the learned Sessions Judge ought not have taken the same into consideration.   Therefore, when the sanction order is not proved, the learned Sessions Judge instead of deciding the appeal ought to have remitted the case to the trial court for further trial.  When once the sanction order as required under
Section 39
of the Act was not produced or proved by the prosecution, it must be concluded that the prosecution launched against the petitioner is bad in law and the petitioner is, therefore, entitled for acquittal.
9. In the result, the criminal revision case is allowed and the judgments of both the courts below are hereby set aside.  The petitioner is acquitted of the charge framed under
Section 25
(1-B) (a) of the
Arms Act
.  The fine amount paid by him shall be refunded to him forthwith.  His bail bonds shall also stand cancelled.