[Cites
13
, Cited by
19
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
V. Shankaraiah vs State Of A.P. Through Public Prosecutor ... on 11 February, 2002
Equivalent citations: 2002(1)ALD(CRI)812, 2002(1)ALT(CRI)470, 2002CRILJ3201, I(2003)DMC189
ORDER
 

 C.Y. Somayajulu, J.
1. A.3 in P.R.C.No.72 of 2001 on the file of the Court of Judicial First Class Magistrate (East & North), Ranga Reddy District, filed this petition to quash PRC registered against him and two others for an offence under Section 306 I.P.C.
2. The case of the prosecution is that Kalyani (the deceased) felt humiliated and committed suicide because her marriage with A1 was cancelled after its settlement, so A-1 and his father A2 and paternal uncle (A-3, the petitioner) are liable for punishment under
Section 306
IPC., for the suicide of the deceased.
3. The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that since there is nothing on record to show that petitioner is responsible for the death of Kalyani (the deceased) or that petitioner had a role to play in the settlement of marriage between A.1 and Kalyani, the question of petitioner abetting the suicide of Kalyani does not arise.
4. 'Abetment' in
Section 306
IPC has to be understood with reference to its definition given in
Section 107
I.P.C. While considering the scope of
Section 107
IPC the Supreme Court in
C.B.I. K VS. V.C.SHUKLA1
, observed, in Para 50 at Page 1423 as follows:
"...a person abets the doing of a thing when he does any of the acts mentioned in the following three clauses.
(i) instigates that person to do that thing.
(ii) engages with one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that things.
(iii) Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing.
So far as the first two clauses are concerned it is not necessary that the offence instigated should have been committed. For understanding the word 'aid' in the third clause it would be advantageous to see Explanation 2 in
Section 107
IPC, which reads thus:
"Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the commission of the act, does anything in order to facilitate the commission thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act"
It is thus clear that under the third clause when a person abets by aiding, the act so aided should have been committed in order to make such aiding an offence....."
Clauses (i) and (ii) extracted above do not apply to this case because no 'instigation' by or 'conspiracy' between the petitioner and the other accused is alleged by the prosecution. The third clause also is not attracted because no 'aid' was given by the petitioner to the deceased when she committed suicide. Aiding suicide by a person can only be by positive acts of assisting in procuring the material required for suicide, like a person supplying rope or other material for hanging, when a person expresses his desires to commit suicide by hanging, or supplying weapon or material like drugs, poison, etc., when the person intending to commit suicide asks such aid, or if a person suggest the modes in which suicide can be committed like jumping into a river, lake or well, etc., to a person who intends to commit suicide.
5.
In
SIA RAM VS. STATE OF U.P.2
, the Supreme Court held that in order to constitute abetment, the abettor must be shown to have intentionally aided the commission of the crime. It is clearly held that mere proof that the crime could not have been committed without the interposition of the alleged abettor is not enough compliance with the requirement of Section 107IPC. Various High Courts have taken a view that merely because a person committed suicide by feeling insulted or humiliated, due to the comments or utterances made by the accused, the accused cannot be said to be guilty of an offence under
Section 306
IPC.
In DEVRAJ VS. STATE OF H.P.3, a partner in a firm committed suicide due to the other partners [accused] taking away large sums of money out of partnership fund for various purposes and their not rendering an account to the deceased, and for not permitting the deceased utilizing the profits. The other partners in the firm, who are accused of an offence under
Section 306
IPC for the suicide of the deceased, were held to be not guilty of such offence.
In
ALKA GREWAL VS. STATE OF M.P.4
, the woman was held to be not guilty of an offence under
Section 306
IPC, for her husband committing suicide, after feeling insulted and humiliated due to her immoral conduct. The Court specifically held that though she may be the cause for suicide of her husband, she cannot be said to have abetted his suicide.
In
STATE OF GUJARAT VS. PRADYUMAN RAMANLAL MEHTA5
, the publishers and others responsible for publication of a defamatory article are held to be not guilty an offence under
Section 306
IPC, for the defamed persons suicide on feeling humiliated due to the defamatory publication.
V.ADINARAYANA VS. STATE OF A.P.6
, is a case where a woman committed suicide when the accused threatened her that he would reveal her illicit connection to her husband. The accused was held to have not committed an offence under
Section 306
of IPC.
The Supreme Court in
MAHENDRA SINGH VS. STATE OF M.P.7
, held that merely because the deceased woman stated in her dying declaration that she was harassed by the accused, the accused cannot be held guilty of an offence under
Section 306
IPC.
6. It should be noted that 'Suicide' is not an offence, obviously because the person that committed suicide is not available to undergo the trial and punishment, but abetment of suicide, and its attempt, are made offences under
Sections 306
and
309
IPC respectively. From a reading of the old case law under
Section 306
IPC., it can be seen that
Section 306
was intended to cover cases of people instigating a Hindu Widow to commit 'Sati' i.e., wife burning herself in the funeral pyre of her husband, which was prevalent at that time. When suicides by married women, due to harassment by their husbands and in-laws increased in an alarming proportion in the Country, obviously finding that the provisions in the
IPC
is not covering such suicides, the Parliament stepped in 1983 and introduced
Section 498 A
in
IPC
and Section 113A in the
Evidence Act
, enabling courts to draw a presumption of abetment to commit suicide by the wife, if the husband and his relatives subjected her to cruelty within 7 years of her marriage. Subsequently,
Section 304B
IPC and
Section 113B
of Evidence Act also were introduced. Therefore, now, in the case a married woman commits suicide, within 7 years of her marriage due to harassment by her husband or his relatives, by virtue of
Section 113A
of Evidence Act only Section 306 would come into operation, but not otherwise.
7. Since there is no averment in the charge sheet, or material on record, to show that petitioner either induced the deceased to commit suicide or aided the suicide of the deceased, he is not liable to be charge-sheeted for an offence under
Section 306
IPC. Therefore, P.R.C.No.72 of 2001 on the file of the Court of Judicial First Class Magistrate (East & North), Ranga Reddy District, against the petitioner, who is shown as A3 therein, is quashed.