[Cites
9
, Cited by
7
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Parpudi Krishna Kumari And Ors. on 13 September, 2002
Equivalent citations: III(2004)ACC372
JUDGMENT
 

V.V.S. Rao, J.
1. One Parpudi Srinivasa Rao, aged about 28 years was travelling on a scooter as pillion rider. The said scooter bearing No. A.P. 31 A 468 met with an Accident as a result of rash and negligent driving of the person driving the scooter. Said Srinivasa Rao died in the Accident near Yendada bus stop at Km. Stone No. 6/7. His wife, two minor children and mother filed O.P. No. 693 of 1992 on the file of Motor Accident Claims Tribunal-cum-III Additional District Judge, Visakhapatnam. The claim was opposed by the Insurance Company. They also alleged that the vehicle was driven by Srinivasa Rao and that the insurance policy does not cover him. Alternatively, it is alleged that the insurance policy does not cover the risk of pillion rider on motor cycle. The amount claimed was also disputed. The claimants examined P.W. 1 (wife of the deceased) and P.W. 2 (mother of the deceased) and marked Exhs. A-1 to A-13 including the insurance policy, as Exh. A-11. The respondents examined RW 1, Assistant of the Insurance Company and R.W. 2, owner of the scooter besides marking Exhs. B-1 to B-7. After framing the relevant issues, the Tribunal recorded a finding that the Accident occurred due to rash and negligent driving of the driver of the vehicle. On the question of compensation, the learned Tribunal arrived at multiplicand at Rs. 1,500/- per month. On the date of Accident the age of the deceased was determined as 28 years and applying multiplier of 14, total sum of Rs. 1,68,000/- towards loss of dependency and an amount of Rs. 15,000/- towards loss of consortium was awarded. Feeling aggrieved by the award, the Insurance Company filed this appeal.
2. The learned Counsel for the appellant Mr. K.L.N. Rao submits that as per Exh. A-11/B-4 policy, the pillion rider is not covered under the policy. He also submits that as per the copy of the F.I.R. which is marked as Exh. B-1 the deceased himself was driving the vehicle and, therefore, the policy does not cover the same. He also placed reliance on the judgment in
Surjit Singh v. Santosh Kumari I
(1989) A.C.C. 359 : 1989 A.C.J. 466 (P. & H.);
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Marni Ramana
and
Sada Nirmala v. Indrapaul Singh
. These submissions have been refuted by the learned Counsel for the respondents Mr. Murali Lincoln.
3. Before appreciating the rival contentions, it is necessary to refer to Exh. B-4 policy. In the policy it is mentioned that seating capacity of Bajaj Chetak scooter is 1+1. The limitations as to use of the vehicle are also mentioned in the policy. These are, the insured vehicle can be used only for social, domestic and pleasure purposes and for insured's business or profession. The policy does not, however, cover the use of the scooter for hire or reward or for organized racing, pace making, reliability trials, speed testing, etc. It is nowhere specifically mentioned that the policy does not Cover the pillion rider. Indeed, when the policy itself recognises that the seating capacity of the scooter is 1+1, it is reasonable to infer that the policy covers the pillion rider as well.
4. Insofar as Exh. B-1 and/or A-4 copy of F.I.R. is concerned, the same is registered on information given by one Parpudi Venkata Rao. It reveals that on 4.7.1990 at about 8 p.m. Parpudi Srinivasa Rao, driving the scooter A.P. 31 A 468 with Section Dhana Koti (respondent No. 5 herein), the scooter mechanic and that he was driving the scooter in an intoxicated condition when the Accident occurred at Km. Stone 6/7 at Yendada. Exh. A-4 was marked by P.W. 1. The contents thereof were not proved by examining the person who recorded the F.I.R. or the Inspector of police who investigated the offence. The F.I.R. also contains the statements given by respondent No. 6 herein, who is the owner of the scooter and the uncle of the deceased. He only gave opinion that Srinivasa Rao died when he was driving the scooter in intoxicated condition. In the absence of any proof of this, the statements made in the F.I.R. cannot be accepted. Therefore, the contention of the learned Counsel that the deceased was driving the scooter is, therefore, rejected.
5.
In
Surjit Singh
's case (supra), on the conclusion that the pillion rider was not being carried for hire or reward the Punjab High Court held that policy does not cover passenger on the pillion.
In
Marni Ramana
's case (supra), this Court placing reliance on
Sections 95(a)
and
95(1)(b)(i)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 and following the judgment of the Apex Court in
Pushpabai Purshottam Udeshi v. Ranjit Ginning and Pressing Co.
1977 A.C.J. 343 (S.C.), held that gratuitous passengers, who are not carried for hire or reward cannot be considered as third party for the purpose of third party insurance.
Similar view was taken in
Sada Nirmala
's case (supra). These authorities, in the considered opinion of this Court, cannot be taken as laying down law that pillion rider is not covered under the insurance policy at all times.
6. The question in this case is whether or not pillion rider is covered as a third party under the policy depends on the terms/additional terms of the policy and the legal provisions. As seen from Exh. B-4 policy, seating capacity of the vehicle insured is 1+1 and though the driver is excluded, the policy does not specifically exclude the pillion rider. Though the policy adumbrates the limitations as to use of the vehicle insured, the same does not specifically exclude the pillion rider. The theory that it is always possible for a pillion rider to pay hire or fare cannot always be true. Indeed, the policy itself mentions that the vehicle can be used for domestic, business and pleasure purposes. Therefore, when owner/driver of the vehicle uses the vehicle he can always take a member of his family, or wife or a servant or brother on the pillion and such pillion rider would be necessarily third party to the insurance.
7. The view taken by Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Surjit Singh v. Santosh Kumari
(supra), this Court in
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Marni Ramana
(
supra), and Sada Nirmala v. Indrapaul Singh
(supra), that gratuitous passenger is not covered under the policy is no more res integra in view of the binding judgment of the Apex Court in
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Satpal Singh
, wherein it was laid down:
Under Clause (ii) of the proviso to
Section 95(1)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (for short 'the old Act') the insurance policy was not required to cover liability in respect of the death of or bodily injury to persons who were gratuitous passengers of that vehicle. But the proviso to
Section 147(1)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for short, 'the new Act') shows that it is a recast provision by placing the erstwhile Clause (iii) as the present Clause (ii). In other words, Clause (ii) of the proviso to
Section 95(1)
of the old Act is totally non-existent in the proviso to Section 147(1) of the new Act. Moreover, under Section 147(2) of the new Act there is no upper limit for the insurer regarding the amount of compensation to be awarded in respect of death or bodily injury of a victim of the Accident. It is, therefore, apparent that the limit contained in the old Act has been removed and the policy should insure the liability incurred and cover injury to any person including owner of the goods or his authorised representative carried in the vehicle. Therefore, under the new Act an insurance policy covering third party risk is not required to exclude gratuitous passenger in a vehicle, no matter that the vehicle is of any type or class.
8.
In view of the ratio in
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Satpal Singh
(supra), it cannot be said that being a gratuitous passenger, the deceased Srinivasa Rao is not covered under the policy. Learned Counsel for the appellant did not raise any other submission.
9. As noticed, learned Claims Tribunal awarded a sum of Rs. 1,83,000 against the claim of Rs. 2,50,000. Petitioners in O.P. No. 693 of 1992 filed cross-objections seeking enhancement of the compensation. Learned Counsel for the respondents/cross-objectors submits that the Tribunal erred in fixing the multiplicand at Rs. 1,500/- when the deceased being a tailor and income tax assessee and was earning not less than Rs. 3,000/- per month. It is further stated that even in the cross-examination P.W. 1 has suggested that the income of the deceased would be Rs. 2,000 per month and not Rs. 3,000 per month. Therefore, the cross-objectors/ respondents seek enhancement on this ground.
10. The evidence of P.W. 1 is not placed before me. The Tribunal came to a conclusion that the claim of P.W. 1, wife of the deceased is exaggerated. Therefore, taking into consideration the skill of the deceased in stitching and the evidence on record, with regard to the age of the deceased, the Tribunal fixed multiplicand at Rs. 1,500/- per month. Further, in the petition filed by the cross-objectors they themselves claimed that the deceased was earning Rs. 50/- per day. This is a strong circumstance which improbabilises the case of cross-objectors, even if Exhs. A-2 and A-8 income tax assessment orders, are taken into consideration. In that view of the matter, the cross-objections are liable to be dismissed.
11. In the result, for the above reasons, the appeal and the cross-objections fail and are Accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.