[Cites
19
, Cited by
6
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Dasari Srihari Rao vs Talluri Harinadha Babu on 23 April, 2002
Equivalent citations: 2002(3)ALD456, 2002(3)ALT484
Author:
Ar. Lakshmanan
Bench:
Ar. Lakshmanan
JUDGMENT
 

 Ar. Lakshmanan, C.J.
1. Heard Sri B. Adinarayana Rao, advocate for the appellant. The respondent herein filed IP No. 6 of 1984 on the file of the Sub-Court, Bapatla to declare him as an insolvent. The appellant herein who is one of the respondents-creditors opposed the said application on the ground that the respondent is guilty of suppression of facts as regards his assets and the insolvency application was filed only to evade the rightful debts. The Subordinate Judge, Bapatla having recorded a finding that the respondent herein had suppressed his assets and such failure would disentitle him to make an application and had dismissed his application by an order dated 10-8-1987 relying upon the judgment of a learned single Judge (Lakshmaiah, J.,) of this Court in S. Siva Rama Rao v. Suresh Trading Company, 1977 (2) An. WR 462.
2. Aggrieved by the said judgment, the respondent filed AS No. 145 of 1987 on the file of the District Judge, Guntur who by judgment dated 19-6-1989 had allowed the appeal holding that the suppression of assets would not disentitle the debtor to file

an application and declared the respondent herein as an insolvent relying upon the judgment of a learned single Judge of this Court (Gangadhara Rao, J.)
in
P. Dharma Rao v. Vatluru Co-operative Bank
, .
3. It is against
the said judgment
of the learned District Judge, this Civil Miscellaneous Second Appeal is filed and this Court while admitting the appeal by orders dated 13-7-1992 directed the matter be listed before the Division Bench in view of the conflict of opinions between two learned single Judges of this Court and that is how the matter is posted before this Bench.
4.
Under the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920
, a debtor is entitled to make an application to declare him as insolvent under
Section 10
of the Act, if he satisfies that he is unable to pay his debts and (1) his debts amount to five hundred rupees; or (2) he is under arrest or imprisonment in execution of the decree of any Court for payment of money; or (3) an order of attachment in execution of such a decree has been made, and is subsisting against his property.
5. In this case, the schedule of creditors show that his debts exceeded Rs. 500/- and thus he is entitled to file the application. Under
Section 13
, the application filed by a debtor shall contain the particulars mentioned which read thus:
13. Contents of the petition :--(1) Every insolvency petition presented by a debtor shall contain the following particulars, namely:--
(a) xxx
(b) xxx
(c) xxx
(d) xxx
(e) the amount and particulars of all his property, together with-
(i) a specification of the value of all such property not consisting of money;
(ii) the place or places at which such property is to be found; and
(iii) a declaration of his willingness to place at the disposal of the Court all such property save insofar as it excludes such particulars (not being his books of accounts) as are exempted by Code of 'Civil Procedure, 1908, or by any other enactment for the time being in force from liability to attachment and sale in execution of decree.
xx
6. Thus,
Section 13(1)(e)
of the Act imposes an obligation on the debtor making the application, to furnish the particulars of all his property in his application and as could be seen from the opening words of the section which mandates by the use of the expression 'Shall'. Though mere use of the expression 'shall' do not by itself is the determinative factor to decide whether the provision is mandatory or directory, having regard to the fact that one of the questions in an insolvency application being that the debtor is unable to pay his debts, could only be ascertained on prima facie view of the fact that the value of the debts of the debtor exceeded his assets and as such he is unable to discharge them and also in view of the fact that the assets of the insolvent vest in the Court on making the order of adjudication under
Section 28(2)
of the Act, the prescription under
Section 13
(l(e) of the Act is mandatory. Under
Section 25
of the Act, the Court is empowered to dismiss the application if the Court is not satisfied of the debtor's right to present the petition. Thus, a cumulative reading of the above provisions makes it clear without any ambiguity that the debtor shall show that he is unable to discharge his debts and satisfy one of the

conditions stipulated in
Section 10
and on his furnishing all the information as is required by
Section 13
, he can be adjudicated as an insolvent, If on the failure of the above, the application is liable for rejection under
Section 25(2)
of the Act.
7. As regards the conflict of opinion between the
judgments
referred to above
, it is submitted by Sri Adinarayana Rao that the law
laid down in
the decision of Sivarama Rao reported in 1977 (2) An. WR 462, is correct and it is in accordance with the scheme and purport of the Act and the contra view taken in the decision of P. Dharma Rao , fails to take into account the scheme of the Act and the mandatory language employed in
Section 13(l)(e)
referred to above
. It is further submitted that the precedents relied on by the learned Judge do not support the view that was taken.
8. The learned Counsel in support of his contention relied few other decisions. The first in series is the decision in Chatrapat Singh Durgar v. Kharag Singh Lachmiram, AIR 1916 PC 64, wherein the Privy Council held:
The Provincial Insolvency Act
entitles a debtor to an order of adjudication when its conditions are satisfied. This does not depend on the Court's discretion, but is a statutory right; and a debtor who brings himself properly within the terms of the Act is to be deprived of that right on so treacherous a ground as an abuse of the process of the Court. Any misconduct of a debtor is to be visited with its due consequences at the time of the debtor's application for discharge and not on the initial proceeding.
9. It could be noticed from the above ratio laid down by the Privy Council that a person is entitled to get himself declared as an insolvent only if he satisfies the conditions specified. Thus the observations made by the learned Judge had no application and further misconduct

referred  to  therein   is   subsequent  to adjudication.
10. Similarly in
Narayanappa v. Bheemappa
, AIR 1926 Mad. 494, a Division Bench of the ' Madras High Court was concerned with the fact, where it was alleged, that certain debts were not real. It is in this context, the Court opined that the bona fide of the insolvent would be tested when he comes up with an application for discharge.
Similar view was taken in
Srirangachariar v. Narasimha
lyer, AIR 1928 Mad. 1193, wherein it was observed:
Court has to satisfy itself whether the debtor is unable to pay his debts and if he has asserted or if his poverty cannot be converted into money the statement of the debtor must be accepted as true unless the Court has reasons to think that all his debts are fictitious debts and that he is making the application with the ulterior motive. Mere fact that the debtor has large properties is no ground to hold that he is able to pay his debts.
11. The Court was concerned about the suppression of the assets by the applicants and its effect on the insolvency application vis-a-vis
Section 13 (1)(e)
of the Act. Thus, the conclusion reached in
P.Dharma Rao
(supra) in our opinion is incorrect and as such it needs to be declared as such.
12. In Kumarthal v. Balasubramania Gounder, , the Madras High Court observed that the Courts below did not consider the scope of
Sections 10
,
13
and
24
as regards to the conditions to be satisfied for making an application. Further, the Court ruled that the applicant failed to make out a case for adjudication as an insolvent by not complying with the requirements of
Section 13
and reversed the order.
13. Even if tested on the general principles of law, a person who is guilty of suppression of facts is not entitled to

get any relief. Where there is an obligation to speak, a failure to speak wilt constitute the suppression of a fact and it is expressed in the Latin Maxim "Supressio veri expressio falsi" which means that suppression of the truth is equivalent to the expression of falsehood. The oft quoted expression that "he who comes to the Court must come with clean hands" is squarely applicable to be facts of the case. The said principle is embedded into the statute by directing the applicant to state the facts as mandated by
Section 13
of the Act and failure will visit the consequence of dismissal of the application under
Section 25(2)
of the Act. Thus, the long line of cases on suppression of facts disentitles the applicant to seek intervention of the Court are not being adverted to.
14.
In
Marappa Gounder v. Central RT Board
, 1956 (1) MLJ 324, Rajagopalan, J., of the Madras High Court was dealing with a writ petition in which rule nisi was obtained on the basis of an affidavit suppressing the material facts and relevant facts. The learned Judge held :
It is a well settled proposition of law that it is the duty of a person invoking the special writ jurisdiction of a Court to make a full and true disclosure of all relevant facts. He should not suppress any facts. An applicant for a writ under
Article 226
of the Constitution must come in the manner prescribed and must be perfectly frank and open with the Court. If he makes a statement which is false or conceals something which is relevant for the Court, the Court will refuse to go into the matter. If the Court comes to the conclusion that the affidavit in support of the application was not candid and did not fully state the facts, but either suppress the material facts or stated them in such a way as to mislead the Court as to the true facts, the Court ought, for its own protection and to prevent an abuse of its process to refuse to proceed any further with the examination of the merits.
The reason for the adoption of this rule is not to arm the applicant's opponent with a weapon of technicality against the farmer, but to provide an essential safeguard against the process of the Court.
Where the petitioner is clearly found to have suppressed material and relevant facts which if brought to the notice of the Court when applying for a rule nisi should certainly have influenced the Court in deciding one way or the other and such suppression was certainly calculated to deceive the Court into granting the order of rule nisi, the petition should on that short ground be dismissed.
It is not enough to say that even had those facts been placed before the Court, the Court might first have issued by rule nisi pending a final adjudication. If the facts are relevant, it is the duty of the applicant to have placed them before the Court leaving it to the Court to decide whether it was a case where the rule nisi that was asked for should issue. When that has not been done, the High Court should decline to interfere in the exercise of its jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution.
The Court in an application for a writ under
Article 226
should be reluctant to interfere with a finding of feet, unless the circumstances gathered from the material placed before it conclusively establish that no reasonably minded Tribunal could have reached that conclusion, particularly when it cannot be said that the petitioner has made out the case he set out to prove.
15. Even under
the Code of Civil Procedure
, the non-disclosure of relevant facts and material documents with a view to obtain advantage amounts to fraud as held by the Supreme Court in S.P. Chengalavaaraya Naidu (dead) by LRs. V. Jagannath (dead) by LRs., , wherein the Apex Court held:
The facts of the present case leave no manner of doubt that Jagannath obtained the preliminary decree by playing fraud on the Court. A fraud is an act of deliberate

deception with the design of securing something by taking unfair advantage of another. It is a deception in order to gain by another's loss. It is a cheating intended to get an advantage. Jagannath was working as a clerk with Chunilal Sowcar. He purchased the property in the Court auction on behalf of Chunilal Sowcar. He had, on his own volition, executed the registered release deed (Ex.B15) is favour of Chunilal Sowcar regarding the property in dispute. He knew that the appellants had paid the total decretal amount to his master Chunilal Sowcar. Without disclosing all these facts, he filed the suit for the partition of the property on the ground that he had purchased the property on his own behalf and not on behalf of Chunilal Sowcar. Non-production and even non-mentioning of the release deed at the trial is tantamount to playing fraud on the Court. We do not agree with the observations of the High Court that the appellants-defendants could have easily produced the certified registered copy of Ex.B15 and non-suited the plaintiff. A litigant, who approaches the Court, is bound to produce all the documents executed by him which are relevant to the litigation. If he withholds a vital document in order to gain advantage on the other side then he would be guilty of playing fraud on the Court as well as on the opposite party.
16. Under
Section 5(1)
of the Act, Court shall have the same powers and shall follow the procedure as it has and follows in the exercise of original civil jurisdiction. In Venkata Nagayya v. Sitaramayya, 1955 An.WR 322, Chief Justice K. Subba Rao speaking for the Bench held that by reason of
Section 5
, it is manifest that unless there is any express provision in the Act to the contrary, the procedure followed in exercise of original jurisdiction applies to proceedings under the Act. The applicant cannot be permitted to plead that despite the suppression, he is entitled to be declared as an insolvent which means that the Court cannot even make a prima facie adjudication of his inability to pay his debts. It cannot be expected that the

Court in which the property of the insolvent vests for administration to make an investigation into the suppressed assets of the insolvent and make the same available for distribution among the creditors. Under
Section 4(1)
of the Act, the Court shall have power to decide all questions whether involving matters of law or of facts which may arise in any case of insolvency coming within the cognizance of the Court or which the Court may deem it expedient or necessary to decide for the purpose of doing complete justice or making a complete distribution of property. No useful purpose would be served by postponing every aspect for adjudication to a later date viz., on the applicant making an application for discharge under
Section 41
of the Act. Further the Court can refuse an absolute discharge under
Section 42
on any of the grounds stated therein, but not otherwise and the suppression of assets in the petition is not one of the grounds on which discharge can be denied.
17. In view of the finding recorded by the trial Court that the respondent had suppressed his assets and thereby failed to comply with
Section 13(1)(e)
of the Act, the dismissal of the application under
Section 25
is justified and the appellate Court in our view committed an error of law in reversing the said order.
18. For the foregoing discussion, we are of the view that the decision in P. Dharma Rao  does not lay down the correct proposition of law and we are unable to subscribe to the view expressed by the learned Judge in the said decision. We therefore overrule the same and hold that the decision in S. Sivarama Rao reported in 1977 (2) An.WR 462 holds good in the case. In the instant case, it has been clearly established that the respondent had suppressed material facts with regard to his assets and therefore such a party cannot be

declared as an insolvent. The order passed in Appeal Suit No. 145 of 1987 dated 19-7-1989 by the learned District Judge, Guntur is set aside and the appeal is accordingly, allowed.