[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
D.M. Jagadish vs Bangalore Development Authority on 4 February, 2025
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
2025 INSC 157                                                 NON-REPORTABLE
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). ___________OF 2025
                                 [@ SLP(C) NO.___________OF 2025 @ DIARY NO(S).
                                                    7824/2020]

                            D.M. JAGADISH                             APPELLANT(S)
                                                   VERSUS

                            BANGALORE DEVELOPMENT
                            AUTHORITY & ORS.                          RESPONDENT(S)

                                                   JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.   Delay condoned.
2.   Leave granted.
3.   This appeal challenges the judgment and order dated

                            27th September, 2019, vide which the appeal filed by the

                            respondent(s) came to be allowed.
4.   A preliminary notification dated 03rd February, 2003

                            in respect of 380 acres 4 guntas of land came to be issued.

                            In the final notification dated 23 rd February, 2004, out of

                            the said 380 acres 4 guntas, the acquisition in respect of

                            154 acres 26 guntas came to be dropped. The effect being
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2025.02.07
16:59:09 IST
Reason:
1
the area admeasuring 225 acres 18 guntas came to be

covered under the final notification for acquisition.       A

subsequent revised notification was issued on 18 th June,

2014. By the said notification a further area of 66 acres 3

guntas came to be excluded from acquisition.
5.   The father of the appellant approached the High

Court by way of Writ Petition Nos.45695-697 of 2004

challenging the acquisition. The said writ petitions were

allowed, thereby quashing the acquisition. The same was

challenged in appeal(s) by the respondent(s).      The Writ

Appeal   No.2624/2005     and       2625/2005   came   to   be

disposed of on 25th November, 2005.             By the said

judgment, the Division Bench, while upholding the

acquisition issued several directions to the respondent

No.1/B.D.A.
6.   It will be relevant to refer to the directions issued by

the Division Bench in the said order, which read thus:-
“(i) All the petitioners who are the land
          owners who are seeking dropping of the
          acquisition proceedings in so far as their
2
respective lands are concerned, on the
ground that: (a) their lands are situated
within green belt area; (b) they are totally
built up; (c) properties wherein there are
buildings constructed 'by charitable,
educational and/or religious institutions
(d) nursery lands; (e) who have set-up
factories (f) their lands are similar to the
lands which are adjoining their lands but
not notified for acquisition at all, are
permitted to make appropriate application
to the authorities seeking such exclusion
and exemption and producing documents
to substantiate their contentions within
one month from the date of this order.
It is made clear that the BDA shall
consider such request keeping in mind
the status of the land as on the date of
preliminary notification and to exclude
any       developments,    improvements,
constructions put up subsequent to the
preliminary notification and then decide
whether their cases are similar to that of
the land owners whose lands are notified
for acquisition, notified and whose
objections were upheld and no final
notification is issued. In the event the
BDA comes to the conclusion that the
lands of those persons are similarly
placed, then to exclude those lands from
acquisition.
(ii) Petitioners who are interested in
availing    this  benefit    shall  make
appropriate application within 30 days
from the date of this order and thereafter
3
the BDA shall give notice to those
          persons, hear them and pass appropriate
          orders expeditiously.
(iii) Till the aforesaid exercise is
          undertaken by the BDA and the
          applications filed by the petitioners either
          for allotment of site or for denotifying or
          exemption sought for are considered their
          possession shall not be disturbed and the
          existing construction shall not be
          demolished. After consideration of the
          applications, in the light of the aforesaid
          directions, if the lands are not excluded
          then the BDA is at liberty to proceed with
          the acquisition."
7.   It could thus be seen that the Division Bench had

permitted such owners of the land, whose lands were

situated within the green belt where structures were

existing; where they were totally built up; where there were

buildings constructed by charitable, educational and/or

religious institutions; nursery lands; who have set-up

factories and the lands adjoining the ones which were

excluded from acquisition, to make an application to the

B.D.A. Such petitioners who wanted to avail the benefit

were required to make such applications within 30 days.
4
The B.D.A. was thereafter required to give notice to those

persons, hear them and pass appropriate orders. Till the

completion of such an exercise, the possession of the

landowners was not to be disturbed, and the existing

construction was not to be demolished.
8.   Pursuant to the aforesaid directions issued by the

Division Bench, the appellant made an application before

the B.D.A. within the prescribed period urging therein

that the land abutting the land had been excluded from

the acquisition and as such, the appellant was also

entitled to the benefit of exclusion of his land from the

acquisition.   It is also contended that there were

structures existing on the land in question prior to the

preliminary notification being issued.    The same was

rejected by Respondent No.1/B.D.A. vide endorsement

dated 17th June, 2006.   This was again challenged by a

Writ Petition No.13198 of 2006. On the second occasion

also, the petition was allowed with directions to the Land

Acquisition Officer to conduct a spot inspection and
5
consider the claim of the appellant for exclusion of land.

The Land Acquisition Officer, though conducted the

inspection, did not pass any orders. As such, on the third

occasion the appellant filed Writ Petition No.33136 of

2015.
9.   The learned Single Judge partly allowed the Writ

Petition No. 33136 of 2015 vide judgment and order dated

3rd October 2017.     It will be relevant to refer to the

following observations made by the learned Single Judge

in the said order:
“11. There is nothing to show that this
          exercise was done by the Land
          Acquisition Officer or by any of the
          authorities of the B.D.A. They have not
          passed any order.       They have blindly
          proceeded to forward the entire papers to
          the State Government for issuing the final
          notification. The State Government has
          accordingly issued the impugned final
          notification.     In the circumstances,
          petitioner is right and justified in
          contending that the B.D.A. has not
          followed the directions of this Court and
          this action has resulted in serious
          prejudice to the interests of the petitioner.
12. Before issuing the final notification,
6
B.D.A. ought to have applied its mind to
the directions of the Division Bench
followed by the directions issued by the
learned Single Judge and passed an order
after    conducting      spot   inspection.
Therefore, in normal circumstances, the
final notification issued in so far as the
land in question is concerned has to be
declared as having been vitiated. The fact
remains that thereafter the B.D.A.
formed certain sites and as many as 15
sites have been allotted in favour of third
parties. They are not before this Court.
In respect of the remaining land it is
urged by the counsel for the B.D.A. that
the sites have been formed. But, there is
no dispute that no allotments have been
made to the third parties and the
remaining property is kept intact.
Therefore, keeping in mind the interests
of the third parties that have intervened,
the question for consideration in this
petition is restricted to the remaining
extent of land so as to find out if
petitioner is entitled for exclusion of the
same from acquisition by granting
appropriate relief.
13. In this connection, petitioner has
produced Annexure J sketch and
Annexure K map to substantiate that the
surrounding lands bearing Sy. Nos.63/1,
63/2, 63/3, 64/1 and 64/2 have been
excluded from acquisition while issuing
the impugned final notification after
considering the entitlement of those land
owners as per the directions issued by
7
the Division Bench whereas the case of
the petitioners in respect of the very
adjoining land bearing Sy. No.64/3 has
not been considered and without
considering, notification acquiring the
land has been published. Indeed, this
contention      is    probabalised     and
substantiated by the very document
produced by the respondents at Annexure
R1. It is clear from Annexure R1 sketch
that lands lying towards the North, South
and West abutting Sy. No.64/3 have been
excluded from acquisition. In respect of
the eastern portion wherein Sy. No.64/4
is situated, 1 acre 30 guntas have been
included. It is therefore clear that the
case of the petitioner was eminently fit for
being considered favourably keeping in
mind the parameters prescribed by the
Division Bench. In this connection, it has
to be also stated that it is the specific
case of the petitioner that he had put up
construction in the acquired portion of
the land. Indeed this is probabalized by
the spot inspection conducted on
27.12.2006, at an earlier point of time,
pursuant to the directions issued by this
Court that there were two RCC
constructions and one bore-well. It is not
the case made out by the B.D.A. that
these constructions have been put up
after the preliminary notification was
published. Nothing of that sort emerges
from the spot inspection though an
assertion is made in the statement of
objections that these constructions have
come up later. In such circumstances, it
8
has to be stated that if only the B.D.A.
             had complied with the directions of this
             Court and passed an order keeping in
             mind the parameters prescribed by the
             Division Bench, petitioner would have got
             the benefit of exclusion of his land from
             acquisition in view of the exclusion of
             similarly placed lands abutting the land
             of petitioner. The omission on the part of
             the B.D.A. in not discharging its duties as
             per directions of the Division Bench has
             landed the petitioner into this legal
             entangle in as much as he is forced to
             approach this Court again and again.
             Indeed, this is the third time petitioner is
             before this Court in respect of the very
             same grievance.”
10. It can thus be seen that the learned Single Judge

came to a specific finding that the land adjoining the

appellant’s land was excluded from the acquisition and as

such, the appellant was also entitled to the benefit of

exclusion.    It was also found that there were structures

existing on the land prior to the preliminary notification

issued in 2003.
11. It was sought to be contended before the learned

Single Judge by the B.D.A. that the constructions were

carried on by the appellant on the land in question after
9
the preliminary notification was issued.        The learned

Single Judge specifically rejected the said contention. The

Court therefore found that the appellant was entitled to

the reliefs claimed.     The learned Single Judge also

observed that this was the third round of litigation at the

instance of the appellant and therefore thought it

appropriate not to remand back the matter. However, the

learned Single Judge took notice of the fact that out of the

land belonging to the appellant, 15 sites were already

allotted to third parties.     The learned Single Judge,

therefore, directed that the benefit of the quashing of

acquisition would not be applicable in the case of the 15

sites which were already allotted to third parties.
12. Respondent No.1/B.D.A. challenged the same by way

of Writ Appeal No. 8 of 2018. The said Writ Appeal came

to be allowed by the impugned order. It is to be noted that

though in paragraph 13, the Division Bench of the High

Court found that from the inspection report dated 20 th

September, 2003 in Survey No.64 of 2003 there existed
10
one RCC roof building and four AC sheet rooms, the

approximate age of the building was recent one. It further

found that as per the subsequent inspection report dated

28th March, 2006 conducted pursuant to the order of the

Division Bench of the High Court dated 25 th November

2005, it was noticed that there were further additional

constructions.
13. The Division Bench found that it appears that the

constructions were either made after the preliminary

notification was issued or just before the issuance of

preliminary notification having gotten wind of the possible

land acquisition proceedings.
14. Insofar as the contention of the appellant herein that

the    adjoining    lands   were     already     excluded   from

acquisition, the Division Bench relied on an affidavit dated

12th   September,    2019   sworn     by   the    Special   Land

Acquisition Officer, B.D.A. to come to a finding that the

land on the western side of the land of the appellants

already stood acquired. It is pertinent to note that though
11
the said affidavit was filed on 12th September, 2019 the

Division Bench, without giving any opportunity to the

appellant herein to respond to the said affidavit, closed the

matter for hearing on the very same day, though the

judgment    was    subsequently     pronounced     on    27 th

September, 2019.
15. We find that the approach of the Division Bench in

relying on the affidavit of the authority and closing the

matter on the same day, without giving an opportunity to

the appellant herein to meet the averments made in the

said affidavit would be in violation of the principles of

natural justice.   The well-reasoned order passed by the

learned Single Judge as has been reproduced by us

hereinabove has been reversed by the learned Division

Bench based on the affidavit of the authority without

giving an opportunity to the appellant herein to meet the

averments made therein.
12
16. We find that on this short ground alone, the appeal

deserves to be allowed and, therefore, is allowed.            The

impugned judgment and order is quashed and set aside.

The matter is remitted back to the Division Bench of the

High Court to consider it afresh in accordance with law.
17. Needless to state that if the High Court finds that any

further spot inspection is necessary, it may direct so. The

parties are directed to maintain status quo as on the date

of the order of the learned Single Judge of the High Court,

until the decision of the Writ Appeal on remand.
18. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
..............................J
                                       (B.R. GAVAI)


                                      ..............................J
                                     (K. VINOD CHANDRAN)

NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 04, 2025
13