[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Gauri Mahto @ Gauri Kumar vs The State Of Bihar on 27 February, 2025
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
,
J.K. Maheshwari
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 817                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1134 OF 2016


     GAURI MAHTO @ GAURI KUMAR                                         .... APPELLANT
                                               VERSUS
     THE STATE OF BIHAR                                               .... RESPONDENT

                                           J U D G M E N T
J.K. Maheshwari, J.
1.               Challenging the judgment of conviction and sentence

     dated 22.07.2015, for the offence under
Section 364A
of

     Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short “
IPC
”) passed by the

     High Court of Judicature at Patna in Criminal Appeal (DB)

     No. 1051 of 2009 confirming the judgment dated 27.10.2009

     passed by the 1st Additional Sessions Judge, Barh, in

     Sessions Trial No. 1046 of 2004, the present appeal has

     been filed by appellant-convict. The appellant has been

     sentenced to undergo life imprisonment with fine of Rs.

     5000/-, and in case of default, further sentence of three

     months.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
2.
   Gulshan Kumar Arora
   Date: 2025.07.14
   10:48:56 IST
                      The   prosecution     case    in     nutshell     is    that,   on
   Reason:
24.10.2002               at   about    8.30   p.m.,    three     unknown   accused
persons armed with deadly weapons stormed into the house

of Rajendra Kumar (the informant, PW-13) and committed

loot taking away some cash and golden ornaments. In the

said incident, they also tied the informant and his wife

Suma    Kumari      (PW-15)    and    kidnapped      their      elder    child

namely Unnat Raj (PW-12), aged eight years with a threat

to kill the boy in case the informant raised any hue and

cry or inform the police. As alleged, the accused persons

also    left   a    ransom    note    demanding      Rs.    6   lacs    to   be

delivered      near    Rampur     Dumra     station        by   30.10.2002,

failing which, the boy would be killed.
3.     It is further the case of prosecution that while

leaving, the accused persons confined the informant and

his    wife    in    separate    rooms      bolting       the   doors    from

outside. The informant somehow freed himself and rushed

to the roof, wherefrom he saw the accused persons under

the streetlight fleeing away with the child. On the said

basis, FIR was lodged and during course of investigation,

present    appellant     along       with   6    other     accused     persons

namely    Sudhir      Mahto,    Diwakar         Yadav,    Dayanand      Mahto,

Pramod Kumar, Dhurba Yadav and Awdhesh Yadav @ Gama Yadav

were     charge-sheeted         for    offences          punishable      under
Sections        364A
/
395
/
120(B)
/
34
of     IPC.      The    trial     was

conducted and present appellant along with one Sudhir

Mahto was convicted for offence under
Section 364A
of

IPC, whereas, acquitted for other offences.
4.   During trial, the prosecution examined 15 witnesses

to answer whether the child was illegally taken away from

lawful    guardianship       or    not.    The     Trial     Court       largely

relied     on    the   testimony      of        Rajendra     Kumar       (PW-13,

informant/father       of    the    child),        Suma     Kumari       (PW-15,

mother of the child) and Unnat Raj (PW-12, kidnapped

child) alongside documentary evidence brought on record

and held that the child was illegally taken away from the

lawful     guardianship      of    the     parents.         All    the     three

witnesses were consistent qua the incident of kidnapping

on the date of incident. So far as question as to who

were involved in the alleged occurrence, the Trial Court

primarily       considered   the    testimony          of   Krishna      Chandra

(PW-11,    Investigating      officer),          who     deposed     that   the

ransom demanded from the parents of the child, had to be

handed over to the kidnappers at the nearby temple at

Barahiya railway station by a man clad in white shirt,

full pant and a gamchha who was to travel by Vikramshila
train.   Thereafter,        the    trap    was        set    and   when        three

miscreants came to collect the ransom, one person namely

Pramod Kumar @ Pramod Mahto was nabbed, while the other

two escaped.
5.   On interrogation, Pramod Kumar in his confessional

statement     disclosed      the    names        of    present      appellant,

Nandan Mahto, Md. Ajam, Dewakar Yadav, Dhurba Yadav and

Vikas Das being involved in the alleged crime. He further

disclosed    that    the    boy    is     with    Gauri       Mahto      (present

appellant)    and    if    raid    is    conducted,          the   boy    may     be

recovered. Accordingly, a raid was conducted on the house

of   appellant,      but     the     boy     was       not     found       there,

whereafter,     on    further       disclosure          by    Pramod       Mahto,

another raid was conducted on second house of appellant

and the boy was found sleeping in a room situated on the

roof of the house. The present appellant and co-accused

Sudhir Mahto @ Sudhir Kumar were also found in the room.

The recovery of the child was made in the presence of

independent     witnesses,         the     informant/father              and     the

seizure memo of articles (‘Ex. 7’) was prepared. In the

entirety of facts, the Trial Court held that recovery of

kidnapped    child    was    from       conscious       possession        of     the
appellant      from        his     house      in    his     presence       and    is

sufficient     for     conviction          under
Section    364A
of       IPC.

Being aggrieved and on filing appeal, the same came to be

dismissed by High Court vide impugned judgment confirming

the findings of the Trial Court.
6.   The     learned       counsel      for   the     appellant      strenuously

argued      that     in      the       present       case,     the     essential

ingredients of
Section 364A
are not fulfilled, therefore,

conviction      as     directed        cannot       be    sustained.       For    an

offence under
Section 364A
, the essential ingredient is

of detention of the kidnapped person along with threat to

cause hurt or death or reasonable apprehension that death

or   hurt     may    be     caused       to    such      person.     Both    these

conditions are to be read together and not in isolation.

Additionally, there must be a demand of ransom by such

individual. In the present case, it has not been proved

that any such demand was made by the appellant.
7.   The entire case of the prosecution against appellant

is   based    on     the    confessional           statement    of    co-accused

namely     Pramod     Kumar       @    Pramod      Mahto,    which    is    not    a

substantive        piece     of       evidence.      Further,      neither       the

informant Rajendra Kumar (father of the child) who had
accompanied the investigation officer in the raid, nor

the kidnapped child Unnat Raj (PW-12) had identified the

appellant and the recovery of the child also appears

doubtful. Therefore, it was prayed that the appeal be

allowed, and conviction be set-aside.
8.   Learned counsel for the State supported the findings

of the Courts below and submitted that on raid, the child

was found sleeping in the room on the roof of the house

of appellant. The appellant and co-accused Sudhir Mahto

were also found present there. The recovery of the child

was made from the conscious possession of the appellant

in the wee hours of the day as per information furnished

by   co-accused    Pramod   Mahto,   who   came   to    collect    the

ransom near the temple at Barahiya railway station, where

he was nabbed by police. After recovery, Ex. 7 (seizure

memo) was prepared, which was signed by the appellant and

two independent witnesses namely, Sanjay Mahto (PW-1) and

Sadanand   Kumar   (PW-2).   This    confirms     the   presence    of

appellant on the spot. The child was handed over to the

informant and zimmanama was prepared. The testimony of

the independent witnesses along with Ex. 7 and zimmanama

fully corroborates the testimony of I.O. Krishna Chandra
(PW-11) and the confessional statement. It was therefore

urged     that    no     interference     is    warranted      in    present

appeal.
9.   After       having    heard   the    learned      counsel      for     the

parties at length and having perused the material placed

on record, in connection to the case of prosecution, the

first     and      foremost    question        that    calls        for     our

consideration       is,    whether   in   the    facts    of     the      case,

prima-facie offence under
Section 364-A
of IPC against

appellant is made out or not? To answer the same,
Section

364-A
need to be perused, which is quoted herein below:
“364-A. Kidnapping for ransom, etc.—

        Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person or keeps a
        person in detention after such kidnapping or
        abduction, and threatens to cause death or hurt to
        such person, or by his conduct gives rise to a
        reasonable apprehension that such person may be
        put to death or hurt, or causes hurt or death to
        such person in order to compel the Government or
        any   foreign   State   or  international   inter-
        governmental organization or any other person to
        do or abstain from doing any act or to pay a
        ransom, shall be punishable with death, or
        imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to
        fine.”


     On bare reading, it is clear that the afore-mentioned

Section deals with ‘kidnapping for ransom’ a person and

to   convict        an    individual      for    the     said       offence,
fundamentally    three   essential   ingredients    need    to   be

fulfilled; first, a person is kidnapped or abducted, and

is kept in detention after the kidnapping or abduction;

second, there is a threat to cause death or hurt to the

kidnapped person, or a reasonable apprehension of such

harm is created; third, the act is done to compel the

government or a foreign state or international inter-

governmental organization or any other person to do or

not do something, or to pay a ransom.
10.   This Court in its recent judgment in
‘Shaik Ahmed

Vs. State of Telangana
, (2021) 9 SCC 59’, re-iterated the

pre-requisites required to be proved by prosecution to

establish culpability for offence under
Section 364-A
. In

paragraph 33 of
the said judgment
, the Court noticed as

under –

        “33. After noticing the statutory provision of
Section 364-A
and the law
laid down by
this Court
        in the above noted cases, we conclude that the
        essential ingredients to convict an accused under
Section 364-A
which are required to be proved by
        the prosecution are as follows:
(i)    Kidnapping or abduction of any person or
              keeping a person in detention after such
              kidnapping or abduction; and
(ii)   threatens to cause death or hurt to such
              person, or by his conduct gives rise to a
              reasonable apprehension that such person
              may be put to death or hurt or;
(iii)      causes hurt or death to such person in
                   order to compel the Government or any
                   foreign    State   or   any   Governmental
organization or any other person to do or
                   abstain from doing any act or to pay a
                   ransom.
Thus, after establishing first condition, one more
         condition has to be fulfilled since after first
         condition, word used is “and”. Thus, in addition
         to first condition either Condition (ii) or (iii)
         has to be proved, failing which conviction under
Section 364-A
cannot be sustained.”


       From above, it can be inferred, the usage of word

‘and’      after     the   first   condition    in
Section    364-A
,

signifies that the first condition is not independent,

and should not be read in seclusion or isolation with the

other      conditions      prescribed   therein.     Therefore,    for

conviction under this Section, what is to be ensured is

that first condition, i.e., the act of kidnapping or

abduction or detention after such kidnapping or abduction

shall either be coupled with a threat to cause death or

hurt      or    with       such    conduct     creating   reasonable

apprehension of death or hurt in the mind of person so

kidnapped or abducted; or causes hurt or death in order

to compel the Government or any foreign State or any

Governmental organization or any other person to do or

abstain from doing any act or to pay a ransom.
11.
In view of the foregoing discussion, we now proceed

to consider whether the findings of the Trial Court and

the High Court are in consonance with the ingredient

specified under
Section 364-A
and dictum of this Court in
Shaik      Ahmed
(supra),    in    particular,    paragraph     33   to

sustain conviction as directed.
12.   In the context of the ingredients required to be

proved, if we look into the evidence brought, then it is

apparent that Rajendra Kumar (PW-13) - informant/father

of the child, Suma Kumari (PW-15) - mother of the child

and the kidnapped child, namely, Unnat Raj (PW-12) in

their      testimony   have    not    identified   the   accused.      The

conviction is primarily based on the oral evidence of the

Investigating       Officer,        Krishna   Chandra    (PW-11).      On

examination of material placed, it is found that the main

allegation against the present appellant is based on the

confessional       statement    of    the   co-accused   Pramod   Kumar

Mahto, who is absconding. The said co-accused in his

confessional statement disclosed that the child is in the

house of the present appellant and on conduct of raid,

the child was recovered. However, on perusal of records,

it    is    seen   that   no   investigation       was   conducted     to
determine whether the house from where the child was

recovered belonged to appellant or not. It is undisputed

that, the recovery was made from the second house and not

from     the        original/first          house     of       the     appellant.

Furthermore, seizure memo (Ex. 7) did not contain any

information qua recovery of child. It is also admitted

that    in        the    identification       parade       conducted       by   the

police, the appellant has not been identified by the

father (PW-13). The child also has not identified the

appellant in the Court, despite the allegation that the

child       was    with        the   appellant      for    about     15    days.
13.    Coming to aspect of demand of ransom, it is found out

from the records that Suma Kumari (PW-15) after 15 days

of incident, on 08.11.2002 informed the police that her

devar, Jitender Kumar, received a phone call from phone

no. 262694 on his mobile no. 9835231064 demanding ransom

of    Rs.    4     lakhs       to    be   delivered       at   railway     station

Barahiya, for release of child. Rajendra Kumar (PW-13)

has    deposed          that    he   received    ransom        notes      demanding

approximately Rs. 4 to 5 lacs. At this juncture, it is

pertinent to note that the entire case of the prosecution

is based on the testimony of Krishna Chandra (PW-11) -
Investigating       Officer, however,       interestingly as            borne

out of records that, neither he has deposed anything

about ransom notes nor about any investigation regarding

phone call made by the kidnappers. The prosecution has

also    failed     to    bring    on   record   any    cogent      evidence

regarding any ransom demand made by the appellant.
14.    Lastly, to sustain the conviction of appellant for

offence    under
Section       364-A
,   it   is    to    be   seen   that

whether any threat to cause death or hurt to the child

was made by appellant or not? As per prosecution’s case,

the kidnapped child was with appellant for a period of 15

days and on raid, he was found sleeping in the room of

the house belonging to the appellant. After considering

the medical report, it is found that, the child had only

simple injury in the nature of abrasion. Furthermore, the

child     (PW-12)       himself   in   testimony      has    not    deposed

anything to the effect that appellant had threatened him

to cause death or hurt. Under such circumstances, the

prosecution’s case suffers with infirmities and creates

serious doubt insofar as the involvement of appellant in

the present crime is concerned.
15.
In view of the discussion made above, thus, we are of

the considered view that the prosecution has failed to

prove conditions together as envisaged under
Section 364-
A, in particular, paragraph 33 of the judgment of this

Court in
Shaik Ahmed
(supra). Accordingly, this appeal is

allowed. The judgment of sentence and conviction dated

27.10.2009, passed by the 1st Additional Sessions Judge,

Barh, confirmed in appeal by the High Court vide impugned

judgment dated 22.07.2015 are set-aside.
16.   The   sentence   of   the   appellant   has   already   been

suspended vide this Court’s order dated 11.01.2019. As a

sequel      to   the   acquittal,   the    appellant   need    not

surrender. His bail bonds stand discharged.
…………………………………………………,J.
[J.K. MAHESHWARI]



                                          …………………………………………………,J.
[ARAVIND KUMAR]
New Delhi;
February 27, 2025.