[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Zon Hotels Pvt. Ltd vs Goa Coastal Zone Management Authority on 19 February, 2025
NON-REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 297                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 9328/2022


        ZON HOTELS PVT. LTD.                                                                       APPELLANT(S)

                                                             VERSUS


        GOA COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY & ORS.                                           RESPONDENT(S)



                                                           J U D G M E N T
NAGARATHNA, J.
Admit.
2.              Being aggrieved by the order dated 14.10.2022 passed by the

            National Green Tribunal, Western Zone Bench, Pune (“NGT” for

            the              sake   of   convenience),       in       Appeal    No.19/2022         (WZ),   the

            appellant is before this Court.
3.              We have heard learned counsel for the appellant and learned

            counsel for first respondent and learned counsel for respondent

            Nos.2 and 3 and we have perused the material on record.
4.              The controversy in this appeal is in a very narrow compass.

            The              grievance     of    the   appellant        is     that    pursuant      to    the

            direction               issued      by   the   High       Court    in     PIL   Writ    Petition
Signature Not Verified
No.2530/2021
Digitally signed by
dated    19.04.2022,         the     first    respondent      herein
   RADHA SHARMA
   Date: 2025.03.01
   15:02:04 IST
   Reason:
sought to compute damages vis-a-vis the illegal construction
1
put   up   by    the    appellant     herein      and   estimated    the      damages

resulting from the illegal construction put up by the appellant

herein in monetary terms.            The first respondent herein by order

dated 09.05.2022 directed the appellant herein to pay a sum of

Rs.2,04,19,560/-        (Ruees       Two     Crores,    four   lakhs          nineteen

thousand and five hundred and sixty only) towards environmental

compensation.
5.    Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that prior to

the determination of the environmental compensation directed to

be paid by the appellant herein, there was no opportunity given

to the appellant herein inasmuch neither a Show Cause Notice

was issued to the appellant nor was an opportunity of hearing

granted.    The impugned order dated 09.05.2022 is a unilateral,

one-sided       order   which   is    hit    by   the   principles       of   natural

justice.
6.    Being aggrieved by the said order, the appellant herein

preferred an appeal before the NGT, Western Zone. Although the

NGT acknowledged the fact that the appellant was not heard in

the matter, nevertheless it did not remand the matter to the

first respondent-management authority for a re-determination of

the environmental compensation afresh. Instead, the NGT simply

sustained   the     said   order     on     the   premise   that    it    (NGT)   was

giving an opportunity of being heard to the appellant herein.

Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that an Appellate

Authority hearing a lis in the form of an appeal is totally

different from the original authority which would determine the
2
environmental     compensation       which    is      in    the   nature    of     an

exercise of administrative powers.              Learned counsel submitted

that the order dated 09.05.2022 which was passed by the first

respondent-management authority was in total violation of the

principles of natural justice. The NGT, therefore, ought to

have remanded the matter to the Management Authority for re-

determination of the environmental compensation that was liable

to be paid by the appellant herein after giving an opportunity

of being heard and filing objections to the said determination.
7.   In   the   circumstances,      learned    counsel      for   the     appellant

submitted that the impugned order of the NGT as well as the

order dated 09.05.2022 may be set aside and there may be a

fresh compliance of the direction issued by the High Court

dated 19.04.2022.
8.   Per contra, learned counsel for the first respondent and

learned    counsel   for   third    respondent        supported    the     impugned

order(s) and contended that there is no merit in the appeal;

that the appellant herein could have approached the High Court

in Writ Petition No.2530/2021 if it had any grievance with

regard to order dated 09.05.2022; that it was the appellant

which chose to file an appeal before the NGT and the NGT, after

giving an opportunity of hearing to the appellant herein, has

passed    the   impugned   order;    that     there    is    no   merit    in    this

appeal and hence, the same may be dismissed.
3
9.   We have considered the arguments advanced at the bar in

light of the material on record and particularly in light of

order dated 09.05.2022 passed by first respondent-Authority as

well as the impugned order passed by the NGT.
10. We   find    that      the    High      Court     by    order   dated    19.04.2022

observed as under:
“3. In so far as prayer clause (c) is concerned,
         we direct the GCZMA as well as other authorities
         who    are   involved         in     the    demolition       of    such
         construction to file an affidavit indicating the
         cost required for such demolitions.                        The GCZMA
         should also make an estimate of the damages that
         such      illegal        constructions             cause     to     the
         environment       in     monetary         terms,    though    we    are
         conscious that such damage can never be fully
         compensated only in monetary terms.
4.       Respondent          No.6      is     also     granted       an
         opportunity to file affidavit, if they choose to
         explain why they should not be required to pay
         damages      to    the       State     for    the     illegal      and
         unauthorized constructions put up by them in an
         area effected by CRZ notification.”
11. On the basis of the aforesaid order, the impugned order

dated 09.05.2022 was passed by the first respondent-Authority.

The Authority while determining the compensation has neither

issued any Show Cause Notice to the appellant herein nor has it

given    an    opportunity       of    being       heard.      Therefore,      the   said
4
determination        made       by      the        first       respondent-authority                is

unilateral and in the absence of hearing the appellant herein,

we find that the procedure adopted by the first respondent

herein      was   contrary        to    the        settled          principles       of    natural

justice.     Further,       when       the    said       order       dated       09.05.2022       was

assailed by the appellant before the NGT, the NGT, having found

violation of the principles of natural justice, ought to have

remanded the matter to the first respondent-authority for re-

determination        of     environmental              compensation          after      giving     an

opportunity of being heard to the appellant herein. Instead,

the   NGT    took     upon      itself        to       determine       the       correctness      or

otherwise      of    the     calculation            of      environmental           compensation

arrived at by the first respondent-authority on the premise

that it was giving an opportunity to the appellant herein.
12. We    hold      that    the      opportunity            given     by     the     NGT    to    the

appellant     herein       in     an   appeal          is     not    the     same    quality       of

opportunity which the first respondent as an original Authority

would have granted to the appellant herein. Therefore, we find

that the NGT was not right in sustaining the impugned order

dated 09.05.2022 passed by the appellant herein. Since we are

setting     aside     the    order       of    the       NGT    only        on    the     issue   of

violation of principles of natural justice and not on merits,

we shall construe the impugned order dated 09.05.2022 passed by

the   first       respondent-Authority                   as    a      Show       Cause     Notice.

Appellant herein is granted three weeks’                             time    from       today     to
5
reply to the said order now construed as a Show Cause Notice.

The    appellant   shall   be   heard   and    there   shall   be   a    re-

determination of the environmental compensation that has to be

paid by the appellant herein having regard to the direction

dated 19.04.2022 issued by the High Court in PIL Writ Petition

No.2530/2021 extracted above.
13. It is needless to observe that the said re-determination

shall be made as expeditiously as possible and in accordance

with law.
14. The   appeal   is   allowed   in-part     and   disposed   of   in   the

aforesaid terms.
15. It is stated that a sum of Rs.60,00,000/- (Rupees Sixty

Lakhs Only) has been deposited by the appellant before the NGT,

Western Zone, the disbursal of the said amount shall be subject

to the orders to be made by the first respondent-Authority.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
…………………………………………………………………..,J.
(B.V. NAGARATHNA)



                                         …………………………………………………………………..,J.
(PRASANNA B. VARALE)

  NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 19, 2025
6
ITEM NO.23                        COURT NO.7                     SECTION XVII

                  S U P R E M E C O U R T O F         I N D I A
                          RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 9328/2022

ZON HOTELS PVT. LTD.                                             Appellant(s)
                                      VERSUS

GOA COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY & ORS.                     Respondent(s)

(IA No.201434/2022-EXEMPTION         FROM   FILING    C/C   OF    THE     IMPUGNED
JUDGMENT)
Date : 19-02-2025 This appeal was called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE B.V. NAGARATHNA
           HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANNA B. VARALE

For Appellant(s)        Mr. Shiven Desai, Adv.
Mr. Avishkar Singhvi, Adv.
Mr. Vivek Jain, AOR
                        Ms. Suchitra Kumbhat, Adv.
Mr. Rajat Jain, Adv.
Mr. Sadiq Noor, Adv.
For Respondent(s)       Mr. Surjendu Sankar Das, AOR
                        Ms. Annie Mittal, Adv.
Mr. Sanjay Parikh, Sr. Adv.
Ms. Srishti Agnihotri, AOR
                        Ms. Kritika, Adv.
Mr. D.P.Singh, Adv.
Ms. Tara Elizabeth Kurien, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                              O R D E R
           Admit.
The appeal is allowed in-part and disposed of in

   terms     of   the    signed   non-reportable     judgment     which    is

   pending on the file.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
(RADHA SHARMA)                                          (DIVYA BABBAR)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                                COURT MASTER (NSH)
7