[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Southern Power Distribution Company Of ... vs B Ramesh on 17 February, 2025
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
2025 INSC 326




                                                                 NON-REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO._____________ OF 2025
                             (@Special Leave Petition (C) No.16512 of 2023)

                            SOUTHERN POWER DISTRIBUTION COMPANY OF
                            TELANGANA LTD.(TSSPDCL) & ORS.
                                                                  …APPELLANTS
                                                     Vs.
                            B RAMESH & ANR.                    …RESPONDENTS


                                                 ORDER
Leave granted.
2. The appellant(s) is a power distribution
                            company, aggrieved with judgment of the Division
                            Bench of the High Court of Telangana affirming the
                            directions issued by the learned Single Judge in the
                            Writ Petition directing appointment of the respondent
                            herein as an Office Subordinate in the Company. The
                            directions were issued accepting the contention of the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Nirmala Negi
Writ Petitioner that his case is similarly situated to
   Date: 2025.03.06
   15:12:51 IST
   Reason:
Page 1 of 6
that of one Shri A. Anjaneyalu who was also a
Contract Junior Lineman1 and had suffered an
accident while carrying out the duties; which
incapacitated him from discharging the duties of a
CJLM.
3. Mr. D. Abhinav Rao, learned Counsel
appearing for the appellant(s)-Company raised two
contentions; one that the case of Respondent No.1
was not identical to that of A. Anjaneyalu’s; the latter
of whom had suffered permanent disability by reason
of amputation carried out on his right hand, a direct
result of an accident while carrying out the duties of
the CJLM. The second contention is that merely
because the respondent No.1 could not qualify in the
physical test for CJLM, he cannot be appointed to the
post of Office Subordinate; which could only be by a
due selection process inviting applications from the
public. The contention is that the directions issued
would        be   in   conflict   with
Article   16
of   the
Constitution of India, 1950 which mandates equality
of opportunity in public employment.
1
“CJLM”
Page 2 of 6
4.    Mr.   A.   Karthik,   learned   Counsel
appearing for the 1st respondent would contend that
the respondent No.1 has been prosecuting his cause
right from 2007 onwards and he deserves to be
appointed as an Office Subordinate, as directed by
the learned Single Judge and affirmed by the Division
Bench of the High Court. Even if A. Anjaneyalu’s case
is not identical to that of the respondent No.1, there
is similarity insofar as both suffered an accident
while discharging duties, by reason of which they
were not able to effectively participate in the physical
test.
5. We have gone through the records
and find that the respondent No.1 has been agitating
his cause right from 2007; which though cannot be
the sole reason for approving the directions issued by
the High Court. When the appellant was unable to
participate in the physical test of pole climbing; by
reason only of the fracture suffered in an accident, he
approached the High Court. Learned Single Judge of
the High Court in Writ Petition No.23913 of 2007,
produced along with the additional documents filed
by the appellant, found that the ends of justice would
Page 3 of 6
be met if the respondents-therein are directed to
conduct pole climbing test to the appellant-therein
and, if he qualifies, the respondents     consider his
candidature to the post of CJLM. The respondent
No.1 appeared in the pole climbing test and failed,
when he turned around and contented that he was
unable to qualify in the pole climbing test due to the
disability occurred in an accident. In fact, respondent
No.1 had never raised such a contention at the earlier
instance and he invited the order in W.P.(C) No.23913
of 2007 for a participation in the pole climbing test.
6. Admittedly, even the selection was to
the post of CJLM as a contract employee in the
appellant-Company. Having failed in the physical
test, the respondent No.1 cannot seek for regular
appointment as an Office Subordinate. As far as the
disability; from the records, we find that the case of
A. Anjaneyalu and respondent No.1 are quite distinct
and different. A. Anjaneyalu suffered a permanent
disability by reason of the accident while carrying out
the duties of the CJLM. A. Anjaneyalu, as is seen
from Annexure P-7 (discharge summary), suffered an
amputation of his fifth finger and the base of the right
Page 4 of 6
hand. The amputation which resulted in a permanent
disability was also on account of the accident while
discharging duties of the CJLM. The appointment as
an   Office   Subordinate   was   in    that     peculiar
circumstances.
7. Respondent No.1 on the other hand,
had suffered a fracture in the accident while he was
performing the duties and there was no permanent
disability. Respondent No.1 only submitted that he
has a rod implanted in his hand which resulted in his
failure in the physical test. As we noticed respondent
No.1 had invited an order in a Writ Petition, appeared
in the physical test, in which he failed and then, on
an after-thought, has taken the contention. We have,
absolutely, no reason to equate the case of A.
Anjaneyalu with respondent No.1. We cannot also
countenance, the order of the learned Single Judge
which    directed   appointment        as   an     Office
Subordinate; equating the case of A. Anjaneyalu with
the respondent No.1. The mere fact that respondent
No.1 has been agitating his cause from 2007 cannot
result in an appointment when there is no legal basis
shown for giving such alternate appointment. We,
Page 5 of 6
hence, allow the appeal setting aside the order of the
Division Bench and the learned Single Judge, thus,
rejecting the Writ Petition filed by respondent No.1.
We leave the parties to suffer their respective costs.
8.    The appeal stands allowed in
the above terms.
9.    Pending application(s), if any,
shall stand disposed of.
……………………..……………, J.
[SUDHANSHU DHULIA]



                       ……………………..……………, J.
[K. VINOD CHANDRAN]


NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 17, 2025.
Page 6 of 6