[Cites
10
, Cited by
89
]
Supreme Court of India
Central Bureau Of Investigation Etc vs V.K. Sehgal And Anr on 8 October, 1999
Equivalent citations: AIR 1999 SUPREME COURT 3706, 1999 AIR SCW 3742, 1999 (10) SRJ 136, (2000) 1 CRIMES 418, 1999 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 761, (2000) 1 KER LJ 14, 1999 (6) SCALE 419, 1999 (8) ADSC 581, 1999 (8) SCC 501, 1999 (3) CRIMES 165, 1999 SCC(CRI) 1494, 1999 (4) LRI 986, 1999 CRILR(SC&MP) 761, 1999 ADSC 8 581, 2000 ALL MR(CRI) 1514, (1999) 8 JT 170 (SC), 2000 (2) SERVLJ 85 SC, (1999) 3 SCJ 519, (1999) 4 ALLCRILR 408, (2000) 1 EASTCRIC 184, (2000) 1 MADLW(CRI) 306, (2000) 1 PAT LJR 9, (1999) 4 RECCRIR 615, (1999) 4 CURCRIR 109, (1999) 8 SUPREME 490, (1999) 26 ALLCRIR 2329, (1999) 6 SCALE 419, (2000) 1 BLJ 69, (1999) 3 CHANDCRIC 75, 2000 (1) ANDHLT(CRI) 1 SC, (2000) 1 ANDHLT(CRI) 1
Bench:
K.T. Thomas
,
M.B. Shah
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  1059 of 1999

PETITIONER:
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION ETC.

RESPONDENT:
V.K. SEHGAL AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 08/10/1999

BENCH:
K.T. THOMAS & M.B. SHAH

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

1999 Supp(3) SCR 570

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by THOMAS, J. Leave granted.
The High Court of Punjab and Haryana has rescued a public servant from
bribery offence solely on the ground of want of valid sanction. Evidently
the attention of the learned Single Judge of the High Court, who set aside
the conviction and sentence, was not drawn to the intervened changes in law
regarding sanction for prosecuting a public servant under Prevention of
Corruption enactments. Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI for short) and
the State of Haryana have filed the special leave petitions in challenge of
the aforesaid judgment of the High Court.
First respondent was the accused in the case. He was working as Section
Officer in the office of the Defence Pension Disbursement Section. He was
challaned by the CBI on the allegation that he demanded and collected an
amount of Rs. 200 from a pensioner as reward for disbursing the arrears of
pension due to him and that the accused was trapped in the process of
receiving the aforesaid amount of bribery on 20.12.1984. After trial the
Special Judge, Ambala (Haryana) convicted the accused by its judgment dated
30.8.1990, under
Section 161
of the Indian Penal Code and
Section 5(2)
of
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 and sentenced him to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for two years besides payment of fine.
Accused preferred an appeal before the High Court against the aforesaid
judgment of conviction and sentence. He contended before the High Court,
inter alia, that he was holding the post of Section Officer (Accounts) on
promotion which was ordered by the Controller General of Defence Accounts
and hence the competent authority to accord sanction to prosecute the
accused is the said Controller General. On its basis it was further
contended that the sanction accorded by the Controller of Defence Accounts
(Pension and Disbursement), who is a subordinate officer of the Controller
General, is invalid.
Learned Single Judge upheld the above contention and on that ground alone
set aside the conviction and sentence as per the judgment which is impugned
in those appeals.
On behalf of the CBI it was submitted before the High Court that it was
never pointed out by the accused to any of the prosecution witnesses that
sanction was not granted by the competent officer i.e., Controller General
of Defence Accounts. It was also submitted that the question whether the
accused was promoted by the Controller General of Defence Accounts or by
the Controller of Defence Accounts, are mixed questions of law and facts
and therefore at that stage such a plea raised by the accused should not be
countenanced.
But the learned Single Judge repelled the aforesaid plea for which he put-
forth the following reasons :
"Problem in this case is that the appellant/accused was promoted by the
Controller General of Defence Accounts and not by the Controller of Defence
Accounts. This aspect, if the appellant has not been able to put before the
Trial Court, then it does not mean that the appellant/accused is debarred
from entertaining the same at this stage because the appeal itself is in
continuation of the trial. The plea raised by him is legal and has gone
deep to the root of the case of the prosecution. Resultantly, I hold that
the sanction Ex.PL has not been granted by a competent authority vitiating
the entire case. Learned Special Judge was not competent to take cognizance
into the matter as already stated above. Consequently, the present appeal
is hereby accepted and the judgment of the conviction and order of sentence
passed by the learned Special Judge, Ambala is hereby set aside." Two
factual positions have emerged from the above. First is that the trial
court took cognisance of the offence on the strength of the sanction
accorded by the Controller of Defence Accounts. Second is that the accused
never raised any objection regarding sanction when his case was in the
trial court. In such a situation the High Court ought not to have allowed
the accused to raise the contention regarding any defect in the sanction
for the first time in appeal, according to the CBI.
An endeavour was made before us to show that the sanction ordered by the
Controller of Defence Accounts is quite valid and is good enough for
prosecuting the accused but we do not think it necessary to consider the
merits of that aspect. In these appeals we are only deciding the question
whether it was open to the court of appeal to reverse a conviction and
sentence passed by the trial court on the mere premise that there was no
valid sanction to prosecute. In this connection a reference to
Section 465
of the Code of Criminal Procedure is appropriate. It reads thus :
"465. Finding or sentence when reversible by reason of error, omission or
irregularity. - (1) Subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained, no
finding, sentence or order passed by a Court of competent jurisdiction
shall be reversed or altered by a Court of appeal, confirmation or revision
on account of any error, omission or irregularity; in the complaint,
summons, warrant, proclamation, order, judgment or other proceedings before
or during trial or in any inquiry or other proceedings under this Code, or
any error, or irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution, unless in
the opinion of that Court, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned
thereby.
(2) In determining whether any error, omission or irregularity in any
proceeding under this Code, or any error, or irregularity in any sanction
for the prosecution has occasioned a failure of justice, the Court shall
have regard to the fact whether the objection could and should have been
raised at an earlier stage in the proceedings."
(emphasis supplied)

A court of appeal or revision is debarred from reversing a finding (or even
an order of conviction and sentence) on account of any error or
irregularity in the sanction for the prosecution, unless failure of justice
had been occasioned on account of such error or irregularity. For
determining whether want of valid sanction had in fact occasioned failure
of justice the aforesaid sub-section (2) enjoins on the court a duty to
consider whether the accused had raised any objection on that score at the
trial stage. Even if he had raised any such objection at the early stage it
is hardly sufficient to conclude that there was failure of justice. It has
to be determined on the facts of each case. But an accused who did not
raise it at the trial stage cannot possibly sustain such a plea made for
the first time in the appellate court.
In
Kalpnath Rai v. State
through
CBI, [1997] 8 SCC 732 this Court has observed in paragraph 29 thus :
"Sub-section (2) of Section 465 of the Code is not a carte blanche for
rendering all trials vitiated on the ground of the irregularity of sanction
if objection thereto was raised at the first instance itself. The sub-
section only says that `the court shall have regard to the fact' that
objection has been raised at the earlier stage in the proceedings. It is
only one of the considerations to be weighed but it does not mean that if
objection was raised at the earlier stage, for that very reason the
irregularity in the sanction would spoil the prosecution and transmute the
proceedings into a void trial."
In a case where the accused failed to raise the question of valid sanction
the trial would normally proceed to its logical end by making judicial
scrutiny of the entire materials. If that case ends in conviction there is
no question of failure of justice on the mere premise that no valid
sanction was accorded for prosecuting the public servant, because the very
purpose of providing such a filtering check is to safeguard public servants
from frivolous or mala fide or vindictive prosecution on the allegation
that they have committed offence in the discharge of their official duties.
But once the judicial filtering process is over on completion of the trial
the purpose of providing for the initial sanction would bog down to a
surplusage. This could be the reason for providing a bridle upon the
appellate and revisional forums as envisaged in
Section 465
of the Code of
Criminal Procedure.
That apart, there is now another trammel on the appellate powers. It must
be remembered that the need for a valid sanction for prosecution was
incorporated in
Section 6
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (it
will hereinafter be referred to as `the 1947 Act'). The present prosecution
was launched under the said Act, but by the time the case reached final
stage in the trial court, the 1947 Act was repealed by
Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988
(hereinafter referred to as `the 1988 Act') which came
into force on 9.9.1988. The prosecution and the trial thereafter continued
by virtue of sub-section (2) of Section 30 of the 1988 Act. That section
reads thus :
"30. Repeal and saving. -
The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947
(2 of
1947) and the
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952
(46 of 1952) are hereby
repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, but without prejudice to the application
of
section 6
of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), anything done
or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken under or in
pursuance of the Acts so repealed shall, in so far as it is not
inconsistent with the provision of this Act, be deemed to have been done or
taken under or in pursuance of the corresponding provision of this Act."
Thus repeal of the 1947 Act was made without prejudice to the application
of
Section 6
of the General Clauses Act which Act reads thus :
"6. Effect of repeal, - Where this Act, or any Central Act or Regulation
made after the commencement of this Act, repeals any enactment hitherto
made or hereafter to be made, then, unless a different intention appears,
the repeal shall not -
(a)    revive anything not in force or existing at the time at which the
repeal takes effect; or
(b)    affect the previous operation of any enactment so repealed or
anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or
(c)    affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired,
accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed; or any
(d)    affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of
any offence committed against any enactment so repealed; or
(e)    effect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of
any such right, privilege, obligation, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as
aforesaid, and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be
instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture or
punishment may be imposed as   if the repealing Act or Regulation had not
been passed." So "unless a different intention appears" in the 1988 Act the
repeal of the 1947 Act will not affect any penal liability incurred or any
legal proceedings or remedy in respect of any right acquired under the 1947
Act. However, if a different intention can be discerned from the 1988 Act,
such intention will have overriding effect. It is said in sub-section (2)
of Section 30 of the 1988 Act that any action taken under or in pursuance
of the repealed Act such action will be deemed to have been taken under the
corresponding provisions of the new Act.
It is noticeable that no specific provision was incorporated in the 1947
Act regarding appeal and revision and hence the appeal and revision were
entirely governed by the provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
.
However, under the 1988 Act there is a special provision regarding appeal
and revision which is incorporated in Section 27. Section 27 is extracted
below :
"27. Appeal and revision. - Subject to the provisions of this Act, the High
Court may exercise, so far as they may be applicable, all the powers of
appeal and revision conferred by the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of
1974) on a High Court as if the court of the special Judge were a court of
session trying cases within the local limits of the High Court." Thus the
powers of appeal and revision of the High Court conferred by the
Code of
Criminal Procedure
shall be "subject to the provisions of the 1988 Act. It
is worthwhile to notice that a trammel has been imposed on a court of
appeal and revision under Section 19(3)(a) of the 1988 Act. It reads thus :
(only material portion is extracted)

"Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
1973
:- no finding, sentence or order passed by a special Judge shall be
reversed or altered by a Court in appeal, confirmation or revision on the
ground of the absence of or any error, omission or irregularity in. the
sanction required under sub-section (1), unless in the opinion of that
court, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.
Explanation - for the purposes of this Section,
(a)   error includes competency of the authority to grant sanction"It is a
further inroad into the powers of the appellate court over and above the
trammel contained in Section 465 of the Code which has been dealt with
supra. Under Section 19(3) (a) no order of conviction and sentence can be
reversed or altered by a court of appeal or revision even "on the ground of
the absence of sanction" unless in the opinion of that court a failure of
justice has been occasioned thereby. By adding the Explanation the said
embargo is further widened to the effect that even if the sanction was
granted by an authority who was not strictly competent to accord such
sanction, then also the appellate as well as revisional courts are debarred
from interfering with the conviction and sentence merely on that ground.
Thus the legal position to be followed, while dealing with the appeal filed
against the conviction and sentence of any offence mentioned in 1947 Act,
is that no such conviction and sentence shall be altered or reversed merely
on the ground of absence of sanction, much less on the ground of want of
competency of the authority who granted the sanction.
So from any point of view the High Court committed an error in setting
aside the conviction and sentence passed on the accused, on the ground of
want of a valid sanction to prosecute. Hence we quash the impugned judgment
of the High Court and remit the matter to the High Court for disposal
afresh of the appeal preferred by the accused before it, in accordance with
law. Needless it is to say that the accused will continue to remain on bail
till the disposal of the appeal for which purpose the bail bonds executed
by him before the High Court shall stand revived.