[Cites
7
, Cited by
98
]
Supreme Court of India
Mahesh Balmiki @ Munna vs State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 August, 1999
Equivalent citations: AIR 1999 SUPREME COURT 3338, 2000 (1) SCC 319 2000 SCC (CRI) 178, 2000 SCC (CRI) 178
Author:
Syed Shah Mohammed Quadri
Bench:
Syed Shah Mohammed Quadri
PETITIONER:
MAHESH BALMIKI @ MUNNA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	27/08/1999

BENCH:
K.Vankataswami, Syed Shah Mohammed Quadri




JUDGMENT:
SYED SHAH MOHAMMED QUADRI, J.
Leave  is granted limited to the question of nature of
offence.   The appellant along with two others was tried for
committing  murder of one Satish (hereinafter referred to as
'the deceased') and causing injuries with knife to Harkishan
and was convicted for offences punishable under
Sections 302
and
324
I.P.C.   read	 with
Section	34
I.P.C.   He	 was
sentenced  to  life  imprisonment and three  years  rigorous
imprisonment for the said offences by learned Sessions Judge
in  Sessions  Case  No.198  of 1981 on	July  17,  1982.   A
Division  Bench	 of the High Court of the Madhya Pradesh  at
Gwalior	 in  Criminal  Appeal No.171 of 1982  confirmed	 his
conviction  under
Sections 302
and
324
I.P.C.  and  sentence
for  the said offences and dismissed his appeal on April 30,
1998.	Against the judgment and order of the High Court, he
is  in	appeal	before this  Court.   Dr.T.N.Singh,  learned
senior	counsel	 for the appellant, has urged that it  is  a
case  falling under Exception 4 to
Section 300
I.P.C and, in
any  event,  as the appellant had given only a	single	blow
with  knife,  he  ought	 not to have  been  convicted  under
Section	 302
I.P.C.;	his conviction could only  be  under
Section	 304
I.P.C.   Mr.Anoop	 Choudhary,  learned  senior
counsel	 appearing  for the State, argued that none  of	 the
requirements   of   Exception	4   are	 present   and	 the
circumstances  clearly	suggest	 that	the  appellant	 had
intention  to  kill the deceased, therefore, he was  rightly
convicted under
Section 302
I.P.C.  Apropos the contentions,
we  have  perused the judgments of the Trial Court  and	 the
High  Court.  It appears that the appellant and three others
snatched  the wrist watch of a boy known to the deceased and
Harkishan.   At	 the  request of that boy,  they  asked	 the
appellant  and	his  associates to return  the	watch.	 The
appellant  told	 the deceased and Harkishan to come to	some
specified  place.   On reaching there, they had exchange  of
hot  words and then Naresh, Pappu and Laxman caught hold  of
the  deceased  and  the appellant gave a knife blow  on	 the
chest  of  the deceased as a result of which he	 fell  down.
The   appellant	 also  inflicted   injuries  with  knife  on
Harkishan  who	rushed	to  save the  deceased.	  While	 the
deceased was being taken to the police station, he succumbed
to  the	 injuries.   Dr.D.S.Badkur  (P.W.5),  who  conducted
post-mortem  on	 the  person  of  the  deceased,  found	 the
following injuries :
"Stab  wound  1.5	 x  .5	cm.   vertical	situated  on
interior  aspect  of chest on left border of sternum and  at
the  stern costal joint of 6th and 7th rib, sternum cut	 and
fracture  in arms 9.2 area, truck of the wound going through
and through and sternum, pericandium (pericardium), anterior
and  posterior	well of rt.  vertical (It) dome of  disphram
(diaphragm),  left  lobe  of liver cardiac  and	 of  stomach
perforated total depth of wound was 19 cm.  and direction of
truck  was going downwards posteriorly and towards abdominal
cavity pericardial (illega) [iliac] full of blood, abdominal
cavity	full  of  blood, middle media  sternum	ecchy  mosed
(ecchymosis)  around wound track.  Stomach contention coming
out in peritoneum cavity."
P.W.5  stated that the deceased died due to shock	 and
haemorrhage  resulting from the said wound which could	have
been caused by a sharp- edged cutting weapon.  Now Exception
4 to
Section 300
I.P.C, is in the following terms :
"Exception  4.- Culpable homicide is not murder if  it
is  committed without premeditation in a sudden fight in the
heat  of  passion  upon	 a sudden quarrel  and	without	 the
offender's  having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel
or unusual manner.
Explanation.-  It	 is immaterial in such	cases  which
party offers the provocation or commits the first assault."
The  requirements of this exception are :	 (a) without
premeditation in a sudden fight;  (b) in the heat of passion
upon a sudden quarrel;	(c) the offender has not taken undue
advantage;  and (d) the offender has not acted in a cruel or
unusual manner.
Where  these  requirements   are	satisfied,  culpable
homicide would not be murder.  On the facts of this case, it
cannot	said  that  the fatal injury was  inflicted  without
premeditation.	 Indeed, the appellant asked the deceased to
come  to  a particular place to receive the  watch.   There,
three  associates  of  the  appellant  caught  hold  of	 the
deceased  and  the  appellant gave the fatal blow  with	 the
knife.	 The  stab wound was given on the chest on the	left
side  of the sternum between the costal joint of the 6th and
7th  rib and both the ribs have been fractured.	 It  appears
that   truck  of  the  wound   had  gone  through   sternum,
pericardium  anterior  and posterior after passing the	ribs
and thereafter entered the liver and perforated a portion of
stomach.   Total  depth of wound was 19 cm and direction  of
truck  was  going downwards posteriorly.  The impact of	 the
single	blow with knife has been disastrous.  Therefore,  it
cannot	be  said  that	the appellant has  not	taken  undue
advantage  or not acted in cruel or unusual manner.  In	 our
view,  Exception  4  has, therefore, no application  on	 the
facts of this case.  Adverting to the contention of a single
blow,  it may be pointed out that there is no principle that
in  all	 cases	of single blow
Section 302
I.P.C.   is	 not
attracted.    Single  blow  may,  in  some   cases,   entail
conviction  under
Section 302
I.P.C., in some	cases  under
Section	 304
I.P.C and in some other cases under
Section 326
I.P.C.	 The  question with regard to the nature of  offence
has  to be determined on the facts and in the  circumstances
of  each  case.	 The nature of the injury, whether it is  on
the  vital  or non-vital part of the body, the weapon  used,
the  circumstances  in	which the injury is caused  and	 the
manner	in  which the injury is inflicted are  all  relevant
factors	 which may go to determine the required intention or
knowledge  of the offender and the offence committed by him.
In  the instant case, the deceased was disabled from  saving
himself	 because  he  was  held by  the	 associates  of	 the
appellant  who inflicted though a single yet a fatal blow of
the  description noted above.  These facts clearly establish
that  the appellant had intention to kill the deceased.	  In
any  event,  he can safely be attributed knowledge that	 the
knife  blow given by him is so imminently dangerous that  it
must in all probability cause death or such bodily injury as
is likely to cause death.  Dr.Singh invited our attention to
the  following judgments of this Court in
Tholan vs.   State
of  Tamil  Nadu
[AIR 1984 SC 759],  Ranjitsinh	 Chandrasinh
Atodaria vs.  State of Gujarat [AIR 1994 SC 1060] and Balbir
Singh  vs.   State of Punjab [1995 (3) Suppl.  SCC 472]	 for
altering  conviction from
Section 302
I.P.C.  to
Section 304
I.P.C.	 A  perusal of these judgments shows that these	 are
instances  of application of the aforementioned	 principles.
We do not, therefore, consider it necessary to refer to them
in  detail.  For the above reasons, we are of the view	that
the appellant had rightly been convicted and sentenced under
Sections 302
and
324
I.P.C.  by the Trial Court and the High
Court.	We find no merit in this appeal which is accordingly
dismissed.