[Cites
19
, Cited by
22
]
Supreme Court of India
Ram Lakhan Etc. Etc vs Presiding Officer And Ors on 17 November, 1999
Equivalent citations: AIR 2000 SUPREME COURT 1946, 2000 (10) SCC 77, 2000 AIR SCW 1123, 2000 LAB. I. C. 1371, (2000) 2 SERVLR 177, (2000) 2 SUPREME 394, (2000) 2 LAB LN 958, (2000) 85 FACLR 524, (2000) 2 SCT 21, (2000) 3 ALLMR 508 (SC), (2000) 2 CURCC 52, (2000) 2 CURLR 563, (2000) 96 FJR 347, (2000) 1 LABLJ 1067, 2000 LABLR 496, (2000) 2 RAJ LW 357, 2000 (10) SCC 201, (2000) 3 ANDHLD 53, 2000 SCC (L&S) 422, (2000) 2 SCALE 9, (2000) 84 DLT 147, (1999) 10 JT 466 (SC), (1999) 10 JT 268 (SC), (1999) 7 SCALE 217, (1999) 7 SCALE 217.2, (2000) 1 SERVLR 689, (2000) 3 ALLMR 508, 2000 SCC (L&S) 388, (2006) 13 SCALE 635, 2006 (13) SCC 497, (2007) 1 CTC 694 (SC), (2007) 1 KER LT 46, (2007) 1 LANDLR 507, (2007) 2 ALLMR 893, (2007) 53 ALLINDCAS 145
Bench:
S. Saghir Ahmad
,
D.P. Mohapatra
,
R.P. Sethi
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  6566 of 1999

PETITIONER:
RAM LAKHAN ETC. ETC,

RESPONDENT:
PRESIDING OFFICER AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 17/11/1999

BENCH:
S. SAGHIR AHMAD & D.P. MOHAPATRA & R.P. SETHI

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

1999 Supp(4) SCR 463

The following Order of the Court was delivered:
S. SAGHIR AHMAD, J. Leave granted in all the Special Leave Petitions.
The appellants were the employees of the Swatantra Bharat Mill against whom
charge-sheets were issued in the year 1986 and they were subsequently
suspended.
Since an industrial dispute was already pending before the Industrial
Tribunal vide Delhi Administration Notification No. F-24(798)/94-Lab dated
1.4.86, an application was filed by the management under
Section 33(1)
of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 for permission to dismiss the employees
on completion of enquiry. This application was opposed by the appellants
who filed objections and claimed that they were entitled to be paid
Subsistence Allowance during the pendency of the disciplinary proceedings
for the period of suspension. On this, the Tribunal framed the following
preliminary issue:-
"At what rate, if any, the Management is to pay the subsistence allowance
to the workman"
The Presiding officer, Industrial Tribunal, Tis Hazari, Delhi, relying upon
the decision of this Court in
The Management, Hotel Imperial, New Delhi &
Ors. v. Hotel Workers Union
, AIR [1959] SC 1342, dismissed the objections
of the appellants and held that they were not entitled to any Subsistence
Allowance. The appellants thereafter filed Writ Petitions in the High Court
of Delhi which were dismissed by the impugned judgment reading as under:-
"in view of the decision of the larger Bench of the Supreme Court in the
case of
The Management, Hotel Imperial, New Delhi & Ors- v. Hotel Workers'
Union
reported as AIR (1959) SC 1342, we are not inclined to interfere in
this petition.
Dismissed."
It appears that the decision of this Court in
Fakirbhai Fulabhai Solanki v.
Presiding
officer & Anr., [1986] 3 SCC 131 = [1986] 2 SCR 1059 = AIR (1986)
SC 1168, was cited before the High Court, but it did not follow the
decision and preferred to follow the Judgment in
Hotel Imperial
's case
(supra).
This Court, while entertaining these appeals had passed the following order
on 2.1.1996:-
"In view of the fact that the judgment in
Hotel Imperial
's case was
rendered by a three Judge Bench, we consider it appropriate that these
petitions be listed before a three Judge Bench. Appropriate order from the
Hon'ble the Chief Justice may be obtained in this behalf.
In the event the special leave petitions cannot be listed within the next
two weeks, the application for interim stay may be put up before the three
Judge Bench within that period."
It is irrthese circumstances that the matter has come up before us. In
Hotel Imperial
's case (supra), this Court had laid down as under:
"We have, therefore to see whether it would be reasonable for an Industrial
Tribunal where it is dealing with a case to which
Section 33
of the Act
applies, to imply a term in the contract giving power to the master to
suspend a servant when the master has come to the conclusion after
necessary enquiry that the servant has committed misconduct and ought to be
dismissed, but cannot do so because of
Section 33
. It is urged on behalf of
the respondents that there is nothing in the language of
Section 33
to
warrant the conclusion that when an employer has to apply under it for
permission he can suspend the workmen concerned. This argument however,
begs the question because if there were any such provision in
Section 33
,
it would be an express provision in the statute authorising such suspension
and no further question of an implied term would arise. What we have to see
is whether in the absence of an express provision to that effect in
Section
33
, it will be reasonable for an Industrial Tribunal in these extraordinary
circumstances arising out of the effect of
Section 33
to imply a term in
the contract giving power to the employer to suspend the contract of
employment, thus relieving himself of the obligation to pay wages and
relieving the servant of the corresponding obligation to render service. We
are of the opinion that in the peculiar circumstances which have arisen on
account of the enactment of
Section 33
, it is but just and fair that
Industrial Tribunals should imply such a term in the contract of
employment.........
We are, therefore, of opinion that the ordinary law of master and servant
as to suspension can be and should be held to have been modified in view of
the fundamental change introduced by
Section 33
in that law and a term
should be implied by Industrial Tribunals in the contract of employment
that if the master has held a proper enquiry and come to the conclusion
that the servant should be dismissed and in consequence suspends him
pending the permission required under
Section 33
he has the power to order
such suspension, thus suspending the contract of employment temporarily, so
that there is no obligation on him to pay wages and no obligation on the
servant to work. In dealing with this point the basic and decisive
consideration introduced by
Section 33
must be borne in mind. The
undisputed common law right of the master to dismiss his servant for proper
cause has been subjected by
Section 33
to a ban; and that in fairness must
mean that, pending the removal of the said statutory ban, the master can
after holding a proper enquiry temporarily terminate the relationship of
master and servant by suspending his employee pending proceedings under
Section 33
, It follows therefore that if the tribunal grants permission,
the suspended contract would come to an end and there will be no further
obligation to pay any wages after the date of suspension. If, on the other
hand, the permission is refused, the suspension would be wrong and the
workmen would be entitled to all his wages from the date of suspension."
(Emphasis supplied)

This Court in
Hotel Imperial
's case (supra) was thus concerned with the
preliminary question whether the Management during the pendency of its
application under
Section 33(1)
of the Industrial Disputes Act can legally
suspend the employees after holding a proper departmental enquiry. The
question whether an employee would be entitled to Subsistence Allowance
during the period of suspension was not directly involved
in that case
, in
which it was held that if the master had held a proper enquiry and come to
the conclusion that the servant was to be dismissed and in consequence
thereof suspends him pending the permission required under
Section 33
, he
could legally do so with the result that the contract of employment would
stand suspended temporarily so that "there would be no obligation on him to
pay wages and no obligation on the servant to work". This observation
reflects the well-recognised rule that when an employee is suspended, he
does not get full wages and he is also not put on duty. He gets only
reduced salary (subsistence Allowance), prescribed by the Rules.
The view expressed in
Hotel Imperial
's case (supra) was reiterated in
T.
Cajee v. U. Jormanik  Siem
, [1961] 1 SCR 750 = AIR (1961) SC 276.
To the
same effect is the decision of this Court in
R.P. Kapur v, Union of India
,
[1964] 5 SCR 431 = AIR 1964 SC 787.
Thereafter, the Court rendered its
decision in
Balvantray Ratilal Patel v. State of Maharashtra
, [1968] 2 SCR
577 = AIR 1968 SC 800, in which it was laid down that an employer can
suspend an employee pending an enquiry into his misconduct and the only
question that can arise in such a suspension will relate to the payment of
his wages during the period of such suspension. It was further observed
that the power to suspend, in the sense of a right to forbid an employees
to work, is not an implied term in an ordinary contract between master and
servant and that such a power can only be the creature either of a statute
governing the contract, or of an express term in the contract itself. The
Court further observed that the absence of such a power either as an
express term in the contract or in the rules framed under some statute
would mean that an employer would have no power to suspend an employee and
if he does so, in the sense that he forbids the employee to work, he will
have to pay the employee's wages during the period of suspension. The Court
also came to the conclusion that an order of interim suspension can be
passed against the employee while an enquiry is pending into his conduct
even though there is no such term in the contract of employment or in the
rules, but in such a case the employee would be entitled to his
remuneration for the period of suspension if there is no statute or rule
under which it could be withheld.
The whole case law was reviewed by this Court in
V.P. Gindroniya v. State
of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
, AIR 1970 SC 1494, in which the decisions in
Hotel
Imperial
's case as also in the case of Balvantray Radial, both
referred to
above
, were considered.
Gindroniya's decision (supra) was followed in The
vice-Chancellor,
Jammu University & Anr. v. Dushinant Kumar Rampal
, AIR
(1977) SC 1146 and it was laid down as under:
`It will, therefore, be seen that where there is power conferred on the
employer either by an express term in the contract or by the rules
governing the terms and conditions of service to suspend an employee the
order of suspension has the effect of temporarily suspending the relation
of master and servant with the consequence that the employee is not bound
to render service and the employer is not bound to pay. In such a ease the
employee would not be entitled to receive any payment at all from the
employer unless the contract of employment or the rules governing the terms
and conditions of service provide for payment of some subsistence
allowance."
In
State of Madhya Pradesh v. State of Maharashtra & Ors..
AIR (1977) SC
1466 = [1977] 2 SCR 555 = [1977] 2 SCC 288, it was laid down that an order
of suspension does not put an end to the Govt. service. It was further
observed that suspension merely suspends the claim of salary as the
employee is paid suspension allowance during the period of suspension.
For
this purpose, reliance was placed upon an earlier decision of this Court in
Khem Chand v. Union of India
, [1963] Supp. 1 SCR 229 = AIR 1963 SC 687.
The Right to Life, guaranteed to a person under
Article 21
of the
Constitution, was read into the Service Rules relating to payment of
Subsistence Allowance and it was for this reason that this Court in State
of Maharashtra v, Chanderbhan, [1983] 3 SCR 337 = [1983] 3 SCC 387 = AIR
(1983) SC 803, struck down a Service Rule which provided for payment of a
nominal amount of Rupee one as Subsistence Allowance to an employee placed
under suspension.
In
Fakirbhai Fulabhai Solanki v. Presiding Officer & Anr.
, [1986] 3 SCC 131
= [1986] 2 SCR 1059 - AIR (1986) SC 1168, the decision of this Court in
Hotel Imperial
's case (supra) was considered and it was laid down as under:
"6. The learned counsel for the management however relied upon the decision
of this Court in
Management of Hotel Imperial, New Delhi v. Hotel Workers `
Union, In
that case this Court was mainly concerned with the right of the
management to suspend a workman where the management had taken a decision
to dismiss him but could not immediately give effect to such decision owing
to the restriction imposed by
Section 33 (1)
of the Act which required the
management to obtain the permission of the Tribunal when a reference was
pending adjudication before it....,..,"
It was further observed as under:-
"7.
In
the above decision
it was laid down that the management should be
deemed to possess the power to suspend an employee in respect of whom a
decision had been taken to dismiss him but an application for permission
had to be filed until the application for permission was decided.
The court
in giving
the above decision
also relied on an earlier decision of the
court in
Ranipur Colliery v. Bhuban Singh
, AIR (1959) SC 833. In that case
it was pointed out that but for the ban on the employer by
Section 33(1)
the employer would have been entitled to dismiss the employee immediately
after the completion of his enquiry on coming to the conclusion that the
employee was guilty of misconduct but
section 33
stepped in and stopped the
employer from dismissing the employee immediately on the conclusion of his
enquiry and compelled him to seek permission of the Tribunal. // was
therefore, held that it wax reasonable that the employer having done all
that he could do to bring the contract of service to an end should not be
expected to continue paying the employee thereafter. It was pointed out
that in such a case the employer would be justified in suspending the
employee without pay as the time taken by the Tribunal to accord permission
under
Section 33
of the Act was beyond the control of the employer. Lastly,
it was observed that this would not cause any hardship to the employee for
if the Tribunal granted permission the employee would not get anything from
the date of his suspension without pay while if the permission was refused
he would be entitled to his back wages from such date."
(Emphasis supplied) It was also observed as under:
"8. But in neither of the above two decisions the court considered the
question from the angle from which we have approached the problem. In
neither of them the court had the occasion to consider whether the denial
of payment of subsistence allowance during the pendency of the proceedings
under
Section 33(3)
of the Act would amount to violation of principles of
natural justice. They approached the question from the angle of the common
law right of a master to keep a workman under suspension either during the
pendency of a domestic enquiry into an act of misconduct alleged to have
been committed by a workman or during the pendency of an applications under
section 33
of the Act. Those were perhaps halcyon days when such
application were being disposed of quickly. If the court had realised that
such applications would take nearly six years as it has happened in this
case their view would have been different. An unscrupulous management may
by all possible means delay the proceedings so that the workman may be
driven to accept its terms instead of defending himself in the proceedings
under
Section 33 (3)
of the Act. To expect an ordinary workman to wait for
such a long time in these days is to expect something which is very unusual
to happen. Denial of payment of at least a small amount by way of
subsistence allowance would amount to gross unfairness."
this Court thus explained the decision in
Hotel Imperial
's case (supra) and
held that the principal question involved
in that case
related to the right
of the employer to suspend an employee under the general law of master and
servant and not whether he would be entitled to Suspension Allowance.
In another decision, namely in
O.P. Gupta v. Union of India & Ors.
, [1987]
4 SCC 328, it was held as under:
"An order of suspension of a government servant does not put an end to his
service under the government. He continues to be a member of the service in
spite of the order of suspension. The real effect of suspension as
explained by this Court in
Khem Chand v. Union of India
is that he
continues to be a member of the government service but is not permitted to
work and further during the period of suspension he is paid only some
allowance -- generally called subsistence allowance -- which is normally
less than the salary instead of the pay and allowances he would have been
entitled to if he had not been suspended. There is no doubt that an order
of suspension, unless the departmental inquiry is concluded within a
reasonable time, affects a government servant injuriously. The very
expression `subsistence allowance' has an undeniable penal significance.
The dictionary meaning of the word `subsist' as given in Shorter Oxford
English Dictionary, Vol. II at p. 2171 is "to remain alive as on food: to
continue to exist. " "Subsistence" means - means of supporting life,
especially a minimum livelihood. "
(Emphasis supplied) In Capt.
Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. & Anr.,
JT
(1999) 2 SC 456 = (1999) 3 SCC 679, it was observed as under:
"To place an employee under suspension is an unqualified right of the
employer, This right is conceded to the employer in service jurisprudence
everywhere. It has even received statutory recognition under service rules
framed by various authorities, including Govt. of India and the State
Governments. (See: for example. Rule 10 of Central Civil Services
(Classification, Control & Appeal) Rules. Even under the
General Clauses
Act
, this right is conceded to the employer by
Section 16
which, inter
alia, provides that power to appoint includes power to suspend or dismiss,"
Applying the principles
laid down in
the decisions
referred to above
to the
facts of this case, it has to be conceded that if the Management has held a
departmental enquiry against an employee, it has the right to place that
employee under suspension, if on the basis of the findings recorded at the
departmental enquiry, the Management is, prima facie, of the opinion that
the employee, on account of the charges having been proved was liable to be
dismissed from service, but the final order of dismissal could not be
passed on account of a Reference raised under the
Industrial Disputes Act,
1947
, which was already pending before the Tribunal. In such a situation,
if the Management makes an application under
Section 33 (I)
of the
Industrial Disputes Act for permission of the Tribunal to dismiss such
employee from service the management can, pending disposal of his
application under
Section 33(1)
, place that employee under suspension. Once
the employee is placed under suspension, the Management cannot take any
work from the suspended employee nor can the employee claim full salary
from the Management.
But the Management has to pay the Subsistence
Allowance to the employee so that he may sustain himself till the
application under Section 33(1) is finally disposed of.
Read in the light of the above discussion, there will not be found any
conflict of opinion between the decisions rendered by this Court in
Hotel
Imperial
's case (supra) and in Fakirbhai `s case (supra).
While right to
place an employee under suspension pending disposal of the application
under
Section 33(1)
is to be conceded to the Management on the basis of the
decision in
Hotel Imperial
's case (supra), the right of the employee to
receive Subsistence Allowance during the period of such suspension has to
be conceded to the employee on the basis of the decision in Fakirbhai's
case (supra) and other decisions of this Court
referred to above
wherein
the employee has been held to be entitled to Subsistence Allowance during
the period of suspension.
We are conscious of the observation made by this Court in
Hotel Imperial'
case (supra) that the Management has no control over the disposal of
application under
Section 33(1)
filed before the Industrial Tribunal and,
therefore, if it has placed the employer under suspension, it will not be
under any obligation to pay salary to the suspended employee for the period
over which the application under
Section 33(1)
remains pending with the
Tribunal. The Court further observed that if the application under
Section
33(1)
is allowed, the employee would be dismissed from service but if the
application is rejected, the employee would be paid all the arrears of
salary,

Just as the employer has no control over the disposal of the application
under
Section 33(1)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, so also the employee
has no control over the disposal of that application. Whether the employee
would be retained in service or removed would be dependent upon the fate of
the application. While the Management can afford to wait for the disposal
of that application, it would be impossible for an employee who survives
only on his salary to wait for the disposal of that application for an
indefinite period. It would not be possible for him to sustain himself. It
is in this light that the right to receive reduced salary (Subsistence
Allowance) for the period of suspension has to be read along with the right
of the management to place the employee under suspension pending disposal
of the application under
Section 33(1)
of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Thus, the right of Management to suspend and the right of the employee to
receive Subsistence Allowance are intertwined and both must survive
together.
For the reasons stated above, the appeals are allowed, the impugned
judgments passed by the Delhi High Court as also the judgment passed by the
Industrial Tribunal are set aside with the direction that the Subsistence
Allowance shall be paid to the appellants for the whole of the period of
suspension at such rates as is provided under the Standing Orders or the
Service Rules and if there is no such provision, they would be entitled to
be paid full salary even during the period of suspension. The arrears of
Subsistence Allowance shall be paid to the appellants within three months
from the date on which the certified copy of this Order is produced before
the concerned Officer.