[Cites
4
, Cited by
204
]
Supreme Court of India
Dattatraya Laxman Kamble vs Abdul Rasul Moulali Kotkunde & Anr on 28 April, 1999
Equivalent citations: AIR 1999 SUPREME COURT 2226, 1999 AIR SCW 2259, 1999 (2) UJ (SC) 789, 1999 (4) ADSC 149, 1999 (3) LRI 3, 1999 (3) SCALE 46, 1999 (4) SCC 1, 1999 SCFBRC 292, (1999) 3 KER LT 97, 1999 ADSC 4 149, 1999 (2) ALL CJ 1377, 1999 ALL CJ 2 1377, (1999) 3 JT 283 (SC), 1999 (5) SRJ 409, 1999 UJ(SC) 2 789, 1999 (3) JT 283, (1999) 2 MAH LJ 793, (1999) 2 RENCJ 1, (1999) 1 RENCR 508, (1999) 4 SUPREME 350, (1999) 3 SCALE 46, (1999) 2 CURCC 115, (1999) 2 RENTLR 199, (1999) 3 BOM CR 543
Bench:
S.Saghir Ahmad
,
K.T.Thomas
PETITIONER:
DATTATRAYA LAXMAN KAMBLE

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
ABDUL RASUL MOULALI KOTKUNDE & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	28/04/1999

BENCH:
S.Saghir Ahmad, K.T.Thomas




JUDGMENT:
THOMAS,J.
Leave granted.
This  litigation,	 even by now a quarter of a  century
old,  shows  fortune fluctuations as between a landlord	 and
his  tenant.  The latest gainer is the tenant when the	High
Court of Bombay saved him from the peril of eviction.  It is
now  the  turn of the landlord and hence he  challenged	 the
judgment  by  filing this appeal by special leave.   In	 the
year  1975,  appellant-landlord spread his net so wide	with
multi-spoked  grounds, as to catch the tenant by an order of
eviction on the expectation that at least one of the grounds
would click and the tenant could be evicted from a shop room
situated  at  Solapur  (Maharashtra).  But the	trial  court
found  none  of the grounds in his favour  and	consequently
non-suited him.	 However, the appellate court, after testing
all  the grounds employed by the landlord, found all of them
but  one, unsubstantiated.  The one on which appellate court
favoured  the  landlord was the ground envisaged in
Section
13(1)(g)
of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates
Control	 Act,  1947 (for short the Act).  Resultantly  the
appellate  court granted a decree for eviction with a  rider
that  the  tenant need vacate the premises only within	four
months.	   The	appellate  court   passed  the	judgment  on
30.8.1982.
The  tenant  very	 soon filed a writ petition  in	 the
Bombay	High Court under
Article 227
of the Constitution  in
challenge  of the decree for eviction and got it stayed.  It
took 15 long years for the High Court to dispose of the writ
petition  as  per the impugned judgment.  A single judge  of
the High Court interfered with the finding on facts and held
that  the landlord has failed to prove the bona fides of his
claim  for  requirement of the building to start a  business
therein.   Learned  Single Judge observed that the  landlord
has  not  proved  that	he has the know-how  to	 do  such  a
business.
Learned  counsel for the appellant contended that	 the
High Court adopted an erroneous view that a man can think of
starting  a  new business only if he has experience in	that
business  field.   Alternatively learned  counsel  contended
that  the  High	 Court has over-stepped	 its  jurisdictional
contours  under
Article 227
of the Constitution in upsetting
a finding on fact entered by the fact finding court.
The  relevant  provision, under which a  landlord	 can
seek  decree  for  eviction  of	  his  tenant  for  his	 own
occupation  of the building, is
Section 13(1)(g)
of the Act.
It   reads   thus:    13.    When  Landlord   may   recover
possession.(1)	Notwithstanding	 anything contained in	this
Act  but subject to the provisions of
sections 15
and
15A
, a
landlord  shall	 be  entitled to recover possession  of	 any
premises if the Court is satisfied-
(g)  that	 the premises are reasonably and  bona	fide
required by the landlord for occupation by himself or by any
person	for whose benefit the premises are held or where the
landlord  is  a trustee of public charitable trust that	 the
premises are required for occupation for the purposes of the
trust.
Sections	15
and
15A
are not applicable in this	case
and hence we are not bothered about their implications.	 The
grounds	 mentioned in clause (g) is couched in a language to
provide	 emphasis  to the genuineness of the requirement  of
the  landlord  by using the words reasonably and bona  fide
required  by the landlord.  In fact both terms	(reasonably
and  bona  fide)  are  complimentary to each  other  in	 the
context, for, any unreasonable requirement is not bona fide.
Vice-versa  can also be spelt that if the requirement has to
be  bona  fide it must necessarily be reasonable also.	 But
when  the  legislature employed the two terms  together	 the
message	 to  be	 gathered is that the  requirement  must  be
really	genuine from any reasonable standard.  All the same,
genuineness  of the requirement is not to be tested on a par
with  dire  need of a landlord because the latter is a	much
greater need.
When  a  landlord says that he needs the building	 for
his  own  occupation there is no doubt he has to  prove	 it.
But  there is no warrant for presuming that his need is	 not
bona  fide.   The statute enjoins that the court  should  be
satisfied  of his requirement.	So the court would look into
the broad aspects and if the court feels any doubt about the
bona  fides  of	 the requirement it is for the	landlord  to
clear such doubts.  Even in a case where the tenant does not
contest	 or dispute the claim of the landlord the court	 has
to  look  into	the claim  independently  albeit  landlords
burden	gets  lessened by such non-dispute.  In	 appropriate
cases it is open to the court to presume that the landlords
requirement  is	 bona fide and put the contesting tenant  to
the burden to show how the requirement is not bona fide.
In  this	case appellate court found  that  landlords
requirement to occupy the building is to start a business in
electric  goods.   The	fact that landlord is  a  holder  of
diploma	 in  Electrical Engineering was counted as a  factor
lending	 assurance that he would be genuinely  contemplating
such  a	 business  idea.  Regarding the	 contention  of	 the
respondent  tenant that landlord has not acquired  practical
experience  in the business of electric goods the  appellate
court  has  observed that it is not necessary in every	case
that  the landlord should establish previous experience	 for
starting  a  new  business.   But  the	High  Court  took  a
different  view.   This is what the learned single judge  of
the High Court has said in the impugned judgment:  In order
to  establish  that  he is in a position to start  the	said
business,  it  was  necessary  for  the	 landlord  to  place
material  on  record  to  show	that  he  has  the  know-how
necessary for starting business of sale of electrical goods.
For considering, whether the landlord has necessary know-how
to  start the business of selling electrical goods only, the
fact  that he holds a diploma in electrical engineering,  in
my  opinion, would not be sufficient.  It was necessary	 for
the  landlord  to place material on record which would	show
that  either  he  has  experience of the  business  that  he
proposes  to start or that even though he has no  experience
of  the business he has knowledge of the business sufficient
to start the business of his own.
Learned  single judge opted to interfere with the fact
finding	 only  on  the premise that in his opinion  if	the
landlord  is  really in a position to commence the  business
one  of	 the ingredients that has to be established  by	 the
landlord  is  that he possesses the know-how  necessary	 for
doing the business.
If  a person wants to start new business of his own it
may  be	 to his own advantage if he acquires  experience  in
that  line.  But to say that any venture of a person in	 the
business  field	 without acquiring past experience  reflects
lack  of  his  bona fides is a	fallacious  and	 unpragmatic
approach.   Many a business have flourished in this  country
by  leaps  and	bounds which were started by novice  in	 the
field;	 and many other business ventures have gone  haywire
despite	 vast  experience to the credit of the	propounders.
The  opinion of the learned single judge that acquisition of
sufficient know-how is a pre-condition for even proposing to
start  any  business, if gains approval as a proposition  of
law,  is  likely to shatter the initiative of young  talents
and  deter  new	 entrepreneurs from entering  any  field  of
business  or commercial activity.  Experience can be  earned
even  while the business is in progress.  It is too pedantic
a norm to be formulated that no experience no venture.
That  apart,  appellant is not a total novice  in	 the
field  of  dealings in electrical equipment.  The fact	that
the discipline in his academic specialization was Electrical
Engineering  is quite indicative of some knowledge he has in
the  subject, though a business in such commodities may have
different  phases.   Learned  single  judge  seems  to	have
written	 him  off  as a person totally unfamiliar  with	 any
transaction  in	 electrical goods.  Such an angle is  not  a
charitable view towards the landlord.  At any rate there may
be  differing  views for different people on how to start  a
business.  The High Court has committed jurisdictional error
in  upsetting  a fact finding merely on the individual	view
held by the learned judge about a business venture.  We have
no  doubt that reversal of the appellate court order on	 the
above  ground is unsupportable in law and hence is liable to
be interfered with.  We do so.
But  there  is one point which  the  respondent-tenant
urged  in  the	High Court and which  learned  single  judge
avoided	 discussing  on the premise that dislodgment of	 the
appellant in the suit on one ground is enough.	This is what
the High Court said about it:  In the present petition, the
landlord has filed a civil application to point out that the
tenant	has  some  other  premises where he  can  shift	 his
business.   There  is  a  rejoinder  filed  by	the  tenant,
disputing  that statement of the landlord and it is  pointed
out  that it is the landlord himself who has other  premises
available  to  him for starting his business.  That fact  is
also  disputed	by  the	 landlord  by  filing  a  rejoinder.
However,  since	 I  have held that the	landlord  failed  to
establish  one of the necessary ingredients for establishing
that  he  needs	 the  suit premises bona fide  for  his	 own
business,  it is not necessary for me to consider the  Civil
Application filed by the landlord.
Now  that point needs consideration by the High  Court
as  we	have  upset  the finding in  the  impugned  judgment
regarding  the first point.  Hence the writ petition has  to
go back to the High Court for disposal afresh.	We therefore
allow  this  appeal and set aside the impugned judgment	 and
remit the writ petition to the High Court for disposal after
deciding the remaining point referred to above.