[Cites
40
, Cited by
288
]
Supreme Court of India
Dr. Preeti Srivastava & Anr vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh & Ors on 10 August, 1999
Equivalent citations: AIR 1999 SUPREME COURT 2894, 1999 AIR SCW 2795, 1999 ALL. L. J. 1947, (1999) 5 JT 498 (SC), 1999 (5) ANDH LD 34, 1999 (3) LRI 657, 1999 (7) ADSC 149, 1999 (7) SCC 120, 1999 (5) JT 498, (1999) 3 UPLBEC 2179, (1999) 3 PAT LJR 20, (1999) 4 SCT 133, (1999) 4 ALL WC 2853, (1999) 4 SERVLR 687, (1999) 4 SCALE 579, (1999) 7 SUPREME 81, 1999 (3) KLT SN 32 (SC)
Author:
S.B.Majmudar
Bench:
S.B.Majmudar
PETITIONER:
DR. PREETI SRIVASTAVA  & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	10/08/1999

BENCH:
S.B.Majmudar




JUDGMENT:
S.B.Majmudar, J.
Leave granted.
I	 have  carefully  gone through	the  draft  judgment
prepared  by  our  esteemed   colleague	 Justice  Sujata  V.
Manohar.   I respectfully agree with some of the conclusions
arrived	 at  therein at pages 61 and 62, namely,  conclusion
nos.   1 and 4.	 However, so far as conclusion nos.  2 and 3
are  concerned,	 I respectfully record my  reservations	 and
partially  dissent  as noted hereinafter.  In my  view,	 the
common	entrance examination envisaged under the regulations
framed	by  the	 Medical Council of India  for	Postgraduate
Medical	 Education  does not curtail the power of the  State
Authorities,  legislative as well as executive, from  fixing
suitable  minimum  qualifying marks differently for  general
category  candidates  and for SCs/STs and OBC candidates  as
highlighted in my present judgment.
So  far as conclusion no.3 is concerned, with respect,
it  is	not possible for me to agree with the reasoning	 and
the final conclusion to which our esteemed colleague Justice
Sujata	V.  Manohar has reached, namely, that fixing minimum
qualifying marks for passing the entrance test for admission
to  postgraduate  courses is concerned with the standard  of
Postgraduate Medical Education.
I,  however,  respectfully  agree	 to  that  part	  of
conclusion  no.3  which states that there cannot be  a	wide
disparity  between the minimum qualifying marks for reserved
category  candidates  and the minimum qualifying  marks	 for
general	  category  candidates	at   this  level.   I	also
respectfully  agree that there cannot be dilution of minimum
qualifying marks for such reserved category candidates up to
almost	a vanishing point.  The dilution can be only up to a
reasonable  extent  with  a rock bottom,  below	 which	such
dilution   would   not	be   permissible   as	demonstrated
hereinafter  in this judgment.	In my view, maximum dilution
can  be up to 50% of the minimum qualifying marks prescribed
for  general  category	candidates.  On that  basis  if	 45%
passing	  marks	 are  prescribed   for	 general   category,
permissible  dilution can then go up to 22 and 1/2 % (50% of
45%).	Any  dilution  below this rock bottom would  not  be
permissible  under
Article  15(4)
of  the  Constitution  of
India.
For  reaching  the  aforesaid   conclusions,  I	have
independently	considered  the	 scheme	  of  the   relevant
provisions  of the Constitution in the light of the  various
judgments of this Court as detailed hereinafter :
Entry  66	 of List I, Old Entry 11(2) of List  II	 and
Entry 25 of List III:
Entry  66	 of List I of the Seventh Schedule reads  as
under  :   Co-ordination and determination of standards	 in
institutions for higher education or research and scientific
and technical institutions.
Old  Entry  11 of List II, as earlier existing in	 the
Constitution of India, read as under :
Education	 including  universities,  subject  to	the
provisions  of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I and entry
25 of List III.
While  Entry  25	of List III as now existing  in	 the
Seventh	 Schedule  of  the  Constitution reads	as  under  :
Education, including technical education, medical education
and  universities, subject to the provisions of entries	 63,
64,  65 and 66 of List I;  vocational and technical training
of labour.
A	 conjoint  reading of these entries makes  it  clear
that  as  per Entry 11 of List II which then existed on	 the
statute book, all aspects of education, including university
education,  were within the exclusive legislative competence
of  the	 State Legislatures subject to Entries 63 to  66  of
List I and the then existing Entry 25 of List III.  The then
existing  Entry 25 of the Concurrent List conferred power on
the   Union  Parliament	 and   State  Legislature  to  enact
legislation  with  respect  to	 vocational  and   technical
training of labour.  Thus, the said Entry 25 of List III had
nothing	 to  do	 with	Medical	 Education.   Any  provision
regarding  Medical Education, therefore, was thus covered by
Entry  11  of List II subject of course to the	exercise  of
legislative  powers by the Union Legislature as per  entries
63  to 66 of List I.  In the light of the aforesaid relevant
entries,  as  they stood then, a Constitution Bench of	this
court  in
The	Gujarat University, Ahmedabad  vs.   Krishna
Ranganath Mudholkar & Ors.
, 1963 Suppl.(1) SCR 112, speaking
through	 J.C.Shah,  J.,	 for the majority, had	to  consider
whether	 the  State  Legislature could impose  an  exclusive
medium of instruction Gujarati for the students who had to
study	and  take  examination	 conducted  by	the  Gujarat
University.   It was held that If a legislation imposing  a
regional  language  or	Hindi  as the  exclusive  medium  of
instruction is likely to result in lowering of standards, it
must  necessarily  fall	 within	 Item 66 of List  I  and  be
excluded  to that extent from Item 11 of List II as it then
stood  in the Constitution.  Medium of instruction was	held
to  have  an  important	 bearing  on  the  effectiveness  of
instruction  and  resultant standards achieved thereby.	  In
this  connection, pertinent observations were made at  pages
142  and  143  of  the	 aforesaid  Report:   If  adequate
text-books are not available or competent instructors in the
medium,	  through  which  instruction  is  directed  to	  be
imparted, are not available, or the students are not able to
receive	 or imbibe instructions through the medium in  which
it  is	imparted,  standards  must of  necessity  fall,	 and
legislation  for co-ordination of standards in such  matters
would include legislation relating to medium of instruction.
If legislation relating to imposition of an exclusive medium
of  instruction	 in a regional language or in Hindi,  having
regard	to the absence of text-books and journals, competent
teachers  and  incapacity of the students to understand	 the
subjects,  is likely to result in the lowering of standards,
that  legislation  would, in our judgment, necessarily	fall
within	item 66 of List I and would be deemed to be excluded
to  that extent from the amplitude of the power conferred by
item No.11 of List II.
However,	after the deletion of Entry 11 from List  II
and re-drafting of Entry 25 in the Concurrent List as in the
present	 form,	it  becomes  clear   that  all	aspects	  of
education,   including	 admission  of	 students   to	 any
educational  course,  would be covered by the general  entry
regarding   education	including   technical  and   medical
education  etc.	  as found in the Concurrent List  but	that
would  be  subject to the provisions of Entries 63 to 66  of
List  I.   Therefore, on a conjoint reading of Entry  66  of
List  I and Entry 25 of List III, it has to be held that  so
long  as the Parliament does not occupy the field  earmarked
for  it	 under	Entry  66 of List I or for  that  matter  by
invoking  its  concurrent  powers  as per Entry	 25  in	 the
Concurrent  List,  the question of admission of students  to
any  medical  course would not remain outside the domain  of
the  State  Legislature.  It is not in dispute that up	till
now  the  Parliament, by any legislative exercise either  by
separate  legislation  or  by amending	the
Indian  Medical
Council	 Act, 1956
has not legislated about the	 controlling
of  admissions	of  students  to  higher  medical  education
courses	 in  the  country.   Therefore,	 the  only  question
remains	 whether  the
Indian Medical Council Act
enacted  as
per Entry 66 of List I covers this aspect.  If it covers the
topic  then obviously by the express language of Entry 25 of
List  III,  the	 said  topic would  get	 excluded  from	 the
legislative  field  available to the State Legislature	even
under  Entry  25  of Concurrent List.	For  answering	this
question, we have therefore, to see the width of Entry 66 of
List  I.  It deals with Co-ordination and determination	 of
standards  in  institutions for higher education... A  mere
reading	 of this Entry shows that the legislation which	 can
be  covered  by	 this  entry  has  to  deal  basically	with
Co-ordination	and   determination    of   standards	 in
institutions  for  higher education.  Meaning thereby,	the
standards  of  education  at   the  institutions  of  higher
education   where  students  are   taking  education   after
admission  are	to be monitored by such a legislation or  in
other  words  after  their enrolment for  studying  at	such
institutions  for  higher  education such students  have  to
undertake  the prescribed course of education evolved with a
view  to  having  uniform and well laid	 down  standards  of
higher	medical	 education.   It  cannot  be  disputed	that
postgraduate teaching in medical education is being imparted
by  institutions  for  higher medical  education.   But	 the
question  is  whether  the topic of  admission	of  eligible
candidates/students   for   taking     education   in	such
institutions  has  anything  to do  with  co-ordination	 and
determination  of  standards  in  these	 institutions.	 Now
standards  in  the institutions have been prefixed by  two
words,	namely,	 co-ordination and determination  of  such
standards   as	per  Entry  66	of   List  I.	So  far	  as
co-ordination  is  concerned, it is a topic  dealing  with
provision  of  uniform standards of education  in  different
institutions  so  that	there  may  not	 be  any  hiatus  or
dissimilarity  regarding  imparting  of education  by  these
institutions  to the students taking up identical courses of
study  for  higher medical education in these  institutions.
That  necessarily  has	a  nexus  with	the  regulations  of
standards  of  education to be imparted to already  admitted
students  to the concerned courses of higher education.	 But
so  far	 as  the  phrase   determination  of  standards	 in
institutions   for  higher  education	is  concerned,	 it
necessarily  has  to take in its sweep the  requirements  of
having	a  proper  curriculum of studies and  the  requisite
intensity  of practical training to be imparted to  students
attaining  such courses.  But in order to maintain the fixed
standard   of	such  higher   medical	education   in	 the
institutions,	basic  qualification  or   eligibility	 for
admission of students for being imparted such education also
would assume importance.  Thus, the phrase determination of
standards  in institutions for higher education would  also
take  in  its sweep the basic qualifications or	 eligibility
criteria   for	admitting  students  to	 such	courses	  of
education.   It	 can,  therefore, be held  that	 the
Indian
Medical	 Council Act, 1956
enacted under Entry 66 of List  I
could  legitimately authorise Medical Council of India which
is the apex technical body in the field of medical education
and  which  is enjoined to provide  appropriately  qualified
medical	 practitioners for serving the suffering humanity to
prescribe  basic standards of eligibility and  qualification
for  medical  graduates	 who  aspire  to  join	postgraduate
courses	 for obtaining higher medical degrees by studying in
the institutions imparting such education.
But  the	next question survives as to  whether  after
laying down the basic qualifications or eligibility criteria
for  admission	of graduate medical students to	 the  higher
medical education courses which may uniformly apply all over
India  as  directed by the Medical Council of India, it	 can
have  further  power  and authority to	control	 the  intake
capacity  of  these  eligible  students in  a  given  course
conducted  by  the  institutions   for	higher	postgraduate
medical	 education.  In other words, whether it can  control
the admissions of eligible candidates to such higher medical
education courses or lay down any criteria for short-listing
of  such  eligible candidates when the available  seats	 for
admission  to  such  higher postgraduate  medical  education
courses	 are  limited  and the	eligible  claimants  seeking
admission to such courses are far greater in number?  So far
as  this question is concerned, it immediately projects	 the
problem	 of short- listing of available eligible  candidates
competing  for	admission  to the  given  medical  education
course	and  how  such	admissions could  be  controlled  by
short-listing  a  number of eligible candidates out  of	 the
larger	number	of  claimants  who  are	 also  eligible	 for
admission.   In other words, there can be too many  eligible
candidates  chasing too few available seats.  So far as this
question  is concerned, it clearly gets covered by Entry  25
of Concurrent List III rather than Entry 66 of List I as the
latter	entry  would  enable,  as seen	above,	the  Medical
Council	 of  India  only  to   lay  down  the  standards  of
eligibility  and  basic	 qualification of  graduate  medical
students  for  being  admitted to  any	higher	postgraduate
medical	 course.  Having provided for the queue of basically
eligible  qualified graduate medical students for  admission
to  postgraduate medical courses for a given academic  year,
the  role  of  Medical Council of India would  end  at	that
stage.	 Beyond this stage the field is covered by Entry  25
of  List III dealing with education which may also cover the
question  of controlling admissions and short-listing of the
eligible candidates standing in the queue for being admitted
to  a  given course of study in institutions depending	upon
the  limited number of seats available in a given discipline
of  study, the number of eligible claimants for it and	also
would cover the further question whether any seats should be
reserved  for  SC,ST  and OBCs as permissible to  the  State
authorities  under
Article  15(4)
of  the  Constitution  of
India.	 So  far as these questions are concerned, it is  no
doubt  true  that  Entry  25 of Concurrent  List  read	with
Article	  15(4)
of   the   Constitution   of	 India	 may
simultaneously	authorise both the Parliament as well as the
State  Legislatures  to	 make necessary provisions  in	that
behalf.	 The State can make adequate provisions on the topic
by resorting to its legislative power under Entry 25 of List
III  as well as by exercising executive power under
Article
162
of the Constitution of India read with entry 25 of List
III.   Similarly, the Union Government, through	 Parliament,
may  make adequate provisions regarding the same in exercise
of  its legislative powers under Entry 25 of List III.
But
so  long  as  the  Union Parliament does  not  exercise	 its
legislative  powers under Entry 25 of List III covering	 the
topic  of short-listing of eligible candidates for admission
to  courses  of	 postgraduate medical education,  the  field
remains wide open for the State authorities to pass suitable
legislations  or executive orders in this connection as seen
above.	 As we have noted earlier, the Union Parliament	 has
not  invoked  its  power  under Entry 25  of  List  III	 for
legislating  on	 this topic.  Therefore, the field  is	wide
open  for the State Governments to make adequate  provisions
regarding  controlling	admissions to postgraduate  colleges
within	their  territories imparting medical  education	 for
ultimately  getting  postgraduate degrees.  However,  I	 may
mention	 at  this  stage  that	 reliance  placed  by	Shri
Chaudhary,  learned  senior counsel for the State of  Madhya
Pradesh	 on  a Constitution bench judgment of this Court  in
Tej  Kiran Jain & Ors.	vs.  N.Sanjiva Reddy & Ors.
, 1970(2)
SCC  272,  interpreting	 the  word in in  the  phrase  in
Parliament to mean during the sitting of Parliament and in
the  course of the business of Parliament cannot be of	any
avail to him while interpreting the phrase determination of
standards  in institutions for higher education as found in
Entry  66  of  List  I.	  His  submission,  relying  on	 the
aforesaid  decision that directions regarding standards	 in
institutions  mean  only  those directions of  the  Medical
Council	 of India which regulate the actual courses of study
after  the  students are admitted into the institutions	 and
cannot cover the situation prior to their admission, meaning
thereby,  pre-admission stage for students seeking entry  to
the  institution of higher education cannot be countenanced.
The  reason  is obvious.  Once it is held that	the  Medical
Council	 of  India  exercising its statutory  functions	 and
powers	under  the
Indian Medical Council Act,	 1956
which
squarely  falls	 within Entry 66 of List I can lay down	 the
eligibility and basic qualifications of students entitled to
be  admitted  to such postgraduate courses of  study,  their
eligibility   qualification   would   naturally	 project   a
consideration  which  is prior to their actual entry in	 the
institutions   as  students  for   being   imparted   higher
education.   That would obviously be a pre-admission  stage.
Therefore,  the	 phrase	 determination	 of  standards	 in
institutions   does   not   necessarily	 mean	controlling
standards  of  education  only after the stage of  entry  of
students  in these institutions and necessarily not prior to
the  entry  point.   However,  as  seen	 earlier,  the	real
question   is  whether	determination	of   standards	 in
institutions  would go beyond the stage of controlling	the
eligibility  and basic qualification of students for  taking
up such courses and would also cover the further question of
short-listing of such eligible students by those running the
institutions  in the States.  For every academic year, there
will  be  limited  number of seats in  postgraduate  medical
courses	 vis-a-vis a larger number of eligible candidates as
per  guidelines
laid down by
the Medical Council of  India.
Short-listing  of  such	 candidates, therefore,	 has  to  be
resorted  to.	This  exercise	 will  depend  upon  various
imponderables  like i) limited number of seats for admission
in  a  given  course  vis-a-vis larger	number	of  eligible
candidates  seeking admissions and the question of  fixation
of their inter se merits so as to lay down rational criteria
for  selecting	better candidates as compared to  candidates
with  lesser degree of competence for entry in such courses;
ii)  Whether  at  a given point of time there  are  adequate
chances	 and  scope  for SC,ST and OBC	candidates  who	 can
equally	 be eligible for pursuing of such courses but who on
account	 of  their social or economic backwardness  may	 lag
behind in competition with other general category candidates
who  are equally eligible for staking their claims for	such
limited number of seats for higher educational studies, iii)
availability  of  limited   infrastructural  facilities	 for
training in institutions for higher medical education in the
State or in the colleges concerned.  All these exigencies of
the  situations	 may  require	State  authorities,   either
legislatively  or by exercise of executive powers, to  adopt
rational  standards  or methods for  short-listing  eligible
candidates  for being admitted to such medical courses	from
year to year also keeping in view the requirement of
Article
15(4)
of  the	Constitution of India.	While  dealing	with
Entry 25 of List III it has also to be kept in view that the
word  education	 is of wide import.  It would  necessarily
have in its fold (i) the taught, (ii) the teacher, (iii) the
text  and  also	 (iv)  training	 as  practical	training  is
required  to be imparted to students pursuing the course  of
postgraduate  medical education.  Who is to be the taught is
determined  by	Medical Council of India by prescribing	 the
basic	qualifications	for  admission	 of  the   students.
Adequate  number of teachers keeping in view teacher  taught
ratio is also relevant.	 Prescribing appropriate courses for
study	i.e.   curricula  is  also   covered  by  the	term
education.   Training to be imparted to the students has a
direct	nexus with infrastructural facilities like number of
beds  of patients to be attended to by postgraduate  medical
students,  providing appropriate infrastructure for surgical
training  etc.	also would form part of education.  Role  of
Medical Council of India is exclusive in the field of laying
down  of  basic	 qualifications of the taught and  also	 the
requirement  of	 qualified  teachers,	their  numbers	 and
qualifications,	 prescribing text and requisite training  to
be  imparted  to students undertaking  postgraduate  medical
courses.  All these provisions quite clearly fall within the
domain of Medical Council of Indias jurisdiction.  However,
the  only  field left open by the Parliament while  enacting
the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956
under Entry 66 of List
III  of	 Schedule  VII is the solitary	exercise  of  short-
listing	 of  eligible  taught  for being  admitted  to	such
courses.   That	 field can validly be operated upon  by	 the
State authorities so long as Parliament, in its wisdom, does
not  step  in  to block even that solitary  field  otherwise
remaining  open	 for State authorities to function  in	that
limited	 sphere.  Infrastructure facilities, therefore,	 for
giving	such practical training to the taught also would  be
an  important  part of medical education.  It is  of  course
true that not only the eligibility of students for admission
to  medical courses but also the quality of students seeking
to  get	 medical education especially  postgraduate  medical
education  with	 a  view to turning  out  efficient  medical
practitioners  for serving the suffering humanity would	 all
be  covered by the term education.
So far as the  quality
of  admitting  students	 to the courses	 of  higher  medical
education  i.e.	 postgraduate medical courses is  concerned,
the  admission	of  students may get  sub-divided  into	 two
parts;	 i)  basic  eligibility or qualification  for  being
permitted  to  enter the arena of contest for occupying	 the
limited	  number  of  seats   available	 for  pursuing	such
education;   and ii) the quality of such eligible candidates
for  being  admitted  to  such courses.	  As  we  have	seen
earlier,  the  first part of exercise for admission  can  be
covered	 by the sweep of the parliamentary legislation	i.e.
the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956
enabling the  delegate
of  the	 Parliament namely, Medical Council of India to	 lay
down  proper  criteria for that purpose as  per	 regulations
framed	by it under
Section 33
of the Indian Medical Council
Act.   This aspect is clearly covered by Entry 66 of List  I
but  so	 far  as the second part of admissions	of  eligible
students  is concerned, it clearly remains in the domain  of
Entry  25 of List III and it has nothing to do with Entry 66
of List I and as this field is wide open till the Parliament
covers it by any legislation under Entry 25 of List III, the
State  can certainly issue executive orders and instructions
or  even  pass appropriate legislations for controlling	 and
short-listing  the admissions of eligible candidates to such
higher postgraduate medical courses in their institutions or
other  institutions imparting such medical education in	 the
States concerned.  A three Judge bench of this Court in
Ajay
Kumar  Singh & Ors.  vs.  State of Bihar & Ors.
, 1994(4) SCC
401, has taken the same view on these entries which commands
acceptance.
Jeevan Reddy, J., speaking for the three Judge
bench  placing	reliance  on an earlier	 three	Judge  bench
judgment of this Court in
State of M.P.	 vs.  Nivedita Jain
,
1981(4)	 SCC  296,  and	 agreeing with	the  view  expressed
therein	 observed in para 22 of the Report as under :  The
power  to  regulate  admission to the courses  of  study  in
medicine is traceable to Entry 25 in List III.	(Entry 11 in
List  II,  it  may be remembered, was deleted  by  the	42nd
Amendment  to  the  Constitution and Entry 25  of  List	 III
substituted).	The  States,  which establish  and  maintain
these  institutions  have the power to regulate all  aspects
and  affairs  of  the  institutions  except  to	 the  extent
provided  for  by  Entries 63 to 66 of List I.	 Shri  Salve
contended  that	 the  determination   and  coordination	  of
standards of higher education in Entry 66 of List I takes in
all  incidental	 or  ancillary matters, that  Regulation  of
admission  to  courses	of  higher  education  is  a  matter
incidental  to the determination of standards and if so, the
said subject- matter falls outside the field reserved to the
States.	 He submits that by virtue of Entry 66 List I, which
overrides  Entry  25 of List III, the States are denuded  of
all  and  every	 power	to   determine	and  coordinate	 the
standards  of higher education, which must necessarily	take
in  regulating the admission to these courses.	Even if	 the
Act  made  by parliament does not regulate the admission  to
these  courses, the States have no power to provide for	 the
same  for  the	reason that the	 said  subject-matter  falls
outside	 their purview.	 Accordingly, it must be held,	says
Shri  Salve, that the provision made by the State Government
reserving certain percentage of seats under
Article 15(4)
is
wholly	incompetent  and  outside the purview of  the  field
reserved  to  the States under the Constitution.  We  cannot
agree.	 While	Regulation  of admission  to  these  medical
courses	 may be incidental to the power under Entry 66	List
I,  it	is integral to the power contained in Entry 25	List
III.   The  State which has established and  is	 maintaining
these  institutions  out  of public funds must	be  held  to
possess	  the  power  to   regulate  the  admission   policy
consistent  with
Article  14.
Such power  is	an  integral
component  of  the  power to maintain and  administer  these
institutions.	Be  that  as  it may, since  we	 have  held,
agreeing  with the holding in Nivedita Jain that Entry 66 in
List  I	 does  not take in the selection  of  candidates  or
regulation of admission to institutions of higher education,
the argument of Shri Salve becomes out of place.  The States
must  be  held	perfectly  competent  to  provide  for	such
reservations.
It  is  also pertinent to note that decision  of	this
Court  in
Kumari  Nivedita Jain
(supra) is  approved  by  a
Constitution  bench  of nine Judges of this court  in
Indra
Sawhney	 vs.  Union of India
, 1992 Supp.  3 SCC 217 at	page
751,  to  which I will make a detailed reference  later	 on.
II.   Role  of	the  Medical Council  of  India:   As  noted
earlier, the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956
was enacted by
the  Union Parliament in exercise of its powers under  Entry
66  of	List I of the Seventh Schedule of the  Constitution.
The statement of objects and reasons of the said Act read as
under  :  The objects of this Bill are to amend the  Indian
Medical	 Council Act, 1933 (Act XXVII of 1933) - (a) to give
representation	 to  licentiate	 members   of  the   medical
profession,  a large number of whom are still practising  in
the  country;	(b) to provide for the registration  of	 the
names of citizens of India who have obtained foreign medical
qualifications which are not at present recognised under the
existing  Act;	(c) to provide for the temporary recognition
of medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in
countries  outside India with which no scheme of reciprocity
exists	in  cases where the medical practitioners  concerned
are  attached for the time being to any medical	 institution
in  India for the purpose of teaching or research or for any
charitable  object;   (d) to provide for the formation of  a
Committee  of Postgraduate Medical Education for the purpose
of  assisting  the  Medical Council of	India  to  prescribe
standards of postgraduate medical education for the guidance
of  Universities and to advise Universities in the matter of
securing   uniform   standards	 for  postgraduate   medical
education   throughout	India;	 (e)  to  provide  for	 the
maintenance  of an all-India register by the Medical Council
of  India,  which will contain the names of all the  medical
practitioners possessing recognised medical qualifications.
Amongst  others, the object and reason no.(d)  clearly
indicated that the Act was to provide for the formation of a
Committee  of Postgraduate Medical Education for the purpose
of  assisting  the  Medical Council of	India  to  prescribe
standards of postgraduate medical education for the guidance
of Universities.  This necessarily meant conferring power on
Medical	 Council  of India to be the approving body for	 the
universities  for  enabling them to prescribe  standards  of
postgraduate  medical education.  Naturally that referred to
the  courses  of  study to be prescribed and  the  types  of
practical  training to be imparted to the admitted  students
for  such  courses.   We  may  now  refer  to  the  relevant
statutory  provisions of the Act.  Section 10-A empowers the
Central	 Government  to	 give	clearance  for	establishing
medical	  colleges  at	given	centres	 and  the  statutory
requirements  for  establishing	 such colleges.	 It  is	 the
Medical	 Council  of  India  which   has  to  recommend	  in
connection  with  such	proposed   scheme  for	establishing
medical colleges.  Sub-section (7) of Section 10-A lays down
the  relevant  considerations  to  be kept in  view  by	 the
Medical	 Council of India while making such  recommendations
in  connection	with  any scheme proposing  to	establish  a
medical	 college.   They  obviously refer to  the  types  of
education  to be imparted to admitted students and the basic
requirement  of infrastructure for imparting such  education
which  only  would  enable  the	  proposed  college  to	  be
established.   None of these requirements has anything to do
with  the  controlling	of admissions out of  qualified	 and
eligible  students who can take such education.
Section  11
deals  with medical qualifications granted by any University
or  medical  institution which can be recognised as  medical
qualifications for the purpose of the Act.  Meaning thereby,
only  such  qualified persons can be registered	 as  medical
practitioners  under the Act.  None of the other  provisions
of  the Act deal with the topic of short-listing of eligible
and  otherwise	qualified candidates for being	admitted  to
medical	 courses  either  at  MBBS level or  even  at  post-
graduate  level.  As we are concerned with minimum standards
for  medical education at postgraduate level,
Section 20
of
the  Act  becomes  relevant.   It reads	 as  under  :	20.
Postgraduate  Medical  Education   Committee  for  assisting
Council	  in  matters  relating	  to  postgraduate   medical
education  -  (1)  The Council may  prescribe  standards  of
postgraduate   medical	education  for	 the   guidance	  of
Universities,  and may advise Universities in the matter  of
securing   uniform   standards	 for  postgraduate   medical
education throughout India, and for this purpose the Central
Government  may	 constitute  from among the members  of	 the
Council	  a   Postgraduate   Medical   Education   Committee
(hereinafter  referred	to as the  Postgraduate	 Committee).
(2) The Postgraduate Committee shall consist of nine members
all  of	 whom  shall  be,  persons  possessing	postgraduate
medical	 qualifications	 and  experience   of  teaching	  or
examining postgraduate students of medicine.  (3) Six of the
members	 of the Postgraduate Committee shall be nominated by
the Central Government and the remaining three members shall
be elected by the Council from amongst its members.  (4) For
the  purpose  of  considering	Postgraduate  studies  in  a
subject,  the Postgraduate Committee may co-opt, as and when
necessary,  one	 or more members qualified to assist  it  in
that  subject.	 (5)  The views and recommendations  of	 the
Postgraduate Committee on all matters shall be placed before
the  Council;	and if the Council does not agree  with	 the
views	expressed  or  the   recommendations  made  by	 the
Postgraduate  Committee	 on  any matter, the  Council  shall
forward	 them together with its observations to the  Central
Government for decision.
Sub-section  (1)	of
Section 20
while  dealing	with
prescription  of standards of postgraduate medical education
by  the Council for the guidance of Universities does not by
itself	touch upon the topic of controlling of admission  of
eligible  medical graduates or short-listing them  according
to the exigencies of the situations at a given point of time
by those running medical institutions imparting postgraduate
medical	 courses in the colleges.  Standards of postgraduate
medical education as mentioned in sub-section (1) of
Section
20
therefore, would include guidance regarding the  minimum
qualifications or eligibility criteria for such students for
admission  and after they are admitted having undergone	 the
process	 of  short-listing  at	the   hands  of	 the   State
authorities  or	 authorities running the  institutions,	 how
they  are  to be trained and educated in such  courses,	 how
practical training has to be given to them and what would be
the   course  of  study,  the	syllabi	 and  the  types  of
examination  which they have to undertake before they can be
said  to  have successfully completed  postgraduate  medical
education  in  the  concerned States.  But having  seen	 all
these  it  has to be kept in view that all that	 Sub-section
(1) of
Section 20
enables the Medical Council of India is to
merely give guidance to the Universities.  What is stated to
be  guidance  can never refer to the quality of a  candidate
who  is	 otherwise  eligible  for admission.   None  of	 the
remaining provisions up to
Section 32
deal with the question
of controlling of admission by process of short-listing from
amongst	 eligible  and	duly  qualified	 candidates  seeking
admission  to  postgraduate medical courses.  We then go  to
Section	 33
which confers power on the Medical	 Council  of
India  to  make regulations.  It provides that the  Council
may,  with the previous sanction of the Central	 Government,
make regulations generally to carry out the purposes of this
Act.  Therefore, this general power to make regulations has
to  be	with  reference	 to any of  the	 statutory  purposes
indicated  in  any other provisions of the Act.	 As none  of
the  provisions	 in the Act enables the Medical	 Council  of
India  to  regulate the admission of eligible candidates  to
the  available seats for pursuing higher medical studies  in
institutions,  the general power to make regulations  cannot
cover such a topic.  So far as the express topics enumerated
in
Section  33
on  which regulations	can  be	 framed	 are
concerned,  the relevant topics for our purpose are found in
clauses	 (fc) and (j).	So far as clause (fc) is  concerned,
it  deals  with the criteria for identifying a student	who
has  been granted a medical qualification referred to in the
Explanation  to	 sub-section (3) of Section 10B.   When	 we
turn  to  Section  10B,	 we find that it  deals	 with  those
students  who  are admitted on the basis of the increase  in
its  admission	capacity without previous permission of	 the
Central	 Government.  Any medical qualification obtained  by
such  student  will not enable him or her to be	 treated  as
duly  medically	 qualified.   The medical  qualification  is
obviously  obtained  by	 the student  who  has	successfully
completed  his	course of study and obtained  the  requisite
degree.	  It  is  the obtaining of  such  requisite  medical
degree	and qualification that entitles him to get  enrolled
as  per
Section 15
on any State Medical Register so that  he
can   act  as  a   Registered  Medical	Practitioner.	That
obviously  has nothing to do with the admission of  students
desirous  of  obtaining	 medical  degrees  after  undergoing
requisite   educational	  training  at	 the   institutions.
Therefore,  no	regulation framed under
Section	 33(fc)
can
cover  the topic of short-listing of eligible candidates for
admission.   Then  remains  in the filed  clause  (j)  which
provides  as  under :  [(j)the courses and period of  study
and  of practical training to be undertaken, the subjects of
examination  and the standards of proficiency therein to  be
obtained,  in Universities or medical institutions for grant
of  recognised	medical qualifications; A mere look at	the
said  provision shows that regulations under this  provision
can  be	 framed by the Medical Council of India	 for  laying
down  the  courses  and	 period of study  and  of  practical
training  to be undertaken, the subjects of examination	 and
the  standard  of proficiency therein to be obtained by	 the
admitted   students   for   obtaining	recognised   medical
qualifications.	   They	 all  deal   with  post-   admission
requirements  of  eligible students in the  medical  courses
concerned.   That has nothing to do with pre-entry stage  of
such  students	eligible for admission.	  Consequently,	 any
regulation  framed  by	the Medical Council of	India  under
Section	 33
which seeks to give any guidelines in connection
with  the  method of admission of such eligible students  to
medical	 courses  would obviously remain in the realm  of  a
mere  advise  or guidance and can obviously  therefore,	 not
have  any  binding  force qua  admitting  authorities.
It,
therefore,  must  be held that once the Medical	 Council  of
India  has laid down basic requirements of qualifications or
eligibility  criteria for a student who has passed his	MBBS
examination  for being admitted to postgraduate courses	 for
higher	medical	 education  in institutions and	 once  these
basic  minimum	requirements are complied with	by  eligible
students seeking such admissions the role of Medical Council
of  India comes to an end.  As seen earlier, the question of
short-listing	falls  squarely	 in   the  domain  of  State
authorities  as	 per  entry 25 of List III  till  Parliament
steps  in to cover this field.	We may now briefly deal with
decisions  of  this  Court  rendered from time	to  time  in
connection  with this question.	 A three Judge bench of this
Court  in
D.N.	 Chanchala vs.	State of Mysore &  Ors.etc.
,
1971 Supp.  SCR 608, speaking through Shelat, J., emphasised
the  necessity	for  a screening test and  short-listing  of
eligible candidates for being admitted to medical courses in
view of the fact that claimants are many and seats are less.
Dealing with three universities set up in the territories of
the  then State of Mysore catering to medical education, the
following relevant observations were made at page 619 of the
Report	:   The	 three universities were set  up  in  three
different  places presumably for the purpose of catering  to
the   educational  and	academic   needs  of  those   areas.
Obviously  one	university for the whole of the State  could
neither	 have  been adequate nor feasible to  satisfy  those
needs.	 Since	it  would  not	be  possible  to  admit	 all
candidates  in	the medical colleges run by the	 Government,
some  basis  for screening the candidates had to be set	 up.
There  can be no manner of doubt, and it is now fairly	well
settled,   that	 the  Government,  as  also  other   private
agencies,  who found such centres for medical training, have
the  right  to	frame rules for admission so long  as  those
rules  are not inconsistent with the university statutes and
regulations   and   do	 not	suffer	 from	infirmities,
constitutional	or  otherwise. Similar	observations  were
made at page 628 of the Report :
On  account  of  paucity	of  institutions  imparting
training  in technical studies and the increasing number  of
candidates seeking admission therein, there is obviously the
need  for  classification  to	enable	fair  and  equitable
distribution  of available seats.  The very decisions relied
on  by	counsel for the petitioner implicitly recognise	 the
need  for classification and the power of those who run such
institutions to lay down classification.
A	 three Judge bench of this Court in
State of  Madhya
Pradesh	 &  Anr.  vs.  Kumari Nivedita Jain & Ors.
,  (supra)
had to consider the legality of order passed by the State of
Madhya	Pradesh completely relaxing the conditions  relating
to  the	 minimum qualifying marks for SC,ST  candidates	 for
admission  to medical courses of study on non-	availability
of  qualified  candidates  from these categories.   Such  an
exercise  was  held permissible under
Articles 14
and
15
of
the  Constitution of India.  A.N.  Sen, J., speaking for the
Court  in  this	 connection  referred to  Entry	 25  of	 the
Concurrent  List and also the constitutional scheme of Entry
66  of	List I and held that:  By virtue of  the  authority
conferred  by  the
Medical Council Act
, the Medical  Council
may prescribe the eligibility of a candidate who may seek to
get admitted into a Medical College for obtaining recognised
medical	 qualifications.  But as to how the selection has to
be  made  out of the eligible candidates for admission	into
the Medical College necessarily depends on circumstances and
conditions prevailing in particular States and does not come
within	the purview of the Council.  Regulation I which lays
down  the  conditions or qualifications for  admission	into
medical	 course	 comes within the competence of the  Council
under
Section	33
of	the Act and  is	 mandatory,  whereas
Regulation  II which deals with the process or procedure for
selection  from amongst eligible candidates for admission is
outside the authority of the Council under
Section 33
of the
Act,  and is merely in the nature of a recommendation and is
directory  in nature.  (paras 19 and 21) Entry 25 in List II
is  wide enough to include within its ambit the question  of
selection  of  candidates to Medical Colleges and  there  is
nothing in the Entries 63, 64 and 65 of List I to suggest to
the contrary.  (para 22) As there is no legislation covering
the  field  of	selection  of candidates  for  admission  to
Medical	 Colleges, the State Government would,	undoubtedly,
be  competent to pass executive orders in this regard  under
Article	 162.
(para 24) Thus Regulation II of the  Council
which	is  merely  directory  and  in	the  nature   of   a
recommendation	has no such statutory force as to render the
Order  in  question  which contravenes the  said  Regulation
illegal,  invalid  and	unconstitutional.    The  Order	 can
therefore  be supported under
Article 15(4).
(paras 22	 and
25)  The  State	 is entitled to make  reservations  for	 the
Scheduled  Castes  and	Scheduled Tribes in  the  matter  of
admission  to medical and other technical institutions.	  In
the absence of any law to the contrary, it must also be open
to  the	 Government to impose such conditions as would	make
the  reservation effective and would benefit the  candidates
belonging  to these categories for whose benefit and welfare
the   reservations  have  been	 made.	 In  any  particular
situation,  taking  into  consideration	 the  realities	 and
circumstances prevailing in the State it will be open to the
State  to vary and modify the conditions regarding selection
for  admission,	 if such modification or  variation  becomes
necessary  for	achieving the purpose for which	 reservation
has  been made and if there be no law to the contrary.	Note
(ii)  of  Rule 20 of the Rules for admission framed  by	 the
State  Government  specifically empowers the  Government  to
grant such relaxation in the minimum qualifying marks to the
extent considered necessary.  Such relaxation neither can be
said  to  be  unreasonable,  nor  constitutes  violation  of
Article	 15(1)
and
(2)
or
Article 14
of  the  Constitution.
The  impugned  order does not affect any relaxation  in	 the
standard  of  medical education or curriculum of studies  in
Medical	 Colleges for those candidates after their admission
to  the	 College  and the standard of  examination  and	 the
curriculum remains the same for all.  (paras 26 and 27)

      (Emphasis supplied)


      The  aforesaid  observations  of the  court  are	well
sustained  on  the scheme of the relevant entries  in  VIIth
Schedule  to  which  we have made a reference  earlier.	  As
noticed	 herein before, this judgment of three member  bench
is  approved  by the Constitution bench in its	judgment  in
Indra  Sawhneys
case (supra).	It is of course	 true  that
these  observations are made with reference to admission  to
MBBS course and not to postgraduate medical courses.  But on
the  constitutional scheme of the relevant entries, the very
same  result  can  follow  while  regulating  admissions  to
postgraduate  medical  courses	also.
Before  parting	with
discussion on the topic regarding role of Medical Council of
India,	we  may also usefully refer to the  observations  of
Jeevan	Reddy,	J., in the case of
Ajay Kumar Singh  &	Ors.
vs.   State  of	 Bihar & Ors.
, (supra).	 Jeevan	 Reddy,	 J.,
speaking  for the three Judge Bench in para 18 of the Report
on  the review and relevant provisions of the
Indian Medical
Council Act
has made the following pertinent observations in
the  said para of the Report at page 415 :  A review of the
provisions of the Act clearly shows that among other things,
the Act is concerned with the determination and coordination
of   standards	 of  education	 and  training	in   medical
institutions.
Sections 16
,
17
,
18
and
19
all speak of the
courses of study and examinations to be undergone to obtain
the  recognised medical qualification.	They do not speak of
admission  to such courses.  Section 19-A expressly empowers
the  council to prescribe the minimum standards of  medical
education  required  for   granting  undergraduate  medical
qualification.	 So  does
Section 20
empower the council  to
prescribe  standards  of postgraduate medical education	 but
for  the  guidance of universities only.  It further  says
that the council may also advise universities in the matter
of  securing  uniform  standards  for  postgraduate  medical
education  throughout India.  (The distinction between	the
language  of Section 19-A and
Section 20
is also a  relevant
factor,	 as would be explained later.) Clause (j) of
Section
33
particularises  the	 subjects   with  respect  to  which
Regulations  can  be made by the council.  It speaks of	 the
courses and period of study and the practical training to be
undergone by the students, the subjects of examination which
they  must  pass and the standards of proficiency they	must
attain	to obtain the recognised medical qualifications	 but
it  does  not speak of admission to such courses  of  study.
Indeed,	 none  of  the sections aforementioned	empower	 the
council	  to  regulate	or   prescribe	 qualifications	  or
conditions for admission to such courses of study.  No other
provision  in  the Act does.  It is thus clear that the	 Act
does  not  purport  to deal with, regulate  or	provide	 for
admission  to  graduate	 or  postgraduate  medical  courses.
Indeed,	 insofar as postgraduate courses are concerned,	 the
power  of  the	Indian	Medical Council	 to  prescribe	the
minimum	 standards of medical education is only advisory in
nature and not of a binding character.	In such a situation,
it  would be rather curious to say that the Regulations made
under  the Act are binding upon them.  The Regulations	made
under  the Act cannot also provide for or regulate admission
to postgraduate courses in any event.
In  our view, these observations are clearly borne out
from the statutory scheme of the
Indian Medical Council Act
,
as seen earlier.
III.   Role of States for short-listing of  admissions
to postgraduate courses:
As seen earlier, so far as the field consisting of the
short-	listing	 of  admission	out  of	 eligible  and	duly
qualified   medical   graduates	 for   being   admitted	  to
postgraduate  medical courses in institutions is  concerned,
as  the	 Union	Parliament has not said anything  about	 the
same,  the  field is wide open for the State authorities  to
regulate  such	admissions  by short-listing  the  available
candidates  keeping  in view the concept of  reservation  of
seats as permitted by
Article 15(4)
of the Constitution.
In
the  case of
R.	 Chitralekha & Anr.  vs.  State of Mysore  &
Ors.
,  1964 (6) SCR 368, a Constitution bench of this  Court
while  dealing with Entry 66 of List I and
Article 15(4)
of
the  Constitution  of  India had to  consider  the  question
whether	 the  State Government could prescribe the  criteria
for selection of students having minimum qualifications
laid
down  by
the university for admission to medical courses and
whether	 it  would  affect the central	legislation  enacted
under  Entry  66 of List I of the  Constitution?   Answering
this  question	in favour of the State authorities,  it	 was
observed  at  page  379	 of the Report	by  Subba  Rao,	 J.,
speaking  on  behalf  of the Constitution bench as  under  :
If  the	 impact	 of  the  State	 law  providing	 for  such
standards  on entry 66 of List I is so heavy or	 devastating
as  to wipe out or appreciably abridge the central field, it
may  be	 struck down.  But that is a question of fact to  be
ascertained  in each case.  It is not possible to hold	that
if  a  State  legislature made a law  prescribing  a  higher
percentage  of marks for extra-curricular activities in	 the
matter	of  admission  to  colleges, it	 would	be  directly
encroaching  on	 the field covered by entry 66 of List I  of
the  Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.  If so, it is not
disputed  that	the  State Government would  be	 within	 its
rights to prescribe qualifications for admission to colleges
so long as its action does not contravene any other law.  It
is  then said that the Mysore University Act conferred power
to  prescribe  rules  for  admission   to  Colleges  on	 the
University  and	 the Government cannot exercise that  power.
It  is	true that under s.23 of the Mysore  University	Act,
1956, the Academic Council shall have the power to prescribe
the  conditions for admission of students to the  University
and,  in  exercise  of	its power,  it	has  prescribed	 the
percentage of marks which a student shall obtain for getting
admission in medical or engineering colleges.  The orders of
the  Government do not contravene the minimum qualifications
prescribed  by the University;	what the Government did	 was
to  appoint  a selection committee and prescribe  rules	 for
selection  of  students who have the minimum  qualifications
prescribed  by the University.	The Government runs most  of
the  medical and engineering colleges.	Excluding the  State
aided  colleges	 for a moment, the position is as follows  :
The  Colleges  run  by	the  Government,  having  regard  to
financial commitments and other relevant considerations, can
only  admit  a	specific  number of  students  to  the	said
Colleges.
They  cannot obviously admit all the  applicants
who have secured the marks prescribed by the University.  It
has  necessarily to screen the applicants on some reasonable
basis.	  The  aforesaid  orders  of  the  Government	only
prescribed  criteria for making admissions to Colleges	from
among  students	 who  secured the minimum  qualifying  marks
prescribed  by the University.	Once it is conceded, and  it
is not disputed before us, that the State Government can run
medical	 and  engineering colleges, it cannot be denied	 the
power  to  admit  such	qualified   students  as  pass	 the
reasonable  tests
laid down by
it.  This is a	power  which
every  private	owner  of  a  College  will  have,  and	 the
Government which runs its own Colleges cannot be denied that
power.
At  page	381  of	 the   same  Report,  the  following
observations  are  made by the Constitution Bench,  speaking
through Subba Rao, J.  :
We,  therefore, hold that the Government has power to
prescribe a machinery and also the criteria for admission of
qualified  students to medical and engineering colleges	 run
by the Government and, with the consent of the management of
the Government aided colleges, to the said colleges also.
Another  decision	 of the Constitution bench  of	this
Court  was rendered in the case of
Chitra Ghosh & Anr.	 vs.
Union  of  India  &  Ors.
, 1970 (1) SCR	 413.	Grover,	 J.,
speaking  for the Constitution bench observed at page 418 as
under  :   It  is the Central Government  which	 bears	the
financial  burden of running the medical college.  It is for
it  to lay down the criteria for eligibility.  From the very
nature	of things it is not possible to throw the  admission
open  to students from all over the country.  The Government
cannot	be denied the right to decide from what sources	 the
admission  will be made.  That essentially is a question  of
policy	and depends inter-alia on an overall assessment	 and
survey	of  the	 requirements  of  residents  of  particular
territories  and other categories of persons for whom it  is
essential  to provide facilities for medical education.	  If
the  sources are properly classified whether on territorial,
geographical  or  other reasonable basis it is not  for	 the
courts to interfere with the manner and method of making the
classification.
At  page 419 of the Report it has been further  stated
as  under :  The next question that has to be determined is
whether	 the  differentia on which classification  has	been
made  has rational relation with the object to be  achieved.
The  main  purpose of admission to a medical college  is  to
impart education in the theory and practice of medicine.  As
noticed	 before	 the sources from which students have to  be
drawn  are  primarily  determined  by  the  authorities	 who
maintain   and	run  the   institution,	 e.g.,	the  Central
Government  in	the present case.
In
Minor  P.Rajendran  v.
State  of  Madras
it  has been stated that  the  object  of
selection  for	admission  is to secure	 the  best  possible
material.   This  can  surely be achieved by  making  proper
rules  in the matter of selection but there can be no  doubt
that  such selection has to be confined to the sources	that
are  intended  to supply the material.	If the sources	have
been classified in the manner done in the present case it is
difficult  to  see how that classification has	no  rational
nexus  with  the object of imparting medical  education	 and
also of selection for the purpose.
In  the  case of
State of Andhra Pradesh &  Anr.	 vs.
Lavu  Narendranath & Ors.etc.
, 1971(1) SCC 607, a four Judge
bench  of  this Court had to consider whether  the  entrance
test prescribed by the Government for short-listing eligible
candidates for being admitted to medical courses in colleges
was  legally permissible or not.  Upholding the power of the
State  Government on the anvil of the Constitution,  Mitter,
J.,  speaking on behalf of the four Judge bench held that  :
Merely	because	 the  University   had	made   regulations
regarding  the admission of students to its degree  courses,
it  did not mean that any one who had passed the  qualifying
examination such as the P.U.C.	or H.S.C.  was ipso facto to
be  entitled to admission to such courses of study.  If	 the
number of candidates applying for such admission far exceeds
the  number  of seats available the University can  have  to
make its choice out of the applicants to find out who should
be  admitted and if instead of judging the candidates by the
number	of  marks  obtained  by	  them	in  the	  qualifying
examination  the University thinks fit to prescribe  another
test  for admission no objection can be taken thereto.	What
the  University	 can do in the matter of admissions  to	 the
degree	courses	 can certainly be done by the Government  in
the matter of admission to the M.B.B.S.	 course.  9.  In our
view  the  test	 prescribed  by the  Government	 in  no	 way
militates  against the power of Parliament under Entry 66 of
List  I	 of the Seventh Schedule to the	 Constitution.	 The
said entry provides :
Co-ordination  and  determination	 of  standards	 in
institutions for higher education or research and scientific
and technical institutions.
The  above  entry gives Parliament power to make	laws
for  laying down how standards in an institution for  higher
education  are	to  be determined and how they	can  be	 co-
ordinated.   It	 has no relation to a test prescribed  by  a
Government  or by a University for selection of a number  of
students  from out of a large number applying for  admission
to  a  particular course of study even if it be	 for  higher
education in any particular subject.
Similar  observations  were  found in para 15  of	 the
Report,	 wherein  it was observed that :  .The	University
Act,   as   pointed  out,   merely  prescribed	 a   minimum
qualification  for  entry into the higher courses of  study.
There  was  no	regulation to the effect that  admission  to
higher	course	of study was guaranteed by the	securing  of
eligibility.   The  Executive  have  a	power  to  make	 any
regulation  which would have the effect of a law so long  as
it  does not contravene any legislation already covering the
field  and  the	 Government  order in this case	 in  no	 way
affected the rights of candidates with regard to eligibility
for admission :	 the test prescribed was a further hurdle by
way  of competition when mere eligibility could not be	made
the determining factor.
The aforesaid observations of the four Judge bench, in
our  view,  correctly  bring out the permissible  scheme  of
short-listing  of  eligible candidates in the light  of	 the
relevant  provisions  with which we are concerned.
In	 the
case  of
Dr.  Ambesh Kumar vs.	 Principal,  L.L.R.M.Medical
College,  Meerut  & Ors.
, 1986 (Supp) SCC 543, a  two  Judge
bench of this court had to consider the question whether out
of  the	 eligible candidates qualified for being  considered
for  admission	to  medical education  imparted	 in  medical
colleges  of  the  State, looking to the limited  number  of
seats  available,  the State could resort to the process  of
weeding	  out	by   laying   down  further   criteria	 for
short-listing  such candidates.	 Upholding such an  exercise
undertaken  by	the  State  in the  light  of  the  relevant
provisions  of	the Constitution, B.C.Ray, J., speaking	 for
the  court, made the following observations at pages 544 and
545  of the Report as under :  The State Government can	 in
exercise  of  its executive power under
Article 162
make  an
order  relating	 to matters referred to in Entry 25  of	 the
Concurrent  List in the absence of any law made by the State
Legislature.	The  impugned  order   made  by	 the   State
Government pursuant to its executive powers was valid and it
cannot	be  assailed  on the ground that it  is	 beyond	 the
competence  of	the  State  Government to  make	 such  order
provided  it does not encroach upon or infringe the power of
the Central Government as well as the Parliament provided in
Entry  66 of List I.  The order in question merely specified
a further eligibility qualification for being considered for
selection  for admission to the postgraduate courses (degree
and  diploma)  in  the	Medical Colleges  in  the  State  in
accordance  with  the criteria
laid down by
Indian  Medical
Council.   The	number	of seats for  admission	 to  various
postgraduate  courses  both  degree and diploma	 in  Medical
Colleges  is limited and a large number of candidates  apply
for   admission	 to  these  courses   of  study.   In	such
circumstances  the  impugned order cannot be said to  be  in
conflict  with	or  repugnant  to   or	encroach  upon	 the
Regulations framed under the provisions of
Section 33
of the
Indian	Medical	 Council Act.  On the other hand  by  laying
down  a further qualification of eligibility it promotes and
furthers  the determination of standards in institutions for
higher education.
In  this	connection,  we may also refer	to  a  later
Constitution bench Judgment of this Court in
Indra Sawhney &
Ors.   vs.   Union  of	India &	 Ors.
,	(supra).
As  noted
earlier,  judgment  of this Court in
Kumari Nivedita  Jains
case  (supra)  was  approved  therein.
Jeevan	 Reddy,	 J.,
speaking on behalf of the Constitution bench, at page 751 of
the  Report in para 837 has referred to, with approval,	 the
observations  of  this Court in
State of Madhya Pradesh	 vs.
Kumari	Nivedita Jain, (Supra
) to the effect that  admission
to  medical  courses was regulated by an entrance  test	 for
general candidates, the minimum qualifying marks were 50% in
the   aggregate	 and  33%  in	each  subject.	 For   SC/ST
candidates,  however, it was 40% and 30% respectively.
The
said  deviation	 was upheld in
Kumari Nivedita	Jains
case
(supra)	 and the same was also approved by the	Constitution
Bench in the aforesaid decision.
In this connection, we may
also usefully refer to the relevant observations in the case
of
State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.  vs.	Kumari Nivedita Jain
&  Ors.
(supra) which got imprimatur of  the	Constitution
bench  of  this court in
Indra Sawhneys
case  (supra).
At
page  751 of the Report in
Indra Sawhneys
case (supra), the
following  pertinent observations are found in the  majority
judgment  wherein Jeevan Reddy, J., in paragraph 837 of	 the
Report observed as under :
Having   said  this,  we	must   append  a  note	 of
clarification.	In some cases arising under
Article 15
, this
Court has upheld the removal of minimum qualifying marks, in
the  case of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidates,  in
the matter of admission to medical courses.  For example, in
State of M.P.  v.  Nivedita Jain
admission to medical course
was regulated by an entrance test (called Pre-Medical Test).
For  general  candidates, the minimum qualifying marks	were
50% in the aggregate and 33% in each subject.  For Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled	 Tribe	candidates, however, it was 40%	 and
30% respectively.  On finding that Scheduled Caste/Scheduled
Tribe  candidates equal to the number of the seats  reserved
for  them  did	not  qualify  on  the  above  standard,	 the
Government   did  away	with   the  said  minimum   standard
altogether.   The Governments action was challenged in this
Court but was upheld.  Since it was a case under
Article 15
,
Article	 335
had no relevance and was not applied.  But  in
the  case  of
Article 16
,
Article 335
would be relevant	 and
any  order  on the lines of the order of the  Government  of
Madhya	Pradesh (in Nivedita Jain) would not be permissible,
being  inconsistent  with the efficiency of  administration.
To  wit,  in the matter of appointment of Medical  Officers,
the  Government or the Public Service Commission cannot	 say
that  there  shall  be	no   minimum  qualifying  marks	 for
Scheduled    Caste/Scheduled	Tribe	 candidates,   while
prescribing a minimum for others.  It may be permissible for
the  Government to prescribe a reasonably lower standard for
Scheduled   Castes/Scheduled  Tribes/Backward	 Classes   -
consistent   with   the	 requirements	of   efficiency	  of
administration	-  it  would  not   be	permissible  not  to
prescribe   any	 such  minimum	 standard  at  all.    While
prescribing   the  lower  minimum   standard  for   reserved
category,  the nature of duties attached to the post and the
interest of the general public should also be kept in mind.
In  para	20  of the Report in the case  of
State  of
Madhya	Pradesh	 &  Anr.  vs.  Kumari Nivedita Jain  &	Ors.
(supra)	 the  following pertinent observations are  found  :
Undoubtedly,  under
Section 33
of the Act, the Council	 is
empowered  to make regulations with the previous sanction of
the  Central Government generally to carry out the  purposes
of  the Act and such regulations may also provide for any of
the  matters  mentioned in
Section 33
of the Act.   We	have
earlier	 indicated  what  are  the  purposes  of  this	Act.
Sub-sections  (j), (k), (l) and (m) of the Act which we have
earlier	 set  out  clearly  indicate   that  they  have	  no
application  to the process of selection of a student out of
the  eligible  candidates  for admission  into	the  medical
course.	   Sub-	 sections  (j),	 (k)   and  (l)	 relate	  to
post-admission	 stages	 and  the   period  of	study  after
admission  in Medical Colleges.	 Sub-section (m) of
Section
33
relates  to	 a post-degree stage.	Sub-section  (n)  of
Section	 33
which has also been quoted earlier is also of no
assistance  as the Act is not concerned with the question of
selection  of  students out of the eligible  candidates	 for
admission  into Medical Colleges.  It appears to us that the
observations  of  this	Court in the case of Arti  Sapru  v.
State  of  Jammu & Kashmir which we have earlier quoted	 and
which  were  relied  on by Mr.	Phadke, were  made  on	such
consideration,	though	the question was not  very  properly
finally decided in the absence of the Council.
The  aforesaid  observations are also well  borne	 out
from  the scheme of the
Indian Medical Council Act
to  which
we  have made a detailed reference earlier.  But even  apart
from  that, once these observations have been approved by  a
Constitution  Bench  of nine learned Judges of	this  Court,
there  is no scope for any further debate on this aspect  in
the present proceedings.
We may now refer to a two Judge Bench decision of this
Court  in
Dr.	Sadhna Devi & Ors.  vs.	 State
o f  U.P.   &
Ors.,  1997(3)	SCC  90.  The court was concerned  with	 the
short-listing  of  eligible  candidates who have  got  basic
qualification for admission to postgraduate medical courses.
Reservation   of  seats	 for  SC   and	ST   candidates	  in
postgraduate  courses was not challenged but providing	zero
percent	 marks for them for passing the entrance examination
for  admission to postgraduate course was questioned  before
the  Bench.  It was held that once minimum qualifying  marks
for  passing  the  entrance  examination  for  admission  to
postgraduate courses was a pre- requisite, in the absence of
prescription  of  any minimum qualifying marks for  reserved
category  of candidates, admitting such students who did not
get  any marks at the entrance test amounted to	 sacrificing
merit  and  could  not be countenanced.	 In para 21  of	 the
Report,	 the following observations are made:  In our view,
the  Government	 having	 laid  down  a	system	for  holding
admission  tests,  is  not  entitled to	 do  away  with	 the
requirement  of	 obtaining the minimum qualifying marks	 for
the  special  category	candidates.   It   is  open  to	 the
Government  to	admit  candidates belonging to	the  special
categories  even  in a case where they obtain  lesser  marks
than  the  general  candidates provided they  have  got	 the
minimum	 qualifying  marks to fill up the reserved quota  of
seats for them.
A	 cursory  reading  of these  observations  seems  to
indicate   that	 once  the   minimum  qualifying  marks	 are
prescribed   for   otherwise	 eligible   candidates	 for
short-listing  them  for admission to postgraduate  courses,
minimum	 qualifying  marks prescribed for  general  category
candidates and reserved category candidates must be uniform.
But  then  follows para 22 which relies on the	decision  of
this  court in
State of Madhya Pradesh vs.  Kumari  Nivedita
Jain
(supra)	wherein	 prescription	of  lesser   minimum
qualifying  marks  in the entrance test for SC,ST and  Other
Backward  Class	 candidates  as	  compared  to	the  minimum
qualifying  marks  for	general	  category  candidates	 was
approved.  Even in earlier para 18 it is observed that if in
the  entrance test special category candidates obtain lesser
marks  than general category candidates even then they	will
be  eligible  for  admission within  their  reserved  quota.
These  observations  indicate that for reserved category  of
candidates  there can be separate minimum qualifying  marks.
Thus,  on a conjoint reading of observations in paras 18, 21
and 22 of the Report it has to be held that the ratio of the
decision  in
Sadhna  Devis
case (supra) is that  even	for
reserved  category  candidates there should be some  minimum
qualifying  marks  if  not the same as prescribed  as  bench
marks  for general category candidates.	 Thus, there  cannot
be   any  zero	qualifying   marks  for	 reserved   category
candidates   in	  the  entrance	  test	for   admission	  to
postgraduate  courses.	Hence, this judgment cannot be taken
to  have  laid down that there cannot be  lesser  qualifying
marks  for  reserved category candidates as compared to	 the
general	 category candidates who are otherwise eligible	 and
qualified for being considered for admission to postgraduate
medical	 courses.
That takes us to the consideration of  a
three  Judge  Bench decision of this Court  in
Postgraduate
Institute  of  Medical	Education & Research,  Chandigarh  &
Ors.,  vs.   K.L.   Narasimhan	& Anr.
, 1997  (6)  SCC	283.
Ramaswamy, J., speaking for the Bench had mainly to consider
two  questions;	  1) whether there can be reservation  under
Articles  15(4)
and
16(4)
of the Constitution in  connection
with  only  one	 post  in  a  discipline;   and	 2)  whether
reservation of seats in postgraduate courses was permissible
as per
Articles 14
, 15
and
16
of the Constitution.  Both the
aforesaid  questions  were  answered in the  affirmative  in
favour	of  the	 schemes  of reservations.
So	far  as	 the
question of reservation of seats when there is only one post
in the discipline is concerned, decision rendered thereon by
the   three  Judge  Bench  is	expressly  overruled  by   a
Constitution  Bench  judgment of this Court in
Postgraduate
Institute  of  Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh	 vs.
Faculty	 Association & Ors.
, 1998(4) SCC 1.  However, so far
as  the	 second	 question  is concerned,  in  the  aforesaid
judgment  it was held that there can be reservation of seats
in postgraduate courses as per the mandate of
Articles 15(4)
and
16(4).
In the present proceedings, there is no dispute
on  this score.	 Hence
the said judgment
on the second point
is  not	 required  to  be  reconsidered.   However,  certain
observations  are  found  in para 21 of the  report  wherein
Ramaswamy,  J.,	 has  observed	 that  diluting	 of  minimum
qualifying  marks  in  an  entrance   test  for	 entry	into
postgraduate  courses  for reserved category  of  candidates
cannot	be said to be unauthorised or illegal.	It has	been
observed   that:    Equally,   a  student,   admitted	on
reservation,   is  required  to	  pass	the  same   standard
prescribed  for speciality or a superspeciality in a subject
or  medical  science  or  technology.  In  that	 behalf,  no
relaxation  is given nor sought by the candidates  belonging
to  reserved  categories.  What is sought is a	facility  or
opportunity  for admission to the courses, Ph.D., speciality
or  superspeciality  or high technology by relaxation  of  a
lesser	percentage  of marks for initial admission than	 the
general	 candidates.  For instance, if the general candidate
is  required  to get 80% as qualifying marks  for  admission
into  speciality  or  superspeciality,	the  relaxation	 for
admission  to  the reserved candidates is of 10 marks  less,
i.e.,  qualifying marks in his case would be 70%.  A  doctor
or  a  technologist  has to pass the postgraduation  or	 the
graduation  with  the  same  standard	as  had	 by  general
candidate  and	has  also  to possess  the  same  degree  of
standard.   However,  with the facility of  possessing	even
lesser marks the reserved candidate gets admission.
Now,  so	far as these observations are concerned,  as
the  court  was	 not called upon to  consider  the  question
whether	 prescription  of lesser qualifying marks for  SC,ST
and  other  reserved  category candidates for  admission  to
postgraduate  or  super speciality courses in  medicine	 was
permissible,  they are clearly obiter.	So far as  admission
to  super  speciality courses are concerned, in the  present
reference  we  are  not concerned with	the  said  question,
hence, we need not say anything about the same.	 However, so
far  as	 admission to postgraduate courses is concerned	 the
question  of  providing	 of   lesser  qualifying  marks	 for
reserved  category candidates for admission to these courses
directly  arises  for our consideration.  Hence, the  obiter
observations in the aforesaid case on this aspect do require
consideration for their acceptance or otherwise.  As per the
scheme of Entry 66 of List I and Entry 25 of List III of the
Seventh	 Schedule of the Constitution of India, as discussed
earlier	 goes,	it  is	not   possible	to  countenance	 the
submission  of	Shri Salve, learned senior counsel  for	 the
Medical	 Council  of India and other counsel canvassing	 the
same  view  that the question of short-listing	of  eligible
candidates  who	 were  otherwise duly  qualified  for  being
admitted  to postgraduate courses in Medicine is not  within
the  domain  of State authorities especially in view of	 the
fact  that  the Parliament, in exercise of  its	 legislative
powers	under Entry 25 of List III, has still not spoken  on
the  point  nor	 does the
Indian Medical Council  Act,	1956
enacted	 under	Entry  66 of List I  covers  this  question.
Hence,	while  providing for entrance test as an  additional
requirement  for eligible candidates for being	short-listed
in  connection	with  admission to smaller number  of  seats
available  in  postgraduate courses, it cannot be said	that
the  State  authorities in exercise of their  constitutional
right  under
Article 15(4)
cannot give additional facilities
to   reserved  category	 of   candidates   vis-a-vis   their
requirement  of	 getting  minimum qualifying marks  at	such
entrance  tests	 so  that seats reserved for  them  may	 not
remain	unfilled and the reserved category of candidates  do
get   adequate	opportunity  to	 fill	them  up   and	 get
postgraduate  education on the seats reserved for them which
in  their  turn would not detract from the  availability  of
remaining  seats for general category candidates.  Thus, the
observations in para 21 of the aforesaid judgment that there
can be lesser qualifying marks for admission to postgraduate
courses	 for reserved category of candidates cannot be found
fault  with.  It is made clear that similar observations for
admission  to super speciality courses and the relaxation of
minimum	 qualifying  marks for candidates appearing  at	 the
entrance  test for such courses are not being approved by us
as  we	are  not  required to consider that  aspect  of	 the
matter,	 as  noted earlier.  As it will be presently  shown,
once  reservation  of  seats in postgraduate  courses  under
Article 15(4)
is accepted then even lesser bench marks being
prescribed for reserved category of candidates in the common
entrance examination which they undertake along with general
category of candidates would in substance make no difference
so  far	 as  the  un-reserved  seats  available	 to  general
category  of  candidates  are concerned.
In a	later  three
Judge  Bench  Judgment of this Court in
Medical	 Council  of
India  vs.   State of Karnataka & Ors.
, 1998(6) SCC 131,  it
was  held  that in the light of Sections 10-A,	10-B,
10-C
,
19-A  and
33(fa)
, (fb), (fc), (j), (k) and (l) of the
Indian
Medical	 Council Act, 1956
fixation of admission capacity in
medical	 colleges/institutions is the exclusive function  of
Medical	 Council  of  India  and   increase  in	 number	  of
admissions can only be directed by the Central Govt.  on the
recommendation	of  the	 Medical  Council  of  India.	This
function  of the Medical Council of India was upheld in	 the
light  of Entries 66 List I and 25 of List III thereof.	 Now
it  becomes  at	 once obvious that providing for  number  of
seats  to be filled up by eligible candidates in any medical
course	imparted by medical colleges or medical institutions
will   have   a	  direct   nexus  with	 coordination	and
determination  of standards in medical education, as larger
the  seats  in	medical	 colleges wherein  students  can  be
admitted  to MBBS or even higher courses in medicine, larger
infrastructure would be required by way of beds and eligible
and  efficient	teachers  and all other	 infrastructure	 for
imparting  proper  training to the admitted students.	Once
this  exercise	is clearly within the domain of the  Medical
Council	 of  India in the light of the	aforesaid  statutory
provisions it becomes obvious that Entry 66 of List I of the
Seventh	 Schedule  would  hold the  field  and	consequently
States	will not be empowered under entry 25 of List III  to
legislate on this topic as such an exercise would be subject
to  legislation under Entry 66 of List I which would  wholly
occupy	the field.  However, a moot question remains whether
given the permissible intake capacity for admitting students
in  any medical college as
laid down by
the Medical  Council
of  India  can the available intake capacity of students  be
regulated at the admission stage when the number of eligible
candidates  aspiring  to  be  admitted is  larger  than	 the
available  intake  capacity?   This   question	will  remain
outside the domain of the Medical Council of India under the
aforesaid Act.	As we have discussed earlier, there being no
parliamentary legislation on this aspect even under entry 25
of  List  III of the Seventh Schedule, the short-listing  of
eligible  candidates  for  being admitted to  the  available
permitted intake capacity in medical colleges will obviously
remain	in  the	 domain	 of   State  legislature  and  State
executive on the combined reading of entry 25 of List III as
well  as
Article 162
of the Constitution of India.  In	view
of  the	 aforesaid discussion, it therefore,  becomes  clear
that once seats in postgraduate medical courses are reserved
for  SC,  ST and OBC candidates as per
Article 15(4)
of	 the
Constitution  the  question as to how admission	 to  limited
number	of  general  seats  and reserved  seats	 are  to  be
regulated will remain in the domain of the State authorities
running	  these	  institutions.	    They   can,	  therefore,
legitimately  resort  to the procedure of  short-listing  of
otherwise  eligible  candidates.    While  undertaking	this
exercise of short-listing, the state authorities have to see
how  best  in a given academic year the reserved  seats	 and
general	 category  seats can be filled in by  available	 and
eligible  candidates.  The question is while undertaking the
task  of  short-listing	 of  available	eligible  candidates
vis-a-vis  limited number of seats that may be available for
being filled in in a given academic year, uniform qualifying
bench  marks  for  passing  the	  entrance  test  should  be
prescribed  for both the general category candidates as well
as reserved category candidates or there can be lesser bench
marks  for  the	 latter	 category of students.	 If  due  to
non-availability  of reserved category candidates who  could
obtain	minimum	 qualifying  marks prescribed  for  all	 the
   examinees whether there can be any legitimate dilution of
minimum	 qualifying  marks  for these reserved	category  of
question.
candidates and if so, to what extent is the moot
In  the	 case of
M.R.  Balaji & Ors.  vs.  State of  Mysore,@@
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
1963  Supp.(1)	SCR 439, a Constitution bench of this  court
was  concerned with the extent of reservation which could be
legally	 permissible under
Article 15(4)
of the Constitution
of India.  Gajendragadkar, J., speaking for the Constitution
bench  held  that  reservation of 68% seats  in	 educational
institutions  was  inconsistent with the concept of  special
provision authorised by
Article 15(4).
It was then observed
as  under  :   Reservation should and must  be	adopted	 to
advance	 the  prospects of weaker sections of  society,	 but
while  doing  so,  care	 should	 be  taken  not	 to  exclude
admission  to  higher educational centres of  deserving	 and
qualified  candidates  of other	 communities.	Reservations
under Arts.15(4) and 16(4) must be within reasonable limits.
The  interests	of weaker sections of society, which  are  a
first  charge  on  the	States and the Centre,	have  to  be
adjusted  with	the interests of the community as  a  whole.
Speaking  generally and in a broad way, a special  provision
should	be less than 50%.  The actual percentage must depend
upon  the  relevant prevailing circumstances in	 each  case.
The  object of
Art.15(4)
is to advance the interests of	 the
society	 as  a whole by looking after the interests  of	 the
weaker	elements in society.  If a provision under
Art.15(4)
ignores	 the  interests of society, that is clearly  outside
the  scope  of
Art.15(4).
It is extremely  unreasonable  to
assume	that  in enacting
Art.15(4)
, Parliament intended  to
provide	 that where the advancement of the backward  classes
or  the	 Scheduled  Castes and Tribes  were  concerned,	 the
fundamental  rights of the citizens constituting the rest of
the  society  were to be completely and absolutely  ignored.
Considerations of national interest and the interests of the
community and the society as a whole have already to be kept
in mind.
Thus,  even accepting that when seats are reserved for
SC  and	 ST and Other Backward Classes for admission  to  be
given  to  such reserved category of eligible candidates  in
postgraduate  medical  courses, the concession	or  facility
given  to  them cannot exceed 50% of the facility  otherwise
available  to  members of the general public.	Keeping	 the
aforesaid   ratio  of  the   Constitution  Bench  in   view,
therefore, even proceeding on the assumption that 50% of the
available  seats in postgraduate medical courses in a  given
year  may be reserved for SC,ST and OBCs, further concession
that  may be given to them by State authorities by  diluting
the  minimum  qualifying marks at the entrance test so	that
seats  reserved	 for  them may not remain  unfilled  by	 the
reserved  categories of persons for whom they are meant, the
dilution  of  such  marks cannot exceed 50% of	the  general
standards  of  qualifying  bench  marks laid  down  for	 the
general	 categories of candidates.  Otherwise even the	said
dilution  would	 become	 unreasonable and would	 be  hit  by
Articles  14
and
15(1)
of the Constitution of India.
In the
case  of
Minor P.  Rajendran vs.  State of Madras  &  Ors.
,
1968  (2) SCR 786, another Constitution bench of this  court
had  to	 consider  whether   district-wise  distribution  of
reserved  seats in medical courses for granting admission to
reserved  category of candidates was violative of
Article 15
(1)
read  with
Article 14
of the  Constitution  of  India.
Answering the question in the affirmative it was observed by
Wanchoo,  J.,  speaking for the Constitution bench at  pages
792  and  793  of  the Report as under :   The	object	of
selection  can only be to secure the best possible  material
for  admission	to  colleges subject to	 the  provision	 for
socially   and	educationally	backward  classes.   Further
whether	 selection  is from the socially  and  educationally
backward  classes  or from the general pool, the  object  of
selection  must	 be to secure the best possible talent	from
the two sources.  If that is the object, it must necessarily
follow	that  that  object would be defeated  if  seats	 are
allocated  district  by district.  It cannot be and has	 not
been  denied  that the object of selection is to secure	 the
best  possible	talent	from  the two sources  so  that	 the
country may have the best possible doctors.
Relying  on  these  observations of  the	Constitution
bench  Shri  P.P.   Rao and Shri Chaudhary,  learned  senior
counsel appearing for the State of Madhya Pradesh, submitted
that  when  there is a pool of eligible candidates who	have
all  passed  MBBS  examination and are	duly  qualified	 and
eligible  to  pursue postgraduate medical courses of  study,
and  if in a given institution there are seats reserved	 for
them  then  the	 selection  out	 of  the  reserved  category
candidates  for	 filling up of these reserved posts  can  be
done  in a selective manner and that would permit reasonable
dilution  of  the uniform qualifying marks at  the  entrance
test  as required to be obtained by the examinees concerned.
This  submission  is  amply  borne out	from  the  aforesaid
observations  of  the  Constitution bench decision  of	this
court.	 However, a further question survives as to  whether
in  diluting  the  minimum  qualifying	marks  for  reserved
category  of candidates who are otherwise eligible for being
admitted  to postgraduate courses on the seats reserved	 for
them,  whether
Article	 335
can get attracted.	  It  is  of
course	true  that  candidates	 appointed  or	admitted  to
postgraduate medical course have to work as registrars, some
posts  of  the registrars are fully paid posts while  others
may  be	 stipendary  residents posts.  However, it  is	not
possible to accept the contention of learned counsel for the
Special	 Leave	Petitioners that admission  to	postgraduate
courses	 would amount to recruitment to any posts.   Concept
of  recruitment	 to  posts is entirely	different  from	 the
concept	 of  admission to the course of study which  in	 its
turn  may  require the students concerned to take  practical
training  by  functioning  as registrars attached  to  wards
where  patients are treated.  Even though such students work
as  registrars	during the course of study  as	postgraduate
students, they essentially remain students and their working
as  registrars would be a part of practical training.	They
would  all  the	 same remain trainee registrars and  not  as
directly   recruited  registrars   through  any	 recruitment
process held by the Public Service Commission for filling up
full-fledged   medical	officers  posts.    They  work	 as
registrars  as	a part of postgraduate educational  training
only  because  they are admitted to the course of  study  as
postgraduate  students in concerned disciplines.
It is easy
to  visualise that calling for applications from open market
by  advertisement  for appointment of  full-fledged  medical
officers to be recruited through the process of selection to
be   undertaken	 by  Public   Service  Commission  or  other
departmental  selection committees will stand entirely on  a
different  footing  as compared to the process of  admitting
eligible  students  to	postgraduate   medical	courses	  of
studies.   Thus,  keeping in view the nature of	 working  as
trainee	 registrars  by	 admitted students  to	postgraduate
medical	 courses  it  cannot  be  said	that  such  admitted
students   are	recruited  to	any  posts  of	 registrars.
Consequently,
Article 335
of the Constitution of India which
has  relevance while considering reservation of posts  under
Article	 16(4)
cannot have any direct impact on	 reservation
of  seats  in  educational institutions as  permitted  under
Article	 15(4).
Learned  counsel for the  petitioners	 had
invited	 our  attention to a decision of two Judge bench  of
this  Court in
S.  Vinod Kumar & Anr.  vs.  Union of India &
Ors.
,  1996(6)	SCC  580,  wherein it was  held	 that  while
providing  for	reservations  to posts in the  hierarchy  by
invoking  powers under
Article 16(4)
, making a provision for
lower  qualifying  marks or lesser level of  evaluation	 for
members of reserved category was impermissible on account of
Article	 335
of the Constitution of India.   The  aforesaid
decision  obviously  cannot  be	 pressed  in  service  while
considering  the  question of giving facilities to  reserved
category  of  candidates  for being admitted  to  the  seats
reserved  for them in educational institutions wherein	they
can  undertake	courses of studies for ultimately  obtaining
postgraduate degrees in medicine.
In the case of
Ajay Kumar
Singh & Ors.  vs.  State of Bihar & Ors.
(supra), this aspect
of  the	 matter	 has been correctly  highlighted  by  Jeevan
Reddy,	J., speaking for the court in para 14 of the Report.
It  has	 been  held therein that :  We	see  absolutely	 no
substance  in  the  third  submission of  Shri	Singh.	 The
argument  taxes	 ones credulity.  We are totally unable	 to
appreciate how can it be said that admission to postgraduate
medical	 course	 is  a promotional post	 just  because	such
candidate  must	 necessarily  pass MBBS	 examination  before
becoming  eligible  for	 admission to  postgraduate  medical
course	or  for	 the  reason  that  some  stipend  -  it  is
immaterial  whether  Rs.1000 or Rs.3000 p.m.  - is  paid  to
postgraduate  students.	 Admission to such course cannot  be
equated	 to  appointment to a post and certainly not  to  an
appointment  by	 promotion.   The  argument  is	 accordingly
rejected.
(Emphasis supplied)

      It  is  obvious  that only because a  person  who	 has
passed	MBBS examination and is made eligible for  admission
to  postgraduate course is paid stipend during the course of
his studies at postgraduate level, he cannot be said to have
been  appointed to the post of a registrar.  It may be	that
he  has to work as a trainee registrar during the course  of
his study to obtain practical training but that is a part of
the curriculum of studies and not because he is appointed to
the post of the registrar after undergoing selection process
whereunder  a  person  from open market is  recruited  as  a
medical	 officer  and whose recruitment as  medical  officer
would  be  subject  to rules and regulations and  would	 not
terminate only because his training period is over.  In fact
such  a full-fledged medical officer has no training period.
He  has	 if at all probation period.  In case of  a  trainee
registrar  who has to work as such during the course of	 his
studies	 as  a postgraduate student on the other  hand,	 his
work  as registrar would be co-terminus with his passing the
postgraduate  examination  as M.D.  or M.S./M.D.S.   as	 the
case  may be.  He is also not liable to be transferred as  a
full-fledged registrar, duly appointed as such, is liable to
be  transferred	 due  to exigencies of service.	  Thus,	 the
working	 of  such  students during the course  of  study  as
residents  whether on full payment or on stipendary  payment
would  make  no	 difference and they cannot be	said  to  be
holding	 any  civil  post in any hospital as  full-  fledged
medical	  officers.   Consequently,
Article   335
of	 the
Constitution  of  India	 cannot	 by itself  be	applied	 for
regulating  the	 admission  of	eligible  reserved  category
students  to  postgraduate  medical  courses  in  the  seats
reserved for them under
Article 15(4)
of the Constitution of
India.	 The next question that falls for consideration that
even  assuming that
Article 335
cannot be pressed in service
while  considering the question of admission of eligible and
qualified  candidates for enabling them to pursue courses of
postgraduate medical studies the guidelines
laid down by
the
Medical	 Council  of India pursuant to the regulations	made
under
Section	33
of the Indian Medical Council  Act,	even
though	persuasive  in	nature	and not	 mandatory,  can  be
totally	 by-passed  or	ignored	 by  the  State	 authorities
concerned  with short-listing of candidates for admission to
limited	 seats	available in medical institutions  imparting
postgraduate  medical education?  The answer obviously would
be in the negative.  The guidelines
laid down by
the Medical
Council	 of India though persuasive have to be kept in	view
while  deciding as to whether the concession or facility  to
be  given  to  such reserved category of  candidates  should
remain	within the permissible limits so as not to amount to
arbitrary  and unreasonable grant of concessions wiping	 out
the  concept  of  merit in its entirety.   Consequently,  it
cannot	be  said that even though short-listing of  eligible
candidates  is	permissible to the State authorities,  while
doing  so, the State authorities can completely give a go-by
to  the concept of merit and can go to the extent of totally
dispensing   with  qualifying  marks   for  SC,ST  and	 OBC
candidates  and can short-list them for being considered for
admission  to  reserved	 categories  of seats  for  them  in
postgraduate  studies  by reducing the qualifying  marks  to
even  zero.
That was rightly frowned upon by this court  in
Sadhana	 Devis
case  (supra) as that would not	 amount	 to
short-listing but on the contrary would amount to completely
long  listing  of such reserved category candidates for	 the
vacancies  which  are  reserved for them and on	 which	they
would not be entitled to be admitted if they did not qualify
according  to  even reduced bench marks or qualifying  marks
fixed  for them.
As seen earlier, keeping in view the ratio
of  the	 Constitution bench of this court in
M.R.   Balajis
case (supra) it must be held that along with the permissible
reservation  of	 50%  of  seats	 for  reserved	category  of
candidates  in institutions imparting postgraduate  studies,
simultaneously	if further concessions by way of  facilities
are  to be given for such reserved category of candidates so
as  to enable them to effectively occupy the seats  reserved
for  them, such concessions by way of dilution of qualifying
marks to be obtained at the entrance test for the purpose of
short-listing, can also not go beyond the permissible limits
of  50%	 of the qualifying marks uniformly fixed  for  other
candidates  belonging to general category and who appear  at
the  same competitive test along with the reserved  category
of  candidates.	 It is found from the records of these cases
that  qualifying  marks	 at the entrance  test	for  general
category  of  candidates are fixed at 50%.  In fact such  is
the  general  standard of qualifying marks suggested by	 the
Medical	 Council  of  India even at the	 stage	of  entrance
examination  to MBBS course which is at the gross-root level
of  medical  education	after a student	 has  completed	 his
secondary  education.  Thus it would be proper to proceed on
the  basis  that minimum qualifying marks for  clearing	 the
entrance  test by way of short-listing for getting  admitted
to postgraduate medical courses uniformly for all candidates
who  appear at such examination should be 50% but so far  as
reserved  category  of	candidates  are	 concerned  who	 are
otherwise   eligible   for  competing	for  seats  in	 the
postgraduate  medical courses, 50% reduction at the  highest
of  the general bench marks by way of permissible concession
would  enable the State authorities to reduce the qualifying
marks for passing such entrance examination up to 50% of 50%
i.e.   25%.  In other words, if qualifying marks for passing
the  entrance examination for being admitted to postgraduate
medical	 courses  is 50% for a general	category  candidate,
then  such  qualifying	marks by way of	 concession  can  be
reduced	 for reserved category candidates to 25% which would
be  the maximum permissible limit of reduction or  deviation
from  the  general  bench marks.  Meaning  thereby,  that  a
reserved category candidate even if gets 25% of the marks at
such  a common entrance test he can be considered for  being
admitted  to the reserved vacancy for which he is  otherwise
eligible.   But	 below	25%  of	 bench	marks  for  reserved
category   of  candidates,  no	 further  dilution  can	  be
permitted.   In	 other	words, concession  or  facility	 for
reserved category of candidates can remain permissible under
Article	 15(4)
up to only 50% of bench marks prescribed	 for
general	 category  candidates.	The State cannot reduce	 the
qualifying  marks for a reserved category of candidate below
25%  nor  can it go up to zero as tried to be  suggested  by
Shri P.P.Rao, learned senior counsel for the State of Madhya
Pradesh	 as  that  would  not	amount	to  the	 process  of
short-listing  but  would in fact amount to long listing  or
comprehensive	listing	 of  such   reserved   category	  of
candidates  as	seen earlier.
Any such attempt	 to  further
dilute	the  qualifying	 marks or bench marks  for  reserved
category  of  candidates  below 25% of the  general  passing
marks  would be violative of the provisions of
Article 15(4)
as
laid down by
the Constitution Bench in
M.R.Balajis
case
(supra)	 and would also remain unreasonable and would be hit
by
Article  14
of the Constitution of India.	Within	this
sliding	 scale	of percentages between 25% and	50%  passing
marks  appropriate bench marks for passing the entrance test
examination  can  be  suitably	fixed	for  SC/ST  and	 OBC
candidates  as exigencies of the situation may require.	 But
in  no	case the qualifying marks for any of these  reserved
categories  of	students  can go below 25%  of	the  general
passing	 marks.	  Any reserved category candidate  who	gets
less  than 25% of marks at the entrance examination or	less
than   prescribed  reduced  percentage	of  marks  for	 the
concerned  category  between  50% and 25% of  passing  marks
cannot	be called for counselling and has to be ruled out of
consideration  and in that process if any seats reserved for
reserved categories concerned remains unfilled by candidates
belonging  to  that  category  it must	go  to	the  general
category  and  can  be	filled in by  the  general  category
candidate  who has already obtained 50% or more marks at the
entrance  examination  but  who could  not  be	accommodated
because	 of  lesser percentage of marks obtained by him	 qua
other  general category candidates in the limited number  of
seats	available  to  them  in	  a  given  institution	  in
postgraduate  studies.	 As we will presently show  even  if
minimum	 passing marks in the entrance test for admission to
postgraduate  courses is either reduced to 25% uniformly for
all  the  candidates  or  is reduced and  diluted  only	 for
reserved category of candidates, the net result would remain
substantially  the same.  This aspect can be highlighted  by
taking	an  illustration.  Suppose there are six seats in  a
given  postgraduate medical course.  Then applying the ratio
of  50%	 permissible  reservation  of  seats  for   reserved
category  of candidates like SC/ST and OBCs three seats	 get
reserved,  one each for SC,ST and OBC while three seats will
remain	available to general category of candidates  passing
the common entrance test.  On the basis of this illustration
let  us	 take a hypothetical case of 13 eligible  candidates
who  have  passed  basic  MBBS	 examination  and  are	duly
qualified  to compete for the six seats in a given course of
postgraduate  study.  These 13 candidates undertake the same
entrance  test and all of them as a result of the said	test
obtained  marks as under :  A 75 out of 100, B 70, C(SC) 65,
D  60,	E(SC) 55, F51, G50, H(OBC) 48, I 42, J(ST) 40,	K35,
L30, M25, N (SC) 21.  In the aforesaid illustration C, E and
N  are SC candidates, H is OBC and J is a ST candidate.	 Now
if 50% passing marks are uniformly applied to all of them as
tried	to  be	suggested  by	learned	 counsel   for	 the
petitioners,  the following picture will emerge :  Situation
No.1:  Seat numbers 1,2, and 3 are general seats, 4 reserved
for  SC,  5 reserved for ST and 6 reserved for OBC.  If	 50%
passing	 marks are uniformly applied to seat nos.1,2,3,4,5 &
6  :   Seat no.1 will go to A, 2 to B, 3 to C (SC), 4  to  E
(SC),  seat  nos.5&6 will not get filled in by the  reserved
category candidates as there are no ST or OBC candidates who
have  obtained	50% and more marks.  These two	seats  which
remain	unfilled  will	go  to	D  and	F  general  category
candidates  who	 have obtained more than 50% marks, but	 who
could  not be accommodated in the seats available to general
category  of candidates as the last candidate in the general
category  who got admission though SC, was having 65% marks.
Thus the situation would be the two seats i.e.	seat nos.  5
and  6 which are reserved for ST and OBC and were  otherwise
not available to general category of candidates would not go
to  eligible  and qualified ST and OBC candidates namely,  H
and J even though they had obtained MBBS degrees and had the
basic  qualification  and eligibility for being admitted  to
the  seats  reserved  for them.	 That may  affect  the	real
purpose	  underlying   reservation   under
Article   15(4).
Situation  No.2:  We may now take the alternative  situation
for  consideration  :  If the minimum qualifying  marks	 are
reduced	 to  25%  for all categories of	 candidates  to	 the
rock-bottom  permissible  limit	 including SC/ST  and  other
reserved  category  candidates, then the  following  picture
would emerge :	Seat no.1 will go to A, seat no.2 will go to
B,  seat no.3 will go to C(SC), seat no.4 which is  reserved
for  SC candidate will go to E, seat no.5 which is  reserved
for  ST	 will go to J, seat no.6 which is reserved  for	 OBC
will go to H.  All six seats will be filled up by A,B, C,E,J
&  H.  Thus even if the minimum passing marks are  uniformly
reduced to 25% which is the permissible rock- bottom as seen
earlier	 the  general category candidates will get the	same
seats  which  would have been available to them even if	 the
minimum	 qualifying  marks  for admission  would  have	been
uniformly  kept	 at 50% for all candidates at  the  entrance
test.	But what will happen is, that by reduction of  these
qualifying marks to 25% all the reserved category seats 4 to
6  will	 get filled in by otherwise eligible  and  qualified
reserved category candidates E,J and H and there will remain
no  occasion for making any of such seats available to	left
out  general category candidates like D and F for whom	they
were not meant even otherwise and reservation of seats under
Article 15(4)
would get fully fructified.
Situation	 no.3:	 Now let us assume that for  general
category  candidates  minimum passing marks at the  entrance
test  are  kept at 50% but for reserved category  candidates
the passing marks are reduced to the permissible rock-bottom
limit  of 25%.	If that happens, the result would remain the
same,  namely,	as found in situation no.2, i.e.  A will  be
admitted  to  seat no.1, B will be admitted to seat no.2,  C
(SC)  will  be admitted to seat no.3, E will be admitted  to
seat  no.4 reserved for SC, J will be admitted to seat	no.5
reserved for ST and H will be admitted to seat no.6 reserved
for  OBC.  Then the net result would be that because of	 the
limited	 deviation  of	minimum qualifying  marks  only	 for
reserved  category  candidates,	 E,  J & H  who	 would	have
otherwise  been admitted to reserved category seats even  if
there  was  universal  and uniform reduction  of  qualifying
marks  at  25%, will get the same benefit without  affecting
the  admission	of general category  candidates.   Situation
No.4:	As minimum qualifying marks for reserved category of
candidates  are	 kept at 25% and are not reduced  below	 the
same, candidate N who is a SC candidate and who has obtained
only  21% passing marks at the entrance test will be totally
ruled out of consideration, but even if the qualifying marks
are  reduced  to below the permissible limit of 25%, N	will
not get any seat as the seat reserved for such candidates is
only  one  being no.  4 in the said course of study  and  is
already occupied by E who is a more meritorious SC candidate
qua  N.	  Situation No.5:  Now let us consider	a  situation
wherein	 E  a  SC  candidate, who is  entitled	to  reserved
category  seat	no.4  and has excluded D who  is  a  general
category  candidate  who  has obtained more marks  than	 him
because	 of such permissible reservation of a seat for	him,
for  any  reason does not join the course of study  and	 his
seat becomes vacant, then in such a situation, the following
picture	 may  emerge in different categories of cases  where
minimum	 passing marks are fixed differently :	i) In case E
is not available and 50% minimum passing marks are fixed for
all  categories	 of candidates then seat no.1 will go to  A,
seat  no.2 will go to B., seat no.3 will go to C, seat	no.4
would  not go to N who is the next eligible SC candidate who
has  qualified	for  being admitted but has  got  less	than
passing	 marks at the entrance test.  That seat will  remain
unoccupied  and will go to the general category candidate D.
Seat  no.5 which is reserved for ST person also cannot go to
J as he has got less than the passing marks.  Seat no.5 will
therefore,  go	to F.  Seat no.6 reserved for OBC also	will
not  go	 to  H as he has got only 48% marks, less  than	 the
minimum passing marks.	His seat will go to general category
candidates  who are in the waiting list and will be  offered
to  G  who  has	 just got the passing marks.   Thus  in	 the
absence	 of availability of E the six seats will go as under
:  A,B,C,D,F & G.  Thus all the reserved category seats will
remain	unfilled by reserved category candidates and will be
added to general category seats.  Result will be reservation
under
Article 15(4)
will totally fail.	 ii) Now let us take
another	 category  of situation where minimum passing  marks
are fixed at 25% for all candidates.  In that case even if E
is not available then the first three general category seats
will  go to A,B,C and the 4th seat reserved for SC candidate
will  remain  unfilled	as the next  available	eligible  SC
candidate  is N who has got less than 25% minimum marks.  So
his seat will go to the general category candidate who is in
the waiting list namely, D.  While seat no.4 reserved for ST
candidate  will	 go  to	 J and seat no.6  reserved  for	 OBC
candidate  will go to H.  Therefore, the net result will  be
as under :  1 to 6 seats will go to A,B,C,D,J & H.  iii) The
same  result  would follow for general	category  candidates
even  if the minimum passing marks are fixed at 50% and	 for
the  reserved  category	 candidates the	 minimum  qualifying
marks  are reduced to 25%.  Then the first three seats	will
go  to A,B,C, and seat no.4 not occupied by E a SC candidate
cannot	go to N the next SC candidate who has got less	than
25%  marks.   It  will	be occupied by D  from	the  general
category  candidates.	While  seat no.5 will go to J  a  ST
candidate  who has more than 25% marks and seat no.6 will go
to  H who is a OBC candidate having got 48% marks.  Thus the
six  seats will go to A,B,C,D,J & H.  Thus it is clear	that
where  the  minimum passing marks are uniformly reduced	 for
all  candidates or they are reduced only for backward  class
candidates  but	 to  the same extent, the  result  regarding
occupation of these seats by general category candidates and
reserved  candidates  would  remain the same if E  does	 not
occupy the seat available to him as an SC candidate.
iv) If
for  any  reason the minimum qualifying marks  for  reserved
category candidates are still further reduced to 20% then in
the absence of availability of a SC candidate E, the next SC
candidate  N  having  21%  may get it and  occupy  the	seat
reserved  for  a  SC  candidate.  In such  a  situation	 the
following  picture  will emerge :  1 to 3 will go to  A,B,C;
seat  no.4  reserved for SC candidate will go to N and	seat
no.5  will  go to ST candidate J and seat no.6 reserved	 for
OBC  candidate	will go to H.  Resultantly no seat  will  be
left  for being made available to general category candidate
D and he will get excluded.  But as we have seen earlier, if
concession  or	dilution of minimum qualifying marks at	 the
entrance  test for admission to postgraduate medical courses
is kept within the permissible limit of 50% dilution and can
go down only up to 25% minimum qualifying marks for reserved
category  candidates  then  N  in no case would	 get  in  to
displace  D who is a general category candidate and who	 had
an  opportunity to get in vis-a-vis the seat reserved for SC
candidate as E the eligible SC candidate is not available at
a  given  point of time.  The aforesaid	 illustration  shows
that  as  C  (SC  candidate) has got  the  seat	 in  general
category  on  his  own	merit his occupancy  is	 not  to  be
considered while granting admission to the seat reserved for
SC  candidate  as held by a Constitution bench	decision  of
this Court in
R.K.  Sabharwal & Ors.  vs.  State of Punjab &
Ors.
,  1995(2)	SCC  745.
We may at this  stage  refer  to
decision  of  a	 three	Judge bench of	this  court  in
Dr.
Pradeep Jain & Ors.  vs.  Union of India & Ors.
, 1984(3) SCC
654,  wherein  in  the	context of  reservation	 in  medical
education   courses   on  the	basis  of   territorial	  or
institutional  preference,  Bhagwati, J., speaking  for	 the
court  in para 22 of the Report observed as under :  But as
far  as	 admissions to postgraduate courses, such as MS,  MD
and  the like are concerned, it would be eminently desirable
not  to	 provide  for  any reservation	based  on  residence
requirement within the State or on institutional preference.
There  the  excellence	cannot be compromised by  any  other
considerations	because	 that  would be detrimental  to	 the
interest  of  the  nation. It is of course true	 that  the
aforesaid  observations were made not with reference to	 any
reservations   as  per
Article	  15(4).
However,   while
considering  the extent of dilution of minimum passing marks
in  the	 entrance  examination	for  admission	of  reserved
category  candidates  to postgraduate medical  courses,	 the
permissible  limit below which the concessions available  to
reserved  category of candidates cannot be permitted to	 go,
would  require serious consideration, otherwise merit  would
be  totally by-passed and jeopardised.	It is also pertinent
to note that in the aforesaid decision the permissible limit
of  reservation by way of institutional preference was	held
to  be	only up to 50% of the total available seats.
While
dealing	 with  the  scope  and ambit  of  reservation  under
Article	 15(4)
in postgraduate courses, which of course  is
not  in	 challenge before us, we have also to keep in  view,
the  observations  of the nine Judge bench of this Court  in
Indra  Sawhneys
case (supra).  In para 146 of the Report at
page  401  Pandian,  J., concurring with the  main  majority
decision rendered by Jeevan Reddy, J., observed that :	The
basic policy of reservation is to off-set the inequality and
remove	the  manifest  imbalance, the victims of  which	 for
bygone	generations  lag far behind and demand	equality  by
special	 preferences  and  their strategies.   Therefore,  a
comprehensive	 methodological	    approach	encompassing
jurisprudential, comparative, historical and anthropological
conditions   is	  necessary.	Such  considerations   raise
controversial issues transcending the routine legal exercise
because certain social groups who are inherently unequal and
who  have fallen victims of societal discrimination  require
compensatory treatment.	 Needless to emphasise that equality
in  fact  or substantive equality involves the necessity  of
beneficial  treatment  in order to attain the  result  which
establishes  an	 equilibrium  between  two  sections  placed
unequally.
Same  learned  Judge  at pages 402-403 of	 the  Report
considered a passage by Allan P.  Sindler in his book Bakke,
Defunis	 and  Minority	Admissions   (The  Quest  for  Equal
Opportunity)  which  dealt with a running race	between	 two
persons i.e.  one who has his legs shackled and another not.
In  such  a race between unequals it was found necessary  to
remove	the  inequality	 between the two runners  by  giving
compensatory edge to the shackled runner.  The learned Judge
also  noted  the  submission  of  learned  counsel  for	 the
petitioners  who  demonstrably explained that  as  unwatered
seeds  do not germinate, unprotected backward class citizens
will  whither  away.
In  the	earlier	 Constitution  bench
judgment  in
M.R.Balaji  vs.	 State	of  Mysore
(supra),
Gajendragadkar,	 J.,  at page 467 of the Report, this  Court
made  the following pertinent observations with reference to
Article	 15(4)	:
When
Art.15(4)
refers  to  the  special
provision   for	 the  advancement  of  certain	classes	  or
scheduled castes or scheduled tribes, it must not be ignored
that  the  provision  which is authorised to be	 made  is  a
special provision;  it is not a provision which is exclusive
in  character,	so that in looking after the advancement  of
those  classes,	 the  State would be justified	in  ignoring
altogether  the advancement of the rest of the society.	  It
is  because  the interests of the society at large would  be
served	by promoting the advancement of the weaker  elements
in  the society that
Art.15(4)
authorises special  provision
to be made.
We  may also refer to the contention of learned senior
counsel	 Shri Rajendra Sachar, placing reliance on page	 474
of  the	 Report in
M.R.Balajis
case (supra) to	the  effect
that  the efficiency of administration is of such paramount
importance that it would be unwise and impermissible to make
any  reservation at the cost of efficiency of administration
and  that  it  was undoubtedly the effect  of
Article	335.
Therefore,  what  is true in regard to
Art.15(4)
is  equally
true  in regard to
Art.16(4).
These observations,  strongly
relied	upon  by  Shri Sachar for importing  the  impact  of
Article	 335
on the reservations under
Article 15(4)
cannot
be  treated  to	 be  of any real  assistance  to  him.	 The
aforesaid  observations were made by the Constitution  bench
while considering the reasonableness of reservation of seats
in  educational institutions and for highlighting the  point
that  such reservation of seats should not be more than	 50%
and  reservation  of  68%  of	seats  was  not	 within	 the
permissible  limit of special provision under
Article 15(4).
From  these observations, it cannot necessarily follow	that
admission   to	such  reserved	 seats	can  tantamount	  to
appointments  to  any posts to which
Article 335
would	 get
directly  attracted.   While   considering  the	 permissible
limits	of  dilution of minimum passing marks  for  reserved
category candidates appearing at the entrance test for being
called	for  counselling  for	admissions  to	postgraduate
medical	 courses,  we have to keep in view the salient	fact
that different universities examining students for obtaining
MBBS  degrees  on  the basis of the same syllabus  may	have
different  yardsticks and standards of assessment of  papers
and,  therefore,  students passing their  MBBS	examinations
from  different universities cannot ipso facto be treated to
be  equally meritorious and consequently the common entrance
test for admission to postgraduate courses cannot be said to
be  totally  uncalled for.  However, because reservation  of
seats  at postgraduate educational level is countenanced, as
a  logical corollary, to make effective the reservations and
with a view to seeing that the reserved category students do
not  get excluded from getting admitted as far as  possible,
provision  for lesser qualifying marks for reserved category
candidates  at the common entrance test cannot be said to be
totally	 illegal.
However,  with  a view  to	seeing	that
crutches  provided to such weaker sections of society do not
cripple	 them for ever, the dilution of passing marks at the
common	entrance  test	at   which  such  reserved  category
candidates  appear  after obtaining their MBBS degrees	from
different  universities cannot be totally arbitrary and must
have  a permissible rock-bottom limit below which it  cannot
go  and	 that  is  why it is reasonable to  hold  that	when
reservation  of	 seats under
Article 15(4)
in	postgraduate
medical	  courses  cannot  exceed  50%	 as  held   by	 the
Constitution  bench  in
M.R.  Balajis
case (supra) then	 on
the same line of reasoning additional facilities to be given
to  such reserved category candidates for being admitted  to
the  seats  reserved  for them in the  postgraduate  medical
courses	 also should not exceed the permissible limit of 50%
dilution  from the general cut-off marks provided  uniformly
for  general category of candidates competing for  admission
to  such  limited  number of seats  at	postgraduate  level.
While  dealing	with  the question of  dilution	 of  minimum
passing	 marks for reserved category of candidates appearing
at  the entrance tests for admission to postgraduate courses
it  has	 to be kept in view that general  category  students
form  a	 separate  class as compared  to  reserved  category
candidates  for whom seats are reserved under
Article 15(4).
Once  that is kept in view, as a logical corollary, it	must
follow	that to make such reservations effective appropriate
dilution of the minimum cut-off marks for students belonging
to the reserved category would become permissible subject to
the  rider that such dilution should not be so	unreasonable
as  to	go  out	 of the beneficial  protective	umbrella  of
Article	 15(4)
as seen earlier.  If that happens  it  would
squarely  get  hit by
Article 15(1)
read with
Article 14
of
the Constitution of India.  However, within such permissible
limits	such  dilution for different reserved categories  of
candidates  who	 may be given benefit of sliding  scales  of
reduced passing marks as required by exigencies of situation
would	remain	legal  and   valid.
In  this	 connection,
observations  in  the  Constitution bench judgment  of	this
court  in
Chitra Ghosh & Anr.	vs.  Union of India  &	Ors.
(supra),  wherein  Grover,  J., spoke for  the	Constitution
bench  as to which we have made a detailed reference earlier
are  required  to be kept in view.  To recapitulate, it	 has
been   held  that  selection  of  eligible  candidates	 for
admission to medical courses can be made by classifying such
candidates  category-wise keeping in view the services	from
which  they  are  drawn.   The	aforesaid  decision  of	 the
Constitution   bench  was  directly   concerned	  with	 the
admissions  in	medical	 colleges.  It	would  squarely	 get
attracted  while  deciding the present controversy.   It  is
obvious	 that if for admission to a medical education course
at  gross-root level of MBBS, different rules for  selecting
candidates  from different sources from which they are to be
drawn  are countenanced, then even at the stage of admission
at  postgraduate level, the ratio of the aforesaid  decision
of  the Constitution bench would squarely get attracted	 and
would  permit  separate	 treatment for students	 drawn	from
different  sources.   It is of course true that in the	said
case,	the  Constitution  bench   was	concerned  with	 the
nominations made by the Central Government on seats reserved
for such nominees.  However, that would not whittle down the
decision  of the Constitution bench to the effect that while
imparting  education  in  theory  and  practice	 in  medical
courses of study, the source from which candidates are drawn
can  be a relevant classificatory criterion and there can be
different  rules  in the matter of selection  of  candidates
drawn from different sources.  It is axiomatic that reserved
category  candidates  competing	 for being selected  to	 the
seats  reserved for them in postgraduate medical courses  as
per the mandate of
Article 15(4)
of the Constitution have to
compete	 inter	se with their own colleagues from  the	same
categories  and not necessarily have to compete with general
category  candidates  who form entirely a  different  class.
Once  such  classification is countenanced, as	a  necessary
concomitant,  separate	provision for reserved	category  of
candidates forming a separate class for which reservation of
seats in postgraduate medical courses is permitted cannot be
faulted	 and hence the dilution of minimum qualifying  marks
for  reserved  category	 of candidates cannot by  itself  be
treated	 to be unauthorised or illegal from any view  point.
Otherwise the very purpose of reserving seats for such class
of  candidates	at postgraduate level of  medical  education
would  be  denuded  on its real content and the	 purpose  of
reservation  would  fail.   The	  seats	 reserved  for	such
category  of  persons would go unfilled and will  swell	 the
admission  of general category of candidates for whom  these
seats  are  not at all meant to be made available, once	 the
scheme	of reservation of seats under
Article 15(4)
is	held
applicable.   In the light of the aforesaid discussion,	 the
following  conclusions emerge :	 1) It is permissible to the@@
	   JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
State  authorities which are running and/or controlling	 the
medical	 institutions in the States concerned to  short-list
the eligible and qualified MBBS doctors for being considered
for  admission	to  postgraduate medical  courses  in  these
institutions.	For  the purpose of such short-listing	full
play  is  available  to the State  authorities	to  exercise
legislative  or executive power as the field is not occupied
till  date  by	any legislation of the	Parliament  on	this
aspect	in exercise of its legislative powers under Entry 25
of  List III of the Constitution of India and this topic  is
also not covered by any legislation under Entry 66 of List I
of  the Constitution.  2)
The Indian Medical Council Act
and
the  regulations framed thereunder do not cover the question
of short-listing of admission of eligible and duly qualified
MBBS  doctors  who  seek   admission  to  different  medical
institutions   imparting  postgraduate	 education  run	  or
controlled  by the States concerned.  3) The regulations and
guidelines  given  by the Medical Council of India  in	this
connection,  though  persuasive and not having	any  binding
force,	cannot	be totally ignored by the State	 authorities
but  must  be  broadly kept in view  while  undertaking	 the
exercise  of short-listing of eligible candidates for  being
admitted   to  postgraduate  medical   courses.	  4)   While
short-listing candidates having basic qualifications of MBBS
for  being  considered	for admission to limited  number  of
vacancies  in postgraduate courses available at the  medical
institutions  in the Sates, it is permissible for the  State
authorities  to have common entrance tests and to  prescribe
minimum	 qualifying  marks for passing such tests to  enable
the   examinees	 who  pass  such   test	 to  be	 called	 for
counselling.   That  would  be	in  addition  to  the  basic
qualification by way of MBBS degree.  The performance of the
candidate  concerned during the time he or she undertook the
study  at MBBS level for ultimately getting the MBBS  degree
also  would  be	 a  relevant  consideration  for  the  State
authorities   to  be  kept  in	 view.	 5)  It	 is  equally
permissible  for the State authorities while undertaking the
aforesaid  exercise  of	 short-listing to  fix	50%  minimum
qualifying  marks at the entrance test for general  category
of  candidates and to dilute and prescribe lesser percentage
of  passing  marks  for reserved category of  candidates  as
exigencies  of situation may require in a given year but  in
no case the minimum qualifying marks as reduced for reserved
category of candidates can go below 25% of passing marks for
such  reserved	category of candidates.	 In other  words,  a
play  is  available  to the State authorities  to  prescribe
different  minimum passing marks for SC/ST and OBC  eligible
candidates  between 50% and 25% as the prevailing  situation
at  a  given point of time may require.	 In such  categories
for  SC, ST & OBC candidates different diluted passing marks
can  be	 prescribed, but this exercise has to be within	 the
permissible  limits  of	 less than 50% & up to	minimum	 25%
passing	 marks	for  each of such reserved  categories.	  No
eligible  candidate belonging to reserved category who	does
not  obtain minimum percent of passing marks as diluted	 for
such  category of candidates by the State authorities can be
considered  to	be  eligible  for  undertaking	postgraduate
medical courses in a given year for which he has offered his
candidature  and if any seat reserved for such categories of
candidates  remain unfilled due to non-availability of	such
eligible  reserved category candidate to fill up such  seat,
then  the said seat would go to general category  candidates
and  will be available in the order of merit in the light of
marks	obtained  by  such   wait-listed  general   category
candidates  having  obtained  requisite	 passing  marks	 who
otherwise  could not get admitted due to non-availability of
general	 category  seats  earlier.   The  ratio	 of  various
decisions of this court considered herein above will have to
be  implemented in the light of the aforesaid conclusions to
which  we  have reached.  The aforesaid practice has  to  be
followed and should hold the field from year to year so long
as  the	 Parliament  does  not	 pass  any  legislation	 for
regulating  admission to postgraduate medical courses either
by  separate legislation or by appropriately amending
Indian
Medical	 Council  Act
by empowering the Medical	 Council  of
India to prescribe such regulations.  The writ petitions and
the  civil appeal arising out of the special leave  petition
as  well  as  the review petitions would stand	disposed  of
accordingly  in	 the  aforesaid	  terms	 and  the  judgments
rendered  by  the  High Courts will stand modified  and	 the
impugned  orders  passed by the State authorities will	also
stand  set aside accordingly.  However, the present judgment
will  operate  purely prospectively and will not affect	 the
admissions  already granted by the concerned authorities  in
the  postgraduate medical courses prior to the date of	this
judgment.   In other words, the State authorities will	have
to comply with the directions contained in this judgment and
put  their  house in order for regulating the admissions  to
postgraduate  medical  courses starting hereinafter  in	 the
medical institutions concerned.