[Cites
5
, Cited by
86
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Haryana & Ors vs S.K.Singhal on 16 April, 1999
Equivalent citations: AIR 1999 SUPREME COURT 1829, 1999 (4) SCC 293, 1999 AIR SCW 1427, 1999 LAB. I. C. 2072, 1999 (3) SERVLJ 194 SC, 1999 (2) SCALE 650, 1999 (2) LRI 623, 1999 (4) ADSC 289, 1999 (2) UJ (SC) 944, (1999) 3 JT 140 (SC), 1999 (5) SRJ 270, 1999 (3) UPLBEC 2246, 1999 UJ(SC) 2 944, 1999 (3) JT 140, (1999) 2 SCJ 385, (1999) 82 FACLR 476, (1999) 2 LAB LN 660, (1999) 2 SCT 678, (1999) 2 SERVLR 249, (1999) 4 SUPREME 205, (1999) 1 CURLR 1148, (1999) 2 ESC 1182, (1999) 2 SCALE 650, (1999) 3 UPLBEC 2246, 1999 SCC (L&S) 859
Author:
M.Jagannadha Rao
Bench:
M.Jagannadha Rao
,
S.N.Phukan
PETITIONER:
STATE OF HARYANA & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
S.K.SINGHAL

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	16/04/1999

BENCH:
M.Jagannadha Rao, S.N.Phukan




JUDGMENT:
JUDGEMENT
M.Jagannadha Rao.J.

	Leave granted.
The appellant,	State  of  Haryana  has	 filed	this
appeal	against	 the  Judgment of the High Court of Punjab &
Haryana in C.W.P. No. 675 of 1996 dated 12.9.1997.  By	that
Judgment,  the High Court allowed the writ petition filed by
the respondent and quashed the order dated 13.12.95  of	 the
Civil  Surgeon.	 The  Civil Surgeon in his order stated that
the respondent-writ petitioner could not be deemed  to	have
retired	 voluntarily  w.e.f. 16.11.95 pursuant to his notice
dated 16.8.1995. The respondent had claimed that  by  virtue
of  the	 proviso  to  sub-clause  (2)  of Rule 5.32.B of the
Punjab Civil Service Rules (Vol.II), he must  be  deemed  to
have  retired on the expiry of three months of notice issued
after completion of 20 years qualifying service.
The facts  of  the  case  are  as  follows.	 The
respondent joined  service  on 4.6.75.	Which he was working
as Medical Officer, Civil Hospital Kaithal,  the  respondent
was  transferred  on  8.8.1995	as  Medical Officer, Primary
Health Centre Kharak Ramji, District Jind.   The  respondent
joined	at  Jind  on  16.8.95  and  on	the  same date (i.e.
16.8.95), he issued a notice seeding  voluntary	 retirement,
and  the  letter  was  addressed  to  the  Commissioner	 and
Secretary, Health Department, Haryana, Chandigarh.  He	sent
an  advance copy to the Commissioner Secretary and presented
the application to his	departmental  head,  Civil  Surgeon,
Jind.	There was no response from the concerned authorities
till 16.11.1995.  Government stated in its counter filed  in
the High Court that the respondent was not allowed to retire
w.e.f.	16.11.1995.   "as he was absent from duty and he did
not perform  his  duties  during  the  period  of  3  months
notice".  Long after the expiry of 3 months on 16.11.1995, a
telegram  was  sent on 5.12.95 asking the respondent to join
duty.  It was the case of the respondent that his retirement
was automatic on expiry of 3 months and that in	 any  event,
there was no truth in the allegation that he did not perform
his duties  in those 3 months.	He pointed out that he wrote
in the movement register on 1.9.95 at 11 a.m.  that  he	 was
going  to  meet the Senior Medical Officer (SMO) incharge of
Primary Health Centre, Kharak Ramji, Dr.Khazan Singh and had
placed a copy of the station leave in the Movement Register,
that he took the second copy with himself to seek permission
but at Jind, Dr.  Dhazan Singh was not available because  on
that day, the Govt.  had declared 1st and 2nd Sept.  1995 as
holidays  on  account  of  the	assassination  of  the Chief
Minister, Sri Beant Singh.  On 4.9.95, the respondent had to
give evidence in the Kaithal Court.  (He  had  started	from
Kaithal on  1.9.95  itself).	Thereafter,  he	 had to give
evidence in another Court on 6.9.95 and he could not  go  to
Kharak Ramji  to  meet	the SMO.  Unfortunately, on 5.10.95,
there were floods  and	the  roads  reaching  to  Jind	were
blocked.   He  sent  a	letter	dated  7.9.95  to  the Civil
Surgeon, Jind from Kaithal informing him that due to  floods
he  was	 unable	 to  report at his head quarters and that he
would be able to do so only after  the	floods	receded	 and
transport services  were  restored.  The respondent obtained
certificates from the Courts  regarding	 his  attendance  at
those Courts.	He met the SMO and requested that his salary
bill could be forwarded.  The Smo said that  the  respondent
could  not  join  without  permission  of  the	Director and
without explaining his absence to the Civil Surgeon.   These
facts  were put on record in a separate letter dated 6.10.95
from Kaithal to the Director seeking permission to join duty
at PHC, Kharak Ramji.  He had to stay at Kaithal from  7  to
10th  due  to floods, then he attended Court at Kaithal from
11 to 14th Sept.  1995, continued to stay at Kaithal due  to
floods from 15	to 17th Sept.  1995.  Then 23rd to 25th were
Gazetted holidays (24th was Sunday).  The  floods  continued
and there  was	to  transport.	He attended Court again from
27th to 29th Sept.  and had to stay at	Kaithal	 on  30.9.95
due to floods.	  Ist  Oct.   was a Sunday, 2nd and 3rd Oct.
were gazetted  holidays.    Respondent	approached  the	 SMO
Kharak Ramji  on  3.10.95  evening.    The  latter asked the
respondent to see the Civil Surgeon, Jind.   The  respondent
gave  a	 letter	 on  4.10.95  (duly  forwarded	by  the SMO)
narrating the above facts and soliciting permission to	join
duty w.e.f.  4.10.95  &	 seeking salary from Sept.  95.	 The
Civil Surgeon addressed a letter to the Director on  4.10.95
seeking	 the  letter's	approval for the respondent joining.
The respondent sent a further  letter  to  the	Director  on
6.10.95	 giving	 the  above  facts  and sought permission to
join.  No reply	 was  received.	   Respondent  attended	 the
Criminal Court on 6, 12, 14, 18, 20, 27, 30.10.95, 9,14, 21,
23.11.95 for giving evidence as certified by the Court.	 For
the  first time he received a letter dated 16.11.95 from the
Civil Surgeon, Jind that the respondent should join after

	"Rule 5.32 (B):
(1)	At   any   time	  a   Govt.
employee   has	 completed   twenty   years
	qualifying  service,  he  may,	by   gining
	notice	of  not	 less  than three months in
	writing to the appointing authority  retire
	from service.	   However,   a	 Government
	employee may make a request in	writing	 to
	the  appointing	 authority to accept notice
	of less	 than  three  months  given  reason
	therefor.   On	receipt	 of  a request, the
	appointing  authority  may  consider   such
	request	 for  the curtailment of the period
	of notice of three months on merits and	 if
	it is satisfied that the curtailment of the
	period of notice of three months.
(2)	The   notice  og  voluntary
	retirement given under sub rule	 (1)  shall
	require	  acceptance   by   the	 appointing
	authority subject to  rule  2.2.    of	pb.
C.S.R.	Vol.  II:
Provided  that where the appointing
	authority does	not  refuse  to	 grant	the
	permission for retirement before the expiry
	of  the	 period	 specified  in sub rule (1)
	supra,	 the   retirement   shall    become
	effective  from	 the  date of expiry of the
	said period:
Provided  further  that	 before	  a
	Govt.	employee  gives notice of voluntary
	retirement with reference to  sub-rule	(1)
	he  should  satisfy  himself  by menas of a
	reference to the appropriate authority that
	he has	in  fact,  completed  twenty  years
	service qualifying for pension."
Rule  2.2 (a) of the punjab Civil Service Regulation
(Vol.II) referred to in Rule 5.32(b)(2) reads as follows :
approval by the Director.  According to the  respondent,  in
view  of  the above facts, the allegation that he was not on
duty after 16.8.95 was not correct. No letter  was  received
from   the   Commissioner  and	Secretary  to  Govt.  before
16.11.95.
In the meantime, the 3 months  period  was  over  on
16.11.95.   The	 respondent sent a letter on 23.11.95 to the
Commissioner/Secretary, Health narrating the above facts and
requested to treat him as retired w.e.f.  16.11.95 & pay him
salary for Sept., Oct.	and upto 16.11.95  in  November	 and
grant him  retrial  benefits.	 On 29.11.;95 a telegram was
sent by the appellant (received by respondent  on  30.11.95)
requesting him	to  join  at  kharak  Ramji  at	 once.	 The
respondent sent a reply dated 2.12.95 to the Civil  Surgeon,
Jind stating  that  he stood retired w.e.f.  16.11.95 and so
there was no question of his joining.
It is in the light of the above facts that it has to
be  considered	if  the	 respondent  must  be deemed to have
retired. That is the crucial question. Question also  arises
whether	  the	allegation  that  the  respondent  was	"not
attending to duties" after notice was relevant and could  be
a   valid  ground  for	refusing  to  permit  the  voluntary
retirement coming into force under Rule 5.32 (B).
The said rule 5.32 (B) of the Punjab  Civil  Service
Rules, (Vol.2) reads as follows :
"Rule 2.2 (a)  Furture	good  conduct  is  an
	implied	  condition   of  every	 grant	of  a
	pension.  The (appointing authority)  reserve
	to   itself   the  right  of  withholding  or
	withdrawing a pension or any part  of  it  if
	the  pensioner	be convicted of serious crime
	or be  guilty  of  grave  misconduct.	  The
	decision of the (appointing authority) on any
	question  of  withholding  or withdrawing the
	whole or any part of pension under this	 rule
	shall be final and conclusive."
It will	 be  noticed  that  under  Rule	 5.32  B,  a
government employee who has completed 20 years of qualifying
service	 may,  by giving notice of not less than 3 months in
writing to the appointing authority,  retire  from  service.
There  is  provision  for  requesting  for relaxation of the
notice period of 3 months and for consideration thereof.  As
to what the  appointing	 authority  is	to  do	is  governed
squarely by sub-clause (2).  That sub-clause states that the
notice	of  voluntary  retirement given under sub-clause (1)
"shall"	 require  acceptance  by  the  appointing  authority
subject	 to  Rule 2.2 of the Punjab Civil Service Regulation
(Vol.II).  Acceptance of the request is subject to Rule	 2.2
of the	Rules.	  But  the proviso to sub-clause (2) of Rule
5.32B states that if the permission to retire is not refused
within the period specified in sub-clause (1) the retirement
shall become effective	from  the  date	 of  expiry  of	 the
period.	  Therefore,  it  is  clear  that  if  a  person has
completed 20 years qualifying service and has given a notice
under rule  5.32B  of  3  months  (or  if  his	request	 for
relaxation  of	3  months  is  accepted),  then	 the request
"shall" he accepted subject to	invoking  the  provision  of
Rule  2.2  of  the Punjab Civil Service Regulation (Vol.II).
Under Rule 2.2, the "future good conduct" of an employee  is
an implied  condition  of  every grant of pension.  In other
words, what all it means is that even if the  acceptance  of
the   voluntary	  retirement   is  mandatory,  there  is  an
obligation cast on the retired	employee  to  maintain	good
conduct after  such  retirement.    The	 words	"future good
conduct" mean  good  conduct  after  retirement.    If	 the
employee  does	not  continue to maintain good conduct after
retirement, then the govt.  can	 withhold  or  withdraw	 the
pension	 or  a part of it in case he is convicted of serious
crime or in case he be guilty of  grave	 misconduct.	Such
decision  to  withhold	or  withdraw  the  whole  or part of
pension would be final and conclusive, that is	to  say,  so
far as	the governmental hierarchy is concerned.  It will be
noticed that  Rule  2.2	 does  not  obstruct  the  voluntary
retirement  to	come into force automatically or expiry of 3
months and it only  enables  withdrawal	 or  withholding  of
pension	  subject   to	certain	 conditions,  to  a  retired
employee.
The employment of government servants is governed by
rules.	These rules provide a particular age as the  age  of
superannuation.	  Nonetheless,	the  rules confer a right on
the Govt.  to compulsorily retire and  employee	 before	 the
age  of	 superannuation	 provided the employee has reached a
particular age or has completed a particular number of years
of qualifying service in case it is found that	his  service
has not	 been  found  to  be  satisfactory.   The rules also
provide that an employee who has completed the	said  number
of  years  in  his  age	 or who has completed the prescribed
number of years of qualifying service could give  notice  of
(say)  three  months that he would voluntarily retire on the
expiry of the said period of three months.  Some  Rules	 are
couched in language which results in an automatic retirement
of  the	 employee wpon expiry of the period specified in the
employee's notice.  On the other hand, certain Rules in some
other departments are couched in  language  which  makes  it
clear  that  even upon expiry of the period specified in the
notice, the retirement is not automatic and an express order
granting permission is required and has to be  communicated.
The relationship of master and servant in the latter type of
rules  continues  after	 the  period specified in the notice
till such acceptance is communicated; refusal of  permission
could  also  be communicated after 3 months and the employee
continues to be in  service.	Cases  like
Dinesh  Chandra
Sangma vs.   State of Gujarat & Others
1978 (2) SCC 202; and
Union of India & Others vs.  Sayed Muzaffar Mir
1995  Supp.
(1)  SCC  76  belong to the former category where it is held
that upon expiry of the	 period,  the  voluntary  retirement
takes  effect automatically as no order of refusal is passed
within the notice period.
On the other hand HPMC vs.  Suman
Behari Sharma  1996  (4)  SCC  584  belongs  to	 the  second
category  where	 the Bye-laws were interpreted as not giving
an option "to retire" but only provided a limited  right  to
"seek" retirement thereby implying the need for a consent of
the  employer  even if the period of the notice has elapsed.
We shall refer to these two categories in some detail.
In
Dinesh Chandra Sangma
's case 1977  (4)  SCC	441,
this  Court  was  dealing with F.R. 56 (c) as it stood then.
The Court pointed out that FR 56(b) and FR 56(c) referred to
rights respectively  conferred	on  the	 State	and  on	 the
employee.  FR  56(b)  conferred	 a  right  on  government to
compulsorily retire an employee in public interest by giving
him notice of not less than 3 months in writing or 3  months
pay and allowances in lieu of such notice, after he attained
50  years  of  age  or	had  completed	25 years of service,
whichever was earlier. Correspondingly FR, 56(c)  stated  as
follows :
"FR 56(c): Any Govt. servant  may,  by	giving
	notice	of  not	 less  than  three  months  in
	writing to the appropriate  authority,	retire
	from  service after he has attained the age of
	fifty years  or	 has  completed	 25  years  of
	service, whichever is earlier.
It  was held by the three Judge Bench that it was clear that
effect of FR 56(c) was	statutory  unlike  in  the  case  of
contracts  of  employment  requiring  an  express  order  of
acceptance of the retirement notice. It was stated (p.445):
"There was no  question	 of  acceptance	 of  the
	request	 for  voluntary	 retirement by the Govt.
	when the Govt.	  servant  exercises  his  right
	under FR 56(c)."
It was again stated (p.447):
"FR 56 is one of the statutory rules which binds
	the Govt. as well  as  the  Govt.  Servant.  The
	condition  of service which is envisaged in Rule
	56(c) giving an option in absolute  terms  to  a
	Govt.  Servant	to voluntarily retire with three
	months' previous notice,  after	 he  reaches  50
	years  of  age	or  has	 completed  25	years of
	service, cannot	 therefore  be	equated	 with  a
	contract   of	employment   as	  envisaged   in
	Explanation 2 to Rule 119."
and at (p.447-448) as follows:
"The appellant has voluntarily retired by  three
	months'	  notice,  not	in  accordance	with  an
	express or  implied  term  of  his  contract  of
	employment,  but  in  pursuance	 of  a statutory
	rule."
Another three Judge Bench in B.J.Shelat's case	1978
(2)  SCC  202 was dealing with Rule 161 (2)(i) of the Bombay
Civil Service Rules which contained a proviso similar to the
proviso (b) or FR 56(K) to the effect that "it shall be open
to the appointing authority to withhold permission to retire
to a Govt.  servant who is under suspension, or against whom
departmental proceedings are pending  or  contemplated,	 and
who seeks  to retire under this sub-clause".  It was noticed
that  no  suspension  was  in  force  and  no	departmental
proceedings were pending but on facts, it could be said that
a departmental proceeding was noticed that no suspension was
in  force  and no departmental proceedings were pending but,
on facts, it could be said that	 a  departmental  proceeding
was under  contemplation.  However, on a reading of the Rule
and the proviso, it was	 held  that  inasmuch  as  no  order
refusing  permission  was  passed or communicated within the
notice	period,	 the  voluntary	  retirement   took   effect
automatically.
The Court observed that this result followed
even  though  the  right to retire conferred on the employee
was not as absolute as in
Dinesh Chandra Sangma
's  case	 but
was a qualified right.	The Court held (p.205) as follows:
"A right is conferred on the Govt. Servant under
	Rule  161(2)(ii)  to  retire  by giving not less
	than three months; notice on his  attaining  the
	prescribed  age.  Such a right is subject to the
	proviso which is incorporated to the sub-section
	which reads as follows ..........
But for the proviso, a Govt. servant would be at
	liberty to retire by giving not less than  three
	months'	 notice	 in  writing  to  the appointing
	authority on attaining a  prescribed  age.  this
	position  has  been  made clear by this Court in
	Dinesh Chandra Sangam vs. State	 of  Assam  1977
	(4)  SCC 441 where the Court was considering the
	effect of the  (Assam)	Fundamental  Rule  56(c)
	........"
The Court further stated (p.206) :
"But  for  the	proviso to Rule 161(2)(ii), the
	decision of this Court in the case Cited  above
	would  be  applicable  and the right would have
	been absolute.	But the proviso has  restricted
	the right  conferred on the Govt.  servant ....
	Thus the permission to retire can  be  withheld
	by  the	 appointing  authority	either when the
	Govt.  servant is under suspension  or	against
	whom  departmental  proceedings	 are pending or
	contemplated........No departmental  proceeding
	was  pending  but  on the facts, one cannot say
	that a proceeding was not under contemplation."
Having stated that the right  conferred	 on  the  government
servant was not absolute but conditional and that one of the
conditions,   namely,  that  departmental  proceedings	were
contemplated, was in existence which could have	 been  taken
advantage of  by  the  Govt.	the  Court  held  (p.207) as
follows:
"In the case before us it is  incumbent	 on  the
	appointing  authority  to withhold permission to
	retire on one of the conditions mentioned in the
	proviso. We are of the opinion that the	 proviso
	contemplates a positive action by the appointing
	authority."
and it was finally declared (p.207):
:For  the  proviso  to	become	operative, it is
	necessary that the government  should  not  only
	take  a decision but communicate it to the govt.
	servant	 .........  admittedly	the   order   of
	suspension  was not communicated before the date
	of supernnuation".
And explaining the inditical proviso in the proviso  (b)  to
FR 56(k), this Court again reiterated that (p.208) :
"It  is incumbent on the govt. to communicate to
	the government servant its decision to	withhold
	permission  to	retire	on  one	 of  the grounds
	specified in the proviso."
It was further made clear that the appointing authority

	"has no jurisdiction to take disciplinary action
	against a government servant who had effectively
	retired."
It was held (p.209) that :
"disciplinary  action  cannot be taken after the
	date off retirement

Therefore,  it	was necessary to communicate the decision of
refusal of  permission	before	the  expiry  of	 the  notice
period.
The third case which falls in the first category  is
the one	 in
Union of India & Others vs.  Sayed Muzaffar Mir
1995 Supp.  (1) SCC 76 decided by a  Bench  of	two  learned
Judges.	  In  this  case,  the	above-said  two rulings were
followed.  The case arose under	 Rule  1802  (b)(1)  of	 the
Railway Establishment  Code.	In that case, the respondent
had given a notice on 22.7.85 of 3 months to the Railways to
retire from service as visualised  by  Rule  1802(b).	 The
period	expired	 on  21.10.1985 and the order of removal was
passed on 4.11.1985.  The  proviso  to	the  Rule  permitted
withholding of permission to retire in case the employee was
under suspension.    As	 a  fact,  the	employee  was  under
suspension at the relevant time and  this  could  have	been
taken advantage of by the govt.	 In fact, Rule 1801(d) which
started	  with	 a  non-obstante  clause,  stated  that	 the
competent authority might require a  railway  servant  under
suspension  to	continue  his service beyond the date of his
retirement in which case he shall not be permitted  by	that
authority  to  retire  from service and shall be retained in
service till such time as required by that  authority.	  It
was  held  that even though the officer was under suspension
and the request for retirement could  be  denied,  still  an
order  withholding  such  permission  or  requiring  him  to
continue was required to be passed.  It was "admitted"	that
no such	 order	was passed.  Therefore, it was held that the
employer had not exercised a right given to  it	 under	Rule
1801(d).   The Court further observed that in
Dinesh Chandra
Sangma
's case 1977 (4) SCC 441 it was held  that  "the	same
does  not  require  acceptance	and comes into effect on the
completion of the  notice  period"  and	 that  decision	 was
followed in  B.J.Shelat's  case 1978 (2) SCC 202.  The Court
finally held :
"The period of notice in the present case having
	expired on 21.10.1985, and the	first  order  of
	removal having been passed on 4.11.1985, we held
	that  the  Tribunal  had  rightly  come	 to  the
	conclusion that the order of removal was non-est
	in the eye of law."
Thus form the aforesaid three decisions it is  clear
that  if the right to voluntarily retirement is conferred in
absolute terms as in
Dinesh Chandra  Sangma
's  case  by	 the
relevant  rules	 and  there  is	 no  provision	in  Rules to
withhold permission in certain contingencies  the  voluntary
retirement comes into effect suthomatically on the expiry of
the period  specified  in  the	notice.
If, however, as in
B.J.Shelat's case and as in
Sayed Muzaffar Mir
's  case,	 the
concerned  authority  is empowered to withhold permission to
retire if certain  conditions  exist,  viz.    in  case	 the
employee  is  under  suspension	 or  in	 case a departmental
inquiry is pending or is contemplated, the mere pendency  of
the  suspension or departmental inquiry or its contemplation
does not result in the notice of  voluntary  retirement	 not
coming into  effect on expiry of the period specified.
What
is further needed is that the concerned authority must	pass
a  positive  order withholding permission to retire and must
also communicate the same  to  the  employee  as  stated  in
B.J.Shelat's  case  and	 in
Sayed Muzaffar Mir
's case before
the expiry of the notice period.  Consequently, there is  no
requirement  of	 an  order of acceptance of the notice to be
communicated to	 the  employee	nor  can  it  be  said	that
non-communication   of	 acceptance  should  be	 treated  as
amounting to withholding of permission.
Before	referring  to  the  second category of cases
where the rules require a positive acceptance of the  notice
of  voluntary  retirement  and	communication thereof, it is
necessary to refer to the decision  of	this  Court  in
Dr.
Baljit Singh vs.  State of Haryana
1997 (1) SCC 754 strongly
relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellants and to
Power Finance Corporation  Ltd.	   vs.	 Pramod Kumar Bhatia
1997 (4) SCC 280.  the format case arose under Rule  5.32(b)
of the	Punjab	Civil  Service	Rules.	 That rule extracted
earlier contains an express  provision	in  the	 proviso  to
sub-section   (2)   that   the	 retirement   takes   effect
automatically  if  refusal  is	not  communicated  within  3
months.	  In  that  case,  when the employee gave notice for
voluntary retirement  on  20.9./1993,  criminal	 cases	were
pending against	  him.	   After  expiry  of  3	 months,  on
25.2.1994, the competent authority declined  to	 accept	 the
notice.	 A two Judge Bench of this Court, however, held that
the voluntary retirement did not come about automatically on
the  expiry  of	 the  notice  period  but that it could take
effect only upon acceptance of the notice by govt.  and that
the acceptance must also be communicated and till  then	 the
jural relationship  of	master	and servant continues.
This
Court referred only to the decision of the two	Judge  Bench
in
Sayed  Mazaffar  Mir
's  case	 1995  Supp.  (1) SCC 76 and
stated that case was to be confined to its own facts.
The
two Judge Bench of this Court in
Dr.Baljit Singh
's case 1997
(1)  SCC  754 did not notice that there were two three Judge
Bench cases in Dinesh Chandra Sangma and Shelat	 taking	 the
view  under  similar  rules  that a positive order was to be
passed within the notice period	 withholding  permission  to
retire	and  that the said order was also to be communicated
to the employee during the said period.	 By stating that  an
order of acceptance of the notice was necessary and that the
said  acceptance  must	be  communicated to the employee and
till that was done  the	 jural	relationship  continued	 and
there  was  no	automatic  snapping  thereof  on expiry of 3
months period, the Two three Judge Bench  cases	 which	were
not brought  to	 its notice.
In the above circumstances, we
follow the two three Judge Bench cases for deciding the case
before us.
Learned	 counsel  for the appellant also relied on a
two Judge Bench decision in
Power Finance  Corporation	Ltd.
vs.  Pramod  Kumar Bhatia
1997 (4) SCC 280.  That was a case
where the letter of voluntary retirement  was  conditionally
accepted subject to payment of dues and the employee wrote a
further	 letter	 seeding  adjustment thereof but before that
was done the scheme itself was withdrawn.  There  are  again
some  observations  made  to  the  effect that there must be
acceptance  of	request	 to  retire  and  that	it  must  be
communicated.	Neither Dinesh Chandra Sangma nor Shelat was
referred to.  In our opinion, the express provision  in	 the
proviso	 to  sub-rule  2 of Rule 5.32B in the case before us
does not  permit  such	a  view	 to  be	 taken.	   The	said
observations  again  run contrary to the decision in the two
three Judge Bench cases
referred to above
.  Our comments  on
Baljit	Singh  apply  equally  to  this	 case, so far as the
observations are concerned.
We then come to the second category of	cases  where
the  rules  require that an order of acceptance of notice be
passed	to  make  the  voluntary  retirement  effective.
In
H.P.M.C.  vs.  Suman Behari Sharma
1996 (4) SCC 584, it will
be noticed, the principle in Dinesh  Chandra  Sangma's	case
was  accepted  but  the case was distinguished on the ground
that the Bye-law 3.8(2) in HPMC	 case  provided	 differently
and  that  under that Bye law an employee could be permitted
at his request to retire on completion of 25  years  service
or  50	years  of age. Sub-para (5) of Bye-law 3.8 stated as
follows:
"(5) :	Notwithstanding the provision under para
	(2) above, the Corporation employees who have  a
	satisfactory service record of 20 years may also
	seek   retirement   from   the	service	 of  the
	corporation after giving three months' notice in
	writing to the	appropriate  authority.	 Persons
	under  suspensions  would  not	be retired under
	this  clause  unless  proceedings  of  the  case
	against them are finalised ...".
While  Sub-clause (2) speaks of 25 years service, sub-clause
(5) speaks of 20 years service.
The employee applied  on  26.11.1990  for  voluntary
retirement  effective from 30.11.1990 and also requested for
waiver of notice of 3 months. He  did  not  report  to	duty
right  from 1.12.1990. Earlier on 12.12.1989, a charge sheet
was issued against him for certain acts	 of  misconduct.  On
26.12.1990 he filed a reply to the chargesheet. On 22.8.1992
another	 chargesheet was served for unauthorised absence and
one more  on  18.9.1992.  On  30.9.1992	 he  approached	 the
Tribunal  contending  that  he	stood retired on expiry of 3
months from notice, w.e.f. 26.2.1990. The Tribunal  accepted
the  said  plea.  Reversing  the order of the Tribunal, this
Court held while distinguishing
Dinesh Chandra Sangma
's case
and other similar High Court Judgemnts, that clause  (2)  of
the  Bye  law  merely gave a right to make a request and the
request would become  effective	 only  if  permitted.  Under
clause (2) of the Bye law, it was a 'right to a request' and
not  '	a  right to retire'. If the request was not accepted
and permission was not granted, the employee could not claim
that there was an automatic  retirement	 on  expiry  of	 the
period.	 Even  under  sub-clause  (5) while it was true that
there was a non-obstante clause, it was only an exception to
clause (2) to a limited extent i.e. completion of  20  years
satisfactory  service  [rather than 25 under clause (2)] but
the grant of 'permission' to the request seeking  retirement
was  necessary	even  under  the  sub-clause (5) and was not
dispensed with. If under clause (2) a person who had put  in
25  years  had to seek to retire and had to be 'permitted to
retire', a person with only 20 years  service  under  clause
(5)  could  not	 have been placed on a better footing it was
held. The Court emphasised (p.588-589):
"The words 'seek retirement' in para 5	indicate
	that  the  right which is conferred by it is not
	the right to retire  but  a  right  to	ask  for
	retirement.   The  word 'seek' implies a request
	by the employee and corresponding acceptance  or
	permission by  HPMC.  Therefore, there cannot be
	automatic  retirement  or  snapping  of	 service
	relationship on expiry of three months period."
On  that basis, it was held that though the rejection of the
request was not communicated within the notice period, there
was no automatic retirement. There are no such provisions in
the case before us.
In  the	 case before us sub-clause (1) of Rule 5.32B
contemplates a 'notice to retire' and not a request  seeding
permission  to retire. The further "request" contemplated by
the sub-section is only for seeding  exemption	from  the  3
months	period.	 The  proviso  to  sub-clause  (2)  makes  a
positive provision that "where the appointing authority does
not refuse to grant the permission for retirement before the
expiry	of  the	 period	 specified  in	sub-rule  (1),	 the
retirement shall become effective from the date of expiry of
the  period  specified in sub-rule (1), the retirement shall
become effective from the date of expiry of the said period.
The case before us stands on a stronger footing than
Dinesh
Chandra	 Sangma
's  case so far as the employee is concerned.
As already stated Rule 2.2 of  Punjab  Civil  Service  Rules
Vol.II	only  deals  with  a  situation	 of  withholding  or
withdrawing pension to a person who has already retired.
For the aforesaid reasons, we follow the  two  three
Judge  judgments in Dinesh Chandra Sangma and B.J.Shelat and
the two judgment in
Sayed Muzaffar Mir
's case in  preference
to the two Judge judgment in
Dr. Baljit singh
's case.
So far as the plea of the State in regard to absence
from  duty  during  the notice period is concerned, the High
Court has shown that it is unsupportable on  facts.
In	 any
event,	in  view  of the express provision in the proviso to
sub-rule (2) of	 Rule  5.32B
referred	to  above
requiring
communication  of  rejection  within  the notice period, the
said allegations of absence even if true,  cannot  help	 the
State.
For  the  aforesaid  reasons the appeal preferred by
the State is dismissed	but  in	 the  circumstances  without
costs.	The  order  of	the  High  Court will be implemented
within 3 months from the receipt of this order.