[Cites
18
, Cited by
45
]
Supreme Court of India
Gobind Sugar Mills Ltd vs State Of Bihar & Ors on 17 August, 1999
Equivalent citations: AIR 1999 SUPREME COURT 3097, 1999 AIR SCW 3041, 1999 (5) SCALE 54, 1999 (7) ADSC 476, 1999 (7) SCC 76, 1999 BRLJ 293, 2000 (1) BLJR 178, 1999 (9) SRJ 62, (1999) 6 JT 120 (SC), (1999) 115 STC 358, (1999) 8 SUPREME 335, (1999) 5 SCALE 54, (1999) 3 PAT LJR 166
Bench:
S.P.Bharucha
,
N.Santosh Hegde
PETITIONER:
GOBIND SUGAR MILLS LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF BIHAR & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	17/08/1999

BENCH:
S.P.Bharucha, N.Santosh Hegde




JUDGMENT:
SANTOSH HEGDE, J.
These  appeals  by  special   leave  are	against	 the
judgment  and order dated 4.7.1996 passed by the High  Court
of  Judicature	at Patna in C.W.J.C.  No.8754/93  and  other
connected  matters.   The  appellants in these	appeals	 are
engaged,  inter alia, in the business of manufacturing sugar
and  for its production they use sugarcane as the basic raw-
material.   The State of Bihar, according to the appellants,
is  levying  and  collecting purchase tax on  the  sugarcane
purchased  by  them both under the provisions of  the
Bihar
Finance	 Act, 1981
(for short `the
Finance Act
'] as well  as
the
Bihar Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply & Purchase)	Act,
1981
(for short `the Sugarcane Act').	Thus, subjecting the
same  purchase of sugarcane to tax twice under two different
Acts.	The  appellants contend that the  State	 legislature
having	once provided for the levy of purchase tax under the
sugarcane Act, cannot impose the same levy under the
Finance
Act
.  This challenge of theirs having failed before the High
Court,	the  appellants are now before us in these  appeals.
On  behalf  of the appellants, Mr.  Shanti Bhushan,  learned
senior	counsel,  contended that the Sugarcane Act  being  a
special	 enactment  for levying purchase tax exclusively  on
sugarcane while providing also for regulation of production,
supply	and  distribution  of sugarcane, it would  become  a
special	 enactment and would override the provisions of	 the
Finance Act
, with reference to levy of purchase tax on sugar
cane.	He  contended that the
Finance Act
is a general	 Act
which  provides	 for collection of commercial taxes on	sale
and  purchase of goods.	 Hence, on a harmonious construction
of  the two enactments, it should be held that the State  of
Bihar  could  only  levy  purchase tax on  the	purchase  of
sugarcane under the Sugarcane Act.  In response, Mr.  Rakesh
Dwivedi	 and  Mr.   S.B.   Sanyal,  learned  senior  counsel
appearing  for	the  State  of	Bihar,	contended  that	 the
purchase  tax levied under these two Acts are two  different
levies,	 covering different aspects and operate in different
fields.	  Therefore, according to them, the rule of  special
Act  overriding the general is not attracted in the  instant
case.	It is also contended on behalf of the State that the
levy of purchase tax under Section 49(1)(b) of the Sugarcane
Act  is	 a provision to create a separate fund to cover	 the
expenses  of  the Board and the Council created	 under	sub-
section	 (8)  of
Section  49
of the said  Act.	  Lastly  an
attempt	 was  made to contend that the levy of purchase	 tax
under  Section	49 of the Sugarcane Act is, in fact, in	 the
nature	of  fee	 and not a tax on purchase.   On  the  above
arguments,  the following points arise for our consideration
:
a) Whether the two Acts under reference operate in the
same  field ?  If so, which one of the two Acts is a special
Act  ?	b) Is the Sugarcane Act an enactment intended solely
for  the  purpose  of regulation of supply,  production	 and
distribution of sugarcane and the collection of purchase tax
under  the  said Act is only incidental for the	 purpose  of
creating a fund for maintenance and functioning of the Board
and  the  Council under the said Act ?	c) Whether the	levy
under  the  Sugarcane  Act is only a fee  for  the  services
rendered  ?  At the outset, it should be borne in mind	that
both  the  enactments are legislated under the	same  Entry,
namely,	 Entry	54 of List II of the Seventh Schedule  which
empowers  the  State  Legislature to levy tax  on  sale	 and
purchase  of  goods.   If it is not so, the State  of  Bihar
could  not  have imposed the levy of purchase tax under	 the
Sugarcane  Act.	 The object of the
Finance Act
reads thus  :
"
An  Act
to consolidate and amend the law relating  to	 the
levy of tax on the sale and purchase of goods in Bihar;"
This  clearly shows that the
Finance Act
is a  general
Act  relating  to  the levy of tax on sale and	purchase  of
goods  in the State of Bihar and the same would apply to all
transactions   of  sale	 and   purchase	 of  goods  wherever
applicable.
Sections 4
to
6
of the said Act which  empower
the  levy of various types of commercial taxes read thus  :-
"4.   Levy of purchase tax.  - Subject to the provisions  of
section	 5
,
6
and
7
of this part, every dealer liable to pay
tax under
section 3
, who purchases goods in circumstances in
which  no sales tax is payable or has been paid on the	sale
price  of  such goods and either consumes such goods in	 the
manufacture of other goods for sale or otherwise or disposes
of such goods in any manner other than by way of sale in the
State  or  sale	 in  the  course  of  inter-State  trade  or
commerce,  shall be liable to pay tax on the purchase  price
of  such goods at the same rate at which it would have	been
leviable on the sale price of such goods under
section 12
.
5.   Surcharge.	-  (1)	 Every	dealer	whose  gross
turnover  during a year exceeds rupees five lakhs shall,  in
addition  to the tax payable by him under this part also pay
a  surcharge at such rate not exceeding ten percentum of the
total  amount of the tax payable by him, as may be fixed  by
the  State  Government	by a notification published  in	 the
Official Gazette :
Provided	that the aggregate of the tax and  surcharge
payable under this part shall not exceed in respect of goods
declared to be of special importance in inter-State trade or
commerce,  by
section 14
of the Central Sales Tax Act,	1956
(Act  74 of 1956), the rate fixed by
section 15
of the	said
Act :
Provided	further	 that in the case of  an  assessment
year  which  has commenced before the commencement  of	this
part  or this Section, if there be a different date for	 the
commencement  of this section, turnover of the whole of such
assessment  year shall be taken into account for purposes of
determining  whether  the dealer is liable to pay  surcharge
under  this Section, but the surcharge shall be payable only
in respect of that part of the turnover which relates to the
period after the commencement of this section.
(2)  All	provisions  of	this part  relating  to	 the
payment,  assessment,  recovery and refund of the tax  shall
apply to the payment, assessment, recovery and refund of the
surcharge.   (3)  Notwithstanding anything to  the  contrary
contained  in this part, no dealer mentioned in	 sub-section
(1),  who  is liable to pay surcharge, shall be entitled  to
collect	 the  amount  of  this	surcharge.   (4)  The  State
Government  may,  by  notification,   and  subject  to	such
conditions  and	 restrictions as it may impose, exempt	from
the  levy of surcharge, any goods or class or description of
goods.
6.    Charge  of	 additional  tax.-   Notwithstanding
anything  contained  sub section (3) of section/or
sections
11
,
12
,
13
and
21
or in any notification issued  thereunder
every dealer having a gross turnover exceeding the specified
quantum	 as laid down in
section 3
shall, with effect from a
date   to  be  specified  by   the  State  Government  by  a
notification   published  in  Official	 Gazette,   pay	  an
additional  tax at such rate, not exceeding two percentum of
his gross turnover (excluding the sales or purchase of goods
which  have taken place either in the course of	 inter-State
trade or commerce, or outside the State, or in the course of
import	of  goods  into,  or  export of	 goods	out  of	 the
territory  of India) as the State Government may, from	time
to time by notification in the Official Gazette, fix :
Provided that State Government may fix different rates
within the ceiling rate of 2 percentum on the gross turnover
of different goods :
Provided	further that in the case of declared  goods,
as  defined in the
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956
(Act LXXIV of
1956) -
(i) where the tax payable under
section 3
or
section 4
equals	the maximum amount of tax permissible under
section
15
of the Act, no additional tax shall be payable under this
section	 :  (ii) where the additional tax under this section
together  with the tax payable under
section 3
or
section  4
would  exceed  the maximum amount of tax  permissible  under
section	 15
of	 that Act, the additional  tax	shall  stand
reduced	 to such amount as, together with the tax payable as
aforesaid, equals the said maximum amount.
(2)  The	State  Government may  by  notification	 and
subject	 to  such  conditions and restrictions,	 as  it	 may
impose exempt from the levy of additional tax gross turnover
in respect of any goods or class description of goods."
A	 perusal of these provisions shows that the
Finance
Act
has  provided  for	 the  levy  of	different  types  of
commercial  taxes which are generally leviable in the  State
of  Bihar.  The object of the Sugarcane Act says that it  is
an  Act to regulate the production, supply and	distribution
of  sugarcane  intended for use in sugar factories  and	 for
taxation  of  sugarcane	 (emphasis   supplied)	and  matters
incidental  thereto.  Section 49(1)(b) of the Sugarcane	 Act
reads thus "49.	 Tax on Sugarcane.- (1) The State Government
may, by notification in the official Gazette, impose - (a) x
x x
(a)  a tax not exceeding one rupee per quintal on	 the
purchase  of sugarcane by or on behalf of the occupier of  a
factory:"
It is to be noted here the incidence of taxation is on
the  purchase  of sugar cane, as in the
Finance	 Act
.	This
section	 nowhere says that the levy of purchase tax  therein
is   in	 addition  to  the   levy  under  the
Finance	Act
.
Therefore,  it	is seen that this Act specifically  provides
for  levy  of  purchase	 tax  on sugarcane  and	 it  is	 not
applicable  to levy of purchase tax on any other goods which
are  otherwise taxable under the
Finance Act
.  The Sugarcane
Act  also provides for regulation of production, supply	 and
distribution  of sugarcane.  Thus, it is an enactment  which
is  specifically meant for the control of the activities  of
production,  supply  and regulation of sugarcane,  including
the levy of purchase tax.  So far as the activity of levy of
purchase  tax  on  sugarcane is concerned,  both  the  Acts,
namely, the Finance Act and the Sugarcane Act operate in the
same  field.   Therefore, the Sugarcane Act being a  special
Act pertaining to all aspects of the control of sugarcane as
well  as  levy	of purchase tax, the same will	have  to  be
construed  as  a special enactment with reference  to  sugar
cane.  While determining the question whether a Statute is a
general	 or  a special one, focus must be on  the  principal
subject-matter	coupled	 with  particular  perspective	with
reference  to  the intendment of the Act.  Keeping  in	mind
this basic principle, we will have to examine the provisions
of  the	 two  Acts  to find out whether it  is	possible  to
construe  harmoniously	the provisions of
Section 4
of	 the
Finance	 Act and Section 49 of the Sugarcane Act.  If it  is
not  possible  then  an	 effort	 will have  to	be  made  to
ascertain whether the legislature had intended to accord the
levy  on sugarcane a special treatment vis-a-vis the levy of
purchase  tax  on other items, and a further endeavour	will
have  to  be  made  to find out whether Section	 49  of	 the
Sugarcane  Act excludes the applicability of the levy  under
Section	 4
of	the  Finance  Act.   On	 a  perusal  of	 the
provisions  of	the above Acts including the objects of	 the
two  Acts,  it	could  be seen that the	 two  enactments  in
question  contemplate  levy  of	 purchase  tax.
While	 the
Finance	 Act
empowers the State to levy all commercial taxes
generally,  the Sugarcane Act empowers the levy of  purchase
tax  only on sugarcane.	 In this background, there can be no
doubt  that  the  Legislature intended to  enact  a  special
enactment  for	the  purpose of levy of	 purchase  tax	with
reference  to  sugarcane  under	 the Sugarcane	Act  to	 the
exclusion  of such levy under the
Finance Act
.	Once we come
to  the	 conclusion  that  this	 is  the  intention  of	 the
legislation then the rule "general provision should yield to
special	  provision"  is  squarely   attracted.	  The	next
contention  on behalf of the State, as noted above, is	that
the  two enactments operate in different fields inasmuch  as
while  the
Finance Act
is an enactment for the	 purpose  of
generating  revenue  for  the State, the  Sugarcane  Act  is
enacted	 generally for the purpose of production, supply and
distribution  of sugar.	 The power of taxation	contemplated
under  this Act is only incidental to further the object  of
Section	 49(8)	of  the Sugarcane Act.	In other  words,  an
attempt	 was  made to contend that the tax which was  levied
and  collected under Section 49 of the Sugarcane Act was  to
be  appropriated  towards the requirements of the Board	 and
the  Council  constituted under the Sugarcane Act.  In	this
connection, it was contended that Section 3 of the Sugarcane
Act  contemplated establishment of the Sugarcane Board	with
specific  power	 to  fulfil  the objects of  the  said	Act.
Therefore, the levy that was being collected as purchase tax
under
Section 49(1)(b)
of the Act, being an exclusive	levy
for the purpose of the requirement of the Board, same cannot
be  equated with the levy of purchase tax contemplated under
Section	 4
of the Finance Act.	 We do not  find  sufficient
force  in  this	 argument  to repel the	 contention  of	 the
appellant  that the tax collected under Section 49(1)(b)  of
the  Sugarcane	Act  is the same as  is	 contemplated  under
Section	 4
of the Finance Act but confined to sugarcane.   A
perusal	 of Section 49(8) of the Sugarcane Act shows that  a
part  of  the  amount of purchase tax  collected  under	 its
sub-section (3) is utilised for the purpose of the Board and
the  Council as grant but sub-section (8) of
Section 49
does
not,  in  any  manner,	indicate   that	 entirety  of	this
collection  under
Section  1(b)
of
Section  49
is  solely
earmarked for the purpose of the expenditure of the Board or
the Council.  A perusal of Sections 6 and 9 of the Sugarcane
Act  clearly  shows that the legislature has  made  separate
provisions for the funds of the Board as well as the Council
under  the  said Act, and only a portion of  the  collection
under  sub-
section 1(a)
of
Section 49
is earmarked for these
purposes,  hence, it is clear that the balance of collection
goes  to the State exchequer/general fund.  So, there is  no
merit  in the arguments advanced on behalf of the State that
the  collection	 of purchase tax under sub-
section  1(b)
of
Section	 49
is for the purpose of creating a fund  for	 the
exclusive use of the Board and the Council created under the
said  Act.   Last argument advanced by Mr.  Sanyal,  learned
senior	counsel appearing in some of the cases on behalf  of
the respondent-State is that the amount collected under sub-
section	 3(b)
of
Section 49
is in fact not a tax but a	 fee
for the services rendered by the Board and the Council under
the  Sugarcane	Act.  With respect, this argument has to  be
noted  only  for  the  purpose	of  rejection.	 Legislative
history	 of  the Sugarcane Act bears testimony to  the	fact
that  at  one point of time the legislature had intended  to
collect a levy under sub- section (3) of
Section 49
as a fee
which imposition came to be challenged before the High Court
and  the challenge succeeded because the State was not	able
to  satisfy  the Court that the said levy was  supported  by
quid  pro  quo.	 It is in this background that	the  present
section 1(b)
of
Section 49
came to be brought on the Statute
book,  first by way of an Ordinance and then by virtue of an
Act,  making the collection a tax under Entry 54 of List  II
of  the Seventh Schedule.  It is too late in the day for the
State  now to contend once again that the said levy is a fee
and  not  a  tax.  It may also be noted at this	 stage	that
nowhere	 in  the pleadings, material has been placed by	 the
State  to satisfy the requirement of levy of fee by  showing
that  there  is	 a  reasonable	 service  rendered  to	 the
purchasers  of sugarcane so as to justify the said levy as a
fee.   For  the	 reasons  stated above,	 these	appeals	 are
allowed,  setting  aside the judgment and order of the	High
Court  impugned	 herein, and the writ petitions	 from  which
these  appeals	arise, are allowed, with  all  consequential
relief.