[Cites
26
, Cited by
24
]
Supreme Court of India
Kammari Brahmiah And Ors vs Public Prosecutor, High Court Of A.P on 3 February, 1999
Equivalent citations: AIR 1999 SUPREME COURT 775, 1999 (2) SCC 522, 1999 AIR SCW 390, 1999 (1) SCALE 235, 1999 (1) LRI 129, 1999 (1) ADSC 381, 1999 SCC(CRI) 281, 1999 ALLMR(CRI) 1 555, 1999 CRILR(SC&MP) 227, 1999 ADSC 1 381, 1999 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 227, (1999) 1 JT 259 (SC), (1999) 1 EASTCRIC 751, (1999) 38 ALLCRIC 408, (2001) 2 MADLW(CRI) 486, (1999) 1 RECCRIR 839, (1999) 1 CURCRIR 54, (1999) 1 SUPREME 308, (1999) 24 ALLCRIR 494, (1999) 1 SCALE 235, (1999) 1 CHANDCRIC 40, (1999) 1 ALLCRILR 380, (1999) 1 CRIMES 50, (1999) SC CR R 258, 1999 (1) ANDHLT(CRI) 143 SC, (1999) 1 ANDHLT(CRI) 143
Author:
M.B. Shah
Bench:
M.B. Shah
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  64 of 1994

PETITIONER:
KAMMARI BRAHMIAH AND ORS.

RESPONDENT:
PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF A.P.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 03/02/1999

BENCH:
G.B. PATTANAIK & M.B. SHAH

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

1999 (1) SCR 361


The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

SHAH, J. Short question in this appeal is whether some accused could be
convicted for the offence punishable under Section 325 read with 149, when
all of them were charged for an offence punishable under
Section 302
I.P.C.
The appeal is filed against the judgment and order passed by the High Court
of Judicature of Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad in Criminal Appeal No. 1088 of
1992 by which the High Court reversed the judgment and order passed by the
Additional Sessions Judge, Mahabub-nagar in Sessions Case No. 156 of 1992
acquitting the accused no. 1 to 6 for the offence punishable under
Section
302
IPC and convicted the accused no. 1 for the offence punishable under
Section 304
part II
IPC
, accused no. 2 for the offence punishable under
Section 325
IPC; and accused no. 3 to 6 for the offence punishable under
Section 325
IPC read with
Section 149
. At the time of admission, the appeal
filed by the original accused no. 1 & 2 was dismissed, leave was granted to
the accused no. 3 to 6 and they were ordered to be released on bail.
Before deciding the contention raised by the learned counsel for the
parties, it would be necessary to narrate few facts. It is the prosecution
story that Accused No. 1, 2, 4 & 5 are brothers. On 17th November, 1989,
the accused no. 1 had picked up the quarrel in the morning regarding the
usage of pasage in the field and thereafter at about 3.30 p.m., accused no.
1 to 6 came to the field belonging to the deceased and quarrelled regarding
the use of passage and water by the deceased. Deceased was beaten and he
fell down. At that tune, P.W. 3, younger brother of the deceased went to
the rescue but he was prevented by accused no. 4 & 5 who held him tight.
Accused no. 3 & 6 caught hold of the deceased and at that time accused no.
2 gave a stick blow on the head and accused no. 1 stabbed twice the
deceased with a barisa on his right flank and all of them ran away. As per
the doctor's evidence, who performed post-mortem examination, the deceased
was having the following injuries :
1. Contusion over the right cheek i.e. 3-4" length 1" width.
2. Contusion over the right elbow joint over the lateral posterior part
i.e., 3" below the right elbow joint 1" length XI/2" width.
3.  A deep stab injury over the mid scapulor region 1" length 1/2" width
4-5" depth.
4. A deep stab injury ove the right infro-memory region 1" length X 1/2"
width X 4-5" depth. From the evidence of P.W. 1 to 4, the Court arrived at
the conclusion that the death of the deceased was the result of the
injuries inflicted by accused no. 1 & 2 and the evidence was cor-roborated
by the injuries caused to the deceased as mentioned in post-mor-tem
examination. The Court also held that prosecution evidence establishes
beyond reasonable doubt that accused no. 4 & 5 caught hold witness
Venkataiah who went to rescue the deceased. Similarly, accused no. 3 & 6
caught hold of the deceased and at that time accused no. 1 & 2 inflicted
injuries. On the basis of the aforesaid evidence led by the prosecution,
High Court held that prosecution has made out a case that accused formed an
unlawful assembly and during the course of the said unlawful assembly, they
caused injuries and so they were liable to be convicted for the offence
punishable under
Section 148
of the IPC. The Court further held that it is
true that there is no charge framed by the trial court for the offence
punishable under Section 148 against the accused but since it was found
that all participated and the main charge framed against the accused is
under Section 302 and as no prejudice is caused to the accused the accused
could be convicted for a lesser offence under Section 325 read with 149
I.P.C.
At the time of hearing of this appeal, learned Counsel appearing on behalf
of the appellant submitted that the Order passed by the High Court
convicting the appellants for the offence punishable under
Section 325
read
with 149 is on the face of it illegal as no charge under
Section 149
was
framed against the accused. He contended that all accused were charged only
for the offence punishable under
Section 302
of IPC for causing injuries to
the deceased Itikala Mogulaiah. As against this, learned counsel for the
State vehemently submitted that even though it is an error on the part of
the Additional Sessions Judge of not framing the charge under
Section 302
read with 149 of
IPC
no prejudice is casued to the accused as relevant
facts were placed before the Court and the attention of the accused also
was drawn. Futher, they are punished for lesser offence, therefore, the
order passed by the High Court is justified and legal.
In this view of the matter, the only contention which requires decision is
whether the conviction of the accused 3 to 6 for the offence punishable
under
Section 325
read with 149 of
IPC
can be maintained even if no charge
under
Section 149
was framed by the trial court. It is true that there is
an error apparent on the part of the Additional Sessions Judge in not
framing the charge for the offence punishable under
Section 149
IPC despite
the clear case of the prosecution that there was a quarrel in the morning
between the deceased and the accused no. 1 on the question of passage for
watering the fields and thereafter at 3.30 p.m. all the accused came in the
field of the deceased, they picked up the quarrel and inflicted injuries on
the deceased. Still the question would be whether the conviction of A3 to
A6 by the High Court for the offence under
Section 325
read with 149 can be
said to be illegal which requires to be quashed and set aside if no
prejudice is caused by not framing of charge under
section 148
and charge
under
section 302
read with 149.
For deciding this contention, we would first refer to
section 464
of the
Criminal Procedure Code which reads as under :
"Effect of omission to frame, or absence of, or error in, charge - (1) No
finding, sentence or order by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be
deemed invalid merely on the ground that no charge was framed or on the
ground of any error, omission or irregularity in the charge including any
misjoinder of charges, unless in the opinion of the Court of appeal,
confirmation or revision, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned
thereby.
(2) If the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision is of opinion that a
failure of justice has in fact been occasioned, it may -
(a) If the case of an omission to frame a charge, order that a charge be
framed and that the trial be recommenced from the point immediately after
the framing of the charge.
(b)  in the case of an error, omission or irregularity in the charge,
direct a new trial to be had upon a charge framed in whatever manner it
thinks fit;
Provided that if the Court is of opinion that the facts of the case are
such that no valid charge could be preferred against the accused in respect
of the facts proved, it shall quash the conviction."
The aforesaid section is in mandatory terms and it specifically provides
----- what is to be done in cases where charge is not framed or there is an
error, omission or irregularity in framing of the charge. From the
unequivocal terms of the section, it can be stated that finding, sentence
or order could be set aside only in those cases where the facts are such
that no valid charge could be preferred against the accused in respect of
the facts proved. Secondly, if the facts are such that charge could be
framed and yet it is not framed but there is no failure of justice, has in
fact been occasioned thereby, the finding sentence or order of the court of
competent jurisdiction is not to be set aside on that ground. Thirdly, if
there is failure of justice occassioned by not framing of the charge or in
case an error, omission or irregularity in charge re-trial of the case is
to be directed as provided under sub-section (2).
In the present case, the facts are clear. It establishes beyond reasonable
doubt that because of the morning quarrel between the accused no. 1 and the
deceased, the accused no. 1 to 6 went at the field of the deceased at about
3.30 p.m. They picked up the quarrel and inflicted injuries on the
deceased. In view of these facts, the learned counsel for the appellant was
not in a position to point out any prejudice caused to the accused by not
framing of the charge under
Section 148
or for the offence punishable under
section 302
read with
section 149
except by stating that by not framing
charge properly accused have lost an opportunity of leading rebuttal
evidence. He relied upon the decision rendered in the case of Panduram v.
State of Hyderabad, AIR (1955) S.C. 216 wherein the Court has observed that
Section 149
unlike
Section 34
creates a specific offence and deals with
punishment of that offence alone; hence, strong reasons for using
Section
149
, when it is not charged even if it be possible to convict under that
Section in the absence of any specific charge, is required and the Court
has left the point undecided.
In our view, this question is concluded by the decision rendered in the
case of
Ramkishan and Other v. State of Rajasthan
, [1997] 7 SCC 518 wherein
the Court has relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of
Willie
(William) Slaney v. State of M.P.
, [1955] 2 S.C.R. 1140 and held that
ommission to mention
Section 149
1PC specifically in the charge is only an
irregularity and since no prejudice is shown to have been caused to the
accused by that omission, it could not affect their conviction. The Court
in that case
from the established facts and circumstances convicted the
accused under
Section 304
part II 1PC read with
Section 149
IPC and not
under
Section 302
IPC even though no specific charge indicating the
applicability of
Section 149
IPC was framed.
Further, at this stage it would be worthwhile to refer to some discus-sions
on the question involved from the case of
Willie (William) Slaney v. The
State of Madhya Pradesh
, [1955] 2 SCR 1140, wherein the larger bench has
elaborately discussed the provisions of
Section 232
,
233
,
237
238
,
535
&
537
of the Criminal Procedure Code 1898 (
Section 232
, 535 and 537 are
combined as
section 464
in
Criminal Procedure Code
1973) and observed that
"the Code is a code of procedure and, like all procedural laws, is designed
to further the ends of justice and not to frustrate them by the
introduction of endless technicalities. The object of the Code is to ensure
that an accused person gets a full and fair trial along certain well-
estab-lished and well-understood lines that accord with our notions of
natural justice. If he does, if he is tried by a competent court, if he is
told and clearly understands the nature of the offence for which he is
being tried, if the case against him is fully and fairly explained to him
and he is afforded a full and fair opportunity of defending himself, then,
provided there is substantial compliance with the outward forms of the law,
mere mistakes in procedure, mere inconsequential errors and omissions in
the trial are regarded as venal by the Code and the trial is not vitiated
unless the accused can show substantial prejudice. That, broadly speaking,
is the basic principle on which the Code is based." After considering the
various decisions, the Court further observed that "the swing of the
pendulum has been away from technicality, and a greater endeavour has been
made to regard the substance rather than the shadow and to administer
justice fairly and impartially as it should be administered; fair to the
accused, fair to the State and fair to the vast mass of the people for
whose protection penal laws are made and administered."
Thereafter, Court examined the scheme of relevant sections as well as
section 535 & 537 and held that "Section 535 uses the words "shall be
deemed invalid" which indicate that a total omission to frame a charge
would render the conviction invalid but for Section 535 which serves to
validate it when, that sort of "irregularity" has not occasioned a "failure
of justice" Section `537 does not use any of these expressions but merely
says that no conviction or sentence "shall be reversed or altered" unless
there has in fact been a failure of justice" The Court thereafter negatived
the contention that total omission to frame the charge would not be covered
by Section 535 or 537 and held as under; "Chapter XIX deals comprehen-
sively with charges and sections 535 and 537 cover every case in which
there is a departure from the rules set out in that Chapter. Such
departures range from errors, omissions and irregularities in charges that
are framed, down to charges that might have been framed and were not and
include a total omission to frame a charge at all at any stage of the
trial. In all these cases the only question is about prejudice. We say this
because the Code repeatedly says so in express and emphatic terms and
because that is the foundation on which rules of procedure are based. We
say it because that accords with logic and principle and reason and because
it touches the deep verities on which the structure of justice is erected
and maintained." The Court pertinently further observed, "We are unable to
find any magic or charm in the ritual of a charge. It is the substance of
these provisions that count and not their outward form To hold otherwise is
only to provide avenues of escape for the guilty and afford no protection
to the innocent. We agree that a man must know what offence is he being
tried for and that he must be told in clear and unambiguous terms and that
it must all be "explained to him" so that he really understands (
section
271(1)
in sessions trials,
section 255(1)
in warrant cases) but to say that
a technical jargon of words whose significance no man not trained to the
law can grasp or follow affords him greater protection or assistance than
the informing and the explaining that are the substance of the matter, is
to base on fanciful theory wholly divorced from practical reality; and the
same applies to the vast bulk of jurors who attend our courts. They are
none the wiser because of a formal charge except in a vague and general way
that is of no practical account. The essence of the matter is not a
technical formula of words but the reality. Was he told? Was it explained
to him? Did he understand? Was it done in a fair way?"
Thereafter, Court dealt with not framing the charge under
Section 34
or 149
and held that "endeavour was made in the argument to draw a distinction
between cases falling under
section 34
of the Indian Penal Code and those
under
section 149
of the Indian Penal Code. It was contended that even if
no separate charge is necessary when
section 34
is called in aid because
section 34
does not create a separate offence, one is essential for a
conviction under
section 149
and that there, at any rate, the absence of a
separate charge is fatal. This is not a case under
Section 149
of the
Indian Penal Code so the question does not really arise but it is necessary
to advert to the argument because, on the view we take of
sections 225
, 535
and 537, it is immaterial what the offence is and whether there is a charge
at all. The only question is whether the irregularity occasioned
prejudice." The
Court further held
it is to be observed that section 535 of
the Code is mandatory in its terms, just as mandatory as
Section 233
. If it
be accepted that an absence of a charge would, but for its provisions,
render a convic-tion invalid, this section cures such an invalidity when
there is, in fact, not in theory but in fact, no failure of justice."
Dealing with the facts in the case, the
Court further held
as under : "Put
at its highest, all that the appellant can urge is that a charge in the
alternative ought to have been framed, which in itself imports that it
could have been so framed.
As was said by the Privy Council in
Begu v.
King-Emperor
(1) and also by this Court in
Lachman Singh v. The State
(2) -
"A man may be convicted of an offence, although there has been no charge in
respect of it, if the evidence is such as to establish a charge that might
have been made. That is what happened here...........They were not charged
with that formally, but they were tried on evidence which brings the case
under
section 237(1)
The variation between murder and concealing evidence after the crime is no
more than the variation between killing a man jointly with another, sharing
his intention, or allowing the other to do the actual killing with the same
common intention.''

In a differing judgment, Chandrasekhara Aiyar, J. observed that "
Sections
34
,
114
and
149
of the Indian Penal Code provide for criminal liability
viewed from different angles as regards actual participants, acces-sories
and men actuated by a common object or a common intention : and the charge
is a rolled-up one involving the direct liability and the constructive
liability without specifying who are directly liable and who are sought to
be made constructively liable. In such a situation, the absence of a charge
under one or other of the various heads of criminal liability for the
offence cannot be said to be fatal by itself, and before a conviction for
the substantive offence, without a charge, can be set aside, prejudice will
have to be made out. In most of the cases of this kind, evidence is
normally given from the outset as to who was primarily responsible for the
act which brought about the offence and such evidence is of course
relevant."
The aforesaid discussion leaves no doubt that non-framing of charge would
not vitiate the conviction if no prejudice is caused thereby to the
accused. As observed in the aforesaid case, the trial should be fair to the
accused, fair to the State and fair to the vast mass of the people for
whose protection penal laws are made and administered.
Criminal Procedure
Code
is a procedural law and is designed to further the ends of justice and
not to frustrate them by the introduction of endless technicalities. In the
present case, accused were tried on the prosecution version that all of
them went at 3.30 p.m. in the field of the deceased; they picked up the
quarrel

with him, inflicted injuries to the deceased as narrated by the prosecution
witnesses, accused no. 3 to 6 participated as stated above; the statements
were recorded under
section 313
of the CPC and the questions were asked to
the effect that they jointly came at 3.30 p.m. and caused injuries to the
deceased as stated by the prosecution witnesses and the role assigned to
accused no. 3 to 6 was also specifically mentioned. Hence, it is apparent
that no prejudice is caused to the accused who were charged for the offence
under
section 302
, by not framing the charge for the offence punishable
under
section 302
read with 149. In this view of the matter, the conviction
of the accused no. 3 to 6 for the offence punishable under
section 325
read
with 149 cannot be said to be anyway illegal which requires to be set
aside.
In the result, appeal is dismissed.