[Cites
77
, Cited by
432
]
Supreme Court of India
M.I. Builders Pvt. Ltd vs Radhey Shyam Sahu And Others on 26 July, 1999
Equivalent citations: AIR 1999 SUPREME COURT 2468, 1999 (6) SCC 464, 1999 AIR SCW 2619, 1999 ALL. L. J. 1802, (1999) 5 JT 42 (SC), 1999 (4) COM LJ 67 SC, 1999 (3) LRI 859, 1999 (7) ADSC 1, (1999) 4 COMLJ 67, 1999 ADSC 7 1, 1999 (8) SRJ 105, 1999 (5) JT 42, (1999) 3 UPLBEC 1818, (1999) 3 ALL WC 2508, (1999) 4 SCALE 209, (1999) 6 SUPREME 273
Author:
D.P. Wadhwa
Bench:
S.B.Majmudar
,
D.P.Wadhwa
PETITIONER:
M.I. BUILDERS PVT. LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
RADHEY SHYAM SAHU AND OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	26/07/1999

BENCH:
S.B.Majmudar, D.P.Wadhwa




JUDGMENT:
D.P. Wadhwa, J.
These  appeals are directed against the judgment dated
August	23,  1994 of a Division Bench of the High  Court  of
Judicature  at	Allahabad,  (Lucknow Bench).   By  a  common
judgment  in  three  writ  petitions,  High  Court  speaking
through	 Shobha	 Dixit,	 J.  held that the decision  of	 the
Lucknow	 Nagar Mahapalika ('Mahapalika' for short), also now
called Nagar Nigam or Corporation, permitting M.I.  Builders
Pvt.   Ltd.  (the appellant herein) to construct underground
shopping  complex  in  the Jhandewala Park  (also  known  as
Aminuddaula  Park) situated at Aminabad Market, Lucknow, was
illegal,  arbitrary  and unconstitutional.  High  Court	 set
aside and quashed the relevant resolutions of the Mahapalika
permitting  such  construction and also the agreement  dated
November 4, 1993 entered into between the Mahapalika and the
appellant  for the purpose.  Writ of mandamus was issued  to
the  Mahapalika	 to  restore back the park in  its  original
position  within  a period of three months from the date  of
the judgment and till that was done, to take adequate safety
measures  and to provide necessary safeguard and  protection
to  the	 public, users of the park.  High Court had  noticed
that the fact that the park was of historical importance was
not  denied  by	 the  Mahapalika  and  also  the  fact	that
perseverance  or maintenance of the park was necessary	from
the environmental angle and that the only reason advanced by
the   Mahapalika  for  construction   of   the	 underground
commercial complex was to ease the congestion in area.	High
Court,	however,  took	judicial notice	 of  the  conditions
prevailing  at	the  Aminabad  market.	It said	 it  was  so
crowded	  that	it  was	 bursting   from  all	its   seams.
Construction of the underground shopping complex in question
would  only  complicate the situation and that	the  present
scheme	would  further congest the area.  It said  that	 the
public	 purpose,  which  is  alleged	to  be	 served	  by
construction  of the underground commercial complex,  seemed
totally illusory.
Aggrieved	 by the impugned judgment of the High Court,
appellant  has	come  to this Court.  Mahapalika  also	felt
aggrieved  and filed appeals (Civil Appeal Nos.	 9326-28  of
1994)  but these appeals by the Mahapalika were subsequently
allowed	 to  be withdrawn by order dated February  6,  1997.
There  is  controversy	as to how the Mahapalika  which	 had
earlier	 justified its action later turned round and  sought
to  withdraw the appeals.  The order allowing withdrawal  of
the appeals by the Mahapalika is as under:  -
"I.A.  Nos.  10 TO 12 IN

      CIVIL APPEAL NOS.	 9326-28 OF 1994

      Nagar Mahapalika Appellants

      Versus

      Radhey Shyam Sahu & others Respondents


      O R D E R

      Taken on board.
The  learned counsel for the appellant seeks leave  to
withdraw  the  appeals and states that Mr.  S.V.   Deshpande
who  appears  for  the other side has no  objection  to	 the
withdrawal.   The appeals will, therefore, stand disposed of
as withdrawn with no order as to costs.
Sd/- .......CJI

      New Delhi, Sd/- February 6, 1997 ......,J."
Mahapalika  also	cancelled the building plans.	This
action	of the Mahapalika was subject matter of criticism by
the  appellant	as  to how a duly sanctioned plan  could  be
revoked	 without  any notice to the appellant.	We  may,  at
this  stage,  itself reproduce the relevant portion  of	 the
resolution  dated  August  6,  1996 of	the  Mahapalika	 for
withdrawal of its appeals which is as under:-
"The  Lucknow Bench of Hon'ble High Court of Allahabad
has  declared the agreement dated 4.11.1993 executed between
the  Nagar  Mahapalika, Lucknow and M.I.  Builders,  Karamat
Market	Lucknow	 in respect of construction  of	 underground
Palika	Bazar  and Multistoreyal parking on Jhandewala	Park
Aminabad,  Lucknow as invalid and not in the public interest
vide their judgment dated 23.8.1994.
The  Hon'ble  High  Court	  rendered  the	 above	said
Judgment  by  accepting	 the  writ  petitions  preferred  by
several	 elected  sabhasad of the then Nagar Mahapalika	 and
the citizens.
On  the  directions  of the then	Nagar  Pramukh	Shri
Akhilesh  Das,	who  wanted to cause undue  profit  to	M.I.
Builders  against the interest of Nagar Mahapalika now Nagar
Nigam  Lucknow,	 the  citizens of Lucknow, the	Nagar  Nigam
Lucknow	 filed Special Leave Petition No.  17223-25 of	1994
in  the	 Hon'ble Supreme Court against the Judgment  of	 the
Hon'ble High Court.
It  is proposed that in the interest of the citizen of
Lucknow	 and  the  Lucknow Nagar Nigam and  pending  Special
Leave  Petition No.  17223-25 of 1994 in the Hon'ble Supreme
Court  be  withdrawn and the Nagar Nigam Lucknow be  further
directed  to oppose the Special Leave Petition filed by M/s.
M.I.   Builders	 in  the Hon'ble Supreme Court	against	 the
Judgment  dated	 23.8.1994 of Lucknow Bench of Hon'ble	High
Court of Allahabad.
Unanimously  decided that the aforesaid resolution  be
passed and accordingly the action may be taken."
The  letter revoking the sanctioned building plans  is
dated April 17, 1997 and is as under:-
"To

      M/s   M.I.   Builders  (P)   Ltd.	   Karamat   Market,
Nishatganj, Lucknow

      Sir,

      Vide  this  office  letter No.   223/Sa.Sa.A./95	dtd.
23.1.1995 the building plans for construction of underground
shopping  and parking complex at Jhandewala Park,  Ameenabad
were sanctioned.
After taking legal advice by the Hon'ble Nagar Pramukh
from  the  standing  counsel  of the Nagar  Nigam  and	Add.
Advocate  General the earlier sanctioned building plans	 has
been  revoked vide order dated 17.4.97.	 As such these	have
no legal sanctity.
Please be informed.
Yours  faithfully,  Sd/-	S.K.	Gupta  Mukhya  Nagar
Adhikari  17.4.97  Copy	 to:   The  Vice  Chairman,  Lucknow
Development Authority, for information.
Sd/- S.K.	 Gupta Mukhya Nagar Adhikari"
There  were three writ petitions before the High Court
and  during  the course of hearing of those  petitions	High
Court had directed maintenance of status quo.  At that time,
it  would  appear only digging in some part of the park	 had
been  done  and there was no construction.  When the  matter
came before this Court, by order dated December 14, 1994 the
Court passed the following order:-
"Exemption   from	 filing	  official  translation	  is
allowed.
Liberty to add the omitted parties in the cause title.
Leave granted.
We  have	heard  counsel on the question of  grant  of
interim relief.
Printing dispensed with.
The  operation of the impugned order of the High Court
is stayed on the following conditions:
Taking   all   the  facts	  and	circumstances	into
consideration  and having regard to the fact that it may not
be possible for this Court to hear the appeal within a short
time  having regard to the pressure of work and pendency  of
old  cases, we direct that the appellant shall be  permitted
to construct an under ground shopping complex by raising its
own  funds  without  collecting any  additional	 funds	from
individuals  or concerns to whom the promise of allotment of
shop  is made.	To clarify the matter, we say that the funds
can  be	 raised from agencies other than those to  whom	 the
shops are ultimately allotted.	It will be made clear to the
agencies  from whom the funds are raised that they will	 not
be  entitled  to  allotment of shops.	The  appellant	will
maintain  accounts  and	 file an undertaking  to  the  above
effect	in  this  Court	 within two weeks  from	 today.	  In
addition  the  undertaking will contain a statement  to	 the
effect	that  in the event the appeals fail,  the  appellant
will  not raise questions as to equity or the ground on	 its
having	invested a huge amount and will be totally  amenable
to  such  directions and orders that this Court may make  in
regard	to  the	 maintenance or otherwise  of  the  shopping
complex.   In  other words, if the Court directs removal  of
the shopping complex in the event of failure of the appeals,
the  shopping  complex	will  have  to	be  removed  at	 the
appellant's  cost without claiming anything in return.	 The
construction will be so carried out that the open space will
remain	available for the public and the entire complex will
be  so constructed that it will be an underground one except
for  the  ingress and egress portions to the  complex.	 The
total  area  to	 be constructed on the surface of  the	plot
shall not exceed 10% of the plot.
SLP (C) Nos.  17223-25/94

      Exemption from filing official translation is allowed.
Leave granted.
Tag  on  with  appeals arising from S.L.P.   (C)	Nos.
16907-09  of 1994 in which interim orders have already	been
made."
It  is  contended	 by  the appellant  that  after	 the
aforesaid  interim  order, it got necessary  building  plans
sanctioned  by	the  Mahapalika	 and  started  construction.
Respondents,  however, filed an application complaining that
construction  was in violation of the building plans and was
also  against the provisions of the
U.P.  Urban Planning and
Development  Act,  1973
(for short, the 'Development  Act').
To ascertain the nature of construction being carried out at
that  time this Court appointed a Local Commissioner.  These
applications  were then disposed of by passing the following
order:-
"I.A.  Nos.  10-12

      The Commissioner, Mr.  Justice Loomba, a retired Judge
of the High Court of Allahabad, has pursuant to this Court's
order,	submitted  his Report dated February 15,  1996.	  In
paragraph  3 of the Report he identifies the points on which
the  Report  was required and then proceeds to indicate	 the
actual	physical condition in regard to the construction  of
the  market  and  states  that the entire  market  is  being
constructed  underground  and not above the ground and	that
the  total area on the surface of the market for the ingress
and  egress  (with Chabutras) and light purposes etc.	does
not  exceed  10 per cent of the plot and is about  9.74	 per
cent  of the area in which the market is being	constructed.
He,  however,  notes  that  the level of  the  park  at	 the
periphery  appears  to be higher than the estimated  average
level  of the original park by about 3.21 feet = 3 feet	 2.5
inches as worked out on the basis of available old signs and
that  the same does not appear to be in any manner offensive
and  is of no consequence.  He also points out that the park
made  on  the market area is and will be available  for	 the
public	in the form of park less the structures made on	 the
surface,  which	 as pointed out above;	does not exceed	 the
permissible limit of 10 per cent of the total plot area.  He
also  states  that the Chabutras constructed on the back  of
the  structures will also be available to the public and may
serve  as benches in the park.	In view of this Report which
precisely  indicates the actual physical condition  existing
on  the	 date  of the Report and the plan  appended  thereto
which  shows  beyond  any manner of doubt  that	 the  entire
construction is underground, the total surface area does not
exceed	the permissible limit of 10 per cent and the raising
of  the height on the periphery is of no consequence because
it  does  not  in any manner affect the surface	 area.	 We,
therefore, accept the Report of the learned Judge and see no
merit in these I.As."
The  Court,  however,  did not go	 into  other  issues
raised in the applications.  By a subsequent order dated May
7, 1997 the Court stopped further construction.
Before we consider the details of the case we may note
in brief the contentions of the parties.
Petitioners   (now  the  respondents)   in  the	writ
petitions  submitted  that  the park was not only  of  great
historical  significance  but its maintenance was  necessary
from  the  environmental point of view as mandated  by	law.
Admittedly,  the park is the only open space in the Aminabad
market,	 which is an over-crowded commercial and residential
area of the city.  Possession of the park was handed over to
the   appellant	 (M.I.	 Builders)  in	violation   of	 the
provisions  of	law  to construct  an  underground  shopping
complex	 and underground parking with the ostensible purpose
of  decongesting  the area.  It is not that the	 encroachers
would be removed from the area as the underground shops were
not  allotted  to any one of them.  They would	nevertheless
remain	at  the places occupied by them.  Challenge  to	 the
action	of  Mahapalika in allowing construction was  on	 the
grounds:  -
1.   It was against the public purpose to construct an
underground  market in the garb of the decongesting area  of
the  encroachers to destroy a park of historical  importance
and  of	 environmental necessity.  It would be in breach  of
Articles 21
, 49
, 51-A(g)
of the Constitution as the existing
park  which is the only open space in the busiest commercial
area  in  the heart of the city of Lucknow can be  destroyed
and  the  citizens  particularly the residents of  the	area
would  be deprived of the quality of life to which they	 are
entitled under the law and to maintain ecology of the area.
2.   It is in violation of the statutory provisions as
contained in the U.P.  Nagar Mahapalika Adhiniyam, 1959 (now
called Uttar Pradesh Municipal Corporation Adhiniyam, 1959 -
by
Amending  Act
12  of 1994) (for short  the	 Act),
U.P.
Regulation  of Buildings Operations Act, 1958
(for short the
'Building   Act'),
Uttar  Pradesh   Urban   Planning	 and
Development  Act, 1973
(for short the 'Development Act') and
also
Uttar  Pradesh  Parks,  Playgrounds  and	Open  Spaces
(Preservation  and  Regulation)	 Act, 1975
(for  short	 the
'Parks Act').
3.   No tenders were invited by the Mahapalika  before
entering  into	the  agreement with the builder.   This	 was
against	  the  established  procedure	and  thus  it  acted
arbitrarily  in the matter of disposing and dealing with its
immovable   property  which  was  of  immense  value.	 The
agreement  is wholly one sided and gives undue advantage  to
the builder at the cost of the Mahapalika.
4.   The agreement between Mahapalika and the  builder
smacks of arbitrariness, is unfair and gives undue favour to
the  builder  and  this was done with mala fide	 motives  of
personal   gain	 by  the   authorities	of  the	  Mahapalika
particularly  the  Mukhya  Nagar Adhikari  (Chief  Executive
Officer) and the Adhyaksh (the Mayor).
5.   The resolution of the Mahapalika by which it	 has
agreed	to  enter  into the agreement with the	builder	 was
against the provisions of the Act which were mandatory.
6.   The	whole action of the Mahapalika	was  against
public	interest.  Lucknow Development Authority (for  short
LDA) which was constituted under the Development Act and was
responsible  for  development in the area which	 would	mean
construction  of  the  underground   shopping  complex	 and
underground  parking lot was side-lined and no sanction	 was
obtained  from	the  Vice Chairman in  accordance  with	 the
provisions of the Development Act.
The  builder  as	well as the Mahapalika	filed  their
respective counter affidavits in the High Court opposing the
writ  petitions.   No counter affidavit was filed either  by
the  State  or by LDA though they were parties in  the	writ
petitions.   Chief  Executive  Officer and  the	 Mayor	were
impleaded  by name as respondents in the writ petitions	 and
allegations  of mala fides and favourtism made against	them
but  none  of  them  choose to file  any  counter  affidavit
controverting  those allegations.  In the High Court a	very
strange	 scenario emerged and that was that though the stand
of  Mahapalika and LDA as spelled out from documents was  at
variation  with each other, yet both were represented by one
counsel.  Builder was represented by the Advocate General of
the  State  while  State  was represented  by  its  standing
counsel.   Before us though Mahapalika earlier supported the
builder	 as  noted above and also filed appeals against	 the
impugned  judgment  but subsequently it reversed its  stand,
withdrew  its appeals and filed an affidavit supporting	 the
impugned  judgment of the High Court.  The State  Government
and  the  LDA  also filed their	 affidavits  supporting	 the
judgment  of the High Court with full vigour though as	seen
earlier	  before  the  High  Court   they  were	 just	mute
spectators.   We  may  also  note   that  in  reply  to	 the
applications IA Nos.  10 and 11 in this Court the Mahapalika
lent  its  support  to	the builder.   This  action  of	 the
Mahapalika  changing  its stand midstream was  subjected  to
severe	criticism  by the appellant and it was	stated	that
there  was estoppel by deed in the case and Mahapalika could
not go back on its earlier stand.
The  impugned  judgment  has been	 challenged  by	 the
builder on the following grounds:  -
a) There was no disposal of the property by Mahapalika
in favour of the builder and therefore provisions of
Section
128
of the Act were inapplicable.  Even assuming it was so,
provisions  of
Sections  129
and
132
of  the  Act  stood
complied.
b)  There	 was  no arbitrariness	or  unreasonableness
vitiating  the agreement between Mahapalika and the  builder
particularly  in  view	of the express finding of  the	High
Court  that there was no lack of bona fides and that it	 was
not  disputed that the builder was competent to execute	 the
job.   This  was  having regard to special features  of	 the
construction  and  further  on account of the fact  that  no
party  had come forward at any time to execute the  project.
In  such  a situation omission to invite tenders  would	 not
vitiate	 the  agreement particularly when the  proposal	 for
construction of the project by the builder was widely known.
c)  In view of its stand before the High Court and  in
the  Special  Leave  Petition  of the builder  and  its	 own
appeals	 filed in this Court it is not open to Mahapalika to
advance	 any contention or take a stand contrary to what had
been taken earlier.
d)  High Court exceeded its jurisdiction as it did not
apply  correct parameters of its power of judicial review as
laid  by  this	Court in
Tata Cellular vs.  Union  of  India
(1994  (6) SCC 651) and other cases and the High Court	went
wrong in going into the question of expediency and wisdom of
the proposed project.
e)  Mahapalika  could  not revoke	 the  building	plan
without	 notice to the builder and without hearing it in the
matter.
This  last submission we need not go into the question
if  cancellation  of  the sanctioned building plans  by	 the
Mahapalika  was	 valid as that was not the issue before	 the
High Court.
Mahapalika  is a body corporate constituted under	 the
Act.
The  Act
provides  for	 various  functions  of	 the
Mahapalika  and how these are to be performed.	Its  various
authorities are described in
Section 5
which is as under:  -
"5.    Corporation  Authorities.-	   The	 Corporation
authorities charged with carrying out the provisions of this
Act for each city shall be -
(a)  the Corporation;  (aa) the Ward Committees;	 (b)
an  Executive Committee of the Corporation;  (bb) the  Nagar
Pramukh;   (c)	a Development Committee of the	Corporation;
(d)  A	Mukhya	Nagar  Adhikari and an	Apar  Mukhya  Nagar
Adhikari appointed for the Corporation under this Act;	and
(e)  in	 the  event  of	  the  corporation  establishing  or
acquiring electricity supply or public transport undertaking
or  other  public utility services, such other committee  or
committees  of	the Corporation as the Corporation may	with
the previous sanction of the State Government establish with
respect thereto."
Chapter  II  provides  for   constitution	 of  various
committees   and   Chapter  III	  for  proceedings  of	 the
Mahapalika,  Executive Committee, Development Committee	 and
other  Committees.   In	 view of the  applicability  of	 the
Development Act, 1973, the Executive Committee of Mahapalika
has ceased to be in operation to that extent.  Under Section
91  falling  in this Chapter, a list of the business  to  be
transacted  at	every meeting except an	 adjourned  meeting,
shall  be sent to each member of the Mahapalika or of  other
Committees  at	least  ninety-six  hours in the	 case  of  a
meeting	 of  the Corporation before the date fixed  for	 the
meeting	 and  seventy two hours in the case of a meeting  of
any  such Committee and "no business, except as provided  in
sub-  section  (2),  shall be brought or transacted  at	 any
meeting	 other	than  a business of which  notice  has	been
given".	 Sub-section (2) is as under:  -
"(2)  Any member of the Corporation or of a  Committee
referred  to  in sub- section (1), as the case may  be,	 may
send  or deliver to the Mukhya Nagar Adhikari notice of	 any
resolution  with a copy thereof proposed to be moved by	 him
at  any	 meeting  of  which   notice  has  been	 sent  under
sub-section  (1).  The notice shall be sent or delivered  at
least  forty-eight  hours  in the case of a meeting  of	 the
Corporation  and twenty four hours in the case of a  meeting
of  any committee before the date fixed for the meeting	 and
thereupon  the Mukhya Nagar Adhikari shall with all possible
despatch  cause	 to be circulated such resolution  to  every
member	in such manner as he may think fit.  Any  resolution
so  circulated may, unless the meeting otherwise decides, be
considered and disposed of thereat."
Under
Section 95
of the Act, the Mahapalika may	from
time  to  time	by special resolution constitute  a  special
committee  to  enquire	into  and  report  upon	 any  matter
connected  with its powers, duties or functions.  Every such
special	 committee shall conform to any instruction that may
be given to it by the Mahapalika.  The report of the special
committee  shall,  as  soon as may be practicable,  be	laid
before	the Mahapalika which may thereupon take such  action
as it thinks fit or may refer back the matter to the special
committee  for	such further investigation and report as  it
may  direct.   Section	97   provides  for  constitution  of
sub-committees	by the Executive Committee or any  committee
appointed  under  clause (e) of
Section 5
and any such	sub-
committee  shall possess such powers and perform such duties
and  functions as the committee appointing it may from	time
to time delegate or confer.
Section 105
of the Act provides
that no act done or proceeding taken under this Act shall be
called	in question in any court on the ground merely of any
defect	or  irregularity  in  procedure	 not  affecting	 the
substance.   Under
Section  119
of the	 Act  falling  under
Chapter	 V  which  prescribes  duties	and  powers  of	 the
Mahapalika  and	 its  authorities, there  is  provision	 for
delegation  of	functions  which we reproduce,	in  relevant
part, as under:	 -
"119.   Delegation of functions, - (1) Subject to	 the
other  provisions  of this Act and the rules thereunder	 and
subject	 to  such  conditions  and restrictions	 as  may  be
specified by the Corporation -
(a)  the	Corporation  may delegate to  the  Executive
Committee  or  to  the	Mukhya Nagar  Adhikari	any  of	 its
functions  under this Act other than those specified in Part
A of Schedule I."
It  is not necessary to refer to Part A of Schedule  I
mentioned  in  Section	119  as none  of  the  functions  of
Corporation   on  which	 there	is  prohibition	  has	been
delegated.   Under Section 119, reproduced above, delegation
can  only  be  to the Executive Committee or to	 the  Mukhya
Nagar  Adhikari	 and  to  no other person  or  authority  or
Committee.
Sections  421
,
422
and
423
of  the  Act	were
referred  to  contend  that it is only	for  the  Mahapalika
itself to establish private markets.  These sections fall in
Chapter	  XVI	dealing	  with	  regulation   of   markets,
slaughter-houses, certain trades and acts, etc.
Chapter  VI  of  the  Act
deals	 with  property	 and
contracts.   Under  Section  125 falling  in  this  Chapter,
Mahapalika  has	 power	to  acquire,  hold  and	 dispose  of
property  or any interest therein whether within or  without
the  limits  of the city.  Under sub-section (3) of  Section
125  any immovable property which may be transferred to	 the
Corporation  by the Government shall be held by it,  subject
to such conditions including resumption by the Government on
the occurrence of a specified contingency and shall apply to
such  purpose as the Government may impose or specify  while
making	the  transfer.	Section 128 deals with power of	 the
Mahapalika  to dispose of the property.	 As to what are	 the
provisions   governing	disposal  of   property	 these	 are
mentioned in Section 129.  Sections 128 and 129, in relevant
part, are as under:  -
"128.   Power  to	 dispose  of property.	 -  (1)	 The
Corporation  shall, for the purpose of this Act, and subject
to  the	 provisions thereof and rules made thereunder,	have
power to sell, let on hire, lease, exchange, mortgage, grant
or otherwise dispose of any property or any interest therein
acquired by or vested in the Corporation under this Act.
Provided	 that  no  property   transferred   to	 the
Corporation  by	 the Government shall be sold, let on  hire,
exchange  or  mortgaged or otherwise conveyed in any  manner
contrary  to the terms of the transfer except with the prior
sanction of the State Government.
129.   Provision	governing disposal of  property.   -
With  respect  to the disposal of property belonging to	 the
Corporation  the  following  provisions shall  have  effect,
namely:
(1)  Every  disposal  of	property  belonging  to	 the
Corporation  shall  be made by the Mukhya Nagar Adhikari  on
behalf of the Corporation.
(2) XXX XXX XXX

      (3) The Mukhya Nagar Adhikari may with the sanction of
the  Executive Committee dispose of by sale, letting out  on
hire  or  otherwise  any movable property belonging  to	 the
Corporation,  of  which	 the  value  does  not	exceed	five
thousand  rupees;   and may with the like sanction  grant  a
lease	of   any  immovable   property	belonging   to	 the
Corporation,  including any such right as aforesaid, for any
period	exceeding  one	year  or sell or grant	a  lease  in
perpetuity  of	any  immovable	property  belonging  to	 the
Corporation  the  value of premium whereof does	 not  exceed
fifty  thousand rupees or the annual rental whereof does not
exceed three thousand rupees.
(4) the Mukhya Nagar Adhikari may with the sanction of
the  Corporation  lease, sell, let out on hire or  otherwise
convey	any property, movable or immovable, belonging to the
Corporation.
(5) xxx xxx xxx

      (6)  the sanction of the Executive Committee or of the
Corporation  under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) may be
given either generally or any in class of cases or specially
in any particular case.
(7)  the aforesaid provisions of this section and	 the
provisions  of	the rules shall apply to every	disposal  of
property  belonging to the Corporation made under or for any
purposes of this Act."
Sections 131, 132 (in relevant part) and 133 prescribe
the  manner of execution of Contract and these are as under:
-
"131.    Powers  of  Corporation	to  the	 making	  of
contracts.     Subject to the provisions of this  Act,	the
Corporation  shall have power to enter into contracts  which
may  be necessary or expedient under or for any purposes  of
this Act.
"132.  Certain provisions relating to the execution of
the  contracts.	  (1) All contracts referred to in  Section
131  including	contracts  relating to the  acquisition	 and
disposal  of immovable property or any interest therein made
in connection with the affairs of the Corporation under this
Act, shall be expressed to be made, for and on behalf of the
Corporation,  and  all such contracts and all assurances  of
property  made in exercise of that power shall be  executed,
for  and  on behalf of the Corporation, by the Mukhya  Nagar
Adhikari  or by such other officer of the Corporation as may
be authorised in writing by the Mukhya Nagar Adhikari either
generally or for any particular case or class of cases.
(2) ............
(3) ............
(4)  No  contract involving an  expenditure  exceeding
five  lakh  rupees  shall be made by Mukhya  Nagar  Adhikari
unless it has been sanctioned by the Corporation."
"133.   Manner  of  execution.  - (1)  Every  contract
entered	 into by the Mukhya Nagar Adhikari on behalf of	 the
Corporation shall be entered into in such manner and form as
would  bind him if it were made on his own behalf and may in
like manner and form be varied or discharged :
Provided that :  -
(a)  the	common	seal  of the  Corporation  shall  be
affixed	 to  every contract which, if made  between  private
persons, would require to be under seal, and
(b)  every  contract for the execution of any work  or
the  supply of any materials or goods which will involve  an
expenditure  exceeding two thousand and five hundred  rupees
shall  be  in writing, shall be sealed with the seal of	 the
Corporation and shall specify-
(i)  the work to be done or the materials or goods  to
be supplied as the case may be;
(ii)  the price to be paid for such work, materials or
goods;	and
(iii)the	time  or times within which the contract  or
specified portion thereof shall be carried out.
(2) The common seal of the Corporation shall remain in
the  custody  of the Mukhya Nagar Adhikari and shall not  be
affixed	 to  any contract or other instrument except in	 the
presence  of  a Sabhasad, who shall attach his signature  to
the contract or instrument in token that the same was sealed
in his presence.
(3)  The	signature  of  the said	 Sabhasad  shall  be
distinct  from the signature of any witness to the execution
of such contract or instrument.
(4) No contract executed otherwise than as provided in
the section shall be binding on the Corporation."
Relevant	part of Section 136 on which some  arguments
addressed, is reproduced hereunder:  -
"136.  Estimates exceeding rupees fifty thousand - (1)
Where  a project is framed for the execution of any work  or
series	of works the entire estimated cost of which  exceeds
fifty thousand rupees-
(a)  the Mukhya Nagar Adhikari shall cause a  detailed
report	to be prepared including such estimates and drawings
as  may	 be requisite and forward the same to the  Executive
Committee  who	shall submit the same before the  Mahapalika
with its suggestions, if any;
(b)  the Mahapalika shall consider the report and	 the
suggestions  and  may reject the project or may	 approve  it
either in its entirety or subject to modifications."
(By  the amending Act 12 of 1994 w.e.f.  30.5.1994 the
amounts	 in sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 136 are	 now
respectively 5 lakhs and 10 lakhs of rupees.)


      Part  IX	of  the	 Constitution was  inserted  by	 the
Constitution (74th) Amendment Act, 1992.
Article 243W
under
this   part   prescribes  the	 powers,   authorities	 and
responsibilities  of  Municipalities etc.  It  provides,  in
relevant  part, that the legislature of a State may, by law,
endow  the  Committee  or the Municipality such	 powers	 and
authority  with respect to performance of functions and	 the
implementation	of  schemes  as	 may   be  entrusted  to  it
including  those matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule.  If
we refer to the Twelfth Schedule, Entries 8, 12 and 17 would
be relevant and are as under:  -
"8.  Urban forestry, protection of the environment and
promotion of ecological aspects.
12.   Provision of urban amenities and facilities such
as parks, gardens, play-grounds.
17.   Public  amenities	including  street  lighting,
parking lots, bus stops and public conveniences."
Keeping  this aspect in view, the Act was amended	 and
some  of  the  relevant	 duties	 of  Mahapalika,  which	 are
obligatory as given in Section 114, are as under:
"114.Obligatory  duties of the Corporation.- It  shall
be  incumbent  on  the Corporation to  make  reasonable	 and
adequate  provision,  by any means or measures which  it  is
lawfully  competent to it to use or to take, for each of the
following matters, namely:  -
(viii)  guarding	from pollution water used for  human
consumption  and  preventing  polluted water from  being  so
used;
(ix)  the	 lighting  of  public  streets,	 Corporation
markets	 and public buildings and other public places vested
in the Corporation;
(ix-a)  the  construction and maintenance	 of  parking
lots, bus stops and public conveniences;
(xxx) planting and maintaining trees on road sides and
other public places.
(xxxiii-a)  promoting  urban forestry  and  ecological
aspects and protection of the environment;
(xli) providing urban amenities and facilities such as
parks, gardens and play-grounds."
The Development Act is in force and it is not disputed
that  whole  of	 the city of Lucknow has  been	declared  as
development  area  within the meaning of
Section 3
of	this
Act.  "Development" is defined in clause (e) of
Section 2
of
the Act and it is as under:-
"(e)  "development", with its grammatical	 variations,
means  the carrying out of building, engineering, mining  or
other  operations in, on, over or under land, or the  making
of any material change in any building or land, and includes
re-development."
Lucknow	Development   Authority	  (LDA)	  has	been
constituted under Section 4 of the Development Act.  Chapter
III  of	 the  Development Act provides	for  preparation  of
Master	Plan and zonal development plan for the	 development
area.
Section 13
provides for the procedure for  amendment
of  the	 Master Plan or zonal development plan.
Section  14
provides  for  development of land in development  area	 and
this section is as under:-
"14.   Development  of land in the developed area.   -
(1)  After  the declaration of any area as development	area
under
Section 3
, no development of land shall be undertaken
or  carried  out or continued in that area by any person  or
body   (including  a  department   of	Government)   unless
permission for such development has been obtained in writing
from  the Vice-Chairman in accordance with the provisions of
this Act.
(2)  After  the  coming into operation of any  of	 the
plans  in  any	development  area no  development  shall  be
undertaken  or carried out or continued in that area  unless
such development is also in accordance with such plans.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections
(1)  and  (2),	the  following	provisions  shall  apply  in
relation  to  development of land by any department  of	 any
State  Government  or  the Central Government or  any  local
authority --
(a)  when	 any  such  department	or  local  authority
intends to carry out any development of land it shall inform
the  Vice  Chairman  in writing of its intention to  do	 so,
giving	full  particulars thereof, including any  plans	 and
documents,   at	 least	30   days  before  undertaking	such
development;
(b)  in  the  case  of  a	 department  of	 any   State
Government  or the Central Government, if the  Vice-Chairman
has  no	 objection it should inform such department  of	 the
same within three weeks from the date of receipt by it under
clause	(a)  of the department's intention, and if the	Vice
Chairman  does not make any objection within the said period
the  department	 shall	be free to carry  out  the  proposed
development;
(c)  where  the Vice Chairman raises any objection  to
the  proposed development on the ground that the development
is  not	 in  conformity	 with	any  Master  Plan  or  zonal
development  plan prepared or intended to be prepared by it,
or  on	any  other  ground, such  department  or  the  local
authority, as the case may be, shall -
(i)  either  make	 necessary   modifications  in	 the
proposal  for  development to meet the objections raised  by
the Vice- Chairman;  or
(ii)  submit  the proposals for  development  together
with  the  objections  raised by the Vice- Chairman  to	 the
State Government for decision under clause (d);
(d)  the State Government, on receipt of proposals for
development  together  with  the  objections  of  the  Vice-
Chairman,  may either approve the proposals with or  without
modifications	or  direct  the	  department  or  the  local
authority, as the case may be, to make such modifications as
proposed  by  the Government and the decision of  the  State
Government shall be final;
(e)  the	development  of any land begun by  any	such
department or subject to the provisions of
Section 59
by any
such  local authority before the declaration referred to  in
sub-  section  (1)  may be completed by that  department  or
local  authority  with	compliance with the  requirement  of
sub-sections (1) and (2)."
The  Development	Act  also   contains  provision	 for
penalties  and power of the LDA to demolish buildings and to
stop  development in case of contravention of the provisions
of this Act.  When the Development Act is in operation, then
under
Section 59
of this Act, certain functions of the U.P.
Municipal  Corporation Adhiniyam, 1959 become inoperative so
far as these are relevant for the purpose :
"59.    Repeal  etc.,  and   Savings.   -	 (1)(a)	 The
operation  of  clause (c) of
Section 5
,
Sections 54
,
55
and
56
,  clause  (xxxiii)  of Section 114, sub- section  (3)  of
Section	 117,  clause  (c)  of sub-section  (1)	 of  Section
119..."
The  provisions  of the U.P.  Regulation of  Buildings
Operation  Act,	 1958 also become inoperative by  virtue  of
Section 59 of the Development Act.
The Parks Act provides for preservation and regulation
of parks, play-grounds and open spaces in the State of Uttar
Pradesh.  The Parks Act applies to an area included in every
Nagar  Mahapalika  under the Uttar Pradesh Nagar  Mahapalika
Adhiniyam, 1959.  It is not disputed that this Act is now in
force  (w.e.f.	February 1, 1995).  Park has been defined in
clause	(b) of
Section 2
of the Act to mean a piece of	land
on  which  there are no buildings or of which not more	than
one-twentieth  part is covered with buildings, and the whole
or  the	 remainder  of which is laid out as  a	garden	with
trees, plants or flower-beds or as a lawn or as a meadow and
maintained  as	a  place for the resort of  the	 public	 for
recreation,  air or light.
The Act
provides for maintenance
of parks and prohibits construction of building, except with
the  previous sanction of the concerned authority, which  is
likely to affect the utility of the park.
As  to  how the impugned agreement dated	November  4,
1993  came  to	be executed between the Mahapalika  and	 the
builder	 we now consider the proceedings of the	 Mahapalika,
the  Executive	Committee and its sub- committee called	 the
High Power Committee.
On  July 6, 1993 notice was issued for meeting of	 the
Mahapalika for July 12, 1993 with following agenda:
"1.Discussions on the accepted proposals passed by the
Executive Committee on 27.5.1993, and 27.6.1993.
2.  Discussions on the various proposals.
3.   Other  subjects,  subject to	 the  permission  of
Presiding Officer."
There  were  no details regarding agenda item No.	  3,
which,	it  is said, pertained to Palika Bazaar,  i.e.,	 the
underground  shopping  complex.	  On   that  day   following
resolution  constituting  the  High   Power  Committee	 for
disposal  of  the  properties of the Mahapalika	 was  passed
under aforesaid agenda item No.3:-
"The  full  details, maps, conditions of allotment  in
respect	 of  Shri Rafi Ahmad Kidwai Nagar Yojna	 and  Rajaji
Puram Vistar Yojna may be prepared at the earliest.  And for
this   act  a  committee  may	be  constituted	 under	 the
chairmanship  of  the  Nagar Pramukh in	 which	two  Honble
Sabhasad  and  three officers be appointed.  For  nominating
the  members,  the  Nagar Pramukh may  be  authorised.	 The
powers	of  disposing  of  the entire  land,  allotment	 and
transfer  in respect of both the schemes shall be vested  in
the above committee.
It  was  also decided that the  Committee	 constituted
under  the Chairmanship of the Nagar Pramukh shall have	 the
rights	of  disposing  of  all	the  properties,  allotment,
transfer  etc.	 situated  within the limits  of  the  Nagar
Mahapalika  and the above committee shall have the right  to
give  the  final  shape to the conditions of  allotment	 and
agreement  etc.	  In  this  manner  this  sub  Committee  is
authorised  to	exercise  the aforementioned rights  of	 the
Mahapalika  conditions	of allotment and agreement etc.	  In
this manner this Sub Committee is authorised to exercise the
aforementioned rights of the Mahapalika."
Meeting  of  the High Power Committee  so	 constituted
under  the aforesaid resolution of the Mahapalika, was	held
on  October 13, 1993 and was adjourned to October 19,  1993.
In  the meeting of the High Power Committee held on  October
19,  1993, presided over by Mr.	 Akhilesh Das, Nagar Pramukh
as  Chairman, there is discussion regarding construction  of
the  underground  air conditioned Palika Bazar	at  Aminabad
Jhandewala  Park on the lines of Palika Bazar in New  Delhi.
It  was recorded that the Vice-Chairman, Lucknow Development
Authority  by his letter No.279/Architect dated October	 16,
1993  intimated that as per the Master Plan, the land use of
the  Aminabad, Jhandewala park is commercial.  The draft  of
the  contract to be entered into between the Mahapalika	 and
the  MI	 Builders was approved.	 The minutes ended with	 the
recording  as  under:	"Amended  and  final  draft  of	 the
contract  was  read by the Advocate before the Committee  on
this,  the  opinion  of	 the members was asked	for  by	 the
Chairman  on  which all the members were unanimous that	 all
the  members  after  discussing	 over  the  suggestions	 and
conditions  set	 out  by the Mahapalika Advocate  took	this
decision  that	the prescribed project may got	executed  by
M.I.   Builders	 Pvt.  Ltd.  And the Mukhya  Nagar  Adhikari
should	be  authorised	for conducting all  the	 forthcoming
actions and formalities.
The  Honble  Chairman also directed that	the  entire
proceedings  may be presented for information in the meeting
of the Executive Committee dated 20.10.93 and meeting of the
Mahapalika house held on 21.10.93.
Sd/-  Sd/-  B.K.	 Singh yadav Sushil  Dubey  Sabhasad
Member.	 Mukhya Nagar Adhikari Member.
Sd/-  G.C.   Goyal  Architect Sd/-D.K.   Doal,  Member
Member, UP Nagar Adhikari.
Sd/-  Akhilesh  Dass Sd/- Laxmi Narain  Nagar  Pramukh
Sabhasad, Chairman of the Committee Member."
In  view of the directions of the High Power Committee
the  matter  was  placed before the Executive  Committee  on
October 20, 1993 which passed the following resolution:	 -
"Resolution No.  (85) As per the decision taken in the
meeting	 dated	12.7.1993 of the Mahapalika, Sub-  Committee
constituted  under  the	 Chairmanship of the  Honble  Nagar
Pramukh was entrusted with the powers of developing, leasing
and  to	 transfer the immovable property of the	 Mahapalika.
In  exercise of these powers, the Sub- Committee, keeping in
view  the  grave  problem  of encroachment  and	 parking  in
Aminabad  Submitted  the  proposal of  the  Honble  Members
namely	Sh.   Kalraj Mishra (President Bhartiya Janta  Party
U.P.)	and  Shri  Ejaj	 Rijvi,	  Ex.	Minister   for	 the
construction  of an Air Conditioned Palika Bazar and parking
place  in the Jandewala park (Aminabad Park) on the  pattern
of  the	 Delhi	Bazar, with a parking place for	 about	1000
vehicles  through M/s.	M.I.  Builders Pvt.  Ltd.  Presented
before	the  Executive Committee for information  which	 was
welcomed by all and the proposal was approved."
Thereafter,  the	matter came to be placed before	 the
Mahapalika  in	its meeting dated October 21, 1993  and	 the
following minutes were recorded:  -
"In view of the decision taken by the General House of
Mahapalika   dated   12.07.93,	a  subcommittee	 under	 the
Chairmanship  of Mayor was entrusted to transfer, to develop
and  to give on lease of immovable properties of Mahapalika.
In  exercise of these powers, the Sub-Committee, keeping  in
view  the  grave  problem  of encroachment  and	 parking  in
Aminabad  submitted  the  proposal  of	Sh.   Kalraj   Misra
(President)  Bhartiya Janta Party U.P.	and Sh.	 Eagaz Risvi
(Ex-Minister)  for construction of an air-conditioned Palika
Bazar  and parking place in the Jhandewala Park (Aminuddaula
Park) on the pattern of Delhi (Air-conditioned) Palika Bazar
and  a	parking	 in which there should be  a  provision	 for
parking	 of about 1000 vehicles through M.I.  Builders	Pvt.
Ltd.   presented before the House for information which	 was
welcomed and a unanimous resolution was passed and the Nagar
Pramukh was congratulated for this important work."
It  will	be  advantageous to reproduce  the  impugned
agreement  dated November 4, 1993, which is executed between
the Mahapalika and the builder:	 -
"WHEREAS,	 the party No.1 is an absolute owner of	 the
plot  of  land	situated  at  Aminabad	popularly  known  as
Jhandewala Park measuring about 2,45,000 sq.ft.	 and bounded
as below :
NORTH Chhedilal Dharamshala Road

      SOUTH Ganga Prasad Road

      EAST Road locating Central Bank of India

      WEST Road locating Hyder Husain building.
More specifically mentioned in the site- plan attached
herewith.
WHEREAS,	the  party No.1 is a body constituted  under
the  UP	 Nagar Mahapalika Adhiniyam (Act II 1959),  managing
the parks, roads street lights and other such maintenance of
amenities in the city.
WHEREAS,	owing  to high increase in urban  population
(according to 1991 Census, Lucknow Urban agglomeration has a
population  of 16,69,204) because of the migratory character
of  Rural  Population to Urban Areas which is too  congested
due  to overflow of population, the city is also being faced
overwhelmingly	with  day  to day  problem  of	encroachment
causing	 much  of  acrimony  perpetrating  high	 guilts	 and
discrete errors.
WHEREAS,	the  party No.1 remained ever  conscious  to
keep  the  city	 hygienically sound free  from	all  adverse
effects	 but  the problem of encroachment is no less than  a
headache  for the Lucknow Nagar Mahapalika which has emerged
like  a	 growing nightmare and becoming unmanageable by	 the
Lucknow	 Nagar	Mahapalika owing to its limited	 and  scanty
resources  and flow of supplementary income.  The  eagerness
of Nagar Mahapalika to maintain proper road, construction of
new  roads  with street lighting and the cleanliness  derive
during	monsoon for removing sand and silt from the  nallahs
is too often inadequately met by the Local Bodies Department
of  the	 Government  as	 the Schedule  of  New	Demands	 for
providing  requisite funds are not available timely as	well
as  sufficiently.   This is one of the major  hindrances  in
keeping	 the functioning of the Lucknow Nagar Mahapalika  at
low ebb.
WHEREAS,	considering  the  above	 points	 M/s.	M.I.
Builders   Private  Limited  had   prepared  a	viable	 and
constructive  proposal	keeping	 in  view  the	interest  of
Lucknow	 Nagar Mahapalika in all respects and, the same	 was
submitted   to	 Lucknow  Nagar	  Mahapalika  as  it   dealt
exhaustively  the  benefits that will be oriented after	 its
implementation to the Lucknow Nagar Mahapalika as well as to
the  Lucknow Populace.	The proposal was found beneficial to
the  Nagar  Mahapalika	Lucknow as well as  to	the  general
public.	 The proposal which will be known as PALIKA BAZAR if
given  affect  will be a source of control over the  traffic
and will reduce the congestion in the vicinity.
WHEREAS,	the  aforesaid proposal was accepted by	 the
Lucknow	 Nagar Mahapalika in its Meeting thereby procuring a
No  Objection  Certificate  from   the	Lucknow	 Development
authority  under  Section 14 of Urban Building Planning	 and
Development  Act, 1973 for constructing the PALIKA BAZAR  on
the land mentioned above 279/vastuvid dated 16.10.1993.
NOW this agreement witnesseth as under :-
1.   That	 party no.2 shall construct the said  PALIKA
BAZAR according to the plan (attached herewith) with respect
to which No Objection Certificate has been obtained by party
no.1 from the prescribed authority.
2.   That	 the  PALIKA BAZAR shall be  constructed  by
party  no.2 at his own cost and party no.2 shall be entitled
to  realise the cost of construction with reasonable  profit
which in any case shall not be more than 10% with respect to
each shop as may fixed by party no.2 in lieu of construction
and  when the project of Palika Bazar is completed and	cost
of  construction has been realised the PALIKA BAZAR  shall
be handed over to the Lucknow Nagar Mahapalika as its owner.
3.    That   the	party	no.2  shall   also   provide
air-conditioning  facility  in the PALIKA BAZAR at  his	 own
cost   as  well	 as  the   installation	 of  the  plant	 and
construction of the infrastructure in this regard.
4.   That	 the party no.2 shall have the right to	 fix
the  amount  of cost of construction while the rent  of	 the
shops  shall be at the rate of Rs.2.50 p.  only per sq.	 ft.
and  50	 p.  will be charged as lease rent as 1/5th  of	 the
rent  of covered area and Rs.300/- per shop for	 maintenance
subject	 to  enhancement  of  the  air	Conditioning  plant,
maintenance of the complex as well as the electric charges.
5.   That party no.2 shall be at liberty to lease	 out
the shops as per its own terms and conditions to the persons
of  their  choice  on behalf of party no.1  which  shall  be
binding	 on  party no.1 but the conditions as  mentioned  in
para  4 as aforesaid in this agreement regarding rent  shall
remain in force.
6.   That the party no.2 shall also have the right  to
sign  the agreement if necessary on behalf of party no.1  as
person	authorised by party no.1 on the terms and conditions
which the party no.2 may deem fit and proper and the copy of
the  agreement	shall  be  given to  party  no.1  after	 its
execution  and	the terms of the deed shall be binding	upon
both  the  parties  of	this deed provided  the	 party	no.2
executes  only that much of agreement which number of  shops
are  available	in  Palika Bazar and in any case  shall	 not
exceed	the same but the rent of the shops shall remain	 the
same as mentioned above.
7.   That the construction of PALIKA BAZAR shall start
within	three  months from the date of registration of	this
agreement  and,	 shall be completed within three years	from
the date of its start.
8.   That party no.2 shall have the right to publicise
the  project  and take advances from the buyers and to	give
them proper allotment receipts.
9.  That party no.1 shall co-operate in all manners in
the  constructional work activities of party no.2 and  shall
extend	all its co-operation and help as and when needed  by
party no.2 from time to time.
10.   That the party no.1 shall be responsible to help
and  assist  party no.2 in completing the project and  party
no.1  shall also be exclusively responsible for getting	 the
electric   sewer  and  water   connection   from   concerned
department for the above project at the cost of party no.2.
11.   That  party	 no.1 shall help the party  no.2  in
getting	 the Project completed and meeting all the needs and
requirements in completing the project.
12.   That  in case there is in any  obstruction	from
Mahapalika  or	legal  proceedings  resulting  in  the	non-
completion  or	carrying out the constructional work of	 the
project	 resulting  in	the non-completion stoppage  of	 the
work, the party no.1 shall be responsible for all the losses
and damages that may accrue to party no.2.
13.   That  party	 no.2 shall not allot the  5%  shops
before	completion  of	parking and other  services  of	 the
complex to ensure the proper compliance of the agreement and
further ensure the quality of construction.
14.   That party no.2 shall give the bank guarantee of
Rs.25,00,000/-	(Rs.  twenty five lacs) for its	 performance
within	3  months  from	 the date of  registration  of	this
agreement  but	this  clause  is subject  to  all  necessary
co-operation of party no.1.
15.   That party no.1 shall charge Rs.5,000/- per shop
for every second and subsequent transfer of the shops.
16.   That  after	 the completion of the	project	 the
party  no.2 shall hand over the entire documents in original
to the party no.1 for keeping the final records.
17.   That  in  case of any  disputes  or	 differences
arising	 out  of  the  project between the  parties  to	 the
agreement, the same shall be referred for arbitration to the
mutually  appointed arbitrator who shall in all cases be the
retired	 justice of Honble High Court or its equivalent and
his award shall be binding upon both the parties.
18.  That the agreement between the party no.2 and the
shop  keeper shall be duly approved by the Nagar  Mahapalika
Lucknow and the party no.2 has made that agreement available
to  the party no.1 and the party no.1 has approved the	said
agreement.
19.   That  all the legal expenses in  executing	this
agreement shall be borne only by the party no.2.
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,  the parties of this  deed	have
signed	the  deed on the day and the year  mentioned  herein
below  in presence of the following witnesses and the  terms
of  this  agreement shall be binding upon the  legal  heirs,
successors,  assignees	and   legal  representatives.	Sd/-
Lucknow	 :   dated  Party No.1 November 4, 1993.   For	M.I.
Builders Pvt.  Ltd.
WITNESSES Sd/- Managing Director Party No.  2 1.	Sd/-
Drafted	 by:  Sd/- 2.  Sd/- (Arvind Razdan) Advocate.  Civil
Court, Lucknow"
Mr.   Soli Sorabjee, learned counsel for the  builder,
submitted that the agreement was not against public interest
and  could not have been revoked by the Mahapalika.  He said
the  petitioners in the writ petitions did not bring forward
any contractor who could say that he was more competent than
M.I.   Builders	 to execute the job and at a cost less	than
that  to be incurred by M.I.  Builders.	 He said case of the
builder	 was  covered  by a judgment of this Court  in	M/s.
Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy and others vs.  State of Jammu and
Kashmir	 and  another
(1980 (4) SCC 1).  In this  case	 the
State  of J & K awarded a contract to the second  respondent
for tapping of 10 to 12 lakhs blazes annually for extraction
of resin from the inaccessible chir forests in the State for
a  period  of  10 years.  This was in  accordance  with	 the
policy of the State Government and it was agreed upon that a
part  of resin so extracted would be delivered to the  State
for  running the State-owned industry and the rest would  be
retained  by  the  second respondent  for  establishing	 and
running	 its  own factory in the State.	 The petitioners  in
the writ petition assailed the order of the State Government
on the following main three grounds:-
"(A) That the order is arbitrary, mala fide and not in
public	interest,  inasmuch  as	 a  huge  benefit  has	been
conferred on the 2nd respondents at the cost of the State.
(B)  The	order creates monopoly in favour of the	 2nd
respondents   who  are	a   private  party  and	 constitutes
unreasonable  restriction on the right of the petitioners to
carry on tapping contract business under
Article 19(1)(g)
of
the Constitution.
(C)  The State has acted arbitrarily in selecting	 the
2nd  respondents  for  awarding	 tapping  contract,  without
affording   any	 opportunity  to   others  to  complete	 for
obtaining  such contract and this action of the State is not
based  on  any	rational  or   relevant	 principle  and	 is,
therefore,  violative  of
Article 14
of the Constitution  as
also  of  the  rule  of administrative	law  which  inhibits
arbitrary action by the State."
This  Court,  after examining the whole facts  of	 the
case  and  applying  the parameters laid in
Ramana  Dayaram
Shetty	vs.  International Airport Authority of India
(1979
(3)  SCC  489)	negatived  all	 the  pleas  raised  by	 the
petitioners.
Referring  to  its   earlier   decision	  in
International Airport Authority of India
case this Court had
observed that there are two limitations imposed by law which
structure  and	control the discretion of the Government  in
giving	largess.   The	first is in regard to the  terms  on
which  largess may be granted and the other in regard to the
persons	 who  may be recipients of such largess.   Then	 the
Court said as under:  -
"So far as the first limitation is concerned, it flows
directly  from the thesis that, unlike a private individual,
the  State cannot act as it pleases in the matter of  giving
largess.   Though  ordinarily a private individual would  be
guided by economic considerations of self-gain in any action
taken  by him, it is always open to him under the law to act
contrary  to  his  self-interest  or to	 oblige	 another  in
entering  into a contract or dealing with his property.	 But
the  government	 is not free to act as it likes in  granting
largess	 such  as awarding a contract or selling or  leasing
out  its property.  Whatever be its activity, the government
is  still  the	government  and is,  subject  to  restraints
inherent  in  its  position in a  democratic  society.	 The
constitutional	power conferred on the government cannot  be
exercised  by  it  arbitrarily	or  capriciously  or  in  an
unprincipled  manner;  it has to be exercised for the public
good.  Every activity of the government has a public element
in  it	and it must therefore, be informed with	 reason	 and
guided	by  public  interest.	Every action  taken  by	 the
government  must  be  in public	 interest;   the  government
cannot	act  arbitrarily and without reason and if it  does,
its  action  would  be	liable to be  invalidated.   If	 the
government  awards  a  contract or leases out  or  otherwise
deals  with  its  property or grants any other	largess,  it
would  be  liable  to  be tested for  its  validity  on	 the
touchstone  of reasonableness and public interest and if  it
fails  to satisfy either test, it would be  unconstitutional
and invalid."
The Court said that the State of J & K, in view of its
policy	of industrialization, was interested in the  setting
up  of	the factory by the second respondents,	particularly
since	the  second  respondents   had	two  factories	 for
manufacture  of resin, turpentine oil and other	 derivatives
and  they  possessed large experience in the  processing  of
resin  and  reprocessing of resin, turpentine oil and  other
derivatives.   The  Court  considered	the  nature  of	 the
contract  and observed that it was obvious that, in view  of
the  policy  of	 the  State Government, no  resin  would  be
auctioned in the open market and in this situation, it would
be  totally irrelevant to import the concept of market price
with reference to which the adequacy of the price charged by
the State to the second respondents could be judged.  If the
State  were  simply selling resin, there could be  no  doubt
that  the  State must endeavour to obtain the highest  price
subject,  of course, to any other overriding  considerations
of  public interest and in that event, its action in  giving
resin  to  a private individual at a lesser price  would  be
arbitrary  and contrary to public interest.  But, where	 the
State  has, as a matter of policy, stopped selling resin  to
outsiders  and decided to allot it only to industries set up
within	 the   State   for   the  purpose   of	 encouraging
industrialization,  there  could be no scope  for  complaint
that  the State was giving resin at a lesser price than that
which  could be obtained in the open market.  The  yardstick
of price in the open market would be wholly inept because in
view  of the State policy, there would be no question of any
resin being sold in the open market.
After  examining	this  judgment it  is  difficult  to
appreciate  the	 argument  of Mr.  Sorabjee as	to  how	 the
principles  laid  in  this  case can be	 applicable  to	 the
present case.
To  substantiate his argument that there was "estoppel
by  pleading" against the Mahapalika Mr.  Sorabjee  referred
to  the	 stand	of  the	  Mahapalika  as  reflected  in	 the
proceedings  before the High Court as well as in this Court.
It  was also pointed out that in the counter affidavit filed
by  the State Government in the High Court it supported	 the
builder.   There  was  no  disposal  of	 property  by  the
Mahapalika  within  the meaning of
Section 128
of  the	Act.
Resolution  of	Mahapalika to enter into the agreement	with
the  builder  was  validly  passed.   The  project  was	 the
brainchild  of	M.I.   Builders	 and   the  nature  of	 the
transaction was such that it was unconventional and there is
no  universal  rule  that tender be invited in	every  case.
There  was  no	secrecy.  Everything was done  in  open	 and
discussed  freely at various stages.  In the affidavit dated
January 8, 1994 of Mr.	B.K.  Singh, Chief Executive Officer
of  the Mahapalika filed in the High Court he had  explained
why  it was necessary to have the project executed in  order
to  avoid  congestion in Aminabad commercial area.   In	 the
affidavit  dated  October  19,	1995 of	 Mr.   T.K.   Doval,
Upnagar	 Adhikari which was filed in answer to IAs 10-12/95,
complaining  breach of this Court's order dated December 14,
1994, again the earlier stand of Mahapalika was re-affirmed.
Mr.   Sorabjee	criticised the action of the  Mahapalika  in
withdrawing its appeals in this Court on February 6, 1997 on
mere  mentioning in the Court.
He said plan, which had been
sanctioned  by	order  dated January 23, 1995,	was  revoked
illegally  on  April  17,  1997 without any  notice  to	 the
builder.   There  is, however, resolution of the  Mahapalika
dated August 6, 1996 filed by Mr.  S.K.	 Gupta, Mukhya Nagar
Adhikari  of the Mahapalika opposing the present appeals  by
the  builder.	Mahapalika  took a summersault	and  gave  a
complete  go- bye to its earlier stand.	 That there could be
estoppel  by  pleadings reference was made to a decision  of
this  Court in Union of India vs.  M/s Indo-Afghan  Agencies
Ltd.   (1968 (2) SCR 366) approving the earlier decision  of
the Calcutta High Court in
The Ganges Manufacturing Co.	 vs.
Sourujmull  and others
(1880 ILR Calcutta 669 at 678).	 Mr.
Sorabjee  said a party could not change its stand even if it
was legally wrong in its earlier stand as otherwise it could
be a negation of everything.
In  the
Ganges Manufacturing Co.	 vs.   Sourujmull  &
Ors.
[(1880)	5  ILR	Cal 669] a  Division  Bench  of	 the
Calcutta  High	Court held that "a man may be  estopped	 not
only from giving particular evidence, but from doing any act
or relying upon any particular argument or contention, which
the  rules  of equity and good conscience prevent  him	from
using as against his opponent".
In  Union	 of India and others vs.  M/s.	 Indo-Afghan
Agencies Ltd.  [(1968) 2 SCR 366] in a certain scheme called
the  Export Promotion Scheme incentives were provided to the
exporters  for	woolen goods.  M/s.  Indo-  Afghan  Agencies
Ltd.   Exported woolen goods to Afghanistan of F.O.B.  value
of  over Rs.5 crores.  The Deputy Director in the office  of
the  Textile Commissioner, Bombay, issued to them an  Import
Entitlement  Certificate  for about Rs.2 crores only.	When
the  representations  made  to the Government for  grant  of
Import	Entitlement  Certificate for full F.O.B.  value,  it
produced  no response and writ petition under
Article 226
of
the  Constitution  was filed in the High Court.	 High  Court
allowed	 the writ petition.  In the appeal filed by Union of
India  to this Court various contentions were raised.	This
Court said:  -
"Under  our jurisprudence the Government is not exempt
from liability to carry out the representation made by it as
to  its	 future conduct and it cannot on some undefined	 and
undisclosed  ground of necessity or expediency fail to carry
out  the  promise solemnly made by it, nor claim to  be	 the
judge  of  its own obligation to the citizen on an ex  parte
appraisement  of  the circumstances in which the  obligation
has arisen."
And further:  -
"The  defence  of executive necessity was	 not  relied
upon in the present case in the affidavit filed on behalf of
the  Union  of	India.	 It was also not  pleaded  that	 the
representation	in the Scheme was subject to an implied term
that  the  Union  of India will not be bound  to  grant	 the
import	certificate for the full value of the goods exported
if  they  deem it inexpedient to grant the certificate.	  We
are  unable  to accede to the contention that the  executive
necessity  releases the Government from honouring its solemn
promises  relying  on  which citizens have  acted  to  their
detriment.  Under our constitutional set-up no person may be
deprived of his right or liberty except in due course of and
by  authority of law:  if a member of the executive seeks to
deprive	 a citizen of his right or liberty otherwise than in
exercise  of power derived from the law -- common or statute
-- the Courts will be competent to and indeed would be bound
to, protect the rights of the aggrieved citizen."
It was also held:	 -
"We  hold	 that  the  claim   of	the  respondents  is
appropriately  founded upon the equity which arises in their
favour	as a result of the representation made on behalf  of
the  Union of India in the Export Promotion Scheme, and	 the
action	 taken	 by  the   respondents	acting	 upon	that
representation	under  the belief that the Government  would
carry  out  the	 representation made by it.   On  the  facts
proved in this case, no ground has been suggested before the
Court  for exempting the Government from the equity  arising
out  of	 the acts done by the exporters to  their  prejudice
relying upon the representation."
Mr.   Sorabjee then referred to
Section 128
of the Act
and  to	 the  expression  "disposal" and  also	to
Sections
129(4)
,
131
and
132
of the Act.  According to him there was
no  disposal of any property and no interest in the land had
been  transferred by the Mahapalika to the builder.  In this
connection  reference  was  made  to  the  agreement   dated
November  4,  1993.  Reference was also made to the  counter
affidavit  filed  earlier by Mr.  B.K.	Singh, Mukhya  Nagar
Adhikari,  wherein he had stated that the property vested in
Mahapalika and that there was no disposal or transfer of any
interest  in  the  property to the builder.  As to  what  is
meant  by the expression "disposed of" reference was made to
another	 decision  of this Court in Deputy  Commissioner  of
Sales  Tax  (Law), Board of Revenue (Taxes),  Ernakulam	 vs.
M/s.   Thomas  Stephen and Co.	Ltd.  (1988 (2) SCC  264  at
266).	This  judgment was of course in context of  sale  of
goods.	 Reference  was also made to a decision of House  of
Lords  (1959 (1) WLR 465 at 472) to contend that  "disposal"
means disposal absolutely.
If  it was necessary to call tender reference was made
to  a decision of this Court in
G.B.  Mahajan and others vs.
Jalgaon Municipal Council and others
(1991 (3) SCC 91) where
tender	was invited to construct the building but  authority
was  given  to the developer to grant occupancy rights.	  In
this  case,  this  Court considered the	 scope	of  judicial
review in the case of contractual transaction of Government,
its  policy  decision  and right of the	 Government  on	 its
instrumentality	 to  evolve any method for execution of	 the
project.  In this case respondent Jalagaon Municipal Council
entered into a contract with a private developer/builder for
construction   of  a  commercial   complex.    The   project
contemplated   its   execution	 by    the   developer	  on
self-financing	 basis	 subject  to	handing	  over	 the
administrative	building  of  the complex to  the  Municipal
Council	 free  of cost and allotting some shops at  a  fixed
rate/free  of cost to certain specified persons while having
right  to dispose of the remaining accommodation at its	 own
discretion  and	 to  retain the premia received	 by  way  of
reimbursement  of  its financial outlays plus profits.	 The
execution  of the project was challenged on the ground	that
it  was unconventional and thus untenable.  This Court	said
that  the Government or its instrumentality policy option to
adopt  any method or technique for management of the project
provided  the  same is within the constitutional  and  legal
limits.	  This	Court  held that the project was  not  ultra
vires  the  powers of Municipal Council and such a case	 was
not open to judicial review.  The following main contentions
were raised apprising the project:  -
"a)  That	 the scheme of financing of the project	 was
unconventional	and  was  not one that was, as a  matter  of
policy,	 open  and permissible to a governmental  authority.
The  municipal	authority  could  either  have	put  up	 the
construction  itself departmentally or awarded the execution
of  the whole project to a building contractor.	 The  method
of  financing  and execution of the project are ultra  vires
the powers of the Municipal authority under the Act.
b)  That the terms of the agreement with the developer
that  the  latter be at liberty to dispose of the  occupancy
rights	in the commercial complex in such manner and on such
terms  as  it  may choose would amount to  an  impermissible
delegation  of	the  statutory functions  of  the  Municipal
Council under
Section 272
of the Act to the developer.
c)  That	the  project,  in effect,  amounted  to	 and
involved the disposal of municipal property by way of a long
term  lease  with  rights of sub-letting in  favour  of	 the
developer violative of Section 92 of the 'Act'.
d)  That the scheme is arbitrary and unreasonable	 and
is violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution.	 The project
is  patently one intended to and does provide for an  unjust
enrichment of respondent 6 at public expense."
This  Court negatived all these contentions.  It	said
that  the project, otherwise legal, does not become any	 the
less  permissible by reason alone that the local  authority,
instead of executing the project itself, had entered into an
agreement  with a developer for its financing and execution.
This  Court did not find any violation of any provisions  of
the  Maharashtra  Municipalities  Act,	1965  governing	 the
Municipal  Council.  On the question of reasonableness	this
Court  said  that a thing is not unreasonable in  the  legal
sense  merely  because the court thinks it is unwise.	Then
this Court said:  -
"The  contention regarding impermissible delegation is
not  tenable.  The developer to the extent he is  authorised
to induct occupiers in respect of the area earmarked for him
merely exercises, with the consent of the Municipal Council,
a power to substitute an occupier in his own place.  This is
not impermissible when it is with the express consent of the
Municipal  Council.   It would be unduly restrictive of	 the
statutory  powers  of  the local authority  if	a  provision
enabling  the  establishment  of  markets  and	disposal  of
occupancy  rights therein are hedged in by restrictions	 not
found in the statute."
Reference was then made to a decision of this Court in
Tata  Cellular vs.  Union of India
(1994 (6) SCC 651)  where
this  Court  considered	 the scope of  judicial	 review	 and
adduced the following principles:  -
"(1)  The modern trend points to judicial restraint in
administrative action.
(2)  The	court does not sit as a court of appeal	 but
merely reviews the manner in which the decision was made.
(3)  The court does not have the expertise to  correct
the   administrative   decision.   If  a   review   of	 the
administrative decision is permitted it will be substituting
its  own  decision,  without the necessary  expertise  which
itself may be fallible.
(4)  The	terms of the invitation to tender cannot  be
open  to judicial scrutiny because the invitation to  tender
is  in	the  realm  of	contract.   Normally  speaking,	 the
decision  to  accept  the tender or award  the	contract  is
reached	 by  process of negotiations through several  tiers.
More  often than not, such decisions are made  qualitatively
by experts.
(5)  The Government must have freedom of contract.  In
other  words,  a  fair	play in the joints  is	a  necessary
concomitant  for  an administrative body functioning  in  an
administrative	 sphere	 or   quasi-administrative   sphere.
However,  the  decision	 must  not only	 be  tested  by	 the
application   of  Wednesbury   principle  of  reasonableness
(including  its	 other facts pointed out above) but must  be
free  from arbitrariness not affected by bias or actuated by
mala fides.
(6) Quashing decisions may impose heavy administrative
burden	on  the	 administration and lead  to  increased	 and
unbudgeted expenditure."
Lastly,  Mr.   Sorabjee  said that  after	 this  Court
allowed	 builder to construct, in upholding the judgment  of
the  High  Court,  equities would have to be  balanced.	  Of
course,	 it would be different matter if the appeals were to
be allowed, he said.
Fifty prospective allottees of the shops, who had made
payment to M.I.	 Builders for allotment of shops before High
Court  granted	order of stay, filed an application in	this
Court  seeking permission to intervene in these appeals.  We
heard  Mr.  Salve, learned senior counsel, who appeared	 for
them.  We record his submissions as under:  -
1.   It  is  not in public interest to  dismantle	 the
shops  if  the court ultimately upholds the judgment of	 the
High Court.
2.   Advertisement was made by the builder on December
24,  1993  offering to allot the shops and required each  of
the prospective allottee to pay Rs.25,000/- with application
for  allotment.	 500 such applications were received out  of
which  380  applications  were accompanied  with  cheque  of
Rs.25,000/-  each.   Remaining	 120  prospective  allottees
deposited  the	amount of Rs.25,000/- each by mean of  cash.
When, however, possession of the area was handed over to the
builder	 it  was  found that it was less  than	that  agreed
earlier and that the total number of shops to be constructed
would  be now in 263 in number.	 Shops were of two sizes  of
10 x 15 ft.  and 10 x 20 ft.
3.   Question  raised  now  is:	 if  by	 putting  in
possession any interest in land was created in favour of the
builder?   Could it be said that there was charge created in
favour of the builder on the property including the land and
the  structure	built upon it till the builder got whole  of
the  amount  invested by it plus 10% of the profit over	 and
above  that?  No interest in the land was created in  favour
of  the builder.  The agreement was something like a lien on
a  property  of	 an unpaid creditor as	understood  in	law.
Builder	 in  that situation would have right  to  possession
till it was paid its dues.  As per the terms of the contract
builder would retain the property by way of security till it
was  paid but it could not claim to have any interest in the
property.   It	is like an unpaid creditor.  When  the	term
"disposed  of"	is used it means that full title had  passed
but  when we say any interest in the property is passed then
we mean a slice of that title has passed.
4.  Agreement though is silent as to what is the legal
right  of the builder on the land, it grants merely a  right
to  the builder to enter upon the land and to build upon  as
per its terms.	Provisions of
Section 128
of the Act are not
attracted.
5.   It  is  a  moot point if  in	 a  Public  Interest
Litigation  the petitioner can tell the court to consider  a
document  whether it is favourable or not.  Court cannot use
a  magnified  glass  to see whether any	 interest  had	been
created	 and  then  to	strike	 down  the  agreement  being
violative  of
Section 128
of the Act.	Ultimately it  boils
down  to  the intention of the parties otherwise it will  be
straining the point too far which is not permissible.
6.   If  this Court decides to uphold the judgment  of
the  High Court the applicants would request that the relief
be  moulded.  In Public Law relief can be moulded even where
the  court found irregularity or illegality to deny  relief.
That  can  be  done under
Article 142
of  the  Constitution.
After  all  what  the  High Court has  found  was  that	 the
resolution  was	 not properly considered before passing	 the
same;	that requirements of the provisions of
Sections	 128
and
129
of the Act were not adhered to;  and that  tenders
were not invited in order to favour the builder.
7.   It  is not the case of the writ petitioners	that
any  extraordinary advantage was conferred on the builder or
that  funds  of the taxpayers have been drained out.  If  it
was  a	hospital or an industry or a dangerous	building  it
would  be  imperative that the building be pulled  down	 but
here  construction is underground made to remove  congestion
and  the only complaint of the petitioners was that it would
create	more congestion.  Therefore, a mere irregularity  or
even   illegality  would  not	result	in  destroying	 the
construction,  particularly, when there is no clear  finding
of  any	 mala  fide by the High Court.	It is not  that	 any
other  builder	has  been  aggrieved by the  action  of	 the
Mahapalika and had come forward to complain.  In fact one of
the persons who himself is a party to the resolution was one
of  the petitioners.  In the Administrative Law there is  an
authority  that	 relief	 could	be  moulded.   There  is  no
affidavit of the Lucknow Development Authority that building
was  in any way dangerous.  Shopping complex and the parking
lot,  which  has been built upon, is for public good and  an
order of demolition would not be in general public interest.
Discretion  should  be	used  not to  invalidate  the  whole
process	 even  if  provision of Sections 128  and  129	were
violated.   Some  mechanism  could be evolved so  that	fair
price  for the shops and use of parking lot is fixed and the
case  of every prospective allottee could be examined and so
also  perhaps the terms of the agreement between the builder
and  the Mahapalika.  It would be an extraordinary order  if
demolition is ordered.
Reference	 was made to Wade on Administrative Law, 7th
Edition,  page	720  and to De Smith on Judicial  Review  of
Administrative	Action, 5th Edition, page 271 to support the
contention  that relief could be moulded in law.  In  Wade's
treatise the following part is relevant:  -
"The  freedom  with  which  the	court  can  use	 its
discretion  to mould its remedies to suit special situations
is  shown by two decisions already encountered.	 One was the
case  where the House of Lords refused mandamus to a  police
probationer  wrongly induced to resign, although he made out
a  good	 case  for that remedy, in order not  to  usurp	 the
powers	of  the chief constable, and instead granted him  an
unusual	 form  of  declaration	to the effect  that  he	 was
entitled  to  the remedies of unlawful removal	from  office
except	for  reinstatement.  The other was the case  of	 the
Take-over Panel, where in fact no relief was granted but the
Court  of  Appeal explained the novel way in which  remedies
should	be  employed in future cases, with the	emphasis  on
declaration  rather than certiorari and on 'historic  rather
than  contemporaneous'	relief.	 The same freedom  to  mould
remedies  exists  in  European	 Community  law,  where	 the
European Court of Justice may declare non-retroactivity when
holding some act or regulation to be void."
In De Smith it is as under:  -
"The  principle  that  failure to	 observe  formal  or
procedural rules in the administrative process may be venial
if  no	substantial  prejudice	has  been  caused  to  those
immediately  affected  now appears in a number of  statutory
contexts, but it is too early to say that it has established
itself	as a general principle of law in contexts where	 the
enabling  Act  is  silent on the point, though some  of	 the
cases  on  the effect of disregarding statutory time  limits
point vaguely in this direction.
Administrative inconvenience

      Is  administrative  inconvenience a proper reason	 for
rebutting  the presumption that a decision which violates  a
statutory  provision  is  unlawful (and therefore  that	 the
provision  is,	in  the	  circumstances	 not   "mandatory")?
Administrative	inconvenience  is an accepted  criterion  in
relation  to  remedies	provided by the courts	in  judicial
review.	   For	example,  where	 a  series   of	  commercial
transactions  have  been  undertaken in	 reliance  upon	 the
impugned  decision the court may, in its discretion, fail to
quash that decision in view of the administrative chaos that
would  result  from such a remedy.  Judicial  discretion  is
employed  here to balance fairness to the individual against
the general public interest.  The task, however, of deciding
the force of a statutory provision does not involve judicial
discretion.   It  involves the faithful construction of	 the
objects	 and purposes of an act of Parliament in the context
of  the	 particular  decision.	Although aspects  of  public
policy	may play a part in this exercise, it would be  wrong
of  the	 courts	 to  impute  any  general  implication	that
Parliament may intend administrative inconvenience to excuse
in  advance  the  violation  of	  its  statutes.   Such	  an
implication invites careless administration and assumes that
the  legislature  would	 too easily excuse a breach  of	 its
statutes.   It is suggested, therefore, that  administrative
inconvenience  is  not normally a proper criterion to  guide
the   question	 of  whether  a	  statutory   provision	  is
"mandatory"."
Mr.   Sorabjee  and  Mr.	 Salve	were  opposed  by  a
formidable  cohort of lawyers.	Mr.  N.M.  Ghatate  appeared
for  the  corporators  who filed writ petition in  the	High
Court  and  were present themselves in the meetings  of	 the
Mahapalika on July 12, 1993 and October 21, 1993;  Mr.	G.L.
Sanghi	appeared  for the Mahapalika;  Mr.  Adarsh Goel	 for
the  State of U.P.;  Mr.  Arun Jaitley for the LDA;  and Mr.
Dushyant  Dave for Amrit Puri, who had separately filed	 the
writ  petition.	  Their	 submissions can  be  summarised  as
under:	-
1.   There was no proper convening of the meetings  of
the  Executive	Committee and the Mahapalika, which  granted
approval  to  the  construction	  of  underground   shopping
complex.   There  was also no such agenda in the meeting  of
the Mahapalika.	 Constitution of the High Power Committee by
the  Mahapalika was itself not legal.  Regulations had	been
framed	under  the Act for conduct of the  meetings.   Under
Section	 91
of the Act the requirement is four days  notice
for  the  general body meeting of the Mahapalika  and  three
days  notice  for  the meeting of the  Executive  Committee.
Regulation  7
prescribes  as  to how the  business  of	 the
meeting	 is to be conducted, as to which item is to be taken
up  first  and rest in seriatim.
Regulation  7(f)
requires
that  resolution  of  the   Executive  Committee  should  be
separately  circulated	to  the	 members  and  the  business
respecting that should not be transacted in the heading "any
other  business	 with  permission  of  the  chair".    Under
Regulation  30
it is necessary for a resolution to be  valid
that there should be a proposer and a seconder.
2.  The impugned agreement was not executed as per the
requirement of
Section 133
of the Act and on that account it
is  not binding on the Mahapalika.  Reliance was placed on a
decision  of this Court in
Dr.	H.S.  Rikhy & Ors.  vs.	 The
New  Delhi  Municipal Committee
[AIR 1962 SC 554].  In	this
case  the  question for consideration before this Court	 was
whether	 the provisions of
Section 8
of the Delhi and  Ajmer
Rent  Control  Act,  1952  (the
Rent  Act
)  applied  to	 the
transactions  between  the  appellants	and  the  New  Delhi
Municipal  Committee  (the Committee) constituted under	 the
Punjab Municipal Act, 1911
.  The Committee had constructed a
market	and allotted the shops and flats by inviting tenders
in  pursuance to an advertisement.  On an application  filed
under
Section 8
of the Rent Act by an allottee, an objection
was  raised by the Committee that there was no	relationship
of landlord and tenant between the parties.  High Court held
that  there  was  no  relationship of  landlord	 and  tenant
between	 the  parties  inasmuch as there was  no  'letting',
there  being  no properly executed lease.  In coming to	 the
conclusion  that  there	 was  no  valid	 lease	between	 the
parties, High Court relied upon the provisions of
Section 47
of  the	 Punjab	 Municipal Act.	 High  Court  negatived	 the
contention  that the Committee was estopped from questioning
the  status  of the applicants as tenants, having all  along
admittedly  accepted  rent from them.  On an appeal  against
the  judgment  of the High Court to this Court, it was	held
that  use  of the term 'rent' cannot preclude  the  landlord
from pleading that there was no relationship of landlord and
tenant.	  The question must, therefore, depend upon  whether
or  not	 there was a relationship of landlord and tenant  in
the  sense  that  there was a transfer of  interest  by	 the
landlord  in favour of the tenant.  This Court said that  in
its  opinion  the
Rent	 Act
applied only  that	 species  of
'letting'  by which the relationship of landlord and  tenant
is  created,  that  is to say, by which an interest  in	 the
property,  however,  limited in duration is  created.	This
Court referred to the provisions of
Section 47
of the Punjab
Municipal Act which is as under :
"47.   (1) Every contract made by or on behalf of	 the
Committee of any municipality of the first class whereof the
value  or amount exceeds one hundred rupees, and made by  or
on behalf of the Committee of any municipality of the second
and  third  class whereof the value or amount exceeds  fifty
rupees	shall  be  in  writing, and must be  signed  by	 two
members,  of whom the president or a vice-president shall be
one, and countersigned by the secretary :
Provided	that,  when the power of entering  into	 any
contract on behalf of the committee has been delegated under
the  last foregoing section, the signature or signatures  of
the  member or members to whom the power has been  delegated
shall be sufficient.
(2)  Every transfer of immovable property belonging to
any  committee	must  be made by an instrument	in  writing,
executed  by the president or vice-president and by at least
two  other  members  of committee, whose  execution  thereof
shall be attested by the secretary.
(3)  No  contract	 or   transfer	of  the	 description
mentioned  in  this  section   executed	 otherwise  than  in
conformity  with  the  provisions of this section  shall  be
binding on the committee."
This Court said that in order that the transfer of the
property  in question should be binding on the Committee, it
was essential that it should have been made by an instrument
in  writing, executed by the President or the Vice-President
and  at	 least two other members of the Committee,  and	 the
execution by them should have been attested by the Secretary
and  If these conditions are not fulfilled, the contract  of
transfer  shall	 not  be binding on the Committee.   It	 was
observed  that provisions of
Section 47(3)
are mandatory and
not merely directory.  Finally considering the argument that
the  Committee	is estopped by its conduct from	 challenging
the enforceability of the contract this Court said :
"The  answer  to the argument is that where a  statute
makes  a specific provision that a body corporate has to act
in  a particular manner, and in no other, that provision  of
law  being  mandatory and not directory, has to be  strictly
followed."
3.   It  was  the	 appellant,  the  builder,  who	 was
building  the  underground  shopping complex.	It  was	 not
undertaking  the construction as an agent of the Mahapalika.
In this connection reference was made to a decisions of this
Court in
Akadasi Padhan vs.  State of Orissa
(1963 (2) Supp.
SCR  691  at  722).  It was, therefore, mandatory  that	 the
building plan be approved by the LDA.
In
Akadast  Padhan vs.  State of Orissa
(1963  Supp.
(2)  SCR 691) the State of Orissa acquired a monopoly in the
trade of Kendu leaves.	Prior to this the petitioner used to
carry  on  extensive trade in the sale of Kendu leaves.	  He
filed  a  petition  under
Article 32
of  the	Constitution
complaining  restrictions put on his fundamental rights.  In
the course of discussion this Court said:-
"When  the  State	 carries on any trade,	business  or
industry   it	must   inevitably   carry   it	 on   either
departmentally	or  through its officers appointed for	that
purpose.   In  the very nature of things, the  State  cannot
function  without the help of its servants or employees	 and
that inevitably introduces the concept of agency in a narrow
and  limited sense.  There are some trades or businesses  in
which  it may be inexpedient to undertake the work of  trade
or  business departmentally or with the assistance of  State
servants.   In such cases, it is open to the State to employ
the  services of agents, provided the agents work on  behalf
of the State and not for themselves."
The Court then said:  -
"It is true that an agent is entitled to commission in
commercial  transactions,  and	so, the fact that  a  person
earns commission in transactions carried on by him on behalf
of  another  would not destroy his character as	 that  other
persons	 agent.	 Cases of Delcredere agents are not unknown
to  commercial	law.   But we must not forget  that  we	 are
dealing	 with agency which is permissible under
Art.   19(6)
(ii),  and as we have already observed, agency which can  be
legitimately  allowed under
Art.  19(6)(ii)
is agency in the
strict	and  narrow  sense of the term;	  it  includes	only
agents	who  can be said to carry on the monopoly  at  every
stage  on  behalf of the State for its benefit and  not	 for
their  own  benefit at all.  All that such agents  would  be
entitled  to would be remuneration for their work as agents.
That being so, the extended meaning of the word agent in a
commercial  sense  on  which  the  learned  Attorney-General
relies	is  wholly  inapplicable  in  the  context  of	Art.
19(6)(ii)."
4.   Mahapalika had disposed of the land in favour  of
the  builder in contravention of the provisions relating  to
disposal  of property under
Sections 128
and
129
of the Act.
If the substance of the impugned agreement is looked into it
is the transfer of interest in land by the Mahapalika to the
builder.
5.   Even
Section 128
of the Act was not applicable as
the  land  was	a park which could not be  disposed  by	 the
Mahapalika.   As a matter of fact Mahapalika was the trustee
of  the	 park  and the doctrine of public trust,  which	 was
applicable in India as held by this Court in M.C.  Mehta vs.
Kamal  Nath  and others (known as Span case) (1997  (1)	 SCC
388),  was applicable to the park in question.	 Mahapalika,
therefore, could only manage the park and could not alienate
it  or	convert it something different from the park.	Park
was  held  by  the Mahapalika on trust for the	citizens  of
Lucknow.
In
M.C.	 Mehta vs.  Kamal Nath and others
(1997	 (1)
SCC  388)  the	case, which is also known as that  of  'Span
Resorts	 case', owned by Span Motels Pvt.  Ltd., this  Court
observed,  that	 public trust doctrine, as discussed in	 the
judgment,  is  a  part of the law of land.  The	 Court	gave
various	 directions  even  cancelling the lease	 granted  in
favour	of  the	 Motel	and   directing	 the  Motel  to	 pay
compensation  by  way  of  cost	  for  restitution  of	 the
environment and ecology of the area.  The judgment was cited
to  reaffirm the argument for preservation of ecology, which
is an important factor in preserving the Jhandewala Park.
6.
Section  114
of the Act provides  for  obligatory
duties	of the Mahapalika and one such obligatory  functions
is  to	maintain  public places, parks and to  plant  trees.
This  cannot  now  be  done as the park	 has  been  dug	 and
construction  made  underground.   By  allowing	 underground
construction   Mahapalika  has	deprived   itself   to	 its
obligatory  duties which cannot be permitted.	Irreversible
changes	 have  been made.  Qualitatively it may still  be  a
park  but it is a park of different nature inasmuch as trees
cannot	be planted.  Now it is like a terrace park.   Though
the  Park  Act came into operation w.e.f.  February 1,	1995
and the construction of the underground shopping complex had
started	 in  January, 1995 after the interim order  of	this
Court  but  since the construction was made subject  to	 the
final  order  of this Court the provisions of the
Park	 Act
will have to be considered while deciding the matter.
7.   Contract of such a magnitude could not have	been
awarded	 to the builder without calling for tenders.   There
was no ground to depart from the settled norms.	 Decision of
this  Court in
Sachidanand Pandey & Anr.  vs.  State of West
Bengal	and  others
(1987 (2) SCC 295), is no authority	 for
the proposition that it was not necessary to invite tenders.
That  was a case relating to development of tourism industry
in  the State of West Bengal.  The case did not lay any rule
but  was  an  exception thereto.  In that case a  lease	 was
granted	 by the State Government to Taj Group of Hotels	 for
construction  of a Five Star Hotel.  This was challenged  on
various grounds in a writ petition filed under the banner of
PIL.   The writ petition was dismissed by the learned single
judge  of  the	High Court.  On appeal, the  Division  Bench
confirmed  the	judgment of the learned single	Judge.	 The
matter	then  came  to this Court under
Article 136
of	 the
Constitution  and  leave was granted.  One of the  questions
raised	was  that  lease  which was  granted  by  the  State
Government  without  inviting  tenders or holding  a  public
auction.   This Court posed the question if in pursuing	 the
socio-economic	objective,  the	 State is  bound  to  invite
tenders	 or  hold a public auction.
The Court	referred  to
various	 judgments  of	this Court in
Rashbihari  Panda	 vs.
State
of  orissa  [(1969)  1 SCC  414;
R.D.	 Shetty	 vs.
International  Airport Authority of India & Ors.
[(1979)  3
SCC  489];
Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy vs.  State of J.	& K.
[(1980)	 4 SCC 1];
State of Haryana vs.  Jage Ram
[(1983) 4
SCC  556];
Ram and Shyam Co.  vs.  State of Haryana &	Ors.
[(1985)	 3  SCC	 267];	and
Chenchu Rami Reddy &  Anr.	 vs.
Government  of A.P.  & Ors.
[(1986) 3 SCC 391].  Then	this
Court observed as under :
"On a consideration of the relevant cases cited at the
bar  the  following  propositions  may	 be  taken  as	well
established:   State-owned or public- owned property is	 not
to  be	dealt  with  at	  the  absolute	 discretion  of	 the
executive.   Certain  precepts	and principles	have  to  be
observed.   Public interest is the paramount  consideration.
One  of the methods of securing the public interest, when it
is considered necessary to dispose of a property, is to sell
the  property  by  public auction or  by  inviting  tenders.
Though	that  is the ordinary rule, it is not an  invariable
rule.	There  may be situations where there are  compelling
reasons	 necessitating departure from the rule but then	 the
reasons for the departure must be rational and should not be
suggestive  of discrimination.	Appearance of public justice
is  as	important as doing justice.  Nothing should be	done
which gives an appearance of bias, jobbery or nepotism.
Applying these tests, we find it is impossible to hold
that  the Government of West Bengal did not act with probity
in  not inviting tenders or in not holding a public  auction
but  negotiating  straightway at arms length with  the	Taj
Group of Hotels."
This  Court  also	 found that on	the  commercial	 and
financial  aspect  of the lease even on a prima facie  view,
there  appears	to be nothing wrong or objectionable in	 the
'net sales' method.  The 'net sales' method is a fairly well
known method adopted in similar situations.  It is a profit-
oriented  and  appears	to be in the best  interest  of	 the
Government of West Bengal.
8.   There was collusion among certain members of	 the
Mahapalika,  its officers and the builder.  Even the conduct
of  the	 lawyer	 of  the   Mahapalika  was  commented	upon
adversely.   It was not necessary for the Mahapalika to file
a  separate appeal against the impugned judgment of the High
Court.	 These members of the Mahapalika equated  themselves
with  the builder.  The lawyer of the Mahapalika drafted the
agreement  dated November 4, 1993 between the Mahapalika and
the  builder.	He  also filed special	leave  petitions  on
behalf	of  the Mahapalika which had since  been  withdrawn.
All  the fees of the lawyer of the Mahapalika for  attending
the  meetings  of  the Mahapalika, drafting  the  agreement,
preparing  special  leave petitions, etc.  were paid by	 the
builder	 though that was shown to be done at the instance of
the  Mahapalika.  There is on the record of the Mahapalika a
letter	of the builder that there was a collusion among	 the
Mahapalika,  builder,  the lawyers and the officers  of	 the
Mahapalika,  the  architect of the Mahapalika, who  approved
the  lay out plan, was also the architect of the LDA.  After
the  lay out plan was submitted to the LDA the architect  of
the  Mahapalika himself okays the lay out plan as  architect
of  the LDA, which is then approved by the Vice-Chairman  of
the LDA.
9.  A body corporate cannot be made to remain bound by
its  earlier  decision	if  that decision  is  found  to  be
contrary  to  law.  There could not be any estoppel  against
the  statute particularly when the whole project is  against
public interest.  The State Government was right in changing
its stand.  State Government considered the whole matter and
on  the representations received from the public decided  to
accept the judgment of the High Court.
10.   The	 agreement  is a fraud on the power  of	 the
Mahapalika.   Prime land has been given to the builder for a
song.	The  fact that the scheme was so lucrative could  be
seen  that  all shops to be constructed less 5% were  booked
within	six days of the advertisement appearing in December,
1993.	Public	interest  and  public  exchequer  have	been
sacrificed.   Mahapalika divested itself of its control over
the  project.	The agreement is wholly one sided  favouring
the builder.  It is unjust, unreasonable and irrational.
11.   Builder  had already collected Rs.25,000/-	from
each   of  the	prospective  allottees	 at  the   time	  of
registration when it was originally planned to construct 500
shops.	  There	  were	no   building  plan  in	  existence.
Collecting   of	 this  amount  by   the	 builder  is  of  no
consequence  in	 deciding  the present appeals.	 It  is	 now
stated	that  263  shops  had been  constructed	 though	 the
builder	 collected earnest money for 500 shops.	 In spite of
the  judgment of the High Court the builder did not care  to
refund the earnest money so collected.	Its conduct does not
entitle	 it  to	 any  consideration.  No  proper  study	 was
undertaken  before  the Mahapalika granted its approval	 for
construction  of  the underground shopping  complex.   There
were no building plans when the agreement was entered into.
12.   Narrow consideration that a few crores of rupees
have  been  spent  on  the  construction  cannot  come	into
consideration when the construction is in clear violation of
the  Act,  the	Development  Act   and
Article	 21
of	 the
Constitution.	That crores of rupees have been spent is  an
argument   which  is  advanced	in   every  other  case	  of
unauthorised construction.
13.  There is no alternative to the construction which
is  unauthorised  and illegal to be dismantled.	  The  whole
structure built is in contravention of the provisions of law
as  contained in the Development Act.  The decision to award
contract  and  the agreement itself was	 unreasonable.	 The
construction of the underground shopping complex, if allowed
to  stand, would perpetuate an illegality.  Mahapalika could
not  be allowed to benefit from the illegality.	 A  decision
of  this  Court	 in
Seth Badri Prasad and others  vs.	Seth
Nagarmal  and  others
(1959 (1) Supp.  SCR 769 at  774)	 was
referred  to,  to contend that the court could	not  exclude
from  its  consideration  a  public statute  and  since	 the
construction  of the underground shopping complex was wholly
illegal	 it had to be dismantled.  No question of moulding a
relief	can  arise as the builder made construction  on	 the
basis  of  the	interim order of this Court and at  its	 own
risk.
Various decisions of this Court in support of  these
contentions  where  demolition of unauthorised	construction
was  ordered,  were referred to, these being (
1) K.   Ramdas
Shenoy	vs.   The  Chief Officers, Town	 Municipal  Council,
Udipi  and  others
(1975 (1) SCR 680 at 685),  (2)  Virender
Gaur  and others vs.  State of Haryana and others (
1995	 (2)
SCC  577  at 582), (3) Pleasant Stay Hotel and	another	 vs.
Palani	Hills Conservation Council and others
(
1995 (6)	 SCC
127  at 139), (4) Cantonment Board, Jabalpur and others	 vs.
S.N.   Awasthi and others
(1995 Supp.
(
4) SCC 595 at  596),
(5)  Pratibha Cooperative Housing Society Ltd.	And  another
vs.  State of Maharashtra and others
(
1991 (3) SCC 341), (6)
Dr.   G.N.   Khajuria  and  others  vs.	  Delhi	 Development
Authority  and	others
(
1995 (5) SCC 762), (7)	Mrs.   Manju
Bhatia	and  another  vs.  New Delhi Municipal	Council	 and
another
(JT 1997 (5) SC 574) and (8) an unreported decision
of  this  Court	 in
Ram Awatar Agarwal vs.   Corporation  of
Calcutta  (Civil Appeal
6416 of 1981) decided on August	 20,
1996.
In
K.   Ramadas Shenoy vs.  The Chief Officers,	Town
Municipal  Council,  Udipi  and others
(1975  (1)  SCR	680)
respondent  was	 granted  by  resolution  of  the  Municipal
Committee  to  construct a cinema theatre at a	place  where
earlier	 respondent was granted licence for the construction
of  Kalyan  Mantap-cum-Lecture	Hall.  In a  petition  under
Article 226
of the Constitution the High Court held that the
cinema	theatre	 could not be constructed in a	place  other
than  specified localities without proper sanction but since
the  third respondent had spent a large sum of money it	 did
not   quash  the  impeached   resolution  of  the  Municipal
Committee.   The appellant contended before this Court	that
the  Town Planning Scheme forbade in cinema building at	 the
place  asked  for  and,	 therefore, the	 resolution  of	 the
Municipal  Committee  was invalid.  This Court	observed  as
under:	-
"An   illegal  construction  of	a  cinema   building
materially affects the right to or enjoyment of the property
by  persons residing in the residential area.  The Municipal
Authorities  owe a duty and obligation under the statute  to
see  that the residential area is not spoilt by unauthorised
construction.	The  scheme  is	 for   the  benefit  of	 the
residents  of the locality.  The Municipality acts in aid of
the  schemed.	The rights of the residents in the area	 are
invaded by an illegal construction of a cinema building.  It
has  to	 be remembered that a scheme in a  residential	area
means	planned	  orderliness  in    accordance	  with	 the
requirements  of the residents.	 If the scheme is  nullified
by  arbitrary acts in excess and derogation of the powers of
the  Municipality  the	courts will quash orders  passed  by
Municipalities in such cases.
The  Court enforces the performance of statutory	duty
by  public  bodies as obligation to rate payers who  have  a
legal  right to demand compliance by a local authority	with
its duty to observe statutory rights alone.  The scheme here
is for the benefit of the public.  There is special interest
in  the	 performance of the duty.  All the residents in	 the
area  have their personal interest in the performance of the
duty.  The special and substantial interest of the residents
in the area is injured by the illegal construction."
In
Virender Gaur and others vs.	State of Haryana and
others
(1995	(2)  SCC   577),  the  Municipal  Committee,
Thanesar,  District  Kurukshetra  in the  State	 of  Haryana
framed	Town  Planning Scheme, which was sanctioned  by	 the
Government.   In  the  Scheme  certain land  vested  in	 the
municipality.  State Government sanctioned allotment of that
land  to  Punjab  Samaj Sabha on payment of a price  at	 the
rates  specified therein.  When the Punjab Samaj Sabha after
getting	 sanction started construction the appellants  filed
writ  petition	in the Punjab and Haryana High Court,  which
was, however, dismissed.  It was submitted before this Court
that  the  purpose of the Scheme was to reserve the land  in
question   for	open  spaces   for  the	 better	 sanitation,
environment  and the recreational purposes of the  residents
in  the	 locality  and that the Government had no  power  to
lease  out  the land to Punjab Samaj Sabha.   Reversing	 the
judgment  of  the High Court this Court said that after	 the
writ petition was filed by the appellants Punjab Samaj Sabha
instead	 of  awaiting the decision on merits proceeded	with
the construction in post-haste and expended the money on the
construction.	Therefore, the Court said, "we do not  think
that it would be a case to validate the actions deliberately
chosen,	 as a premium, in not granting the necessary relief.
It  was open to the Punjab Samaj Sabha to await the decision
and  then  proceed  with the construction.  Since  the	writ
petition  was  pending, it was not open to them	 to  proceed
with  the  construction	 and then to plead equity  in  their
favour.	 Under these circumstances, we will not be justified
in  upholding  the  action of the State	 Government  or	 the
Municipality  in allotting the land to Punjab Samaj Sabha to
the  detriment	of the people in the locality and  in  gross
violation  of requirements of the Scheme.  Any	construction
made by Punjab Samaj Sabha should be pulled down and it must
be  brought back to the condition in which it existed  prior
to allotment.  The Municipality is directed to pull down the
construction  within  four  weeks from today.	They  should
place  the report on the file of the Registry of the  action
taken in the matter."
In  Pleasant  Stay Hotel and another etc.	  etc.	 vs.
Palani	Hills Conservation Council and others (1995 (6)	 SCC
127) the question was whether the impugned Government Orders
were  lawfully	and  validly made and, if so,  whether	they
could  regularise the unauthorized construction.  High Court
quashed	 the  impugned Government orders and issued  certain
directions.   This Court observed as under and then referred
the matter to the High Court for certain clarifications:  -
"In  our	considered  opinion the	 most  eloquent	 and
patent	fact  that  must tilt the scale in this	 dispute  in
favour	of the Council is that the Hotel has admittedly made
a residential construction of seven floors even though their
sanctioned  plan was only for two floors.  That	 necessarily
means that five floors of the building have been constructed
illegally   and	 unauthorisedly.   It	is  not	  surprising
therefore  that the entire endeavour of the Hotel now is  to
protect	 the two floors constructed above the road level and
to  yield  to any workable formula.  It is in  that  context
that  the  Hotel,  without  prejudice	to  its	 rights	 and
contentions,  had  suggested  that the entire  structure  of
seven  floors  might  be  allowed to remain  and,  for	that
purpose	 it  was prepared to give an undertaking  that	they
would  not use the five floors below the road level for	 any
residential purpose but utilise it only the for keeping air-
conditioning  plant and other attendant purposes for running
the  Hotel  on	the two floors above the  road	level.	 The
Council, however, vehemently opposed the above suggestion on
the  ground  that  acceptance	thereof	 would	mean  giving
judicial   imprimatur  to  utter   and	flagrant  breach  of
statutory provisions to which the Hotel resorted to in spite
of  repeated  opportunities  given and reminders  issued  to
retrace	 their	steps  and any sympathy shown to  the  Hotel
would  be wholly misplaced.  We need not, However, dilate on
this  aspect of the matter as it appears to us that there is
some  confusion	 as  to	 the   nature  of  the	above-quoted
direction,  given  by the High Court and it requires  to  be
clarified."
In
Cantonment  Board, Jabalpur and others  vs.	S.N.
Avasthi	 and  others
(1995 Supp.  (4) SCC 595)	 this  Court
observed  that	construction  made in contravention  of	 law
would  not be a premium to extend equity so as to facilitate
violation  of  the mandatory requirements of law.  Here	 the
Cantonment  Board had granted permission for construction of
a building which was later on cancelled as the resolution of
the   Board  granting  permission   was	 suspended  by	 the
GOC-in-Chief.
In  Pratibha  Cooperative	 Housing Society  Ltd.	 And
another	 vs.  State of Maharashtra and others (1991 (3)	 SCC
341)  this  Court came down heavily on the  housing  society
which  made construction in violation of Floor Space  Index.
This  Court said that such unlawful construction was made by
the  Housing  Board  in	 clear and  flagrant  violation	 and
disregard of FSI and upheld the order of demolition of eight
floors	as  ordered  by the  Bombay  Municipal	Corporation.
While  dismissing  the	special leave  petition	 this  Court
observed as under:  -
"Before parting with the case we would like to observe
that  this case should be a pointer to all the builders that
making	of  unauthorised  constructions never  pays  and  is
against	 the  interest of the society at large.	 The  rules,
regulations  and  by-laws  are made by the  Corporations  or
development  authorities  taking in view the  larger  public
interest  of  the society and it is the bounden duty of	 the
citizens  to  obey and follow such rules which are made	 for
their own benefits."
In
Dr.	 G.N.	Khajuria   and	others	vs.    Delhi
Development  Authority	and  others
(1995  (5)  SCC  762),
appellants  were  some	of  the residents  of  Sarita  Vihar
colony,	 developed by the Delhi Development Authority (DDA).
It  was contended that the DDA permitted a nursery school to
be  opened  in a certain park in complete violation  of	 the
provisions  of	the
Delhi  Development	 Act,  1957
.   After
considering  the  provisions  of the Delhi  Development	 Act
Master	and Zonal Development Plans this Court said that the
site  at  which	 the school was allowed to be opened  was  a
park.	It  further held that it was not open to the DDA  to
carve  out  any space meant for park for a  nursery  school.
This  Court said that the allotment for opening the  nursery
school	was misuse of power and it cancelled the  allotment.
This  Court  observed  that the construction put up  by	 the
allottee,  even though permanent, was of no relevance as the
same  has  been	 done on a plot of land allotted  to  it  in
contravention of law.  As to the submission that dislocation
from  the  present site would cause difficulty to  the	tiny
tots,  this Court said that the same has been advanced	only
to  get	 sympathy from the court inasmuch as  children,	 for
whom  the nursery school is meant, would travel to any other
nearby	place  where  such a school would be set up  by	 the
allottee  or  by  any  other person.  Six  months  time	 was
granted	 to the allottee to make alternative arrangements as
it  thinks fit to shift the school so that the children	 are
not  put to any disadvantageous position.  Then, this  Court
observed as under:-
"Before  parting, we have an observation to make.	 The
same  is  that	a  feeling is gathering	 ground	 that  where
unauthorised  constructions  are demolished on the force  of
the  order  of courts, the illegality is not taken  care  of
fully  inasmuch as the officer of the statutory body who had
allowed	 the  unauthorised construction to be made  or	make
illegal	 allotments go scot free.  This should not, however,
have  happened	for two reasons.  First, it is	the  illegal
action/order  of  the officer which lies at the root of	 the
unlawful  act of the citizen concerned, because of which the
officer	 is  more  to be blamed than the  recipient  of	 the
illegal	 benefit.   It is thus imperative, according to	 us,
that  while  undoing  the mischief which would	require	 the
demolition  of the unauthorised construction, the delinquent
officer	 has  also  to be punished in accordance  with	law.
This,  however,	 seldom happens.  Secondly, to take care  of
the  injustice	completely, the officer who had misused	 his
power  has  also to be properly punished.   Otherwise,	what
happens	 is that the officer, who made the hay when the	 sun
shined, retains the hay, which tempts others to do the same.
This  really gives fillip to the commission of tainted acts,
whereas the aim should be opposite."
In
Mrs.	 Manju	Bhatia and another  vs.	  New  Delhi
Municipal  Committee  and another
(JT 1997 (5) SC 574),	 the
builder,  after	 obtaining  requisite sanction	to  build  8
floors,	 constructed  more floors, sold the flats  and	gave
possession  to	the respective buyers.	Subsequently it	 was
found that the builder constructed the building in violation
of  the	 building regulations and consequently flats on	 the
top  four  floors  were	 ordered   to  be  demolished.	 The
demolition was challenged in the High Court by way of a writ
petition,  which was dismissed.	 Special leave to appeal  to
this  Court  was also dismissed.  The question	before	this
Court  was  whether  the appellants, who had  purchased	 the
flats  without	the  builder informing them of	the  illegal
construction, should be compensated for the loss suffered by
them.	High  Court  in the impugned judgment  directed	 the
return	of the amount plus the escalation charges.  All this
was on a suit brought by the appellants.  This Court noticed
that  the  escalated price as on the date was around  Rs.1.5
crores	per flat.  Taking into consideration the totality of
the  circumstances  this Court directed the builder  to	 pay
Rs.60 lacs including the amount paid by the allottees.
In  an unreported decision of this Court in Ram Awatar
Agarwal	 &  ors.   Vs.	The Corporation of Calcutta  &	ors.
[C.A.	No.   6416 of 1981] decided on August 20,  1996,  an
unauthorised  construction  in	the  city  of  Calcutta	 was
allowed to be demolished by the Corporation of Calcutta.  It
was a multistory building.  The Court observed as under:-
"We  share  the feeling of the Deputy  City  Architect
when he states in paragraph 18 of his affidavit that this is
a  case	 in which an unscrupulous builder took advantage  of
the  courts order upto a point of time and after he  failed
in the legal process upto this court the tenants were set up
to  delay  the	inevitable  and	 thus  in  this	 matter	 the
unauthorised  structure	 hazardous and unsafe has stood	 all
these  years.	We have, therefore, no manner of doubt	that
this is a case in which exemplary costs should be awarded."
At  the  conclusion of the arguments and in  order  to
decide the matter fully and finally but without prejudice to
the respective contentions of the parties, we wanted to know
the  nature of construction so far as carried out;  the cost
thereof;    the	  area	meant	for  shopping  and   parking
separately;   and  if the plans were in accordance with	 the
Development Act and Rules.  This was particularly so when by
an  interim  order  of this Court construction	was  allowed
though with certain clear stipulations.
Prof.   T.S.  Narayanaswami, Ex-Head of Department  of
Building  Engineering and Management, School of Planning and
Management,  New  Delhi was appointed as Local	Commissioner
for  the  purpose.  He was asked to report on the  following
aspects of the construction :
"1.   What is the extent of construction put up by the
appellant under ground the aforesaid part?
2.  What is the nature of said construction?
3.  What cost can be said to have been incurred by the
appellant in the construction uptil now?
4.   What	 further costs, if any, are required  to  be
incurred   for	completion  of	 the  project  with  parking
provisions?
5.  What will be the extent of the cost required to be
incurred  if the structures existing on spot are required to
be demolished and the land is to be restored to its original
position?
6.   Whether the present structures are put up by	 the
appellant  in accordance with the building plans  sanctioned
by the Nagar Nigam?
7.   Whether  the present structures comply  with	 the
building  requirements	as per the provisions governing	 the
Lucknow Development Authority?
8.   Whether the structures existing on spot are	safe
and  sound  and not likely to create any health	 hazard,  if
they are allowed to be retained on spot?
9.   Whether  the	 existing structures  with  suitable
alterations  can be used for parking of vehicles and/or	 for
putting up other amenities like public convenience etc?
10.  If the land earmarked for parking in the building
plans  submitted  to the Nagar Nigam by the  appellant,	 and
which land is dug up at present, if restored to its original
position,  is it feasible to use the existing structures for
parking of vehicles and for putting up other amenities?
11.   What are the existing general conditions of	 the
locality and the area around the park?"
It is not necessary to examine the report of the Local
Commissioner in detail except to note that :
1.  extent of work carried out is approximately 80% of
the  civil  and structural work, about 30% of the  finishing
work and 20% of the services support work;
2.  it is a First Class permanent construction;
3.   cost of construction of the work so far  executed
is approximately Rs.3.52 crore and the cost of work still to
be done is approximately 2.97 crore;
4.   dismantling	of the construction so far made	 and
restoration  of	 the  park would  cost	Rs.98,10,181/-	less
Rs.22,19,550/- salvage value;
5.    though   there  is	a  letter  of  approval	  of
confirmation  having  been  given, there are  no  sanctioned
drawings  (Chief  Architect  of	 the  Mahapalika  said	that
sanctioned drawings were "missing" from his files).
6.   Lucknow Development Authority (LDA) did not	play
any  role in sanctioning the project except the Layout Plan.
(Layout Plan was forwarded to the LDA by the Chief Architect
of  the	 Mahapalika  who  was	also  officiating  as  Chief
Architect of LDA at that time.	In other words, the approval
of  the Layout at the LDA level was recommended by the	same
person who forwarded it from the Mahapalika);
7.  Master Plan could not have envisaged the park as a
site  available	 for  commercial   exploitation,  given	 the
density and congestion of the surrounding area;
8.   structure as designed is safe from the structural
engineering view point;
9.   air	pollution  levels  of	the  park  and	 the
surrounding  areas  would go up by substantial amount  as  a
result of underground shopping complex-cum-parking;  and
10.  there is a lot of crowding during day hours (9.00
a.m  to	 6.00  p.m.) leading to generally slow	movement  of
traffic	 and  occasional traffic hold ups.  A  high  decibel
level  thanks to vehicles and moving people and vendors.   A
lot  of	 solid	waste collection at the end of the  day	 and
generally high level of pollution as a result.
By  and  large the Report of Prof.  Narayanaswamy	 has
found acceptance by all the parties.
Mr.   M.L.   Verma,  learned   senior  advocate,	 who
appeared  for  M.I.   Builders	after the  report  of  Prof.
Narayanaswamy,	submitted  that	 the  Report  of  the  Local
Commissioner  insofar  as  it  gives cost  incurred  on	 the
constructions  is not correct and so also the cost  required
to  be incurred for completion of the project.	His argument
was that cost so far incurred was in fact more than what the
Local	Commissioner  said  and	  that	cost  required	 for
completion  of the project was less than that arrived at  by
the  Local Commissioner.  We, however, do not find merit  in
his  submission	 as we find that the Local Commissioner	 has
applied	 the  same principles while arriving at the cost  so
far  incurred and the cost to be incurred for completion  of
the  project.  We, therefore, accept the Report of the Local
Commissioner  in its entirety.	But to what effect we  shall
presently see.
Jhandewala  Park,	 the park in question, has  been  in
existence  for	a great number of years.  It is situated  in
the   heart   of  Aminabad,   a	  bustling   commercial-cum-
residential locality in the city of Lucknow.  The park is of
historical  importance.	  Because  of  the  construction  of
underground  shopping complex and parking it may still	have
the  appearance of a park with grass grown and path laid but
it  has	 lost  the  ingredients of a  park  inasmuch  as  no
plantation  now	 can be grown.	Trees cannot be planted	 and
rather while making underground construction many trees have
been   cut.    Now  it	is   more  like	 a   terrace   park.
Qualitatively  it may still be a park but it is certainly  a
park  of  different nature.  By construction of	 underground
shopping  complex  irreversible changes have been made.	  It
was  submitted	that  the  park was acquired  by  the  State
Government  in the year 1913 and was given to the Mahapalika
for  its management.  This has not been controverted.  Under
Section	 114
of  the Act it is the obligatory duty  of	 the
Mahapalika to maintain public places, parks and plant trees.
By allowing underground construction Mahapalika has deprived
itself	of its obligatory duties to maintain the park  which
cannot	be  permitted.	 But  then  one	 of  the  obligatory
functions  of  the Mahapalika under Section 114 is  also  to
construct  and	maintain parking lots.	To that extent	some
area  of  the  park  could  be	 used  for  the	 purpose  of
constructing  underground parking lot.	But that can only be
done  after  proper  study has been made  of  the  locality,
including  density of the population living in the area, the
floating    population	 and	 other	 certain    relevant
considerations.	  This study was never done.  Mahapalika  is
the  trustee  for the proper management of the	park.	When
true  nature  of  the park, as it existed, is  destroyed  it
would  be  violative  of  the doctrine of  public  trust  as
expounded  by  this Court in Span Resort Case (1997 (1)	 SCC
388).  Public Trust doctrine is part of Indian law.  In that
case  the respondent who had constructed a motel located  at
the  bank of river Beas interfered with the natural flow  of
the river.  This Court said that the issue presented
in that
case
illustrated "the classic struggle between those members
of  the public who would preserve our rivers, forests, parks
and  open  lands in their pristine purity and those  charged
with   administrative	responsibilities   who,	 under	 the
pressures  of the changing needs of an increasingly  complex
society,  find it necessary to encroach to some extent	upon
open lands heretofore considered inviolate to change".
In  the  treatise	 "Environmental	 Law  and  Policy  :
Nature,	  Law,	and  Society"  by  Plater  Abrams   Goldfarb
(American  Casebook  series  - 1992) under  the	 Chapter  on
Fundamental  Environmental Rights, in
Section 1
(The  Modern
Rediscovery  of	 the  Public  Trust Doctrine)  it  has	been
noticed	 that  "long ago there developed in the law  of	 the
Roman  Empire  a legal theory known as the Doctrine of	the
public trust." In America Public Trust doctrine was applied
to  public properties, such as shore-lands and parks.  As to
how  doctrine works it was stated:  "The scattered evidence,
taken  together,  suggests  that  the	idea  of  a   public
trusteeship  rests  upon three related	principles.   First,
that  certain  interests - like the air and the sea  -	have
such importance to the citizenry as a whole that it would be
unwise	to  make  them	the subject  of	 private  ownership.
Second,	 that they partake so much of the bounty of  nature,
rather	than  of individual enterprise, that they should  be
made freely available to the entire citizenry without regard
to  economic  status.  And, finally, that it is a  principle
purpose	 of  government	 to  promote the  interests  of	 the
general public rather than to redistribute public goods from
broad  public  uses to restricted private  benefit...  With
reference to a decision in Illinois Central Railroad Company
v.  Illinois (146 U.S.	387 [1892]), it was stated that the
court articulated in that case the principle that has become
the  central substantive thought in public trust litigation.
When  a	 state holds a resource which is available  for	 the
free  use  of  the general public, a court  will  look	with
considerable  skepticism upon any governmental conduct which
is  calculated	either	to reallocate the resource  to	more
restricted   uses  or  to  subject   public  uses   to	 the
self-interest  of  private  parties.	This  public  trust
doctrine  in  our country, it would appear, has	 grown	from
Article 21
of the Constitution.
Thus  by allowing construction of underground shopping
complex in the park Mahapalika has violated not only
Section
114
of the Act but also the public trust doctrine.
If  we now refer to the provisions of law relating  to
notice	of  meetings and business of the Mahapalika and	 its
committees  it	is apparent that these provisions  were	 not
adhered	 to.   There is no authority with the Mahapalika  to
constitute   High  Power  Committee   and  to  delegate	 its
functions to that High Power Committee.	 There was no agenda
at  any	 time in any of the meetings of the  Mahapalika	 for
consideration  of  the underground shopping complex.   There
were  no  proposals,  no documents, no plan,  no  study,  no
project	 report or feasibility report on the basis of  which
Mahapalika  could have given a green signal for construction
of   the  underground  shopping	  complex.   There  was	  no
discussion  and no informed decision.  Mahapalika completely
abdicated its functions.  Mahapalika delegated its functions
to  the	 High Power Committee in contravention of  the	Act.
Constitution  of the High Power Committee itself was  wholly
illegal.   High	 Power Committee took decision to hand	over
the  park to the builder for construction of the underground
shopping  complex  and	also  approved	 the  terms  of	 the
agreement  dated  November  4, 1993.  Decision of  the	High
Power  Committee was put before the Executive Committee	 and
the  general  body  of	the Mahapalika for  the	 purpose  of
"information  and both these bodies stamped their approval.
As  noted  above  there was no agenda for  consideration  of
these	resolutions  of	 the   Executive  Committee  of	 the
Mahapalika.   Corporators had no time to apply their  minds.
Such  an important matter, where the cost of the project was
likely	to  run	 in crores of rupees, could  not  have	been
considered  under the topic "other subjects, subject to	 the
permission  of	the Presiding Officer".
Section 105
of	 the
Act  protects any act done or proceeding taken on account of
any  defect  or irregularity in procedure not affecting	 the
substance.   In the present case it is not mere irregularity
or  defect  in the procedure but the whole procedure  is  in
clear  breach  of
Sections 91
and
119
of the Act  which	 are
mandatory.
The  law mandates that not only the notice of the date
and  the time of the meeting but the notice of the  business
to  be transacted at such meeting should be given at least 4
clear days before the date of the meeting for the Mahapalika
and 3 days for the Executive Committee.	 When the agenda did
not  include  the  subject of  construction  of	 underground
shopping  complex nor was there any material to support	 the
discussion  the	 subject  of   construction  of	 underground
shopping  complex  it could not have been considered in	 the
meetings of the Mahapalika and the Executive Committee.
In
Myurdhwaj  Cooperative Group Housing Society	Ltd.
vs.   Presiding Officer, Delhi Cooperative Tribunal and Ors.
[(1998)	 6 SCC 39), the appellant was a Housing Co-operative
Society	 registered under the Delhi Co- operative
Societies
Act,  1972
and Delhi Co-operative Societies Rules, 1973.  In
the  meeting  of  the general body of the  society,  it	 was
decided	 that  only those who have deposited minimum  amount
specified by the general meeting would be allotted flats and
others	would be accommodated on the flats to be constructed
on the additional land in Phase-II construction.  Respondent
No.3  who  was	one of the original members of	the  society
challenged  the decision of the general meeting.  One of the
contention  raised  was	 that decision of the  general	body
which  relegated her and other such members to Phase-II	 was
not  on	 the  agenda.  This Court said a  general  body	 can
always	with the approval of the house in the meeting of its
members	 take up any other matter not covered by the  agenda
on  that  account, no illegality could be held.	 This  Court
also  observed	that
Section 28
of the	 Delhi	Co-operative
Societies  Act,	 1972 vests final authority in	the  general
body of a cooperative society.	It has wide powers including
residuary  power  except  those not delegated to  any  other
authority  under  the Act, the rules and its  bye-laws.	  In
other  words,  its power, if any, is only restricted by	 the
Act,  the rules, the bye-laws and any order having force  of
law.  This decision is of no help to the appellant as in the
present case we are considering the statutory provisions for
holding	 of the meetings of the Mahapalika and the Executive
Committee which have been violated.
Agreement dated November 4, 1993 has not been executed
as required under
Section 133
of the Act.  Resolution of the
High Power Committee, which was placed before the Mahapalika
and  the Executive Committee for information, required	that
the  prescribed	 project  may  be   got	 executed  by  M.I.
Builders Pvt.  Ltd.  and the Mukhya Nagar Adhikari should be
authorised  for	 conducting all the forthcoming actions	 and
formalities".	Now,  Mahapalika  has power  to	 enter	into
contracts  (Sec.131).  Under sub-section (1) of Section	 132
contract shall be expressed to be made, for and on behalf of
Mahapalika and shall be so executed for and on behalf of the
Mahapalika.  Under sub-section (4), no contract involving an
expenditure  exceeding	five  lakh rupees shall be  made  by
Mukhya	Nagar  Adhikari (Chief Executive Officer) unless  it
has  been  sanctioned  by the Mahapalika.   Proviso  (a)  to
Section	 133(1) requires common seal of the Mahapalika to be
affixed on every contract.  The common seal shall be affixed
only  in  the presence of a corporator (Sabhasad) who  shall
attach his signatures to the contract in token that the same
was sealed in his presence.  The signature of the corporator
shall  be distinct from the signature of any witness to	 the
execution  of such contract (sub-
sections 2
and
3
of Section
133).	Under  sub-
section  4
of Section  133	no  contract
executed  otherwise than as provided in the section shall be
binding	 on the Mahapalika.  The impugned agreement is	thus
not  executed  in accordance with the requirements  of	law.
Further,  under	 sub- section (2) of Section 136  where	 the
Mahapalika  approves  the project and the  entire  estimated
cost  exceeds rupees ten lakhs, the project report shall  be
submitted  to  the State Government and it is for the  State
Government to reject or sanction the project with or without
modifications.	 Till  that  is	 done	no  work  shall	  be
commenced.   No	 such sanction of the State  Government	 was
obtained  in  the present case.	 It was submitted that	this
provision  would  apply only if the project cost was  to  be
incurred  by the Mahapalika.  We do not think it is so.	  It
is  the cost of the project that matters and not who  incurs
the cost in the first instance.	 Agreement dated November 4,
1993  is, therefore, not a valid contract and not binding on
the  Mahapalika.  As held in H.S.  Rikhys case (AIR 1962 SC
554)  where a statute makes a specific provision that a body
corporate has to act in a particular manner and in no other,
that  provision of law being mandatory and not directory has
to  be strictly followed.  This principle will apply both as
regards	 holding of meeting of the Mahapalika and  execution
of  contract on its behalf.  This judgment is also authority
for  the  preposition  that there is no estoppel  against  a
statute.
We  may now examine some of the terms of the agreement
dated  November	 4,  1993.  There are six  recitals  to	 the
agreements  which cannot be co-related to any discussion  in
any  of	 the  meetings	of  the	 Mahapalika,  the  Executive
Committee  or the High Power Committee.	 Under clause (2) of
the  agreement it is for the builder to make construction at
its  own  cost and then to realise the cost with profit	 not
exceeding more than 10% of the investment in respect of each
shop.	Nobody knows how much cost the builder is likely  to
incur  and how long it will continue to be in possession  of
the  shopping  complex.	 Full freedom has been given to	 the
builder	 to  lease  out the shops as per its own  terms	 and
conditions  to	persons	 of  its choice	 on  behalf  of	 the
Mahapalika  and Mahapalika shall be bound by these terms and
conditions.   Builder has also been given the right to	sign
the  agreement on behalf of the Mahapalika on the terms	 and
conditions  which  the	builder	 may deem  fit	and  proper.
Builder	 is only required to give a copy of the agreement to
the  Mahapalika after its execution and both the  Mahapalika
and  the  builder  shall remain bound by the terms  of	that
agreement.   Since  there is no project report nobody  knows
how  many  shops  the builder would construct  and  of	what
sizes.	 Mahapalika is allowed to charge Rs.5,000/- per shop
for  every  second and subsequent transfer of shops  by	 the
builder	 but  what  amount is to be charged  for  the  first
transfer  or  subsequent  transfers  is	 left  to  the	sole
discretion  of	the builder.  A bare glance at the terms  of
agreement  shows  that	not  only that the  clauses  of	 the
agreement  are unreasonable for the Mahapalika but they	 are
atrocious.   No person of ordinary prudence shall ever enter
into such an agreement.	 A trustee, which the Mahapalika is,
has  to	 be  more cautious in dealing with  its	 properties.
Valuable  land	in  the heart of commercial  area  has	been
handed	on a platter to the builder for it to exploit and to
make run away profits.	As a matter of fact on examining the
terms  of  the	agreement we find that Mahapalika  has	been
completely  ousted from the underground shopping complex for
an  indefinite	period.	  It has  completely  abdicated	 its
functions.
To  repeat,  the	agreement is  completely  one  sided
favouring  the builder.	 The land of immense value has	been
handed	over to it to construct underground shopping complex
in  violation  of the public trust doctrine and	 the  Master
Plan  for  the city of Lucknow.	 Mahapalika has no right  to
step in even if there is any violation by the builder of the
terms  of  the agreement or otherwise.	 Mahapalika,  though
considered to be the owner of the land, is completely ousted
and  divested of the land for a period which is not definite
and  which depends wholly on the discretion of the  builder.
On  the question of reasonableness reference may be made  to
Wade  on  Administrative  Law, 7th Edition, page  399.	 The
learned author observed that "The court must strive to apply
an objective standard which leaves to the deciding authority
the  full range of choices which the legislature is presumed
to  have  intended.   Decisions	 which	are  extravagant  or
capricious  cannot be legitimate".  Quoting Lord Hailsham LC
in  Re	W.  (an infant) ([1971] AC 682) where he said,	"two
reasonable persons can perfectly reasonably come to opposite
conclusions  on	 the  same set of facts	 without  forfeiting
their  title  to be regarded as reasonable".  The  following
passage from the treatise would be relevant:-
"This is not therefore the standard of the man on the
Clapham	 omnibus.   It is the standard indicated by a  true
construction of the Act which distinguishes between what the
statutory  authority may or may not be authorised to do.  It
distinguishes  between	proper	use and	 improper  abuse  of
power.	It is often expressed by saying that the decision is
unlawful if it is one to which no reasonable authority could
have  come.   This  is the essence of what is  now  commonly
called	'Wednesbury unreasonableness, after the now  famous
case in which Lord Greene MR expounded it as follows.
It   is  true  that   discretion	must  be   exercised
reasonably.  Now what does that mean?  Lawyers familiar with
the  phraseology  used in relation to exercise of  statutory
discretions  often  use the word unreasonable in a  rather
comprehensive  sense.	It has frequently been used  and  is
frequently  used as a general description of the things that
must  not be done.  For instance, a person entrusted with  a
discretion  must,  so to speak, direct himself	properly  in
law.  He must call his own attention to the matters which he
is   bound   to	 consider.   He	  must	exclude	  from	 his
consideration matters which are irrelevant to what he has to
consider.   If he does not obey those rules, he may truly be
said,  and  often  is  said, to	 be  acting  unreasonably.
Similarly, there may be something so absurd that no sensible
person could ever dream that it lay within the powers of the
authority.   Warrington	 LJ in Short v.	  Poole	 Corporation
[1926] Ch.  66.	 Gave the example of the red-haired teacher,
dismissed because she had red hair.  This is unreasonable in
one  sense.   In  another it is	 taking	 into  consideration
extraneous  matters.   It is so unreasonable that  it  might
almost	be  described as being done in bad faith;   and,  in
fact, all these things run into one another.
This  has	 become	 the most frequently  cited  passage
(though	 most  commonly	 cited	only  by  its  nickname)  in
administrative	law.  It explains how unreasonableness, in
its  classic formulation, covers a multitude of sins.  These
various	  errors  commonly  result   from  paying  too	much
attention to the mere words of the Act and too little to its
general	 scheme	 and  purpose,	and from  the  fallacy	that
unrestricted   language	   naturally	confers	  unfettered
discretion.
Unreasonableness	has thus become a generalised rubric
covering  not  only sheer absurdity or caprice, but  merging
into  illegitimate motives and purposes, a wide category  or
errors	commonly  described as irrelevant  considerations,
and  mistakes and misunderstandings which can be classed  as
self-misdirection,  or	addressing  oneself   to  the  wrong
question.   But	 the language used in the cases shows  that,
while  the abuse of discretion has this variety of differing
legal  facets,	in practice the courts often treat  them  as
distinct.  When several of them will fit the case, the court
is  often  inclined to invoke them all.	 The  one  principle
that  unites them is that powers must be confined within the
true scope and policy of the Act.
Taken  by itself, the standard of unreasonableness  is
nominally  pitched  very high:	so absurd that no  sensible
person could ever dream that it lay within the powers of the
authority  (Lord Greene MR);  so wrong that no	reasonable
person	could  sensibly take that view (Lord  Denning  MR);
so outrageous in its defiance of logic or of accepted moral
standards  that no sensible person who had applied his	mind
to  the	 question  to be decided could have arrived  at	 it
(Lord  Diplock).  It might seem from such language that	 the
deliberate  decisions  of  ministers and  other	 responsible
public	authorities  could  almost never be  found  wanting.
But,  as  may  be  seen in the following  pages,  there	 are
abundant  instances  of legally unreasonable  decisions	 and
actions	 at  all levels.  This is not because ministers	 and
public	authorities take leave of their senses, but  because
the  courts in deciding cases tend to lower the threshold of
unreasonableness  to  fit  their   more	 exacting  ideas  of
administrative good behaviour."
When we keep in view the principles laid by this Court
in its various judgments and which we have noticed above, it
has  to be held that the agreement dated November 4, 1993 is
not  a	valid  one.   The agreement  defies  logic.   It  is
outrageous.    It  crosses  all	  limits   of	rationality.
Mahapalika has certainly acted in fatuous manner in entering
into  such an agreement.  It is a case where the High  Court
rightly	 interfered  in exercise of its powers	of  judicial
review	keeping in view the principles laid by this Court in
Tata Cellular vs.  Union of India
(1994 (6) SCC 651).  Every
decision  of  the authority except the judicial decision  is
amenable  to  judicial	review and reviewability of  such  a
decision  cannot  now  be questioned.  However,	 a  judicial
review	is permissible if the impugned action is against law
or   in	 violation  of	the   prescribed  procedure  or	  is
unreasonable,  irrational or mala fide.
On the principle of
good governance reference was made to a decision of Division
Bench  of Bombay High Court in
State of Bombay vs.  Laxmidas
Ranchhoddas  and another
(AIR 1952 Bombay 468 at 475)  (Para
12).   It  was	submitted  that bad governance	sets  a	 bad
example.  That is what exactly happened in the present case.
In
State	 of Bombay vs.	Laxmidas Ranchhoddas &	Anr.
[1952  AIR Bom.	 468] a Division bench of the High Court was
considering  the  argument that the writ of  mandamus  being
discretionary,	the Court should consider whether it  should
not  put a limitation upon its own powers and  jurisdiction.
It  was	 submitted that it was impossible for any  State  to
function  if  there was a constant interference by the	High
Court in the executive acts performed by the officers of the
State.	Chagla, CJ, speaking for the Court, said :
"It  may	be that interference by the High  Court	 may
result	in  inconvenience or difficulty	 in  administration.
But  what  we have to guard against is a much greater  evil.
When  we  find in the modern State wide powers entrusted  to
Government,  powers which affect the property and person  of
the  citizen, it is the duty of the Courts to see that those
wide  powers  are  exercised  in conformity  with  what	 the
Legislature  has  prescribed.  We are not oblivious  of	 the
fact that in order that the modern State should function the
Government  must  be armed with very large powers.  But	 the
High  Court  does not interfere with the exercise  of  those
powers.	  The High Court only interferes when it finds	that
those  powers  are  not	 exercised in  accordance  with	 the
mandate of the Legislature.  Therefore, far from interfering
with  the good governance of the State, the Court helps	 the
good  governance by constantly reminding Government and	 its
officers that they should act within the four corners of the
statute	 and not contravene any of the conditions laid	down
as   a	limitation  upon   their  undoubtedly  wide  powers.
Therefore,  even  from a practical point of view, even	from
the  point  of view of the good governance of the State,  we
think  that the High Court should not be reluctant to  issue
its  prerogative  writ whenever it finds that the  sovereign
Legislature has not been obeyed and powers have been assumed
which the Legislature never conferred upon the executive."
It  cannot  be  said  that  the  construction  of	 the
underground  shopping complex is by the builder as an  agent
of  the Mahapalika.  Concept of agency is totally missing in
the  present  case.   Rather the deal is from  principal  to
principal.   Reference	may be made to the decision of	this
Court  in
Akadasi  Padhans
case [1963	Supp.(2)  SCR  691]
quoted	above.	 When  the "development" is by	the  builder
provisions of Section 14 of the Development Act would apply.
There is no sanction of the building plan of the underground
shopping  complex  by the LDA.	Construction is,  therefore,
per  se illegal.  Even after the interim order of this Court
allowing  construction,	 plans were not got sanctioned	from
the LDA, which would be authority under the Development Act.
Sanction  of  the  building plan by  the  Mahapalika  would,
therefore,  be	meaningless.   Even   then,  there  were  no
sanctioned  drawings.  It has been pointed out that  process
of  sanction  appeared	to  be ad hoc  and  skeletal.	When
construction  started LDA issued a show cause notice to	 the
Mahapalika  but	 then in view of the interim order  made  by
this Court show cause notice was subsequently withdrawn.  It
was stated that against the order withdrawing the show cause
a  revision was filed by Mr.  Amrit Puri, a writ  petitioner
to  the	 State	Government,  which was stated  to  be  still
pending.
It  is  not  disputed  that there	 is  a	Master	Plan
applicable to city of Lucknow.	This Master Plan is prepared
under  the Development Act.  It was submitted by the builder
that  the park could be exploited for commercial purposes as
Aminabad  has been shown to be a commercial area.  No  doubt
Aminabad  is  a commercial area but that does not mean	that
the  park  can be utilised for commercial purposes.   Rather
using  the park for commercial purposes would be against the
Master	Plan.  However, in letter dated October 16, 1993  by
Vice-Chairman, LDA to the Mahapalika did say :
"I  am to inform you in this regard that the land	 use
of  the	 Jhandewala park situated in Aminabad is  commercial
one  as	 per  the  Master  Plan.   This	 department  has  no
objection on the layout plan submitted accordingly."
How  this letter came to be written one may notice the
sequence.   High  Power Committee meets on October 13,	1993
and  is adjourned to October 19, 1993.	Mr.  G.C.  Goyal  is
the Architect of Mahapalika and he forwarded the layout plan
to LDA.	 Mr.  Goyal is also officiating as Architect of LDA.
Approval  of  the  layout plan by LDA is dated	October	 16,
1993, which is 3 days before the next meet of the High Power
Committee.   This  approval  of	 the   layout  at  LDA	 was
recommended  by	 the same person who forwarded it  from	 the
Mahapalika and in a great hurry.  In the Master Plan for the
city of Lucknow, it is Aminabad area which is commercial and
that  would not mean that Park can be put to commercial use.
By  letter  dated  November 23, 1993, LDA  objected  to	 the
construction  being undertaken in the Park without obtaining
permission/No	objection   from  it	and   required	 the
construction to stop.  Mahapalika in turn by its letter sent
on  the	 following  day to the builder informed	 it  of	 the
objection  raised  by  LDA  and	 that  before  starting	 any
construction  the permission/No objection of LDA as required
under  Sections	 14  and  15  of  the  Development  Act	 was
necessary.  It does appear to us that the Master Plan of the
city of Lucknow could not have envisaged the Jhandewala Park
as  a site available for commercial exploitation considering
the density and congestion in the area.
The  reason  for	the   construction  of	 underground
shopping  complex  given  was  that   it  would	 remove	 the
congestion  in	the  area.   We have  report  of  the  Local
Commissioner,  which says that it would rather lead to	more
congestion.   We think Mr.  Dave is right in his  submission
that a decision to construct underground shopping complex by
M.I.   Builders	 had already been taken and that  the  whole
process	 was  gone  into  to confer undue  benefit  to	M.I.
Builders  and  the  bogie of congestion	 was  introduced  to
justify	 the action of the Mahapalika.	It is wholly illegal
and   smacks   of    arbitrariness,   unreasonableness	 and
irrationality.
We  may also note the argument of Mr.  Adarsh Goel who
said  that Jhandewala Park was acquired by the State in	 the
year  1913  and was given to Mahapalika for its	 management.
He  said  under Section 41 of the Development Act read	with
Section 5
of the U.P.  Regulation of Building Operations Act
a  Government  order  was issued on August 18, 1986  by	 the
State  Government whereby the use of park for any other	 use
was  prohibited.  This direction of the State Government was
incorporated  in the Master Plan for the city of Lucknow and
of  course violated by allowing construction of	 underground
shopping complex.
Action   of   the	 Mahapalika  in	 agreeing   to	 the
construction	of   underground     shopping	complex	  in
contravention of the provisions of the Act and then entering
into an agreement with the builder against settled norms was
wholly illegal and has been held to be so by the High Court.
No  doubt  Mahapalika  is a continuing body and it  will  be
estopped  from	changing its stand in the given	 case.	 But
when  Mahapalika  finds that its action was contrary to	 the
provisions  of	law by which it was constituted there  could
certainly  be no impediment in its way to change its  stand.
There	cannot	be  any	  estoppel  operating  against	 the
Mahapalika.   Principles  laid in Union of India  vs.	M/s.
Indo-Afgan Agencies Ltd.  (1968 (2) SCR 366) and of Calcutta
High  Court in
The Ganges Manufacturing Co.  vs.  Sourujmull
and others
(1880 ILR Calcutta 669) cannot apply to the facts
of the present case.
Section  128
of	the  Act   confers  powers  on	 the
Mahapalika to sell, let of, hire, lease, exchange, mortgage,
grant  otherwise  dispose  of any property or  any  interest
therein	 acquired by or vested in the Mahapalika.  Appellant
and  the intervenors said that there was no disposal of	 any
property and no interest in the land had been transferred by
the  Mahapalika to the builder.	 Respondent, as noted above,
contended to the contrary.  Under
Section 54
of the Transfer
of  Property Act, 1882 agreement to sell does not create any
interest in land.  We are not concerned with this provision.
Reference  may, however, be made to
Sections 60(b)
and
62(f)
of the Easement Act, 1882.  Though the licence under
Section
60(b)
is  irrevocable	but  it can  be	 revoked  after	 the
happening  of  certain event which is when the	builder	 has
recovered  whole  of his investment plus 10% of the  profit.
Reference  may	be  made  to a decisions of  this  Court  in
Chawalier  I.I.	  Iyappan and another vs.   The	 Dharmodayam
Company
[(1963)  1 SCR 85].  In this case an  argument	 was
raised	by the appellant that he had been granted a  licence
and  acting  upon  the	licence he had executed	 a  work  of
permanent  character and incurred expenses in the  execution
thereof and, thereafter, under
Section 60(b)
of the Easement
Act, 1882 the licence was irrevocable.	This Court said:-
"In  our opinion no case of licence really arises	 but
if  it does what is the license which the appellant obtained
and  what is the licence, which he is seeking to plead as  a
bar.  The licence, if it was a licence, was to construct the
building and hand it over to the respondent company as trust
property.   There  was no licence to create another kind  of
trust  which the appellant has sought to create.  It  cannot
be  said  therefore  that there was an	irrevocable  license
which falls under
s.  60(b)
of the Act.	 Even such a license
is  deemed  to be revoked under
s.  62(f)
of that Act  where
the  licence  is  granted  for a specific  purpose  and	 the
purpose	 is attained or abandoned or becomes  impracticable.
In  the	 present case the purpose for which the license	 was
granted	  has	either	 been	abandoned  or	has   become
impracticable because of the action of the appellant."
[
The  Indian  Easement  Act, 1882
:
Sections  52
,
53
,
60
(b0 and 62(f) :-
52.   Where  one	person grants to another,  or  to  a
definite number of other persons, a right to do, or continue
to  do,	 in or upon the immovable property of  the  grantor,
something  which  would,  in the absence of such  right,  be
unlawful,  and such right does not amount to an easement  or
an interest in the property, the right is called a license.
53.   A  license	may  be granted by any	one  in	 the
circumstances  and  to	the extent in and to  which  he	 may
transfer  his  interests  in the property  affected  by	 the
license.
60.  A license may be revoked by the grantor, unless:-
(a)..........
(b)  the	licensee,  acting   upon  the  license,	 has
executed  a  work  of  a permanent  character  and  incurred
expenses in the execution.
62.  A license is deemed to be revoked -
(a) to (e) ...........
(f)  where  the  license is granted  for	a  specified
purpose	 and  the  purpose  is attained,  or  abandoned,  or
becomes impracticable;]


      We  find force in the submissions of respondents	that
by  granting licence to the builder to construct underground
shopping  complex of permanent nature and to hold on to	 the
same  for a period which is not definite and then under	 the
impugned  agreement builder having been authorised to  lease
out  the shops on behalf of the Mahapalika, it is a  dubious
method adopted to subvert the provision of Section 128 which
apply  as well in the case of lease and thus the transaction
will also be covered by the expression "otherwise dispose of
any  interest in the property".	 It is, therefore, difficult
to  accept  the argument of the builder that transaction  is
outside
Section 128
of the Act.	 Now, first licence has been
granted to the builder to enter upon the park and to execute
a  work	 of  permanent character and incur expenses  in	 the
execution  of the work, thus making the licence irrevocable.
However,  the  licence	is deemed to be	 revoked  after	 the
licensee  has  recovered his full cost on  the	construction
plus  10% of the profit on the investment made by him.	When
this purpose is achieved by the licensee is anybodys guess.
Not only that licensee, i.e., the builder is then authorised
to  lease  out	the shops so constructed on  behalf  of	 the
Mahapalika.   The  result  would  be  that  to	the  builder
provisions  of
Section 129
of the Act, cannot be thus	made
applicable.   In such a situation for the builder to contend
that  the  transaction	is not covered by Section  128	and,
therefore,   Section  129  will	  not  apply  is   certainly
incredulous.   Provision  of
Section 129
of  the  Act	has,
therefore,  been flouted.  Impugned agreement dated November
4, 1993 is bad having been executed also in contravention of
the requirement of
Section 129
of the Act.
The  facts  and circumstances when examined  point  to
only  one  conclusion that the purpose of  constructing	 the
underground  shopping  complex	was a mere pretext  and	 the
dominant  purpose  was to favour the M.I.  Builders to	earn
huge profits.  In depriving the citizens of Lucknow of their
amenity	 of an old historical park in the congested area  on
the  spacious  plea of decongesting the area Mahapalika	 and
its  officers  forgot  their duty towards the  citizens	 and
acted in a most brazen manner.
Proposition  of  construction of underground  shopping
complex	 was  so  lucrative and the land  so  valuable	that
Mahapalika  itself could have done it by collecting  earnest
money from the prospective allottees.  But then nobody cared
to  examine  this aspect and a plea was also  advanced	that
Mahapalika  had no finance to undertake the project.  If one
refers	to the agreement the builder itself devised a  self-
financing  scheme and it had not to spend anything from	 its
own  pocket.   On  mere booking of the shops  builder  could
collect	 rupees	 one crore twenty five lakhs and would	have
collected  more money with the progress of the	construction
at  various stages.  A public body would not sequester	away
its property by devising new methods.
Thus  there are two distinct areas of challenge in the
present	 case  - (1) the agreement is fraud on power,  prime
land  has been given for a song by the Mahapalika.  The fact
that  the scheme is so lucrative could be seen from the fact
that  all  shops less 5% were booked within six days of	 the
advertisement  appearing in December, 1993.  Public interest
and  public  exchequer have been sacrificed.  Mahapalika  is
divested  of its control over the project though  notionally
not for ever but the builder, on the other hand, has control
over  the project for all times to come and (2) construction
is in contravention of the provisions of law as contained in
Development  Act.   The	 project has been entrusted  to	 the
builder	 in  violation	of the provisions of the  Act.	 The
decision  taken	 by  the  Mahapalika   was  not	 on   proper
consideration  and  was not an informed objective  decision.
Judicial  review  is permissible if the impugned  action  is
against	 law or in violation of the prescribed procedure  or
is  unreasonable, irrational or mala fide.  As said  earlier
High Court rightly exercised its power of judicial review in
the  present case.  It has examined the manner in which	 the
decision  was made by the Mahapalika.  Second principle laid
in
Tata  Cellular
's case [(1994) 6 SCC 651] applies in	 all
respects.   High Court held that the maintenance of the park
because	 of  its  historical  importance  and  environmental
necessity was in itself a public purpose and, therefore, the
construction  of  an  underground  market  in  the  garb  of
decongesting the area was wholly contrary and prejudicial to
the public purpose.  By allowing the construction Mahapalika
had  deprived its residents as also others of the quality of
life  to which they were entitled to under the
Constitution
and  the  Act
.	 The   agreement  smacks  of  arbitrariness,
unfairness  and	 favourtism.  The agreement was	 opposed  to
public	policy.	  It  was  not in  public  interest.   Whole
process	 of  law was subverted to benefit the  builder.	  We
agree with the findings and conclusions of the High Court.
High  Court  in its impugned judgment has not  doubted
the  capacity of M.I.  Builders to undertake the project but
then  that is not the issue.  The question is why it was not
necessary  to invite tenders for the project of such a	high
cost.	Why  it	 was  thought  that it	was  only  the	M.I.
Builders  in  the country who could undertake the job?	 Why
project	 report	 was  not obtained to know the cost  of	 the
project?   Why	could it not be thought that there could  be
any  other  person who could undertake the job at  a  lesser
cost  and in equally competent manner?	Public interest	 has
certainly  been given a go bye.	 There was some undercurrent
flowing to award the contract to M.I.  Builders.  High Court
said  "lest we are taken amiss we wish to make it clear that
we  do not doubt either the bona fides of the authorities or
the  competence	 of the respondents M/s.  M.I.	Builders  to
enter  into  the impugned agreement but we are of  the	view
..." The competence of M/s.  M.I.  Builders to undertake the
project	 is  not  doubted when now it is  seen	that  proper
construction  has  been made but before taking	decision  to
award  the  contract to it nobody knew its credentials.	  No
attempt	 made whatsoever to consider if there was any  other
person	more competent for the job or if of equal competence
could  offer  better terms.  In these circumstances,  dictum
contained  in  the  case of Kasturi Lal	 Lakshmi  Reddy	 vs.
State  of  J & K [(1980) 4 SCC 1] becomes inapplicable.
No
advantage  can be drawn by the builder from the decision  of
this Court in
G.B.  Mahajans
case [(1991) 3 SCC 91] as here
the whole process of awarding contract to M.I.	Builders has
been  gone  through in an unabashed manner and	in  flagrant
violation of law with the sole purpose of conferring benefit
on  it.	  All  said  and  done we  fail	 to  understand	 the
certificate  given by the High Court about the bona fides of
the  authorities  in  awarding the contract  to	 M/s.	M.I.
Builders.    The  officers  of	 the  Mahapalika,  who	were
impleaded  as respondents by name, did not file any  replies
to  contradict the allegations made against them.  Rather it
appears	 that it was a fit case where High Court should have
directed an inquiry to be made as to how the project came to
be  awarded  to M.I.  Builders including the conduct of	 the
lawyers.
High  Court  has	directed dismantling  of  the  whole
project	 and  for  restoration of the park to  its  original
condition.   This Court in numerous decisions has held	that
no consideration should be shown to the builder or any other
person	where  construction is unauthorised.  This dicta  is
now  almost  bordering rule of law.  Stress was laid by	 the
appellant  and	the  prospective allottees of the  shops  to
exercise  judicial discretion in moulding the relief.	Such
discretion  cannot be exercised which encourages  illegality
or perpetuates an illegality.  Unauthorised construction, if
it   is	 illegal  and  cannot  be  compounded,	has  to	  be
demolished.   There  is	 no way	 out.	Judicial  discretion
cannot	be  guided by expediency.  Courts are not free	from
statutory  fetters.  Justice is to be rendered in accordance
with  law.   Judges are not entitled to exercise  discretion
wearing	 robes of judicial discretion and pass orders  based
solely	 on  their  personal   predilections  and   peculiar
dispositions.	Judicial discretion wherever it is  required
to  be	exercised has to be in accordance with law  and	 set
legal principles.  As will be seen in moulding the relief in
the  present  case and allowing one of the blocks meant	 for
parking	 to  stand  we have been guided	 by  the  obligatory
duties	of the Mahapalika to construct and maintain  parking
lots.
In  the  present case we find that the builder got  an
interim	 order	from this Court and on the strength of	that
order  got  sanction of the plan from the Mahapalika and  no
objection   from  the  LDA.   It   has	no  doubt   invested
considerable  amount  on  the	construction  which  is	 80%
complete  and by any standard is a first class construction.
Why  should  the builder take such a risk when	the  interim
order  was specific that the builder will make	construction
at  its	 own  risk  and will not claim	any  equity  if	 the
decision  in  the appeal goes against it?  When the  interim
order  was  made  by  this Court Mahapalika  and  the  State
Government  were favouring the builder.	 As a matter of fact
Mahapalika  itself  filed  appeals   against  the   impugned
judgment  of the High Court.  Perhaps that gave hope to	 the
builder	 to  go ahead with the construction and to take	 the
risk  of  getting the construction demolished and  restoring
the  park  to its original condition at its own	 cost.	 The
builder	 did not foresee the change in stand not only of the
Mahapalika but also of the State Government.  It also, as it
would  appear,	over-rated its capacity to manage  with	 the
State  Government  to  change  the land	 use  of  the  park.
Builder is not an innocent player in this murky deal when it
was  able  to get the resolutions of the Mahapalika  in	 its
favour	 and   the  impugned   agreement   executed.	Now,
construction of shops will bring in more congestion and with
that  the  area	 will  get more	 polluted.   Any  commercial
activity  now  in  this unauthorised construction  will	 put
additional  burden on the locality.  Primary concern of	 the
Court  is  to eliminate the negative impact the	 underground
shopping  complex will have on environment conditions in the
area  and  the congestion that will aggravate on account  of
increased traffic and people visiting the complex.  There is
no  alternative	 to  this  except  to  dismantle  the  whole
structure  and	restore the park to its	 original  condition
leaving	 a  portion constructed for parking.  We  are  aware
that it may not be possible to restore the park fully to its
original  condition as many trees have been chopped off	 and
it  will take years for the trees now to be planted to grow.
But beginning has to be made.
There  are  four blocks under construction.   Services
like air-conditioning, fire-fighting, water supply, sanitary
installation,  necessary  pumps for drainage  and  sewerage,
etc.  are yet to be installed and completed.
In  block	 No.  1 there are shops at the	level  minus
9'6".  These shops are divided by partition walls.  There is
a  big hall with pillars below these shops at level of minus
19'6".
In block 2 there are shops on the upper basement level
9'6".  There is no lower basement level.
Third block is currently designed to have shops at the
upper  basement	 level	and parking at	the  lower  basement
level.	 The  upper basement level can be converted to	have
parking at that level too since the structural configuration
will permit the same.  Flooring on the lower basement is yet
to  be	laid.  There can thus be parking both on  the  upper
basement  and  the lower basement.  This parking  place	 for
vehicles would lead to decongestion of the roads surrounding
the park which are otherwise choked with the parked vehicles
in its entire periphery.
Fourth  block is only partially developed with just  a
separate  ramp going down to the first basement level and  a
few  columns with their foundations standing from the  lower
basement  level.   This fourth block, is currently  dug	 up.
However,  to facilitate the movement of the vehicles to	 the
two levels of parking in the third block a new ramp shall be
constructed adjacent to and contiguous to the third block.
We  have	noted  above  that under  clause  (ix-a)  of
Section 114
of the Act, it is incumbent on the Mahapalika to
make  reasonable  and  adequate provision by  any  means  or
measures  which it is lawfully competent to it to use or  to
take  for the construction and maintenance of parking  lots,
bus stops and public convenience.
Number  of  cases	 coming to this	 Court	pointing  to
unauthorised  constructions  taking place at many places  in
the   country	by   builders	in   connivance	  with	 the
Corporation/Municipal  officials.   In the series of  cases,
this   Court  has  directed   demolition   of	unauthorised
constructions.	 This  does not appear to have any  salutary
effect	in cases of unauthorised construction coming to this
Court.	  While	  directing   demolition   of	unauthorised
construction, court should also direct inquiry as to how the
unauthorised  construction  came  about	 and  to  bring	 the
offenders to book.  It is not enough to direct demolition of
unauthorised  construction, where there is clear defiance of
law.   In  the present case, but for the observation of	 the
High  Court, we would certainly have directed an inquiry  to
be  made  as  to how the project was conceived and  how	 the
agreement dated November 4, 1993 came to be executed.
We direct as under :
1.   Block  1,  2 and 4 of  the  underground  shopping
complex	 shall	be  dismantled and demolished and  on  these
places park shall be restored to its original shape.
2.   In  Block  3	 partition walls  and  if  necessary
columns	 in  the  upper basement shall be removed  and	this
upper	basement  shall	 be   converted	 into  parking	lot.
Flooring should be laid at the lower basement level built to
be  used as parking lot.  Ramp shall be constructed adjacent
to  Block 3 to go to upper and lower basement levels for the
purpose	 of  parking of vehicles.  Further to make  block  3
functional  as	a separate unit walls shall  be	 constructed
between block 2 and block 3 and also block 3 and block 4.
3	 Dismantling and demolishing of these structures  in
Blocks	1,  2 and 4 and putting Block 3 into  operation	 for
parking	 shall	be done by the Mahapalika at its  own  cost.
Necessary  services  like sanitation, electricity  etc.	  in
Block 3 shall be provided by the Mahapalika.
4.   Mahapalika  shall be responsible for	 maintaining
the  park and the Block 3 for parking purposes in proper and
efficient manner.
5.   M.I.	  Builders  Pvt.  Ltd.,	 the  appellant,  is
divested  of  any right, title or interest in the  structure
built  by it under or over the park.  It shall have no claim
whatsoever against Mahapalika or against any other person or
authority
6.   Block  3 shall vest in Mahapalika free  from	 all
encumbrances.	Licence of M.I.	 Builders to enter into	 the
park  and the structure built therein is cancelled of  which
possession  is	restored  to the Mahapalika  with  immediate
effect.	  No obstruction or hindrance shall be caused to the
Mahapalika  by	any  one in discharge of  its  functions  as
directed by this order.
7.   Restoration of the park and operation of Block  3
for parking purposes shall be completed by Mahapalika within
a  period  of 12 months from today and report filed  in	 the
registry of this Court.
With  the	 directions  aforesaid,	  the  appeals	 are
dismissed with costs.