[Cites
11
, Cited by
9
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Pedda Seetharamappa And Ors. vs Pedda Appaiah on 25 November, 1960
Equivalent citations: AIR1962AP84, AIR 1962 ANDHRA PRADESH 84
JUDGMENT
(1) S. A. No. 852 of 1957, on behalf of the defendants  is directed  against the judgment and decree of the Subordinate Judge of Anantapur dated 26th February, 1957, allowing the appeal and  decreeing the suit  of the plaintiff respondent, for a declaration of his right to the use of the cart tracks A B C D and A B C E in the plaint plan  and for a permanent injunction restraining the defendants from  interfering with  the respondent's user of the above siad cart tracks,  which  was dismissed by the District Munsif.
(2)  The facts which given rise to this appeal are:   The appellants and the respondent are residents of Konapuram Village in Kalyandurg Taluk and are closely related to each other.  The respondent is  the owner of plot P in Cherlothota shown in the plaint  plan.  The way to this field is through G. A. B. C. D. in the plaint plan and  at point  C  the way  bifurcates; the C E is used  for  taking  carts  to Cherlothota.   All the sharers of Cherlothota have been using the said track for taking their carts to Cherlothota as well as to Paduthota and other  fields to the west and the respondent and his predecessors  have been using the cart track form time immemorial without any obstruction from anybody.  Originally, the respondent's branch and the appellants' branch belonged to a joint family at which time all the lands were held joint  and about 30 years ago during the life time of  the respondent's father,  a  division  of  the family  property  took  place and   the appellant's branch got the fields S. No. 366-1/A, 367-1/A and  367-1/-C and  the right to use the cart track was recognised for the benefit  of all the sharers and all the sharers have been using the said track even after  the partition.   The appellants  denied  this  right  of   the rerspondent and hence the present suit for declaration.
(3) In the plaint, it also stated that apart from the route G A B C  D,  thereis another cart track.  f E D shown in  the plaint  plan, which  runs through salinefields and is unusablefor a mJor  portion of theyear as it would bewater-logged.
(4) The first appellant who was thefirst defendant in the trial Court  in  his written statement denied that the rerspondent  had  nay right of way either along G A B C D or G A B C E in the plaint plan and also  that  the path C E ever existed and stated that  the usual  cart track to Cherlothota and beyond from Kondapuram village was across  the tank  bund  viz.,  F E D route running through lands  not  occupied  by others  and not under cultivation.  It was further averred  that  there had  never been any objection for the use of that a pathway by any  one.  While admitting that a small portion of it was marshy during rains,  he stated that it could beset right by putting a little gravel or  stone.  The defendant inter alia denied that both G A B C D and G A B C E  were ever  used  from  time immemorial.  The other  appellants  adopted  the written statement of the first appellant.
(5) The following  five issues were framed by the District Munsif:
1. Has the plaintiff prescribed his right to the user of the cart tracks A B C D and A B C E shown in the plaint plan by enjoyment of the samefor over twenty years?
2. Has  the plaintiff acquired any such  right  by  easement  of necessity?
3. Is  the cart track F E D noted in the plaint plan,  the usual rastha used by the plaintiff, for proceeding to his field, as contended by the defendants?
4. Is the plaintiff entitled to injunction asked for?
5. To what relief is the plaintiff entitled?
(6) The respondent examined three witnesses and marked Exs.  A-1 to  A-8,  while the appellants produced three witnesses  and filed  two documents,  Exs.  B-1  and B-2.  The District  Munsif  found  that  the respondent had not acquired a right to use the cart track A B C D and A B  C  E, either by prescription or easement of necessity.   He further found  that the usual cart track for the respondent to take his  carats to  his  land  was F E D route.  In the result,  the District  Munsif dismissed  the suit.  On appeal by the respondent,  the appellate Court disagreeing with the findings of the District Munsif decreed  the Suit.  Hence this second apeal.
(7) Sri  Venkataramana,  learned  counsel  for  the  appellants contended that the appellate Court without referring to the evidence of the respondent and without givng a finding whether the evidence of the appellants   could   be believed  or  not  merely   relying   on   the commissioner's report, Ex. A-5, which was ex parte and inadmisssible in evidence and referring to certain admisssions of D. Ws. 1 to 3 has held that the respondent has acquired the right to use the cart track A B C D and  A B C E both by prescription and as easement of necessity,  which, he urges, is perverse  because there is absolutely no evidence of  the acquisition of the right by prescription and the question of the right of  easement by necessity does not arise when there is another  pathway available and the right of way being a discontinuous easement and  the Commissoner's report being ex parteand inadmissible in evidence.
(8)   I  would  first  take up the question  relating  to   the admissibility  of  the Commissioner's report.  The present  suit  was instituted  on 22-12-1953.  On 23-12-1953 Sri M. Venkana, Advocate,  P.  W. 1, was appointed Commissioner by Court to makean inspection of  the suit track fields and other tracks and to take  measurements and prepare a  plan.   Ex. A-1 is the warrant of appointment of  the Commissioner.  This appointment was made without giving notice to the apellants.   Ex.  A-2  is the noticeissued by P. W. 1 to the Advocate for the plaintiff intimating  the date of the execution of the warrant.  Ex. A-4  is  the notice said to have been given to the defendants by P. W. 1, Ex. A-5 is his  report and Ex. A-6 is the plan prepared by him.  The appointment of  Sri  M. Venkanna as Commissioner appears to have been  made under Order 26, Rule1 C. P. C.  It runs thus:
"In any suit in which the Court deems a local investigation to be requisite or  proper  for the parpose of  elucidating  any  matter  in dispute,  or of ascertaining the market-value of any property,  or  the amount of any mesne profits or damages or anual net profits, the Court may  issue a Commission to such person as, it thinks fit directing  him  to make such invesstigation and to report thereon to theCourt:
Provided that, where the State Government has made rules as to the person to whom such commision shall beissued, the Court shall be bound by such rules".
(9) Rule 10  of Order 26 prescribes  the procedure after  the appointment of the Commissioner.  It reads:
"(1)   The Commissioner, after such local inspection as  he deems necessary  and  after reducing to writing the evidence taken  by  him, shall return such evidence together with his report in writing  singned by him to the Court".
Clause(2) Of the said Rule enjoins that the report of the Commissioner and  the evidence taken by him shall form part of the record and  shall be evidence in the suit.
(10) The contention of the learned counsel for the appellants  is that as the report would form part of the record and would be evidence in  the case, it was incumbent on the Court to  issue notice,  before appointment or at least after appointment.
(11) The question that arises is whether any duty is cast on the Court  to  issue notice either before an  order  is  passed  for  the appointment  of a Commisioner or after.  There is nothing in Rule 9  of Order 26 to warrant a contention that there is a duty cast on the Court to  issue notice before an order is passed under that Rule.  It is,  in my  opinion,  open to the Court to issue an exparte commission  if  it thinks  that a local investigation is requisite for the purpose of  the suit.   Of  course, under Rule 18 it is obligatory on the Court  after issuing  Commission to direct the parties to the suit to appear  before the Commissioner in person or by their agents or pleaders.  It  is  so because each party should have a chance of presenting his or her  case and it is in conformity with the principles of natural justice that  it is  only  evidence taken in the presence of the party that  should  be used  against him and it is for that purpose that Rule 18 requires  the Court  to  direct  the parties  to  the suit  to  apear  before  the Commissioner.   From the above discussion, it would follow that  though it  is  not obligatory on the Court to issue notice to  the defendant before the appointment of a Commissioner, it is mandatory on the Court after  issue of the commission to direct the parties to appear  before the Commissioner.
(12) In  the instant case, there is neither any  notice to  the appellants  before the appointment of the Commissioner nor  after  the issue of the commission.  The learned counsel Sri Bahah relied on  Ex.  A.  4 a notice said to have been given to the appellants and  contended that  that  was  sufficient  compliance.  I  do  not  agree with  this contention.  The Commissioner as P. W. 1 admits that this notice could not in station and the third defendant refused to accept it.  The third defendant has denied this fact.  Even assuming that what P. W. 1   says is  correct, the question arises whether that is sufficient  compliance with the provisions of Rule 18 of Ordere 26
C.P.C
.  As stated  earlier, that rule casts a duty on the Court.  There is nothing on record to show that  such  direction   was  given by the Court  after  issue of  the Commission.   Notice by  the Commissioner  would  not  be sufficient compliance of Rule 18 of Order 26 C.P.C.
(13) The scope of Order 26, Rule 18 was considered in the Madras  High  Court in the case of
Latchan Naidu v. Rama Krishna Ranga Rao
,  40 Mad L. W. 358 : (AIR 1934 Mad 548) and it has been held:
"Rule 18 of
Order 26 of the Code of Civil Procedure
is  mandatory and  is intended to ensure that the parties have notice of  appiontment of a Commissiner and that they must attend his investigation.  Thereis no  power  in  the Court to issue an ex parte commission  and  even  an emergency cannot absolve the Court from complying with Rule 18".
This  decision has  been approved so far as it related to rule18  by  a Bench  of this Court in the case of
Chalapathi Veeranna  v.  Chalapathi    Venkatachalam
,  .   In  this case relying  on Rule 18 and the above cited case 40 Mad L. W.  358  :  (AIR 1934 Mad 548) it was contended that it was obligatory on the Court to issue a  notice before the appointment of a Commissioner.   It  was held:
"Rule 18  contemplates  a situation after the appointment  of  a Commissioner and not before the commission is issued.  There is nothing in  Rule 9 to warrant a contention that a duty is cast on the Court  to issue an ex parte commission if it deems that a local investigation  is requisite for the purpose of the suit".
(14) It is, therefore, clear that so far as Rule 18 is concerned, their Lordships have approved the decision in the case of 40 Mad L.  W.  358 : (AIR 1934 Mad 548).  My atention was drawn to the casein re: P.  Moosa  Kutly,  and contended by Sri Baliah the learned counsel  that even under Rule 18 it is not obligatory on the court  to issue a notice, for if the Commissioner is not going to investgate or inspect  the site before the defendant appears most often  there will be no  point  in  taking out a commission because the  object  of  the commission itself would be obliterated.  I do not find any substancein this  argument.   As discussed above, Rule 18 clearly  lays  down  that after the issue of the commission, the Court should direct the parties to appear before the Commission.
In the case relied upon by the learned counsel viz.,   it  has not been held that it is not obligatory on  the Court  to issue notice after the issue of the commission; on the other hand there is  a  definite finding by the learned Judge that there is  a  definite finding by the Court as required by Rule18.  As no direction was given by the Court under Rule 18 and no notice was given to appellants 1  and 2, though the first appellant said that the 3rd appellant had no notice and  P. W. 1. says tht notice was issued, but admittedly none of  them was present at the time when the Commissioner made his inspection  and the whole thing was done behind their back, no reliance can be placed on such a report given by the Commissioner.  It must be remembered that Rule 10 (2) of
Order 26, C.P.C
. makes the report of  the commissioner evidence in  the suit. Therefore it is of importance that  the report should not be founded on representations made to the Commissioner or on matters  brought  to his notice by one party to the suit  alone.   This alone would be sufficient to ignore the report.
The contention  of  Sri  Baliah,  the learned  counsel  for  the respondent  is that even assuming that the report of  the Commissioner has  to  be ignored,  there is no reason  why  the evidence of  the Commissioner should not be taken into accound.  Sri Venkataramana,  the learned  counsel  for the other side on the other hand urges  that  the Commissioner's  examination  as a witnesss is only under  Rule 10  (2) touching on matters in his report and when his report cannot be relied upon  his  evidence which is based on the report could  not  be relied upon.  I find sufficient force in this contention.  The examination  of the Commissioner  is  under Rule 10(2) and  that  relates  to  matters referred to in his report and when the report is to beignored, I canot understand  how  his  evidence which is based on the report  could  be relied  upon.  Sri  Balish the learned counsel  drew  my  attention  to certain obsevations in an unreported judgment of Basheer Ahmed  Sayeed, J.  in  C.R.P. 997 of 1957 (Mad), referred to in   and relied  upon the observation of his Lordship Bashir Ahmed  Sayeed  J., that there could not be any objection to the Commissioner being examined as private individual by the plaintiff.
With due respect, I cannot agree with the said observation.   The Commissioner would only given evidence to what he had seen or  inspected and  that  may  be evidence only pertaining to the day  on  which  he inspected  the site.  He cannot be in a position to give evidence as to what  would  be the position on other days.  Even assuming  that  the Commissioner's  evidence can be relied upon, I think his evidence does not advance the case of the respondent any further.  I would refer  to his evidence while discussing the evidence of the other witnesses.
(15) The next question that has to be considered is whether  the respondent  has made out a case that he has acquired the right  to  use the cart  track  A  B C D and A B C E either  by  prescription  or  as easement of necessity.
(16) I would first take up the case of prescription.  The trial Court after discussing the entire evidence has held that the respondent has  not  made out any case.  The appellate Court in  para  8 of  the judgment  has  considered this point; but I find that  it  has  mostlys based  its conclusion on the report of the Commissioner and  on ceretain admissions  of D. Ws. 1 to 3 without either referring to or  discussing the evidence of the respondent.  The contention of Srin  Venkataramana the learned counsel for the appellants is tht there is  absolutely  no evidence.  Before discussing the evidence, I would like to refer to the relevant provisions of the Act.
(17)
Section 15
, which refers to the acquisition by prescription is to the following effect:
"Where the access and use of light or air to and for any  building have  been  peaceably  enjoyed  there with,  as  an  easement,   without interruption, and for twenty years, and where support from one person's land or things affixed there to, has been peaceably received by  another person's  land  .     .     .      .     .      and where a right  of way  or  another easement  has been peaceably and openly enjoyed by any person  claiming title there to, as an easement, and for twenty years,  theright to  such access  and  use of light, or air, support or other easement  shall  be absolute."
(18) The instant case is one where the respondent claims the right of  way.  Before a right of way can be acquired as an easement,  it  is necessary under the above provision to show:
1. that there has been an actual enjoyment of that right.
2. that the enjoyment has been open;
3. that it has been peaceably enjoyed;
4. that it has been as of right;
5. that it has been as an easement;
6. that  the easement was enjoyed without interruption and  it  has been enjoyed for 20 years.
(19) Unless all the ingredients areproved, no right  of  easement can  accrue. I have therefore to see whether in the present  case,  all those ingredients  have been established.  The respondent as P. W. 3 states:
"To cart manure and produce from Cherlothota the tract shown A B C  D in the plaint plan is being used."
Excepting  this bare statement, there is nothing in his evidence to show  that the track A B C D has been used by him as of right, that  it had been enjoyed peaceably, as an easement and without interruption for 20 years.  The other witness P. W. 2 deposes:
"  All  the crops raised in Cherlathota have to  be carted  through Ootikunta way viz. A B C D of the plaint plan".
Excepting  this bare statement there is also nothing in his  evidence to show the ingredients of easement.
(20) The Commissioner's  evidence as P. W. 1 also  if  taken  into account  would not be helpful for he has said nothing and he could  not have as a matter of fact stated because he had no pesonal knowledge.
(21) Now, I have to see whether, as observed by the appellate Court, by  the admissions of D. Ws. 1 to 3 this right of  easement  could  be established.  The admission by the defendants are said to be that  the cart track F. H. D. shown in the Commissioner's plan which is F. E. D., according  to the appellants, was a saline land, that during the rainy season  and after wards till the summer season, set in, there would  be quick-sands  in the said tracks and that bulls could not  pass  through the same during the rainy season.  The secircumstances viz., that  the track  F. H. D. was a saline land, that during the rainy  season  there would  be quick sands and that bulls could not pass through that  path, would not go to show easementary right could be established over A B  C D  and  A  B  C  E as claimed by  the respondent  herein,  unless  the ingredients required to establish that right over those cart-tracks are proved.  It is clear therefore that the admission relied upon would not be helpful in establishing the right of easement.
(22) The report of the Commissioner also refers to the same facts relating  to the cart track F. H. D.  As discussed above, this also  in my opinion would not establish the easementary right.
(23) From  the above discussion, it would  appear  that  there is absolutely no evidence in the case to show that the respondent acquired any right by prescription and the evidence relied upon by the appellate Court was no evidence at all on which such a conclusion be based.
(24) Assuming  that the respondent had not acquired  any  right  by prescription, the other question that arises is whether he has acquired that right as an easement of necessity.
Section 13
of the Easements Act refers to easements of necessity and quasi-easements.  It reads:
"Where one person  transfer or  bequeaths  immovable property  to another:
(a) if an easement in other immovable property of the transfer or  testator  is  necessary  for enjoying the subject of  the transfer  or bequest, the transfer or legatee shall be entitled to such  easement; or
(b) if such an easement is apparent and continuous and necessary for enjoying  the said  subject as it was enjoyed  when  the transfer  or bequest  took  effect,  the transferee or  legatee shall,  unless  a different intention is expressed or necessarily implied, be entitled to such easement;
(c) if an easement in the subject of transfer or bequest is necessary for enjoying other immovable property of the transfer or testator the transferor  or the legal representative of the testator shall be entitled to  such easement; or
(d) ...........................  Where a partition is made of  the joint property of several persons -
(e) if  an easement over the share of one of them is  necessary  for enjoying the share of another of them, the latter shall be entitled  to such easement, or
(f) if such an easement is apparent and continuous and necessary  for enjoying  the share of the latter as it was enjoyed when the partition took  effect,  he shall, unless a different intention is  expressed  or necessarily implied be entitled to such easement.
The easement  mentioned in this section cls. (a), (c)  and  (e)  are called easements of necessity".
(25) In  the instant case, there has been a partition  between  the partiies  and so clauses (e) and (f) of
Sec. 13
would be the relevant clauses.  I would first take up clause(e), which is called easement of necessity.   What  is  easement of necessity has been  the subject  of discussion  in  various  High  Courts.   In  the case of  Gangulu  v.
Jagannatham AIR 1924 Mad 108, Devadoss and Coleridge, JJ. held:
"An  easement  of  necessity, means an  easement  without  which  the property  retained cannot beused at all, and not one merely  necessary to the reasonable enjoyment of that property, but an easement  apparent and continuous and necessary for enjoying the portions severed from the unity  of  ownership will pass to the transferee unless  a  contrary intention is expressed or implied in the instruments of transfer."
In  another  case before the same High  Court  in  Krishnamaraju  v.  Marraju, ILR 28 Mad 495, Sir Arnold White C. J. and Mr. Justice Davies held:
" if  A has a means of access to his property without going over  B's land, A cannot claim a right of way over B's land on the ground that it is the most convenient means of access.  The law under
Sec. 13
,  clause e) of
Easements Act
is the sameas the law in England."
In  another case Narayana Gajapathiraju v. Janaki Rathayyammaji,  AIR 1930 Mad 601 Kumaraswami Sastri and Walsh, JJ. following ILR 28 Mad 495 and Esa Abbas Sait v. Jacob Haroon Sait, ILR 33 Mad 327 and Wutzler  v.
Sharpe, ILR 15 All 270 held:
"An easement of necessity being an easement without which a  property cannot  be used  at  all and not being one merely  necessary  to  the reasonable enjoyment of the property a plaintiff cannot claim  on  the ground  of  necessity  a right of way over the land  of  another  where another mode of access to his property exists."
"For  claiming easement of necessity it must be shown that  he land conveyed is surrounded on all sides by lands belonging to third persons and the only way of access is over the contiguous land of the grantor."
In  the case of Ahmad Ali Fakruddin v. Dhondba Dasrath, AIR 1937  Nag 179 the Nagpur High Court held:
"The easement contemplated by
Sec. 13 (a)
, Easements Act,  must  be absolutely  necessary for the enjoyment of the subject of  transfer  or bequest.   Where a plaintiff claims a right of way over a staircase as an  easement of necessity and it is found that the plaintiff can  have another  access to the upper story of his house by construcing  one or more staircase,  the easement not being absolutely necessary  for  the enjoyment of the property cannot begranted as a necessary easement."
Identical question had come up before the Allahabad High Court in the case of Sukhdei v. Kedar Nath, ILR 33 All 467 and it has been held:
"An easement of necessity is an easement without a property cannot be used  at all, and not one merely necessary to the reasonable enjoyment of the property."
In this case reliance was placed on the English decision reported  in Union Lighterage Co. v. London Graving Dock Co., (1902) 2 Ch 557.
(26) In a recent case, the Patna High Court in Rajpur Colliery  Co.  v.  Purshottam,   took a similar view and it  has  been held by K. Ahmad and C. S. Prasad, JJ.:
"Where a person claims a right of way by certain road as an  easement of  necessity,  that is, on the ground that he has no  other  means  of going out or coming in to his plot except that particular road, but the evidence shows that there is an alternative route to and from his plot, his claims on ground of necesity cannot be entertained."
(27) At this stage, I may also refer to the English case relied upon  in  the cases discussed above viz., (1902) 2 Ch 557 for  the law under section 13(e), Easement Act is the same as the law in England and it has been held by Stirling, L. J.
"An easement of necessity is one without which the property  retained upon  a  severance cannot  be used at all; not  one which  is  merely necessary  to  the reasonable enjoyment of that  property."  Gale "on Easements" while  discussing the question of the necessity, at page 99, 13th Edition states:
"Clearly no way of necessity arises, if at the time of the grant, the claiming party owned other land which gave access."
He observed on the same page:
"But speaking generally it does appear to be essential that the land is absolutely inaccessible or useless.  If, however, a particular  part of  the property cannot, without the right claimed, be used  for  its designed  purpose,  then  it is probably true to say that  a  right  of access for that purpose will arise as to necessity."
Mr. Katiar, while considering clauses (a), (c), (e) of
section 13
of  the Easements Act at page 185 in his 4th Edition of Law  of  Easements and Licences observes:-
"It  is  well settled that necessity under the seclauses  as well as under the general law is not an ordinary necessity but an absolute one.  In order to claim an easement of necessity it must be shown that it  is one without which the property retained upon a severance cannot be used at all.  It is not enough if it is shown that it is merely necessary to the reasonable enjoyment  of property or that in the absence of  an easement  there would  be inconvenience felt. Thus,  a  plaintiff  who claims  a right of passage through the field of another, has  to prove that he has no alternative means  of access however inconvenient to his field."
(28) In the light of these authorities, if I refer to the facts  of the instant case, I find that the respondent himself in his plaint  has referred  to  another track F D E .  The appellants  also  admitted  the existance of this track and stated further that it is this track  that has been used by the respondent to go to his field; where as the case of the respondent is that this track D E D was not in their use as this is saline land and during rainy seasons till summer sets in, there will  be quick  sands  in the said track and it is impossible for the bulls  to pass  through.  In other words, it is contended that it is  practically impossible to use that track to go to his land. It is admitted by  the appellants  also  in  their  evidence that  during  rainy  season  and after wards  till full summer sets in there will be quick sands  in  the said  track  and that bulls cannot pass through the said  track  during that season, but go along the ridge of the adjoining patta land.' 

 

      It  is  common ground therefore that there is a cart track F  E  D though  during rainy season it is difficult for that track to be used.  In other words, the cart track F E D would not be a convenient means of access,  the respondent for a  portion of  the year namely, the rainy season.  But on the ground that it is not a convenient means of access, the respondent would not acquire any right  of  easement  of necessity  under
section  13
of the Easements  Act.   An  easement  of necessity such as is referred to in
Sec. 13
means an easement could not be used at all and not one merely necessary to the reasonable enjoyment of the property.
(29) From the above discussion, it is clear that the respondent  in this  caseis not entitled to any easement under clause(e) of
section 13
of the Easement Act.
(30) Now,  I have to see whether he is entitled  to  rellief  under clause(f) of the said Act, which reads:
"If  such  as easement is apparent and continuous and  necessary  for enjoying  the share of the latter as it was enjoyed when the partition took  effect,  he shall, unless a different intention is  expressed  or necessarily implied, been titled to such easement."
(31)
Section 5
defines a continuous easement and apparent  easement and it runs as follows:
"Easements  are either continuous or discontinuous, apparent or  non-apparent.  A continuous easement is  one whose enjoyment is, or may be continual without the act of man.  A discontinuous easement is one that needs  the act of man for its enjoyment.  An apparent easement  is  one the existence of which is shown by some permanent  sign  which,  upon careful  inspection by a competant person, would be visible to  him.  A non-apparent easement is one that has not such sign."
Illustration (b) to this section is this:
"A  right  of  way annexed to A's house over B's  land.   This  is  a discontinuous easement."
It is therefore clear that a right of way like the present one in the instant case is a discontinuous easement although it is apparent.   The effect of
section 13
is this; that in cases of partition is an easement is  one of necessity a person to whose share certain property falls  is entitled to the easement apart from any question of its being  apparent or continuous but that if the easement is not one of the necessity  but is merely one necessary for enjoying the share of the latter as it  was enjoyed when the partition took effect, then such an easement should be apparent and continuous.  There is a divergence of opinion of the High Courts  so far as the question whether the right of way over a road  is apparent and continuous.
I  need not go into a detailed discussion of the point because in  so far as the Madras High Court is concerned, the point is set at rest and it  has been held that the right of way over a road is not an  apparent and continuous easement and that unless it is an easement of  necessity it  will not pass merely on the ground of its being necessary  for  the use of the house as conveniently as it was before the partition.  I may in  this connection refer to AIR 1930 Mad 609. Sri Baliah, the learned counsel  relying on Chhotalal v. Devshanker, 3 Bom LR 601 and AIR  1924 Mad 108 contended that a right of way may not be absolutely  necessary, and  yet necessary for this purpose of enjoying the property as it  was enjoyed  when the transfer of it took place and the existence of  this last necessity had to be determined by reference to the prior user  and if  prior user has to be taken into account, the respondent  would  be entitled to a decree.  I don't agree with the contention of the learned counsel for the respondent.
It is no doubt true that in 3 Bom LR 601 it has been observed that a right of way may not be absolutely necessary and yet necessary for  the purpose of enjoying the property as was enjoyed when the transfer  took place and a similar view has been taken in the Madras case relying  on the above decision, but in both these cases, there is no reference to
Sec.  5
of the Easements Act and no discussion at all.
The case of  3 Bom  LR 601 came up for consideration before the Bombay High Court  in another case
Malkajappa Chanvirappa v. Rachappa Panchappa
, AIR 1942 Bom 305 and it has been held:
"In view of
sections 5
and
13 (b)
a right of way though apparent,  if it  is a formed way, is a discontinuous easement and therefore it  does not fall under
section 13 (b)
and cannot be regarded as an easement  of qualified necessity, or as it is calleld a quasi easement."
In  this case reliance was placed on AIR 1930 Mad 609.  My  attention was also drawn to
M. Venkataramaniah v. V. Subbaramayya
, .  This was a case pertaining to water rights.  So far as  water rights  are concerned,  it  is settled law that  it  is  apparent  and continuous; where as in the instant case the right claimed is the right to a pathway or cart-track and so far as the right of way is concerned, the settled  law is that it is not apparent and  continuous  easement.  This case therefore is not applicable to the facts of the instant case.  That apart
,
in
the above case
, reliance was placed on the case 3 Bom LR 601 which was not been followed subsequently by that Court and the case of AIR 1930 Mad 609 has been followed.  It also appears that  attention of my learned brother was not drawn
section 5
of the Easements Act.
(32) In  the view I have taken, the judgement and  decree of  the appellate Court  cannot stand.  Appeal is allowed, the judgement  and decree of  the appellate Court areset aside and of  the trial  Court restored.   The appellant  will been titled to  costs  through out.  No leave.
(33) Appeal allowed.