[Cites
16
, Cited by
5
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
K.V. Lakshminarayana Sastry vs Vijaya Commercial Bank Ltd. And Ors. on 2 September, 1960
Equivalent citations: AIR1962AP17, [1962]32COMPCAS886(AP)
ORDER
(1)  This is an application, under
sections 45-A
and
45-B
of the Banking Companies Act (X  of  1949) as amended by Act LII of 1953), for a declaration that the proceedings in I. P. No. 19 of 1958, on the file  of the Sub-court, Masulipatam, and the order of adjudication passed therein are null and void and not binding on the Vijaya Commercial Bank, Limited (in liquidation.
(2)    The facts giving  rise to this application are these:  The Vijaya Commercial Bank  Limited  (hereinafter referred to as 'the Banking Company') was would  up by an order of the High Court of Judicature, Madras, made in O. P. No. 417 of 1953.  As Nadela Sivaramakrishniah (hereinafter referred to as "the debtor")  was, on the date of the winding up order, indebted to the Banking Company, he was included in the list of debtors prepared by the Liquidator.  By an order of the Madras  High Court,  dated 7th December, 1954, he was directed to pay a sum of Rs. 7,693-9-9  with further interest and a certificate ws accordingly issued under
Sec. 45-D(6)
of the Banking Companies Act (hereinafter referred  to  as 'the Act').
The debtor having defaulted to pay the amount within the time allowed, the Liquidator initiated proceedings in execution and a extent of ac. 3-35 cents of which he was the owner, was attached on the 19th October 1957, in E. P. No. 43 of 1957  on the file of the Sub- Court, Masulipatam.  While so, on the 10th October, 1958, Nadella Rama Subbiah (2nd respondent) who, it is alleged, is closely related to the debtor, filed a petition under
Sec. 11
of the Provincial Insolvency Act for the adjudication the debtor as an insolvent.  The 2nd respondent  alleged   that the debtor and another owed him a sum of Rs. 1,200/- under a promissory note executed  by then and that the debtor had fraudulently executed a mortgage deed in favour of one Basaviah.  The debtor was adjudged insolvent by an order of the Sub-Court, dated 17th January 1959.
(3)  It would appear that notice of the insolvency proceedings was not given to the Banking  company.  Pursuant to the order of attachment obtained by him, the Liquidator attempted to bring to sale  the properties of the debtor.  At this  juncture, the Official Receiver, Krishna, moved the  Sub-court for stay of the sale on the ground that the debtor had been adjudged insolvent and that  his  properties had vested in him.  Thereupon  the court stayed   the sale and  dismissed the execution petition filed by the Liquidator.
(4)  It  is contended by the Liquidator before me that the order of adjudication  passed by the Sub-court, Masulipatam,  in I. P. No. 19 of 1958 is null and void in view of Ss. 45-A and 45-B of the Act.
(5)  The debtor, on whom notice of this  application was served, remained expert.  The Official Receiver, Krishna, to whom also notice was given, took no interest sin the matter.
(6)  The 2nd respondent filed a counter-affidavit contending inter alia that Secs. 45-A and 45-B of the Act could not be invoked by the Banking Company, that  if the Company ws aggrieved by the order of adjudication passed  by the Sub-court, it should have filed an appeal against that order, and that the relief sought by the applicant in the present application is misconceived.
(7)  On these contentions, the questions for decision  is whether the order adjudging the debtor an insolvent passed by the Sub-court, Masulipatam, in O. P. No. 19 of 1958 is null and void by reason of Secs. 45-A and 45-B of the Act.
(8)  For appreciating the point in controversy it is necessary to  refer to the relevant statutory provisions.  With the object of consolidating and amending  the law  relating to the
Banking Companies, the Banking Companies Act
(X of 1949) was enacted.  One of the stated objects of the legislation was to provide  a machinery by which proceedings sin liquidation of Banking  Companies could be expedited and speedily terminated.  It was found, however, that the Act of 1949, as originally enacted, was inadequate to achieve that purpose.  It was in this situation that on the 19th September, 1949, the Banking Companies (Amendment) Ordinance, 1949, was promulgated.  The Ordinance was later replaced by the Amendment Act of 1950, which introduced into the Act an entire Chapter,  Part III-A, consisting of  Secs. 45-A and 45-B under the heading "Special provisions for speedy disposal of winding up proceedings".  However, the necessity  for amending the new provisions  was very soon felt and the Act was further amended by  the  Central Ordinance of 1953, later replaced by the
Banking Companies (Amendment) Act
(LII of 1953).
(9)
Sections 45-A
and
45-B
as amended by the Amendment Act of 1953, are as follows:
PART III-
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR SPEEDY DISPOSAL 


OF WINDING UP PROCEEDINGS   

 

 45-A.  PartIII-A to override other laws.-- The provisions of this Part and the rules made thereunder shall have effect  notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in the
Indian Companies Act, 1913
(VII of 1913) or
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (Act V of 1908) or the
Code  of Criminal Procedure
, 1898 (Act V of 1898) or any other law for the time being in force or any instrument having effect by  virtue of any such law;  but the provisions of any such law  or instrument in so far s the same are not varied by, or inconsistent with, the provisions of this  Part or rules made thereunder shall apply  to all proceedings under this Part.
45-B.  Power of High Court to decide all claims in respect of banking companies.-- The High Court shall, see as otherwise expressly provided in
S. 45-C
have exclusive  jurisdiction to entertain and decide anay claim made by or against a banking  company which is being would up (including claims by or against any of its branches in India) or any application made under
S. 153
of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), by or in respect of a banking company or any question of priorities or anay another question whatsoever, whether of law or fact which may relate to or arise in the course of the winding up of a banking company,   whether such claim or question has arisen or arises or such application has been made or is made before or after the date of the order for the winding up of the banking company or before or after the commencement of the
Banking Companies (Amendment) Act, 1953
".
(10)  Having set out the relevant statutory  provisions, it will be convenient to notice the decided cases which have a bearing on the question arising for decision       

 

       (11)  In
Associated Banking Corporation of India Ltd. v. Nazaralli Kasambhai and Co.
, , a Division  Bench of the Bombay  High Court, consisting of Chaagla, C. J. and Bhagwati, J., had to consider the question, whether a suit filed by the Official Liquidator  to recover a claim due to a Banking Company from its debtor was a matter relating to or arising out of the winding  up of the banking company.  The learned Judges pointed out that
Sec. 45-A
had the effect of ousting the jurisdiction of Courts, other than the High Court, and
S. 45-B
conferred a special jurisdiction upon the High  Court.  They observed:
"There can be no doubt that by reason of these two sections extra-territorial jurisdiction has been conferred upon the High Court which it did not possessors enjoy before.  Wherever the party may be resident,  wherever the cause of action may have arisen, if the matter satisfies the test laid down, viz. that it relates to or arises out of the winding invested with the jurisdiction  to decide that matter".
On a consideration of the purpose and object  of  the legislation and the wider amplitude of the expression' relating  to the winding up', the learned  Judges held that the High Court had jurisdiction to decide the suit under
S. 45-B
and the jurisdiction of the City Civil  Court  had been ousted under
S. 45-A
.  

 

     (12) In
Jadunath Roy v. Bank of  Calcutta Ltd. ,  Special Bench
consisting of Harries, C. J. and Das, and Banerjee,  JJ. held that, 

           "it is  the High  Court  (and no other court) which has jurisdiction to decide any matter which relates to or arises cut of the winding up of  banking companies when the registered office is within the jurisdiction of the High Court and the High Court alone has power to decide all questions  whatsoever, whether of law or fact which may relate to or arise in the course of the winding up of the banking companies coming within the cognizance of the Court."
(13)  In
H.Naik v. Jitendranath Das, ,Narasimham J.
( as he then was), held that, 

             " the question s to whether a debtor of a banking company under liquidation should be adjudged an insolvent and should get the protection of the insolvency law is a matter relating to the winding up of the banking company and consequently, the High Court alone has exclusive jurisdiction under Ss. 45-A and       45-B(1) to decide this question and all other questions arising out of the same."
The above decisions were rendered with reference to the provisions of Ss. 45-A and  45-B as they stood before their amendment in 1953.
(14)  Dealing with the effect of the amended provisions, Ramaswami J. of the Madras High Court, held in Thangia v. Hanuman Bank Ltd., AIR 1958 Mad  403, that it would not only be opposed to the scheme of the amending Act but it would also materially  affect speedy realisation of the assets of a banking  company under liquidation if the various debtors of that company were given leave by the High Court to prosecute their petitions for insolvency in the various District Court.
(15)  As pointed out by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in
Ram Narain v. The Simla Banking  and Industrial Co.
, :
".................the pre-existing law relating  to the winding up of a company involved considerable delay  and  expense.  This was sought  to  be obviated so far as Banks are concerned  by  vesting   exclusive jurisdiction in the appropriate High Court in respect of all  matters arising ins relating or in the course of winding up of the company and by investing the provisions of the
Banking Companies Act
with an overriding effect.  This result was brought about first by the
Banking Companies (Amendment) Act, 1950
, and later by the
Banking   Companies (Amendment) Act, 1953
.
Section 45-A
and
45-B
of  Part III  brought in by the 1950 Act  are far more comprehensive and vest not merely exclusive jurisdiction but specifically provides for the overriding effect of other provisions  also ".
There the question for consideration was whether the provisions of  the
Banking Companies Act
could override the provisions of the
Displaced Persons (Debts Adjustment) Act, 1951
, and their  Lordships held that having regard to the wide and comprehensive language of Ss. 45-A and 45-B of the Act, a proceeding to execute a decree obtained by a displaced creditor against a banking company  from a tribunal functioning under Act  LXX  of  1952 and all other incidental  matters  arising therefrom, such  as attachment  and so forth, were matter within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Punjab  High Court  subject to the provisions of
S. 45-C
of the Act as regards pending matters.
(16)  Learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, however, relied upon a decision of  Remachandra    Iyer, J. in V. R. Shenoy  v. Raghunath  Shenoy, 1959-29 Com. Cas 175: 72  Mad  LW  199.  There the learned  Judge held that.
"an application for the partition of the properties  mortgaged to a banking company on the ground that they are the properties of a joint Hindu family cannot be said to be a claim against the banking  company, and such an application is not congnizable by the High Court under
S. 45-B
of the Banking Companies Act, in the course of the windidng up of the banking company".
The learned Judge pointed out that the claim under
section 45-B
of the Act being one by or against a banking company in liquidation it should have a relation to the liquidation of the Banking Company; and it is only those matters which will facilitate the winding up the banking company, viz. the realisation of its assets and their distribution amongst the various  persons entitled to them, that can properly be the subject-matter of an enquiry under
S. 45-B
".
(17)  For the purpose of this case, it is not necessary to consider the soundness of this view.    The matter arising in this application is one  relating to the liquidation of the Banking  Company viz. the realization of its assets and their distribution among the various persons entitled to them, which, the aforesaid  decision itself points out, can be the subject matter of an enquiry under
S. 45-B
. 

 

      (18)  It was pointed out by their  Lordships of the Supreme Court in Kiran Singh v. Singh v. Chaman Paswan,  :
"It is a fundamental principle well established that a decree passed by a court without jurisdiction in a nullity, and that its invalidity could be set up whenever and wherever  it is sought to  be enforced or relied upon, even at the stage of execution and even in collateral  proceedings.  A defect of jurisdiction, whether it is pecuniary or territorial, or whether it is in respect of the subject matter of the action, strikes at the very  authority of the court to pass any decree, and such a defect cannot be cured even by consent of parties".
Sections 45-A
and
45-B
, inserted in the statute by the
Amending  Act
of 1950, vested exclusive jurisdiction in the  appropriate High Court to decide all claims by or against a Banking Company relating to, or arising in the course of winding  up.
Sections 45-A
and
45-B
, substituted  by the
Amending Act
, of 1953, are  far more comprehensive and vest not merely exclusive  jurisdiction but specifically provide for the overriding effect of other provisions also.  It may be noted that
S. 45-A
specifically provides that the provisions of Part III and the rules made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the
Indian Companies Act
1913, or
the Code  of  Civil Procedure
or  the
Criminal Procedure  Code
or  any other  law for the time being in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of such law.
The High Court having been vested with exclusive jurisdiction with regard to all matters arising in relation to or in the course of winding up of a company, the order of adjudication made by the Insolvency Court and the consequent vesting of the properties of the insolvent in the Official  Receiver, are without jurisdiction and must, therefore, be held to be null and void.
(19)  On this conclusion, it follows that  the application must be allowed with costs against the 2nd respondent.
(20) Application allowed.