[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The Honble High Court Of Jharkhand on 15 January, 2025
2025 INSC 72




                                                                           REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 299 OF 2025
                                       [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 17304 of 2022]


                            DHARMENDRA KUMAR
                            SINGH & ORS.                               …APPELLANT(S)

                                                        VERSUS


                            THE HON’BLE HIGH COURT OF
                            JHARKHAND & ORS.                         ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                                        ORDER
SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA, J.
1.     The present appeal is arising out of judgment dated
                            29.06.2022 passed by High Court of Jharkhand in Writ Petition
                            (C) No. 3771/2019, by which the High Court has declined to
                            entertain the relief for quashment of notification dated
                            30.05.2019 whereby the private respondents have been appointed
                            to the post of District Judge in the Jharkhand Superior Judicial
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Service on promotion in the State of Jharkhand.
   NEETU SACHDEVA
   Date: 2025.01.15
   16:46:20 IST
   Reason:
SLP (C) No. 17304 of 2022                               Page 1 of 8
2.     The facts of the case reveal that appellant No. 1 was
initially appointed as Munsif [Civil Judge (Junior Division)] and
was promoted on 23.07.2014 in the cadre of Civil Judge (Senior
Division) and appellant Nos. 2 and 3 who were initially appointed
as Civil Judge (Junior Division) were promoted to the cadre of
Civil Judge (Senior Division) on 20.04.2016. In the combined
gradation list of judicial officers in the State of Jharkhand, the
names of appellant Nos. 1, 2 and 3 find place at serial Nos. 141,
195 and 204 respectively. The High Court of Jharkhand issued a
notification dated 19.05.2018 for appointment in the Jharkhand
Superior Judicial Service and the appellants participated in the
selection process.      The rules governing the field known as
Jharkhand Superior Judicial Services (Recruitment, Appointment
and Condition of Service) Rule, 2001, provides for a process of
appointment to the service and Rules 4 and 5 of the said Rules,
read as under:
“4. APPOINTMENT TO THE SERVICE:
Appointment to the Service, which shall in the first
       instance ordinarily be to the post of Additional
       District Judge, shall be made by the Governor, in
       consultation with High Court:
(a) by direct recruitment of persons as
       recommended by the High Court for such
       appointment under clause (2) of
Article 233
of the
       Constitution of India;
SLP (C) No. 17304 of 2022                               Page 2 of 8
(b) by promotion from amongst the Sub-Judges
       (Civil Judge, Senior Division) on the basis of merit-
       cum-seniority and passing a suitability test and;
(c) by promotion on the basis of Limited
       Competitive Examination of club Judges (Civil
       Judge, Senior Division) having not less than 5 years
       service in the same cadre.
5. Of the total post in the cadre of service:-
(i) 65% shall be filled in by promotion from amongst
       the Sub Judges (Civil Judge, Senior Division) on the
       basis of merit-cum-seniority and passing a
       suitability test as may from time to time be
       prescribed by the High Court.
(ii) 10% shall be filled in by promotion (by way of
       selection) strictly on the basis of merit through a
       limited Competitive examination of Sub Judges
       (Civil Judge, Senior Division) having not less than
       5 years service and also having due regard to his
       service records in the past.
Provided, if candidates are not available for
       10% quota, or are not able to qualify in the
       examination, then vacant post shall be filled up by
       regular promotion.
(iii) 25% shall be filled in by direct recruitment from
       the Bar on the basis of written test and viva-voce
       conducted by the High Court.
(iv) The suitability test as provided in Clause (i)
       above shall comprise of:-
(a) Interview of 20 Marks,
(b) 60 Marks shall be earmarked on the basis of
       Service Profile depending on the remarks earned by
       the Officer in his A.C.R. during last 10 (ten) years
       of service, which may include the Service as Civil
       Judge (Junior Division).
SLP (C) No. 17304 of 2022                                  Page 3 of 8
The marking pattern shall be as follows for this
       section:-
Outstanding -       6 Marks.
       Very Good -         5 Marks.
       Good -              4 Marks.
       Satisfactory -      3 Marks.
       Average -           2 Marks.
       Poor -              1 Mark.
(c) Evaluation of Judgement - 10 Marks.
(d) Maximum of 10 Marks shall be earmarked on
       the basis of 1 mark against each year of completion
       of Service as Civil Judge (Senior Division) by the
       Officer.
The candidate obtaining minimum 40 Marks in
       aggregate shall be treated suitable for appointment
       on promotion. However, the intense seniority in the
       Cadre of Superior Judicial Service of such suitable
       candidates/Officers shall be determined in terms of
       Rules 8(b) of these Rules.”
3.     The aforesaid rules provide for promotion by Limited
Competitive examination, promotion from Civil Judge (Senior
Division) and by Direct Recruitment. The quota for Direct
Recruitment is 25%, the quota for promotion based upon merit-
cum-seniority and passing of suitability test is 65% and the
remaining is to be filled up by Limited Competitive examination.
It is undisputed fact that the cut off marks for determining
suitability of a candidate for promotion was fixed as 40 marks
and undisputedly appellants have obtained more than 40 marks,
however, the persons junior to them were promoted by preparing
a merit list and by promoting those who have more marks than
SLP (C) No. 17304 of 2022                              Page 4 of 8
the appellants. The appellants’ writ petition was dismissed by the
High Court on the ground that the appellant No. 1 got 50 marks,
appellant No. 2 got 50 marks and appellant no. 3 got 43 marks
and the last selected candidate got 51 marks.
4.     At the outset, learned counsel for the appellant has straight
away drawn the attention of this Court towards the judgment
delivered by a Three Judge Bench of this Court in the case of
Ravikumar Dhansukhlal Maheta and Another Vs. High
Court
of Gujarat and Others 2024 SCC Online SC 972 to contend that
in similar circumstances in respect of similar criteria, this Court
has held that the suitability of each candidate has to be tested on
his own merit and a comparative assessment cannot be made and
the promotion cannot be solely based upon merit list. Para 141
of the judgment delivered by this Court reads as under:
“141. We summarise our final conclusion as
       under:—

       (A) What has been conveyed, in so many words, by
       this Court in All India Judges' Association
       (3) (supra) is that the suitability of each candidate
       should be tested on their own merit. The aforesaid
       decision does not speak about comparative merit
       for the 65% promotional quota. In other words,
       what is stipulated is the determination of suitability
       of the candidates and assessment of their continued
       efficiency with adequate knowledge of case law.
       (B) For the 65% promotional quota this Court
       in All India Judges' Association (3) (supra) did not
       state that after taking the suitability test, a merit list
SLP (C) No. 17304 of 2022                                     Page 5 of 8
should be prepared and the judicial officers should
       be promoted only if they fall in the said merit list. It
       cannot be said to be a competitive exam. Only the
       suitability of the judicial officer is determined and
       once it is found that candidates have secured the
       requisite marks in the suitability test, they cannot be
       thereafter ignored for promotion.
(C) However, we clarify that for the 65%
       promotional quota, it is for a particular High Court
       to prescribe or lay down its own minimum standard
       to judge the suitability of a judicial officer,
       including the requirement of comparative
       assessment, if necessary, for the purpose of
       determining merit to be objectively adjudged
       keeping in mind the statutory rules governing the
       promotion or any promotion policy in that regard.
       (D) We find no fault with the promotion process
       adopted by the High Court of Gujarat as the same
       fulfils the twin requirements stipulated in paragraph
       27 of All India Judges' Association (3) (supra)
       being : -
(I) The objective assessment of legal knowledge of
       the judicial officer including adequate knowledge of
       case law and;
(II) Evaluation of the continued efficiency of the
       individual candidates.
(E) The four components of the Suitability Test as
       prescribed under the recruitment notice dated
       12.04.2022 comprehensively evaluate (i) the legal
       knowledge including knowledge of the case law
       through the objective MCQ - based written
       test AND (ii) the continued efficiency by evaluation
SLP (C) No. 17304 of 2022                                   Page 6 of 8
of the ACRs, average disposal and past judgments
       of the concerned judicial officer.
(F) We are of the view that if the contention of the
       petitioners were to be accepted then it would
       completely obliterate the fine distinction between
       the two categories of promotion in the cadre of
       District & Sessions Judge by way of 65% promotion
       on the basis of ‘Merit-cum-Seniority’ and 10%
       promotion strictly on the basis of merit. In other
       words, the 65% quota for promotion will assume the
       character of the 10% quota for promotion by way of
       a departmental competitive examination which is
       distinct in its nature since the latter is strictly based
       on merit.
(G) Deviating from the process of promotion duly
       followed by the High Court of Gujarat since 2011
       would cause grave prejudice to those judicial
       officers who lost out in the previous selections to the
       Higher Judicial Service despite having scored
       higher marks in the suitability test since, judicial
       officers who were relatively senior were promoted
       to the cadre of District & Sessions Judges.
       Accepting the argument of the petitioners would
       completely flip the process and displace the
       respondents once again, for a contrary reason.”
5.     In light of the aforesaid judgment, as the appellants have
successfully qualified the suitability test, they could not have
been deprived of their legitimate right of promotion only on
account of lower placement in the merit list. At this juncture, it
has been brought to the notice of this Court that the appellants
have been subsequently promoted and the issue now remains in
SLP (C) No. 17304 of 2022                                    Page 7 of 8
respect of their seniority alone.
In view of the judgment rendered
by this Court in the case of
Ravikumar Dhansukhlal Maheta
and Another
(supra), the appellants are certainly entitled for
promotion from the same date the other officers from the select
list prepared by the High Court of Jharkhand have been appointed
to the post of District Judge in terms of notification dated
30.05.2019.
6.     Resultantly, the Civil Appeal is allowed and the orders
passed by the High Court of Jharkhand is set aside.           The
appellants shall be entitled for notional promotion from the date
other officers have been promoted to the post of District Judge in
terms of notification dated 30.05.2019.      They shall also be
entitled for all consequential service benefits, including,
seniority, increments, notional pay fixation etc., however, they
shall not be entitled for any back wages.
……………………………………J.
                                [B. V. NAGARATHNA]




                            ……………………………………J.
                            [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA]
NEW DELHI
January 15, 2025
SLP (C) No. 17304 of 2022                               Page 8 of 8