[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mahanadi Coal Fields Ltd vs Mathias Oram on 3 January, 2025
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
2025 INSC 22                                                                   REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION NO. 2662/2023
                                                     IN
                                              M.A. NO. 231/2019
                                                     IN
                                   SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 6933/2007

             MAHANADI COAL FIELDS LTD. & ANR.                             …. PETITIONER(S)

                                                           VERSUS

             MATHIAS ORAM & ORS.                                         …. RESPONDENT(S)

                                                                 AND
                        M.A. (D) NO. 28318/2024 IN M.A. NO. 231/2019
                                  IN SLP(C) NO. 6933/2007
                                            WITH
                INTERLOCUTORY APPLICATION NOS.137789/2024 & 137791/2024

                                                                 AND
                              M.A. (D) NO. 30630/2024 IN SLP(C) NO. 6933/2007
                                                   WITH
                         INTERLOCUTORY APPLICATION NOS.148429 & 148427/2024

                                                       JUDGMENT
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1. The captioned M.A. No. 2662 of 2023 in M.A. No. 231/2019 has been
Signature Not Verified
filed by the Secretary-cum-Administrative Nodal Officer, Claims
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2025.01.03
16:43:26 IST
Reason:
Commission, Bhubaneswar seeking extension of time to finalise the

                            report of village Ratansara.
1
2. The captioned M.A. (D) No.28318/2024 in M.A. No.231/2019 has been

    filed by the Applicant - Manikeswari Bisthapita Committee through its

    Secretary praying to direct the Commission to prepare the PAF/PDF

    list determining R&R benefits of any or all four remaining Villages

    namely Tumulia, Jhupurunga, Kiripsira and Ratansara out of 14

    villages acquired by the MCL in compliance of the order dated

    03.11.2022 passed by this Court in M.A. No. 231 of 2019.
3. The captioned M.A. (D) No.30630/2024 has been filed by the eight

    applicants praying to direct the Commission to decide their cases at

    the earliest.
4. It may be noted that the Claims Commission had submitted the status

    report showing the progress of the proceedings before it as on

    27.06.2024, pursuant to the order passed by this Court on 23.01.2024.

    Vide the said order dated 23.01.2024, this Court had extended the term

    of the Commission till 15.07.2024, after recording the statement of the

    Secretary of the Commission that the Commission shall finalise the

    claims in respect of Village Ratansara by June, 2024. This Court had

    also directed the Commission to submit the report with regard to the

    finalization of the claims in respect of the Village Ratansara on or before

    01.07.2024. The Commission, therefore, has submitted the report dated
2
01.07.2024 updating the Court about the term of the Commission and

    the work pending with the Commission.
5. As per the Status Report submitted by the Claims Commission, the work

    pending before the Commission as on 27.06.2024 was as under: -
“(i) To dispose of 2836 (2581 as on 31st December, 2023 + 255
           in 2024) Nos. of Civil Cases and 232 (228 + 4) Nos. of Misc.
           Cases filed by land oustees of 10 villages pursuant to orders of
           the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 15.07.2013 and 10.07.2017.
(ii) To dispose of 24 (16+8) Nos. of cases pursuant to the
           direction of the High Court of Orissa issued in various Writ
           petitions.
(iii) To dispose of 194 (57+137) Nos. of cases filed by the villagers
           of Jhupurunga and Tumulia after finalization of the Report for
           substitution of legal heirs of awardees and correction of
           computer-generated mistakes.
(iv) To Certify suitability of Rehabilitation sites for shifting of
           eligible land oustees who are entitled to R&R benefits. Once the
           Rehabilitation site is ready, the Commission shall issue
           necessary certificate as directed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
           vide order dated 10.7.2017.
(v) Determination of R&R benefits of land oustees of 4 acquired
           villages namely Jhupurunga, Tumulia, Kiripsira and Ratansara by
           the Commission subject to appropriate direction of the Hon'ble
           Supreme Court to that effect.”
6. The Original Writ Petitioner i.e., Mahanadi Coalfields Limited (MCL) has

    filed a detailed reply to the Part-I report for Village Ratansara dated

    27.06.2024 and to the progress status report dated 27.06.2024. Raising

    objections against the report of Village Ratansara dated 27.06.2024

    submitted by the Claims Commission, the MCL has stated that the

    Claims Commission had completely erred in its methodology of
3
calculating the compensation for Village Ratansara and has also

    ignored the express directions of this Court given vide judgment dated

    03.11.2022 passed in M.A. No. 231 of 2019 in SLP (C) No. 6933 of 2007.

    According to the MCL, since the MCL had objected to the Commission’s

    methodology of calculation, this Court vide the order dated 10.10.2023

    had transferred the issue to the High Court of Orissa. The W.P. (C) No.

    39185 of 2023 preferred before the High Court in this regard is pending.

    It is further stated by the MCL that so far as the payment of

    compensation for the structures was concerned, the MCL has already

    made payment without prejudice to rights and contentions as regards

    the calculation method.
7. As regards the other pending work shown by the Commission in its

    status report dated 27.06.2024, the petitioner MCL has raised strong

    objections by preparing following tabular chart:
S.    Purported pending works          Ground of MCL for closure of the Commission
    No    mentioned       by      Claims
          Commission
    01    To dispose of 2836 Nos. of       At para 68.iii.c of order dated 03.11.2022, this
          Civil Cases and 232 Nos. of      Hon'ble Court had directed that, "This court is of
          Misc. Cases filed by land        the opinion that the Commission could not reopen
          oustees of 10 villages.          determinations based upon change of policies of
                                           the State given that the benefits adjudicated by it
                                           based on factual determinations has crystallised.
In many cases, MCL has actually provided
                                           employment to several individuals. Consequently,
                                           it is held that all cases that have been adjudicated
                                           and were approved by this court cannot be
                                           reopened". Since the PAF list of the 10 villages
                                           have been approved by the Hon'ble Court, the
                                           Claims Commission cannot re-open those cases.
                                           Subsequently Hon'ble Court in its order dated
                                           10.10.2023 had directed that, "in case of any
4
grievance by any party with respect to any order or
                                       report of the Claims Commission, the grievance
                                       should be first articulated before the High Court, in
                                       appropriate proceedings." The Commission
                                       cannot hear all of such cases as is sought to be
                                       heard, as the same pertain to the villages whose
                                       reports have already been finalised, and have
                                       been approved by this Hon'ble Court and this
                                       Hon'ble Court has thereafter in express directions
                                       given vide Judgement dated 03.11.2022 stated
                                       that there shall not be any re-opening in so far as
                                       the 10 villages are concerned. Thus, the act of the
                                       Claims Commission would amount to re-opening
                                       of cases which have already attained finality and
                                       the same cannot be permitted. In view of the
                                       above, the Claims Commission cannot re-open the
                                       cases of 10 villages.
02   In 24 Nos. of writ petitions      The Claims Commission is hearing cases in so far
     Hon'ble High Court has            as the 10 villages which issues have already
     directed    the      Claims       attained finality. The said issues were kept pending
     Commission to dispose these       by the Claims Commission and not decided in
     cases.                            order to prolong the work of the Claims
                                       Commission instead of completing the main task
                                       assigned by this Hon'ble Court. This Hon'ble Court
                                       has vide its Order dated 03.11.2022 passed in M.A
                                       No. 231 of 2019 expressly directed that all the
                                       issues which have attained finality in so far as the
                                       10 villages the same shall not be re-opened, and
                                       therefore, the question of hearing or deciding any
                                       of such cases by the Claims Commission does not
                                       arise.
03   To dispose of 194 Nos. of         The villages acquired under CBA by MCL, apart
     cases filed by the villagers of   from the villages in Sundargarh District, R&R
     Jhupurunga and Tumulia.           Policy of Govt. of Odisha, 2006 is applicable and
                                       District Collector is the competent authority to
                                       redress the grievances, pertaining to R&R
                                       benefits, of the project affected families. As per
                                       para 68.iii.a of the judgement dated 3.11.2022 of
                                       this Hon'bie Court the R&R Policy 2006 as
                                       amended by the 2013 policy more specifically
                                       Clause 20, clearly provides that there shall be a
                                       District and Directorate Level grievance redressal
                                       mechanism for project affected persons. The same
                                       has been set up and can hear all of such
                                       grievances if any. Hence, the Collector,
                                       Sundargarh can also hear the grievance related to
                                       R&R benefits of these 04 villages as is similarly
                                       done in other areas. In case of any grievance
                                       regarding      amount      of    compensation      or
                                       apportionment of compensation, CBA Tribunal is
                                       constituted w/s 17 of CBA Act, 1957 to hear the
                                       grievances of the project affected families
                                       (land losers). A Statutory Tribunal set up under the
                                       CBAAct is functioning in Jharsuguda District
                                       Odisha. As there is well settled mechanism in the
5
Odisha R&R Policy and in CBA Act to redress the
                                       grievance of the affected families (land losers), the
                                       same can be dealt with appropriately.
04   Certify the suitability of        At para 68.iv.a of order 03.11.2022, this Hon’ble
     Resettlement sites for shifting   Court had directed that:
of eligible land oustees, as      “On the point of housing plots, it is hereby declared
     directed by the Hon’ble           and directed that the State and MCL are under an
     Supreme Court vide order          obligation to ensure that the land acquired by it in
     dated 10.07.2017                  those areas which are to be developed, have to be
                                       developed. The State Government shall ensure
                                       that at least three nodal officers from the
                                       departments concerned are deployed for
                                       facilitating this task of coordinating with all
                                       agencies and ensuring that the development of the
                                       plots duly takes place to enable the Collector to
                                       make the necessary allotments within the time
                                       indicated".
Hence, the commission has no role to play in
                                       Resettlement sites for either allotment of plots or
                                       shifting of the project displaced families.
05   Determining R&R benefits of       The Petitioner MCL, the Land oustees, and District
     land oustees of 4 acquired        Administration after holding a meeting, addressed
     villages, namely Tumulia,         a letter dated 25.01.2024 (at page 59 of the Vol-Il
     Kiripsira, Jhupurunga, and        documents of Claims Commission dated
     Ratansara, the Commission         27.06.2024), to the Claims Commission to prepare
     subject to the appropriate        the PAF list. However, the Claims Commission
     direction of the Hon'ble          vide its Letter dated 12.02.2024 (at page 71 of the
     Supreme Court.                    Vol-II documents of Claims Commission dated
                                       27.06.2024) refused to do the same, stating that
                                       there is no direction from this Hon'ble Court to
                                       prepare the PAF list. In order to obviate any further
                                       delays, the Petitioner MCL herein itself preparing
                                       and finalising the PAF list for village Jhupurunga as
                                       per the principle set by this Hon'ble Court in M.A.
                                       231 of 2019 in SLP (C) No. 6933 of 2007 dated
                                       03.11.2022, in consultation with the 03 nodal
                                       officers appointed by State Government. After
                                       preparation of PAF lists it will be sent to Collector,
                                       Sundargarh for approval. On approval of the PAF
                                       list by Collector, Rehabilitation & Resettlement
                                       benefits will be provided to the villagers according
                                       to the approved list. The same procedure is being
                                       followed in other districts coming under the
                                       coalfield area of MCL in the state of Odisha.
Similarly, the PAF list for Tumulia, would be
                                       prepared by the Petitioner MCL. In so far as village
                                       Kiripsira and Ratansara is concerned, the same
                                       does not fall within the Coal Block of MCL, and this
                                       Hon'ble Court vide its Order dated 15.07.2013
                                       passed in SLP (C) No. 6933 of 2007, stated that
                                       since village Ratanrasa and Kiripsara was
                                       transferred by the Union of India to other
                                       companies, only payment of compensation is the
                                       liability of MCL and it may recover the said amount
                                       from the successor company. The Petitioner states
6
that it is also pertinent to note that the in practice,
                                      and otherwise in all acquisitions the modality
                                      adopted is that the Petitioner MCL carries out the
                                      survey and preparation of the Project Affected
                                      Persons (PAF) list and thereafter the same is
                                      submitted to the District Administration which
                                      verifies the same and consequent to such
                                      verification the District Collector approves the PAF
                                      list. Once such PAF list receives the approval from
                                      the District Collector, the Petitioner MCL extends
                                      the R&R benefits to the persons as figuring in the
                                      approved PAF List. Hence, the commission has no
                                      role either in preparation of PAF list or in extending
                                      employment & Monetary Compensation.
8. We had heard the concerned learned counsels for the parties on

    06.08.2024 permitting them to file brief note of submissions, which they

    have filed.
9. Though the case has a chequered history, to put it in nutshell, the Claims

    Commission was appointed by this Court vide the order dated

    19.07.2010 passed in SLP (C) No. 6933 of 2007, for determining the

    claim of compensation in respect of vast portions of lands acquired by

    the Central Government in Village Gopalpur and others of the District

    Sundergarh, Orissa. The said Commission was set up for carrying out

    the exercise for the following villages.
(i)     Sardega

    (ii)    Jhupurunga

    (iii)   Ratansara

    (iv)    Tikilipara

    (v)     Siarmal
7
(vi)   Tumulia

    (vii) Karlikachhar

    (viii) Kulda

    (ix)   Bankibahal

    (x)    Balinga

    (xi)   Garjanbahal

    (xii) Bangurkela

    (xiii) Kiripsira

    (xiv) Lalma R.F.
10. Out of the afore stated villages, part payment was already made at the

    relevant time in case of villages Sardega and Tikilipara and full payment

    was made in case of villages Bankibahal and Balinga, however the

    possession was not fully taken.
11. Based on the Report submitted by the Claims Commission in relation to

    the village Gopalpur, this Court had passed an order dated 19.04.2012

    approving the recommendations contained therein and made it an order

    of the Court.
12. Following the Gopalpur model, the Commission had submitted the

    reports for the villages Balinga, Bankibahal, Sardega and Tikilipara, and

    this Court vide the order dated 08.08.2012 had approved the said

    reports, and observed that the Commission may follow as far as
8
practicable, the same basis in other villages for which compensation

    was yet to be fixed. It further appears that thereafter vide the order dated

    10.04.2013, this Court accepted and approved the Commission’s

    Reports with respect to villages Kulda and Garjanbahal, and vide the

    order dated 15.07.2013 for the village Karlikachhar. It further appears

    that this Court also took notice of the fact that the lands in two villages

    namely Kiripsara and Ratansara were transferred by the Central

    Government to some other Companies, and therefore observed that the

    payment of compensation would be MCL’s liability at the initial stage,

    and it could later recover the sums from the successor companies.
13. This Court disposed of the said SLP on 10.07.2017 after receiving the

    report from the Commission and considering the recommendations

    made by the Amicus Curiae in respect of the outstanding issues. The

    Court observed that “we are broadly in agreement with the

    recommendations made by the learned Amicus. We, however, leave it

    open to the appellants or any other affected parties to put forward their

    objections before the High Court/ Commission since we are inclined to

    leave such matters to be dealt with by the High Court/ Commission.”
14. It appears that thereafter several applications were moved by the MCL

    and also by the land owners seeking a range of directions, and some

    had also filed the contempt proceedings. This Court vide the detailed
9
judgment dated 03.11.2022 passed in M.A. No. 231 of 2019 in SLP (C)

No.6933 of 2007 alongwith other Contempt Petitions disposed of the

same after dealing with all the contentious issues and recording the

findings thereon. The Court gave final directions in Paragraph 68 as

under: -
“Conclusions and Directions
68. Having regard to the following discussion, it is held as follows:
i. Re point no.1 - compensation for the land acquired: cut-off
              date for determining compensation for land acquired is to
              be based upon the cut-off date approved by this court in
              relation to village Gopalpur, i.e., September 2010. At the
              same time, it is directed that since common cut-off date has
              been accepted, all benefits flowing from it, including
              statutory interest upon compensation and solatium, is
              determinable on the basis of that cut-off date for the entire
              acquisition.
ii. Re point no. 2 - on the applicability of the R&R Act, 2013:
               the R&R Act cannot apply prior to the date it was brought
               into force i.e., before 01.01.2014. In the present case, it
               applies from the date the Central Government issued a
               notification bringing into force the proceedings of the First,
               Second and Third Schedules to the enactment specified in
               the Fourth Schedule, which in this case was the CBA Act.
               The date therefore, on which the R&R Act, 2013 is
               applicable from, is 28.08.2015. Additionally, the report
               which was finalised before that date cannot be interfered
               with. The land owners and displaced families residing in the
               villages for which reports were prepared earlier than
               28.08.2015, would not therefore be entitled to the benefits
               of the R&R Act, 2013. Hence, the benefits of the R&R Act
               apply to displaced families and land owners of Kiripsira,
               Ratansara, Jhupuranga and Tumulia.
iii. Re point no. 3, 4 and 5:
a. It is held that the R&R Policy 2006 as amended by the 2013
                policy applies for the purpose of employment benefits.
           b. A family unit would comprise of head of family or father, a
                major son, and an unmarried daughter having regard to the
                definition and the note appended thereof. In case, for some
                reason, the major son cannot be given employment, and
10
there exists a major grandson, he would then be eligible for
   consideration. In other words, two members (father and son
   or father and grandson) would be eligible for employment
   and not three, in addition to the unmarried daughter who is
   also to be treated as separate unit.
c. This court is of the opinion that the Commission could not
   reopen determinations based upon change of policies of the
   State given that the benefits adjudicated by it based on
   factual determinations has crystallised. In many cases,
   MCL has actually provided employment to several
   individuals. Consequently, it is held that all cases that have
   been adjudicated and were approved by this court cannot
   be reopened.
iv. Re point no. 6:
a. On the point of housing plots, it is hereby declared and
    directed that the State and MCL are under an obligation to
    ensure that the land acquired by it in those areas which are
    to be developed, have to be developed. The State
    Government shall ensure that at least three nodal officers
    from the departments concerned are deployed for
    facilitating this task of coordinating with all agencies and
    ensuring that the development of the plots duly takes place
    to enable the Collector to make the necessary allotments
    within the time indicated. These nodal officials shall be duly
    empowered by the state, through appropriate notifications
    to issue all necessary consequential orders, for the
    implementation of resettlement and rehabilitation
    measures. The Chief Secretary of the Orissa State
    Government shall select the officers, and issue the
    necessary notifications. Furthermore, the State shall ensure
    that these officers are not posted out, for at least 3 years,
    or till the task of rehabilitation and resettlement is
    completed.
b. The Collector shall ensure that the plots earmarked are duly
    notified for the concerned villages and land owners by
    giving due publicity and adequate notice. The views of the
    landowners shall be ascertained and noted, for which
    purpose, adequate notice shall be given, specifying the
    venue, date and time of consultation.
c. In case any individual land owner(s) are not interested for
    allotment of the plots, it is open for them to state so. The
    Collector shall in such event record their disclaimer
    expressly in writing and issue a certificate. In that event the
    displaced family would be entitled to a one-time cash
    settlement of Rs.25 lakhs.
d. After ascertaining the number of displaced families'
    entitlements, and having regard to the availability of plots,
    the Collector shall conduct a draw of lots, and if needed,
    more than one draw of lots, whereby plots are allotted to the
11
concerned displaced families. In case, for any reason such
  plot or plots cannot be handed over within two years, or are
  not available, the leftover families so to say would be
  entitled to the one-time compensation of Rs.25 lakhs with
  interest @ 7% per annum, for two years.
v. Re point no. 7:
a. The State shall ensure that all facilities and amenities are
   developed in accordance with the Third Schedule to the
   R&R Act, 2013 within three years in which plots are handed
   over to the displaced families or in any event within three
   years from the date of this judgment. The necessary funding
   for this purpose shall be by MCL, in addition to the State's
   obligation to spend its resources.
b. The members of the SC/ST communities shall be entitled to
   the preservation and protection of their status in view of
   Section 42 of the R&R Act, 2013. Consequently, the
   concerned Collectors shall ensure that appropriate caste
   certificates are issued in this regard, given that land owners
   have been moved involuntarily and would have to migrate
   to other areas.
vi. This court further directs that compensation determination
    in any event shall be completed and payments made within
    six months from today. The Commission shall ensure that
    this task is taken up as far as possible and completed within
    that time frame. Consequently, the Commission shall
    finalize the reports for villages Kiripsira and Ratansara. As
    regards the reports of Jhupuranga, and Tumulia, the
    Commission shall complete the task of redetermining
    compensation within three months. The State shall ensure
    that compensation in respect of four villages is determined
    in accordance with the R&R Act, 2013. Wherever
    compensation has not actually been disbursed, the State
    shall do so within 6 months from pronouncement of this
    judgment.
vii. MCL is under an obligation to ensure that employment
    benefits are granted and extended and offers are made in
    accordance with the 2013 policy in all cases where the lists
    of those who opted for employment has not been finalised.
    It is clarified in this regard that wherever employment has
    been obtained, the same shall not be reopened. Likewise,
    the question of reopening entitlements for employment,
    based upon the interpretation of this court shall not be
    reopened in case of villages where reports have been
    accepted through previous orders.
viii. In the event any family undertakes that its members are
    not desirous or do not wish to opt for employment, the State
12
shall, through the nodal officers, ensure that the disclaimer
                is voluntary, and that one-time compensation indicated in
                the 2006 policy or under the R&R Act, 2013 or the one-time
                offer of Rs.16 lakhs by MCL, as submitted by the learned
                ASG (whichever is more beneficial), is paid to the family
                concerned. The Collector must ensure the same is
                provided.
ix. The court hereby directs that the Commission should
                 complete its task and that its report should be the basis for
                 disbursement of compensation, one-time rehabilitation
                 package of Rs.25 lakhs per family as indicated above and
                 employment offer within one year from today. In case of any
                 vacancy in the Office of Chairman of the Commission, the
                 Chief Justice of the Orissa High Court shall nominate a
                 retired judge of that court. In the event of any other vacancy,
                 the Government of Orissa shall nominate the concerned
                 members. However, it is clarified that the government
                 nominees should not be ex-officio or part time members,
                 and should be of the rank and status of Additional Secretary,
                 with experience in the Social Welfare or Revenue
                 Departments at senior levels.
x. It is further directed that all concerned landowners who
                have continued to occupy the lands shall vacate it upon the
                deposit of compensation. MCL shall be immediately
                granted possession of such lands. The Collector or the
                concerned authority shall issue a certificate in this regard
                which shall entitle them to the one-time rehabilitation
                payment or payment in lieu of compensation or any other
                benefit under the Act, according to the choice exercised by
                them in the manner indicated above.
69.It is lastly directed that any fresh dispute, on account of
             calculation of compensation, disbursement of benefits etc.,
             would be adjudicated by the High Court. This court will not
             entertain miscellaneous application in individual cases in this
             regard.”
15. From the said judgment dated 03.11.2022 passed by this Court, it is

    explicitly clear that this Court after elucidating the issues involved had

    unequivocably held in Paragraph 32 thereof that the Gopalpur Model for

    determining the compensation was applied in respect of the villages for
13
which reports were prepared and approved by the courts (Gopalpur,

    Sardega,     Balinga,     Bankibahal,        Tikilipara,    Garjanbahal,        Kulda,

    Karlikachhar, Siarmal, and Bangurkela). However, in regard to four

    villages i.e., Tumulia, Jhupuranga, Ratansara, and Kirpsara, no award

    was approved on the said date.
16. The Court further held in Paragraph 34 as under: -
“34. In the light of the above discussion, it is held that the First
           Schedule of the R&R Act, 2013 is applicable to the acquisition in
           question, made by the Central Government in favour of MCL, in
           respect of the villages, the reports of which were not approved
           prior to 28.10.2015. Accordingly, the compensation based upon
           the market value for the four villages i.e., Tumulia, Jhupuranga,
           Ratansara, and Kirpsara have to be re-determined in accordance
           with the provisions of the First Schedule to the R&R Act, 2013.
           Since the extent to land involved, identification of land owners,
           and the basic market value along with solatium and interest
           payments, have been determined, the only additional exercise
           which the Commission has to carry out is the differential payable
           after the re-determination in respect of all the elements i.e., the
           market value, solatium, and further interest. It is also further
           clarified that the villages in respect of which this court has already
           approved reports of the Commission, and entitlements have
           been determined, even availed of, or pending implementation,
           i.e., the other ten villages, the issues shall stand finalized - there
           can be no re-determination on the basis of the present judgment.”
17. The Court after analyzing each and every point meticulously gave clear

    and precise directions in Paragraphs 68 and 69 quoted above and also

    directed that any fresh dispute on account of calculation of

    compensation, disbursement of benefits etc. would be adjudicated by

    the High Court, and this Court will not entertain Miscellaneous

    Application in individual cases in this regard. Despite such clear
14
conclusions and directions, the present Miscellaneous Applications

    have been filed seeking directions.
18. In M.A. No. 2662/2023, the Secretary-cum-Administrative Nodal Officer,

    Claims Commissioner, Bhubaneshwar had sought extension of time to

    finalise the report of village Ratansara till the end of 30th June, 2024.
19. It may be noted that the said Miscellaneous Application was filed in

    November, 2023. As mentioned hereinabove, this Court had vide the

    order dated 23.01.2024 extended the term of Commission till

    15.07.2024 after recording the statement of Secretary of the

    Commission that the Commission shall finalise the claim in respect of

    the village Ratansara by June, 2024. However, the Commission has

    submitted the status report showing the progress and pendency of work

    before it as on 27.06.2024.
20. It is pertinent to note that this Court in the judgment and order dated

    03.11.2022 had clearly held that the villages in respect of which this

    Court has already approved the reports of the Commission determining

    the entitlements in respect of the 10 villages, the issues had stood

    finalized, and there could be no re-determination on the basis of the said

    judgment. Accordingly, it was directed in Paragraph 68 (iii)(c) that the

    Commission can not reopen determinations based on change of policies

    of the State, given that benefits adjudicated by it based on factual
15
determination has been crystalized and consequently, all the cases that

    have been adjudicated and approved by this Court can not be reopened.

    However, the Commission appears to have entertained the cases filed

    by the land oustees of 10 villages, whose reports have already been

    finalized and approved by this Court.
21. Similarly, the Commission also appears to have travelled beyond the

    directions given by this Court in the said judgment dated 03.11.2022, by

    entertaining the issues raised by the villagers and land oustees of four

    villages namely Tumulia, kiripsira, Jhupuranga and Ratansara with

    regard to R&R benefits. With regard to these four villages, it may be

    noted that this Court in Paragraph 34 of the judgment dated 03.11.2022

    had specifically held that “since the extent of land involved, identification

    of law owners, and the basic market value along with solatium and

    interest payments, have been determined, the only additional exercise

    which the Commission has to carry out is the differential payable after

    the re-determination in respect of all the elements i.e. the market value,

    solatium, and further interest.” This Court had clearly earmarked the

    task of the Commission and of the other Authorities and given final

    directions in Paragraph 68 and 69 thereof, which had to be followed

    accordingly. The Commission also appears to have entertained the

    issues with regard to the suitability of resettlement sites for shifting of
16
the eligible land oustees, taking recourse to the order passed by this

    Court on 10.07.2017.
22. In our opinion, the Commission should not have entertained any of these

    issues, when all the issues have been alluded and dealt with thoroughly

    by this Court in the judgment dated 03.11.2022.
23. Now, so far as the report submitted by the Commission for the village

    Ratansara is concerned, it appears that out of the three members, one

    member of the Commission has given dissenting opinion as regards the

    Method of calculation adopted by the Commission in its report dated

    27.06.2024. Since, the petitioner MCL had already raised objections

    with regard to the Method of calculation, this Court vide the order dated

    10.10.2023 had transferred the issue to the High Court of Orissa and

    the Writ Petition (C) being No. 39185/2023 in this regard is pending

    before the said High Court. As stated by the petitioner MCL, it has

    already made payment towards the compensation for the structure,

    without prejudice to its rights and contentions as regards the Method of

    calculation, however, has not made payment with regard to the

    compensation for the land, by stating that the said compensation shall

    be paid as per the order that may be passed by the High Court of Orissa

    in the pending petition.
17
24. In view of the above, it is directed that the High Court shall decide the

    Writ Petition (C) being No. 39185/2023, as expeditiously as possible and

    preferably within three months from the date of receipt of this order. The

    MCL shall make payment towards the compensation immediately after

    the final judgment and order is passed by the High Court in this regard.

    It is clarified that that we have not expressed any opinion on the

    correctness of the Method of calculation adopted by the Commission so

    far as village Ratansara is concerned and the High Court shall decide

    the same considering the rights and contentions of the parties as may

    be legally permissible. It is needless to say that the either of the

    aggrieved party shall be at liberty to challenge the order of the High

    Court, if they desire to do so in accordance with law.
25. In the aforesaid premises, no further order for extension of the term of

    the Commission is passed. The M.A. No. 2662/2023 stands disposed of

    accordingly.
26. So far as M.A. (D) No.28318/2024 is concerned, the Applicant-

    Manikeswari Bisthapita Committee has prayed to direct the Commission

    to prepare PAF/PDF list determining the R & R benefits of the four

    villages namely Tumulia, Jhupurunga, Kiripsira and Ratansara. In view

    of the clear and explicit conclusions and directions given by this Court

    in the judgment dated 03.11.2024, and in view of the above order
18
passed by this Court in M.A. No. 2662/2023, no such directions as

    prayed for could be issued. Suffice it to say that it shall be open for the

    applicant/claimants to raise the issues, as may be permissible under the

    law, before the concerned authorities of the State, in view of the

    directions given by this Court in the judgment dated 03.11.2024.
27. In that view of the matter the M.A. (D) No.28318/2024 is dismissed. All

    pending I.A.s filed therein also stand dismissed.
28. The M.A. (D) No.30630/2024 has been filed by the eight applicants

    praying to direct the Commission to decide their cases at the earliest.

    The said M.A. also does not survive in view of the above order and is

    dismissed. All pending I.A.s filed therein also stand dismissed.
……………………………………J.
                                           [BELA M. TRIVEDI]



                                          .…………..……………………… J.
[SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA]

NEW DELHI;
JANUARY, 03rd 2025.
19