[Cites
9
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Suvarna Cooperative Bank Ltd vs The State Of Karnataka on 9 December, 2021
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M.R. Shah
[REPORTABLE]

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1535 OF 2021


                         M/S SUVARNA COOPERATIVE BANK LTD …Appellant


                                                         Versus



                         STATE OF KARNATAKA AND ANR.              …Respondents



                                                 JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 17.07.2014 passed by the High Court of

                         Karnataka passed in Criminal Petition No.5763 of 2013 by which

                         the High Court has quashed the criminal proceedings against the

                         private respondent herein for the offences under Sections 120B,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2021.12.09
408, 409, 420 and 149 of
IPC
, the original complainant has
16:44:42 IST
Reason:
preferred the present appeal.
1
2.    That criminal proceedings were initiated against the private

respondent herein and others. The complainant – bank filed the

complaint under
Section 200
Cr.P.C. before the Court of learned

Addl. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Bangalore being PCR 15250

of 2009 (re-numbered as CC 22308 of 2012). Thereafter an FIR

(Crime No.127 of 2010) was registered before the Chickpet Police

Station under
Sections 120B
,
408
,
409
,
420
and
149
of IPC. That

on completing the investigation a charge-sheet was filed against

the private respondent herein. The private respondent herein –

original accused no.1 approached the High Court by way of

Criminal Petition No.5763 of 2013 to quash the criminal

proceedings in exercise of powers under
Section 482
Cr.P.C.


2.1   By the impugned judgment and order the High Court has

quashed the criminal proceedings against the private respondent –

original accused no.1 mainly on the ground that in absence of the

original accused nos. 2 and 3 in the PCR and in absence of the

officers of the drawee bank informing the payee’s banker with

reference to dishonour of one of the cheques well within the time

stipulated in the Clearing House Rules, they can be said to have

committed the offences under
Sections 408
and
409
of IPC, the

charge-sheet could not have been filed only against accused no.1.
2
By observing so the High Court has quashed the criminal

proceedings against the original accused no.1.


2.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

judgment and order passed by the High Court quashing the

criminal proceedings against the original accused no.1, the original

complainant has preferred the present appeal.
3.    We have heard Shri Amith Kumar, learned counsel

appearing for the appellant and Shri H.V. Nagaraja Rao, learned

counsel appearing for the respondent.
4.    We have perused and considered the impugned judgment

and order passed by the High Court and the reasoning given by

the High Court mentioned in paragraphs 7 and 8 while quashing

the criminal proceedings against the original accused no.1.

Having gone through and considered the reasoning given by the

High Court while quashing the criminal proceedings against

original accused no.1, we are of the opinion that the impugned

judgment and order passed by the High Court quashing the

criminal proceedings against the private respondent herein –

original accused no.1 is unsustainable, both, in law and on facts.

The High Court has observed that in absence of the officers of the
3
drawee bank informing the payee’s banker with reference to

dishonour of one of the cheques well within the time stipulated in

the Clearing House Rules which amounts to offence under
Sections 408
and
409
of IPC,without the presence of accused nos.

2 and 3 in the PCR, the charge-sheet could not have been filed

only against accused no.1.             While quashing the criminal

proceedings the High Court has observed in para 8 as under:
“8. In the light of the complainant keeping quite in not
       taking any action against incomplete charge sheet,
       which is filed by the first respondent police in arraigning
       only accused nos. 1 and 6 as accused in
       CC.No.22308/2012, the prosecution against two of
       them without the presence of other persons, who are
       said to have involved in the same, would not be
       complete charge sheet and the alleged offence would
       not be complete against two of them without there
       being the accomplice to the said act also being
       arraigned as the accused. In that view of the matter,
       this Court feel that prosecuting accused nos. 1 and 6 in
       the instant case, in the absence of accused 2 and 3,
       would be of no avail and would not take this matter to
       the logical end. Hence, the same is required to be
       quashed.”


4.1   The aforesaid cannot be a ground to quash the criminal

proceedings against the accused who was charge-sheeted by the

Investigating Officer after thorough investigation. Merely because

some other persons who might have committed the offences, but

were not arrayed as accused and were not charge-sheeted cannot

be a ground to quash the criminal proceedings against the
4
accused who is charge-sheeted after a thorough investigation.
During the trial if it is found that other accused persons who

committed the offence are not charge-sheeted, the Court may

array those personsas accused in exercise of powers under
Section 319
Cr.P.C. Merely because some of the persons who

might have committed the offences are not charge-sheeted, cannot

be a ground to quash the proceedings against the accused

charge-sheeted after having found prima facie case against him

after investigation. Nothing has been further observed by the High

Court on merits and/or on the allegations against the private

respondent herein – original accused no.1.
4.2   Under the circumstances the impugned judgment and order

passed by the High Court quashing the criminal proceedings

against the respondent no.2 herein – original accused no.1

deserves to be quashed and set aside.
5.    In view of the above and for the reason stated above present

appeal succeeds. Impugned common judgment and order passed

by the High Court quashing the criminal proceedings against the

private respondent no.2 – original accused no.1 initiated pursuant

to private complaint filed in PCR 15250 of 2009 filed before

learned Addl. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Bangalore which were
5
subsequently registered as FIR No.127 of 2010 on the file of

Chickpet Police Station and thereby registered as CC No.22308 of

2012 is hereby quashed and set aside. Present appeal is allowed

accordingly.
Now, on quashing and setting aside the impugned judgment

and order, the respondent no.2 herein – original accused no.1 be

further prosecuted for the offences for which he was charge-

sheeted and shall face trial which shall be dealt with and

considered in accordance with law and on its own merits.
……………………………….J.
                                    [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                          ……………………………….J.
DECEMBER 9, 2021.                   [B.V. NAGARATHNA]
6