[Cites
24
, Cited by
12
]
Supreme Court of India
Mohd Zahid vs State, Through Ncb on 7 December, 2021
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
B. V. Nagarathna
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1457 OF 2021


          Mohd Zahid                                                        ..Appellant(S)


                                                 VERSUS


          State through NCB                                                ..Respondent(S)


                                               JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.             Feeling   aggrieved   and   dissatisfied   with   the   impugned

                         judgment and order dated 31.03.2017 passed by the High

                         Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Criminal Appeal No. 879 of

                         2002, by which the High Court has dismissed the said

                         appeal preferred by the appellant herein ­ original accused

                         and has confirmed the judgment and order passed by the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
learned Trial Court, convicting the appellant for the offence
Date: 2021.12.07
17:13:08 IST
Reason:
under Section 29 read with Section 21(c) of the Narcotics
1
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985
(hereinafter

     referred to as the
NDPS Act
) and sentencing him to undergo

     rigorous imprisonment (RI) for a period of 15 years with a

     fine of Rs.1,50,000/­ for the aforesaid offence in view of the

     provisions of
Section 31(ii)
of the NDPS Act, the original

     accused has preferred the present appeal.
2.   The facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as

     under:­


2.1 That the appellant herein – original accused faced the trial in

     connection with FIR No.134/1999 for the offence under
Section 23
and
Section 21
of the NDPS Act, PS Customs,

     Amritsar, Punjab for recovery of 4 kg of heroin. He was

     sentenced to undergo 12 years RI by the Amritsar Court. One

     another FIR was also filed against the appellant herein –

     original accused being FIR No.43/1999 at New Delhi for

     recovery of 750 grams of heroin from Delhi. In the second

     case also by judgment and order dated 30.01.2002, he was

     held guilty for the offence under
Section 29
read with
Section

     21(c)
of the NDPS Act. The learned Trial Court at Delhi

     imposed the sentence of 10 years RI (minimum sentence),
2
however, in view of the provisions of
Section 31 (ii)
of the

     NDPS Act, which provides for an enhanced punishment for

     offences after previous conviction, and considering the fact

     that earlier appellant was convicted for the offence under the
NDPS Act
in a case arising out of the FIR No.134/1999, the

     learned Trial Court awarded minimum sentence of 15 years

     RI. No specific order was passed by the learned Trial Court at

     Delhi in the trial arising out of FIR No.43/1999 (subsequent

     trial) that the sentence imposed of 15 years RI would run

     concurrently or consecutively.
3.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and

     order of conviction passed by the learned Trial Court at Delhi

     in a case arising out of FIR No.43/1999 (second/subsequent

     case), the appellant – original accused preferred the appeal

     before the High Court. Before the High Court, it was mainly

     submitted on behalf of the appellant – accused that as the

     appellant – accused had already undergone 12 years

     sentence in a case arising out of FIR No.134/1999, he

     cannot be punished twice and that in a case arising out of

     FIR No.43/1999 he has already undergone sentence of 6
3
years and 2 months, a lenient view may be taken and the

     sentences imposed in both the cases/trials, one arising out

     of FIR No.134/1999 (Amritsar Case) and another arising out

     of FIR No.43/1999 (New Delhi Case) shall be held to run

     concurrently. By the impugned judgment and order the High

     Court has not accepted the above and has dismissed the

     appeal. Hence, the accused has preferred the present appeal.
4.   Ms. Sangeeta Kumar, learned counsel appearing for the

     appellant, in her short written submissions, has stated that

     the appellant is a foreign national, resident of Lahore,

     Pakistan and has been behind bars for the last nearly 22

     years as he was arrested on 15.06.1999 in respect of FIR No.

     134 of 1999 by the Police Station, Customs, Punjab and he

     was charged for the offences under
Sections 21
and
23
of

     NDPS Act, 1985, for import of 4kg heroin and was convicted

     by the order of the Additional Sessions Judge, Amritsar,

     dated 08.12.2000.
Without prejudice to the aforesaid submissions, learned

     counsel for the appellant submitted that the appellant was
4
under trial for the period from 17.09.1999 to 14.02.2002 and

   for the second offence the said period has not been taken

   into consideration. It was submitted that if the sentences are

   to run consecutively and if the aforesaid period is also taken

   into consideration, then the number of years that the

   appellant has to be behind bars, would have to be reduced.


4.1 Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the

   appellant was 30 years of age when he was convicted and

   presently, he is 52 years old. His conduct in jail is good and

   there is no adverse remark made against him by the Jail

   Superintendent.    Hence,   the   two   sentences   which   the

   appellant   is   now   undergoing,   may   be   held   to   run

   concurrently under Section 427 Cr.P.C.
4.2 It is submitted that the appellant – accused has already

   completed 12 years RI in FIR No.134/1999 and if the

   sentences imposed, in both the cases – arising out of FIR

   No.134/1999 registered at Amritsar and arising out of FIR

   No.43/1999 registered at New Delhi, are not held to run

   concurrently and the appellant – accused is to undergo
5
sentences consecutively, in that case the appellant is

     required to undergo in all 27 years of imprisonment. It is

     submitted that therefore the sentences imposed in both the

     cases are to be held to run concurrently.
4.3 It is submitted that as such in the case arising out of FIR

     No.43/1999, the Delhi Court while imposing the sentence of

     15 years RI has not passed any order whether the sentences

     in both the cases to run concurrently or not. It is submitted

     that therefore the appellant should be given benefit of

     Section 427 of Cr.PC.
5.   The present appeal is vehemently opposed by Ms. Akaanksha

     Kaul, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State –

     respondent. Heavy reliance is placed on
Section 427
of

     Cr.PC. It is submitted that in the present case the accused

     faced two separate trials for separate offences and not arising

     out of the same transaction and therefore the sentences

     imposed in both the cases are to run consecutive only.


5.1 It is submitted that general rule is that sentences imposed in

     two separate trials in separate offences will run consecutively
6
where there are two different transactions; different crime

    numbers     and   cases    have   been      decided        by   different

    judgments. It is submitted that exceptions are cases falling

    under proviso to
Section 427(1)
of Cr.PC; falling under
Section 427(2)
of Cr.PC or when the court directs sentences

    shall run consecutively.
5.2 It is submitted that even the power conferred on the court

    under
Section 427
of Cr.PC to order concurrent sentence is

    discretionary, but the discretion ought to be exercised having

    regard to the nature of the offence committed and the facts

    situation in which the question arises.
5.3 It is submitted that in the present case, the sentencing court

    did not direct the sentences to run concurrently. It is

    submitted that in the present case appellant – accused faced

    two separate trials for two separate offences and for two

    different   transactions   (not   arising     out     of    the    same

    transaction) and therefore the submissions on behalf of the

    appellant that the sentences imposed in both the cases to

    run concurrently has no substance and cannot be granted.
7
5.4 In support of her above submissions, she has relied upon the

    following decisions of this court:­ Mohd. Akhtar Hussain

    alias
Ibrahim Ahmed Bhatti Vs. Assistant Collector of

    Customs (Prevention), Ahmedabad & Anr.
(1988) 4 SCC

    183;
Ranjit Singh Vs. Union Territory of Chandigarh &

    Anr.
(1991) 4 SCC 304;
V.K. Bansal Vs. State of Haryana &

    Anr.
(2013) 7 SCC 211;
Neera Yadav Vs. Central Bureau of

    Investigation
(2017) 8 SCC 757;
Vicky @ Vikas Vs. State

    (NCT of Delhi
) (2020) 11 SCC 540;
Gurdev Singh Vs. State

    of Punjab
(2021) 6 SCC 558;
Sharad Hiru Kolambe Vs.

    State of Maharashtra & Ors.
(2018) 18 SCC 718 and Rajpal

    Vs. Om Prakash & Anr. (2019) 17 SCC 809.
5.5 It is further submitted that in the present case, the appellant

    – accused as such is a habitual offender. In connection with

    FIR No.134/1999, he was convicted for the offence under
Section 23
and
Section 21
of the NDPS Act for having in

    possession/recovery of 4 kg of heroin and in another case

    arising out of FIR No.43/1999, he has been convicted for the
8
recovery of 750 grams of heroin. It is submitted that

     therefore the appellant – accused is not entitled to any

     leniency as prayed.
6.   Making the above submissions and relying upon the

     decisions of this court, it is prayed to dismiss the present

     appeal.
7.   We have heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of

     the respective parties at length.
8.   The short question which is posed for the consideration of

     this Court is, whether, the sentences imposed against the

     appellant – accused by two different courts in two different

     trials but against the same accused/person should run

     concurrently as submitted on behalf of the appellant –

     accused or consecutively.
8.1 At the outset, it is required to be noted that in the present

     case, the appellant – accused has been convicted by two

     different courts in two different trials for the offences with

     respect to the different transactions. In one case, he has
9
been sentenced to undergo 12 years RI for the offence under
Section 23
and
Section 21
of the NDPS Act by Amritsar

   Court and in another case arising out of FIR No.43/1999 he

   has been sentenced to undergo 15 years RI for the offence

   under
Section 29
read with
Section 21(c)
of the NDPS Act by

   Delhi Court. In one case he has been convicted for having in

   possession of 4 kg of heroin and in another case for having

   750 grams of heroin. It is also required to be noted that

   judgments have been delivered in both the cases one after

   another and in the subsequent judgment and order of

   conviction and sentence by the Delhi court there is no

   specific order passed by the learned Trial Court (Court at

   Delhi) that the sentences to run concurrently. In view of the

   above facts, the question posed for the present appeal is

   required to be considered.
8.2 While considering the issue in the present appeal
Section

   427
of Cr.PC is required to be referred to which reads as

   under:­
427. Sentence on offender already sentenced for another
       offence.
10
(1) When a person already undergoing a sentence of
      imprisonment is sentenced on a subsequent conviction to
      imprisonment or imprisonment for life, such imprisonment
      or imprisonment for life shall commence at the expiration of
      the imprisonment to which he has been previously
      sentenced, unless the Court directs that the subsequent
      sentence shall run concurrently with such previous
      sentence: Provided that where a person who has been
      sentenced to imprisonment by an order under section 122
      in default of furnishing security is, whilst undergoing such
      sentence, sentenced to imprisonment for an offence
      committed prior to the making of such order, the latter
      sentence shall commence immediately.
(2) When a person already undergoing a sentence of
      imprisonment for life is sentenced on a subsequent
      conviction to imprisonment for a term or imprisonment for
      life, the subsequent sentence shall run concurrently with
      such previous sentence.
Therefore on a fair reading of
Section 427
of Cr.PC, when a

person      who     is   already      undergoing    a    sentence    of

imprisonment is sentenced on a subsequent conviction to

imprisonment or imprisonment for life, such imprisonment

or imprisonment for life shall commence at the expiration of

the    imprisonment       to   which     he   has   been    previously

sentenced.        Meaning thereby the sentences in both the

conviction shall run consecutively. However, there is an

exception to that, namely unless the Court directs that the

subsequent sentence shall run concurrently with such

previous sentence. There is one another exception. As per
11
Sub­section (2) of
Section 427
of Cr.PC when a person

   already undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for life is

   sentenced on a subsequent conviction to imprisonment for a

   term or imprisonment for life, the subsequent sentence shall

   run concurrently with such previous sentence. Therefore, in

   aforesaid two cases only the subsequent sentence shall run

   concurrently   with     previous   sentence.     Otherwise     the

   subsequent sentence shall run consecutively             and the

   imprisonment in subsequent sentence shall commence at the

   expiration of the imprisonment to which he has been

   previously sentenced.
8.3 At this stage, few decisions of this court on whether the

   subsequent     sentence     should    run       concurrently    or

   consecutively are required to be referred to.



8.3.1 In the case of Mohd. Akhtar Hussain (Supra), it is

     observed and held that if the transaction relating to

     offences is not the same or the facts constituting the two

     offences are quite different in that case the subsequent

     sentence should run consecutively.
12
In the case of Mohd. Akhtar Hussain, this Court

observed that the broad expanse of discretion left by

legislation to sentencing Courts should not be narrowed

only    to   the   seriousness    of    the   offence.    No   single

consideration      can   definitively    determine       the   proper

sentence. In arriving at an appropriate sentence, the court

must consider, and sometimes reject, many factors. The

court must ‘recognise, learn to control and exclude’ many

diverse data. It is a balancing act and tortuous process to

ensure reasoned sentence. In consecutive sentences, in

particular, the Court cannot afford to be blind to

imprisonment which the accused is already undergoing.
Mohd. Akhtar Hussain is a case which arose under
Gold (Control) Act, 1968
involving a Pakistani national, the

sentence in the first case was imprisonment for 7 years

and fine of Rs. 10 lakhs awarded by the court of Chief

Metropolitan Magistrate, Ahmedabad in CC No. 1674 of

1982. Upon appeal, the High Court confirmed the sentence

but reduced the fine to Rs. 5 lakhs. The special leave

petition filed by the appellant therein was dismissed by
13
this Court and the conviction and sentence became final.

When the appellant was under judicial custody in the

aforesaid case, there was further investigation with regard

to his smuggling activities. It revealed widespread racket of

smuggling gold and silver in collusion with several

persons. The appellant therein was again prosecuted along

with 18 others under
Section 135
of the Customs Act,

1962. The appellant therein was convicted and sentenced

for 4 years rigorous imprisonment and fine of Rs. Two

lakhs and default sentence in case of non­payment of fine.


    Thereafter, the State as well as the appellant therein

approached the High Court. The High Court accepted the

State’s appeal and it enhanced the sentence from 4 years

to 7 years and made it consecutive. Consequently, the

High Court dismissed the appeal of the appellant. The

result was that he had to serve in all 14 years

imprisonment which he had challenged before this Court.

Ultimately, this Court restored the sentence imposed by

the Trial Court and set aside the sentence enhanced by the

High Court by allowing the appeal.
14
8.3.2 In the case of
Ranjit Singh
(Supra) in paragraph 8, it is

     observed and held as under:­



       “8. Sub­section (1) of
Section 427
CrPC provides for the
       situation when a person already undergoing a sentence
       of imprisonment is sentenced on a subsequent conviction
       to imprisonment or life imprisonment. In other words,
       sub­section (1) of
Section 427
CrPC deals with an
       offender who while undergoing sentence for a fixed term
       is subsequently convicted to imprisonment for a fixed
       term or for life. In such a situation, the first sentence,
       being for a fixed term, expires on a definite date which is
       known when the subsequent conviction is made. Sub­
       section (1) says that in such a situation, the date of
       expiry of the first sentence which the offender is
       undergoing being known, ordinarily the subsequent
       sentence would commence at the expiration of the first
       term of imprisonment unless the court directs the
       subsequent sentence to run concurrently with the
       previous sentence. Obviously, in cases covered by sub­
       section (1) where the sentence is for a fixed term, the
       subsequent sentence can be consecutive unless directed
       to run concurrently. Sub­section (2), on the other hand,
       provides for an offender “already undergoing sentence of
       imprisonment for life” who is sentenced on a subsequent
       conviction to imprisonment for a term or for life.
It is well
       settled since the decision of this Court in Gopal Vinayak
       Godse [Ranjit Singh v. U.T. of Chandigarh, (1984) 1 SCC
       31 following
Mithu v. State of Punjab
, (1983) 2 SCC 277
       and reiterated in Maru Ram [(1981) 1 SCC 107 that
       imprisonment for life is a sentence for the remainder of
       the life of the offender unless the remaining sentence is
       commuted or remitted by the appropriate authority. This
       being so at the stage of sentencing by the court on a
       subsequent conviction, the earlier sentence of
       imprisonment for life must be understood in this manner
       and, therefore, there can be no question of a subsequent
       sentence of imprisonment for a term or for life running
       consecutively which is the general rule
laid down in
sub­
       section (1) of Section 427. As rightly contended by Shri
       Garg, and not disputed by Shri Lalit, the earlier sentence
       of imprisonment for life being understood to mean as a
15
sentence to serve the remainder of life in prison unless
       commuted or remitted by the appropriate authority and a
       person having only one life span, the sentence on a
       subsequent conviction of imprisonment for a term or
       imprisonment for life can only be superimposed to the
       earlier life sentence and certainly not added to it since
       extending the life span of the offender or for that matter
       anyone is beyond human might. It is this obvious
       situation which is stated in sub­section (2) of Section 427
       since the general rule enunciated in sub­section (1)
       thereof is that without the court's direction the
       subsequent sentence will not run concurrently but
       consecutively. The only situation in which no direction of
       the court is needed to make the subsequent sentence
       run concurrently with the previous sentence is provided
       for in sub­section (2) which has been enacted to avoid
       any possible controversy based on sub­section (1) if there
       be no express direction of the court to that effect. Sub­
       section (2) is in the nature of an exception to the general
       rule enacted in sub­section (1) of Section 427 that a
       sentence on subsequent conviction commences on expiry
       of the first sentence unless the court directs it to run
       concurrently.
The meaning and purpose of sub­sections
       (1) and (2) of Section 427 and the object of enacting sub­
       section (2) is, therefore, clear.”


8.3.3 In the case of
V.K. Bansal
(Supra) after relying upon the

     decision of this Court in the case of Mohd. Akhtar (Supra)

     in paragraph 10 it is observed and held as under:­

       “10. We are in the case at hand concerned more with the
       nature of power available to the Court under Section
       427(1) of the Code, which in our opinion stipulates a
       general rule to be followed except in three situations: one
       falling under the proviso to sub­section (1) to Section
       427; the second falling under sub­section (2) thereof; and
       the third where the court directs that the sentences shall
       run concurrently. It is manifest from Section 427(1) that
       the Court has the power and the discretion to issue a
       direction but in the very nature of the power so conferred
       upon the Court the discretionary power shall have to be
       exercised along the judicial lines and not in a
       mechanical, wooden or pedantic manner. It is difficult to
       lay down any straitjacket approach in the matter of
16
exercise of such discretion by the courts. There is no cut
           and dried formula for the Court to follow in the matter of
           issue or refusal of a direction within the contemplation of
           Section 427(1).
Whether or not a direction ought to be
           issued in a given case would depend upon the nature of
           the offence or offences committed, and the fact situation
           in which the question of concurrent running of the
           sentences arises.”

8.3.4 In      the     case        of
Neera     Yadav
(Supra)      while

      interpreting/considering
Section   427
of    Cr.PC    it   is

      observed and held that
Section 427
of Cr.PC deals with

      sentence passed on an offender who is already sentenced

      for another offence and the power conferred on the Court

      under Section 427 to order concurrent sentence is

      discretionary. It is further observed that the policy of the

      legislature is that normally the sentencing should be done

      consecutively.         It   is   further   observed      that   only    in

      appropriate cases, considering the facts of the case, the

      court can make the sentence concurrently with an earlier

      sentence imposed. It is further observed that the discretion

      exercised by the sentencing court to direct the concurrency

      will have to be exercised on sound principles and not on

      whims. Whether or not a direction ought to be issued in a

      given case would depend upon the nature of the offence or

      offences committed. It is further observed and held in
the
17
said decision
that it is well settled that where there are

      different transactions, different crime numbers and the

      cases have been decided by the different judgments,

      concurrent sentences cannot be awarded under
Section

      427
of Cr.PC. It is further observed that however, the

      general rule that there cannot be concurrency of sentences

      if conviction relates to two different transactions, can be

      changed by an order of the court.
8.3.5 In the case of
Sharad Hiru Kolambe
(Supra), it is observed

      and held that unless the court directs that the punishment

      for such two or more offences at same trial should run

      concurrently, the normal principle is that the punishments

      would commence one after the expiration of the other.

      Similarly, in a case where a person already undergoing a

      sentence is later imposed sentence in respect of offence

      tried at subsequent trial, the general rule is that the

      subsequent sentence imposed run consecutively unless

      there is a specific order passed by the court while imposing

      any subsequent sentence, exercising discretion conferred

      under
Section 427
of Cr.PC that in the facts and
18
circumstances   the   subsequent   sentence   should   run

     concurrently, the sentence imposed in both the cases shall

     run consecutively.
8.3.6 In the case of
Gulam Mohammad Malik Vs. State of

     Gujarat and Anr.
(2018) 14 SCC 473, this Court

     considered two appeals. One from the judgment of the

     High Court of Gujarat and the other from the High Court of

     Bombay in respect of the same appellant. In both cases,

     the appellant was charged for the offences under
Section

     8(c)
,
20(b)
and
29
of the NDPS Act, 1985.
Insofar as the

     case filed in Gujarat was concerned, registered as NDPS

     Case No. 1 of 2002, the appellant was convicted and

     directed to undergo rigorous imprisonment for ten years

     and to pay fine of Rs. 1 lakh and in default to undergo

     further rigorous imprisonment for one year in case the fine

     was not paid. Appellant therein preferred an appeal

     challenging the aforesaid conviction and sentence before

     the High Court which dismissed his appeal. In fact, the

     appeal by the State for enhancement of sentence was

     dismissed.
19
In the second case, the appellant therein was tried by

the Special Judge for NDPS, Court of Sessions, Greater

Bombay in Special Case No. 60 of 2002, culminating in the

conviction and sentence of appellant therein under
Section

8(c)
,
20(b)(ii)
read with
Section 31A
of the NDPS Act and

was sentenced to death. Death reference had been sent for

confirmation before the High Court. The appellant therein

had also filed an appeal against the aforesaid conviction

and sentence in the High Court of Bombay. The High Court

rejected the Confirmation Case no. 2 of 2008, filed by the

State by not affirming the death sentence and dismissed

the appeal of the appellant and the death sentence was

converted into thirty years rigorous imprisonment and a

fine of Rs.3 lakhs. The matter pertaining to the conversion

of the death sentence was considered before this Court and

on considering
Section 31
of the NDPS Act on the facts of

the said case, it was held that the appellant therein had to

be given maximum punishment and thereafter multiplier

of one and a half times applied. Minimum term of

imprisonment prescribed under
Section 31
is 10 years, on
20
that reckoning, when it is enhanced by one and a half

           times,    the    minimum   sentence   comes    to   15    years.

           Ultimately, sentence ordered by this Court was rigorous

           imprisonment of 16 years. The Court also had in mind that

           the appellant therein was 65 years of age and suffering

           from various ailments. It was also ordered that the

           sentence would run concurrently and so far as with regard

           to both the cases, fine of Rs. 1 lakh which was imposed by

           the Trial Court in Gujarat was concerned, the same would

           remain. As far as fine of Rs. 3 lakhs in Bombay case was

           concerned, the same was reduced from Rs. 3 lakhs to Rs. 2

           lakhs. Accordingly, the appeals were disposed.
9.   Thus from the aforesaid decisions of this Court, the

     principles of law that emerge are as under:­
(i)      if a person already undergoing a sentence of

              imprisonment is sentenced on a subsequent

              conviction to imprisonment, such subsequent

              term     of    imprisonment     would      normally

              commence        at   the     expiration    of    the
21
imprisonment to      which he was previously

       sentenced;
(ii)   ordinarily   the   subsequent   sentence   would

       commence at the expiration of the first term of

       imprisonment unless the court directs the

       subsequent sentence to run concurrently with

       the previous sentence;
(iii) the general rule is that where there are different

       transactions, different crime numbers and cases

       have been decided by the different judgments,

       concurrent sentence cannot be awarded under

       Section 427 of Cr.PC;
(iv) under
Section 427 (1)
of Cr.PC the court has the

       power and discretion to issue a direction that all

       the subsequent sentences run concurrently

       with the previous sentence, however discretion

       has to be exercised judiciously depending upon

       the nature of the offence or the offences

       committed and the facts in situation. However,
22
there must be a specific direction or order by

        the court that the subsequent sentence to run

        concurrently with the previous sentence.
10. Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid

   decisions and the principles of law enumerated hereinabove

   to the facts of the case on hand, the submissions on behalf

   of the appellant – accused that his subsequent sentence to

   run concurrently with the previous sentence is to be rejected

   outright. In the present case the appellant has been

   convicted with respect to two different transactions, there are

   different crime numbers and the cases have been decided by

   the different judgments. Therefore, the appellant is not

   entitled to any benefit of concurrent sentence under
Section

   427
of Cr.PC. As observed hereinabove, there is no specific

   order or direction issued by the court while imposing the

   subsequent sentence that the subsequent sentence to run

   concurrently with the previous sentence.
23
11. Even otherwise as observed hereinabove under
Section 427

   (1)
of Cr.PC, the Court has the power and discretion to issue

   a direction that the subsequent sentence to run concurrently

   with the previous sentence in that case also, the discretion

   has to be exercised judiciously depending upon the nature of

   offence or the offences committed. In the present case the

   appellant – accused has been convicted for the offences

   under the
NDPS Act
. He has been convicted in one case for

   recovery of 4 kg heroin and sentenced to undergo 12 years RI

   and in another case there is a recovery of 750 grams of

   heroin and considering the
Section 31 (ii)
of the NDPS Act,

   he has been sentenced to undergo 15 years RI. No leniency

   should be shown to an accused who is found to be guilty for

   the offence under the
NDPS Act
. Those persons who are

   dealing in narcotic drugs are instruments in causing death

   or in inflicting death blow to a number of innocent

   young victims who are vulnerable. Such accused causes

   deleterious effects and deadly impact on the society. They are

   hazard to the society. Such organized activities of clandestine

   smuggling of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances

   into this country and illegal trafficking in such drugs and
24
substances have a deadly impact on the society as a whole.

   Therefore, while awarding the sentence or punishment in

   case of
NDPS Act
, the interest of the society as a whole is

   required to be taken into consideration. Therefore, even while

   applying   discretion   under
Section   427
of   Cr.PC,   the

   discretion shall not be in favour of the accused who is found

   to be indulging in illegal trafficking in the narcotic drugs and

   psychotropic substances. As observed hereinabove, even

   while exercising discretion under
Section 427
of Cr.PC to run

   subsequent    sentence    concurrently     with    the    previous

   sentence, the discretion is to be exercised judiciously and

   depending upon the offence/offences committed. Therefore,

   considering the offences under the
NDPS Act
which are very

   serious in nature and against the society at large, no

   discretion shall be exercised in favour of such accused who

   is indulging into the offence under the
NDPS Act
.
12. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

   submissions on behalf of the appellant – accused to direct

   the subsequent sentence in case arising out of FIR

   No.43/1999 to run concurrently with the previous sentence
25
arising out of FIR No.134/1999 is hereby rejected. In view of

   the above and for the reasons stated above the present

   appeal fails and the same deserves to be dismissed and is

   accordingly dismissed.
…………………………………J.
                                   (M. R. SHAH)



                                    …………………………………J.
                                   (B. V. NAGARATHNA)
New Delhi,
December 07, 2021
26