[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Pallabi Rai vs Rahul Rai on 3 December, 2021
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
1

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                           CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                   TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO.441 OF 2020

     PALLABI RAI                                                                              Petitioner

                                                          VERSUS

     RAHUL RAI                                                                                Respondent


                                                      O R D E R
Heard learned counsel appearing for the petitioner.

                         The learned counsel appearing for the respondent states that

     he has no objection for passing an order of transfer as prayed for.
The Learned counsel appearing for the respondent states that

     even                 the   petition    under
Section      125
of    the   Code     of    Criminal

     Procedure, 1973 (“the Code” for short) filed by the petitioner

     which                 is   pending    in   the   Court       of    the       Learned      Chief    Judicial

     Magistrate at Barasat Court, 24 Paragana be transferred to the

     Family Court where the case subject matter of this petition which

     is sought to be transferred is pending. As a Family Court will have

     jurisdiction to try a petition under
Section 125
of the Code, the

     aforesaid prayer deserves to be accepted.
Accordingly, Case No.M.C. No.1949 of 2019, titled “Rahul Rai

     vs.                 Pallabi   Rai",    pending    before          the    Court      of    2nd   Additional

     Principal Judge, Family Court, Bangalore is hereby transferred to

     the Court of the Principle Judge, Family Court, Bankshall Court,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2021.12.09
Hare Street, Kolkata.
19:02:02 IST
Reason:
Further, the petition for maintenance being Case No.M502 of

     2020                 titled
“Pallavi     Rai    (Das)      v.     Rahul      Rai”
,       filed    by   the
2
petitioner against the respondent under
Section 125
of Code in the

Court of the Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Barasat Court, 24

Paragana   is also transferred to the Court of the Learned Principal

Judge of the Family Court, Bankshall Court, Hare Street, Kolkata.

Both the cases shall be heard together.
Considering young age of the parties and the nature of the

dispute, the Learned Principle Judge shall endeavour to give out of

turn priority for disposal of the cases. He may also consider the

option of referring the parties to mediation.

    The transferee Court shall decide the transferred cases as

expeditiously as possible.
The Registry is directed to send a copy of this Order to the

concerned Courts immediately by e-mail for necessary compliance.

    This transfer petition is allowed accordingly.
.................................J.
                                 [ABHAY S. OKA]


NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 03, 2021