[Cites
21
, Cited by
27
]
Supreme Court of India
Ajay Kumar Shukla vs Arvind Rai on 8 December, 2021
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
Vikram Nath
,
D.Y. Chandrachud
REPORTABLE


                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                             CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 5966 OF 2021
                         (arising out of SLP (Civil) No(s). 5435 of 2020)


          AJAY KUMAR SHUKLA AND OTHERS                          ...APPELLANT(S)

                                            VERSUS

          ARVIND RAI AND OTHERS                              ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                              WITH
                             CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 5969 OF 2021
                         (arising out of SLP (Civil) No(s). 8783 of 2020)


          ASHISH KUMAR SRIVASTAVA AND OTHERS                   ... APPELLANT(S)



                                               VERSUS


       RAJESH KUMAR SINGH AND OTHERS                        ...RESPONDENT(S)
                                               AND

                             CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 5967 OF 2021
                         (arising out of SLP (Civil) No(s). 5706 of 2020)

          MANOJ KUMAR SHUKLA AND OTHERS                      ... APPELLANT(S)
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
                                            VERSUS
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2021.12.08
13:42:41 IST
Reason:


          RAJESH KUMAR SINGH               AND OTHERS       ...RESPONDENT(S)

                                                1
                              AND

            CIVIL APPEAL NO(s).5968 OF 2021
       (arising out of SLP (Civil) No(s). 5850 of 2020)


MAHESH CHANDRA BADHANI AND OTHERS ... APPELLANT(S)


                            VERSUS


DHARMENDRA SINGH AND OTHERS                 ...RESPONDENT(S)



                        JUDGMENT
VIKRAM NATH, J.
1.   The present set of appeals preferred by the original writ

petitioners (before the High Court) assails the correctness of the

judgement and order dated 04.12.2019 passed by Division Bench

of the Allahabad High Court in Special Appeal No. 819 of 2019, in

between
Rajesh Kumar Singh and Another vs. Rajeev Nain

Upadhyay
and 24 Others whereby the Division Bench allowed the

appeal, set aside the judgment and order of the learned Single

Judge and dismissed the writ petition.
2
Background:
2.   The appellants, who were working as Junior Engineers in the

Department of Minor Irrigation, State of Uttar Pradesh, aggrieved

by the final seniority list dated 05.03.2010 challenged the same by

way of Writ Petition No. 53123 of 2012, being
Rajeev Nain

Upadhyay and Others vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
.

The appellants (Original Writ Petitioners) belong to the Mechanical

and Civil Streams whereas Private Respondents are from the

Agriculture Stream.
3.   Originally when the petition was filed, challenge was only to

the seniority list published on 05.03.2010. However, during the

pendency of the petition by way of amendment, challenge was also

made to the earlier seniority list published on 05.09.2006. The

said amendment was allowed. Thus, the reliefs claimed post

amendment, read as follows:
“Prayer

          Original prayer in the writ petition before the high court:
It is, therefore, most respectfully prayed that this Hon’ble court
          may be pleased to issue:
i. A writ, order or direction in the nature of certiorari quashing the
          office order dated 05.03.2010 issued by the Chief Engineer (Minor
          Irrigation), U.P. Lucknow and the seniority list appended thereto
          (Annexure 12 to the writ petition).
3
ii. A writ, order or direction of a suitable nature commanding the
           respondents to prepare and publish a revised seniority list in
           conformity with UP Government Servant Seniority Rule 1998
           within a period to be specified by this Hon’ble court.
iii. A writ, order or direction of a suitable nature restraining the
           respondents from taking any action on the basis of impugned office
           order.
iv. A writ, order or direction in the nature of which this Hon’ble
           court may deem fit and proper under the circumstances of the
           case.
v. Award cost to the humble petitioner throughout of the present
           writ petition.
Prayer added subsequently to the original prayer in writ petition
           before the High Court:
That the following prayers may be added after prayer no (i) as
           prayer no. i-a) & i-b)

           i-a) Certiorari quashing for the record to quash the seniority list
           dated 5.9.2006.
i·b) mandamus restraining the respondents from giving any
           benefits to the respondents on the basis of the seniority list dated
           5.9.2006.”
4.   The learned Single Judge, vide judgement and order dated

14.05.2019, allowed the writ petition, quashed the seniority lists

dated 05.09.2006 and 05.03.2010 and further issued a writ of

mandamus directing the respondents to draw a fresh seniority list

in accordance with Rule 5 of the Uttar Pradesh Government

Servants Seniority Rules, 1991 (for short “Rules 1991”). It was

also provided that any promotions made during the pendency of

the writ petitions would not be interfered with but would remain

subject to the fresh seniority list to be prepared in accordance with
4
Rule 5 of Rules 1991. Learned Single Judge recorded the following

findings to arrive at the above conclusions:
a)    After examining the relevant rules and also the scheme of

  determination of the seniority, it was recorded that the existing

  seniority list would not only be prejudicial to the interest of

  junior engineers belonging to civil and mechanical branch but

  would also affect their chances of promotion. It would also be

  generating heart burn, adversely affecting the administration

  and working of the entire department. Paragraph 21 of the

  judgment of learned Single Judge is reproduced below:
“21. The scenario noticed above would not only be
          prejudicial to the interests of Junior Engineers
          belonging to Civil· and Mechanical Engineering Stream
          as it would affect their chances of promotion and
          generate heart-burning but would adversely affect the
          requirement of work to be managed by the department
          also.”
b)    The objection taken by the respondents to the original writ

  petition regarding the petition suffering from delay and laches,

  was elaborately dealt with. The law on the point was dealt with

  in abundance and thereafter it was recorded that a delay of

  three to four years, in a matter relating to seniority dispute

  would not be fatal. Reliance was placed upon the judgment of
5
Shiba Shankar Mohapatra vs. State of Orissa1
. It was held

      that in the present case, there was no delay or laches.
c)       It was also recorded that once there was a serious

      challenge to the determination of seniority on the ground that

      the seniority list had been prepared de hors the rules, writ

      petition was required to be considered on merits.
d)       Three different lists were forwarded by the Commission

      relating to the same selection and therefore, a common inter se

      merit of the candidates from the three lists ought to have been

      prepared and accordingly seniority ought to have been fixed.
e) The Competent Authority and the State committed a serious

      error of law in determining the seniority list merely on the basis

      of the date of receipt of the three select lists arising out of the

      same selection. Such an action could neither be supported in

      law or on facts nor the task of determining seniority be left to

      such a fortuitous circumstance.
f) The date of dispatch of select list, by no stretch of imagination

      could be a determining factor for preparing the seniority list.
1
(2010) 12 SCC 471
6
The Competent Authority and the State have acted contrary to

     the specific provisions contained in Rules 1991. As such their

     action is arbitrary and also against the constitutional spirit of

     equal opportunity in matters of public employment.
5.     The judgment of the learned Single Judge was assailed by

way of intra court appeal registered as Special Appeal No. 819 of

2019.      The Division Bench, vide judgment and order dated

04.12.2019, allowed the appeal, set aside the judgment of the

learned Single Judge and dismissed the writ petition.            This

judgment has given rise to the present set of appeals. The Division

Bench recorded the following findings to arrive at the above

conclusions:
a) There was extraordinary delay on the part of the original writ

     petitioners in approaching the Court inasmuch as the seniority

     list of 2006 which had formed the basis of the 2009 seniority

     list, was not challenged within a reasonable time.
b) The original writ petitioners having not challenged the final

     seniority list dated 05.09.2006 principally accepted the same as

     such their claim would be barred by principle of acquiescence.
7
c) All the affected Junior Engineers having not been impleaded

     would be fatal on the principle of non-joinder of necessary

     parties.
d) The appellants having participated in selection/appointment

     process, later on, cannot challenge the process as such action

     would be hit by doctrine of estoppel and acquiescence.
e) The learned Single Judge was not right in directing for

     preparation of the seniority list in accordance with Rule 5 of

     Rules 1991 as it would be Rule 8 which would be applicable and

     not Rule 5.
Facts:
6.        The factual matrix relevant for adjudication of this set of

appeals are:
a)    The Chief Engineer, Department of Minor Irrigation send a

     requisition dated 18.06.1998 to the Uttar Pradesh Public

     Service Commission (for short “the Commission”) requesting for

     recruitment of 206 posts of Junior Engineers in the Department

     of Minor Irrigation. These posts were further divided inter se
8
between agriculture, mechanical and civil streams in the ratio

of 50:30:20 respectively.
b) The Commission issued an Advertisement No. 3 of 1998-
1999, inviting applications for the post of Junior Engineers. The

examination process was in two tiers; a screening test which

was held on 18.10.1998 and after qualifying this screening test,

there was an interview to be conducted by the Commission. The

result of the screening test was declared on 06.01.1999 and

thereafter, interviews were conducted by the Commission from

07.06.1999 to 26.06.1999 with respect to candidates who were

holding a Diploma in Agricultural Engineering.        Insofar as

candidates holding Diploma in Mechanical Engineering were

concerned, their interviews were held between 24.06.1999 to

02.07.1999 and lastly for candidates holding Diploma in Civil

Engineering, their interviews were held between 07.07.1999 to

22.12.1999.    After finalising the results, the Commission

forwarded three separate select lists to the Minor Irrigation

Department of the State Government, as follows:
i) On 28.09.1999, the select list of candidates pertaining to

    Agricultural Engineering;
9
ii) On 06.01.2000, the select list of candidates pertaining to

     Mechanical Engineering and,
iii) Lastly on 07.11.2000, the select list of candidates

     pertaining to Civil Engineering.
Note: There is some discrepancy regarding the dates of the three

lists being forwarded to the department. The Commission, in

its affidavits filed, has given different dates. However, the fact

remains that the sequence of sending the lists of three different

streams remains the same i.e. Agriculture, Mechanical and Civil

in that order.     In one of the affidavits, the three dates are

06.01.2000, 27.01.2000 and 07.11.2000 for Agriculture,

Mechanical and Civil Junior Engineers. In another affidavit it

is 28.09.1999, 06.01.2000 and 07.11.2000 in the same order.

Hereinafter   we    have    dealt    these   dates    as   28.09.1999,

06.01.2000 and 07.11.2000 respectively.
c)   Based upon the above three select lists forwarded by the

Commission, appointment letters were issued on 08.10.2001.

The appointment letter clearly indicated that the issue regarding

seniority   would    be    decided   later   on.     Pursuant   to   the
10
appointment letters dated 08.10.2001, the petitioner and

private respondents joined.
d) In 2006, a tentative seniority list was published vide office

order dated 17.03.2006 with respect to all the Junior Engineers

appointed after 01.01.1989. Later on, vide office order dated

05.09.2006, a final seniority list was published.          The last

sentence of the said office order reads that the seniority of the

candidates selected by the Commission has been kept in their

serial of merit.
e)   The department took a fresh exercise of preparing the

seniority list in 2009 as for the first time Rules relating to Junior

Engineers of the Minor Irrigation Department were framed.

Reference to these Rules would be made a little later.
f) Accordingly, a provisional seniority list was published vide

office order dated 29.12.2009 inviting objections. The

objections received were considered and vide office order

dated 05.03.2010, a final seniority list was published. In the

latter part of paragraph 11 of the office order dated

05.03.2010, reference was made that the Commission had

sent three separate lists i.e. of Agricultural stream on
11
28.09.1999, Mechanical stream on 06.01.2000 and Civil

stream on 07.11.2000.      The department had placed the

candidates of the three lists in the same sequence as they

were received with their inter se seniority in their respective

lists. For example, if there were 30 candidates in the

Agricultural stream, all those candidates were placed on top

at serial nos. 1 to 30 in the same order as it was received, if

20 candidates were in the Mechanical list then they were

placed en bloc in the same serial as received from the

Commission from serial nos. 31 to 50 and, if there were 50

in the Civil stream, they were placed below Mechanical with

serial numbers 51 to 100 again in the same sequence as

forwarded by the Commission.
g)   The appellants came to know of this mode of preparation of

the seniority list only after the publication of the final list on

05.03.2010 as prior to it they were under the bona fide belief

that department had prepared seniority list inter se between all

three streams as per the selection and result conveyed by the

Commission.     They     were        thus   compelled   to   make

representations to correct the seniority list by considering the

inter se merit of all the three streams i.e. Agricultural,
12
Mechanical and Civil on the basis of the marks obtained in their

     examinations and forwarded by the Commission rather than

     preparing the seniority list in the order of receipt of the select

     list of the three streams. When no heed was paid to their

     representations, the appellants approached the High Court by

     way of Writ Petition No. 53123 of 2012.
h) As already recorded above, the Single Judge allowed the writ

     petition whereas the Division Bench dismissed the writ petition

     giving rise to the present set of appeals.
Statutory Provisions: Rules
7.     Before we proceed further, a broad outline of the relevant

rules applicable for preparation of seniority may be referred to.

First and foremost and most relevant is Rules 1991 framed under
Article 309
of the Constitution. This was in existence at the time

when the selection of the appellants and respondents was made in

1998-1999. Part II of the said Rules deals with the determination

of the seniority. Rule 5 thereof provides for seniority where

appointments are made only by direct recruitment. The said Rule

is reproduced hereunder:
13
“5. Seniority where appointments by direct recruitment
          only. - Where according to the service rules appointments
          are to be made only by the direct recruitment the
          seniority inter se of the persons appointed on the result
          of any one selection, shall be the same as it is shown in
          the merit list prepared by the Commission or the
          Committee, as the case may be :
Provided that a candidate recruited directly may lose his
          seniority, if he fails to join without valid reasons when
          vacancy is offered to him, the decision of the appointing
          authority as to the validity of reasons, shall be final :
          Provided further that the persons appointed on the result
          of a subsequent selection shall be junior to the persons
          appointed on the result of a previous selection.
          Explanation. - Where in the same year, separate
          selections for regular and emergency recruitment, are
          made, the selection for regular recruitment shall be
          deemed to be the previous selection.”
8.   A plain reading of the above provision stipulates that inter se

seniority of the persons appointed as a result of ONE SELECTION

would be on the basis of the merit list prepared by the Commission

or the Committee, as the case may be. The Commission means

the Uttar Pradesh Public Service Commission and the Committee

means the Committee constituted to make selections for

appointment. In the present case, it was the Commission which

had made the selections.
9.   Rule 8 of Rules 1991 provides for preparation of seniority list

where appointments were made both by promotion and direct

recruitment. The said Rule reads as under:
14
“8. Seniority where appointments by promotion and
direct recruitment. - (1) Where according to the service
rules appointments are made both by promotion and by
direct recruitment, the seniority of persons appointed
shall, subject to the provisions of the following sub-rules,
be determined from the date of the order of their
substantive appointments, and if two or more persons are
appointed together, in the order in which their names are
arranged in the appointment order:
Provided that if the appointment order specifies a
particular back date, with effect from which a person is
substantively appointed, that date will be deemed to be
the date of order of substantive appointment and, in other
cases, it will mean of issuance of the order:
Provided further that a candidate recruited directly may
lose his seniority, if he fails to join without valid reasons,
when vacancy is offered to him the decision of the
appointing authority as to the validity of reasons, shall be
final.
(2) The seniority inter se of persons appointed on
the result of any one selection-
(a) through direct recruitment, shall be the same as
    it is shown in the merit list prepared by the
    Commission or by the Committee, as the case
    may be;
(b) by promotion, shall be as determined in accordance
    with the principles
laid down in
Rule 6 or Rule 7, as
    the case may be, according as the promotion are to be
    made from a single feeding cadre or several feeding
    cadres.
(3) Where appointments are made both by promotion and
direct recruitment on the result of any one selection the
seniority of promotees vis-a-vis direct recruits shall be
determined in a cyclic order (the first being a promotee) so
far as may be, in accordance with the quota prescribed
for the two sources.
15
Illustrations
(1) Where the quota of promotees and direct recruits is in
the proportion of 1 : 1 the seniority shall be in the
following order-
First       ...         Promotee
             Second      ...         Direct
                                     recruits
and so on.
(2) Where the said quota is in the proportion of 1 : 3 the
seniority shall be in the following order-
First   ...         Promotee
                Second ...          Direct
                to                  recruits
                Fourth
                Fifth   ...         Promotee
                Sixth   ...         Direct
                to                  recruits
                eight
and so on:
Provided that-
(i) where appointment from any source are made in excess
of the prescribed quota, the persons appointed in excess
of quota shall be pushed down, for seniority, to
subsequent year or years in which there are vacancies in
accordance with the quota;
(ii) where appointments from any source fall short of the
prescribed quota and appointment against such unfilled
vacancies are made in subsequent year or years, the
persons so appointed shall not get seniority of any earlier
year but shall get the seniority of the year in which their
appointments, are made, so however, that their names
shall be placed at the top followed by the names, in the
cyclic order of the other appointees;
(iii) where, in accordance with the service rules the
unfilled vacancies from any source could, in the
circumstances mentioned in the relevant service rules be
filled from the other source and appointment in excess of
quota are so made, the persons so appointed shall get the
seniority of that very year as if they are appointed against
the vacancies of their quota.”
16
10. The above Rule is pressed into service where a combined list

of direct recruits and promotees is to be prepared. However, even

this Rule clearly provides in sub-Rule 2(a) that the seniority inter

se of persons appointed on the result of any ONE SELECTION

through direct recruitment shall be the same as it is shown in the

merit list prepared by the Commission or by the Committee, as the

case may be. The language used and the manner provided is

identical to Rule 5 where only seniority list of direct recruits is dealt

with.
11. Part III of Rules 1991 deals with the preparation of seniority

list. According to Rule 9, as soon as after the appointments are

made, the appointing authority shall prepare a tentative seniority

list, the same would be circulated amongst the persons concerned

inviting objections. The appointing authority, after disposing of the

objections, would prepare final seniority list. Rule 9 is reproduced

hereunder:
“9. Preparation of seniority list. –


           (1) As soon as may be after appointments are made to a
               service, the appointing authority shall prepare a
               tentative seniority list of the persons appointed
               substantively to the service in accordance with the
               provisions of these rules.
17
(2) The tentative seniority list shall be circulated amongst
              the persons concerned inviting objections by a notice
              of reasonable period, which shall not be less than
              seven days from the date of circulation of the tentative
              seniority

          (3) No objections against the vires or validity of these
              rules shall be entertainable.
(4) The appointing authority shall after disposing off the
              objection, by a reasoned order, issue a final seniority
              list.
(5) It shall not be necessary to prepare a seniority list of
          the cadre to which appointments are made only by
          promotion from a single feedings cadre.”
12. In the year 2009, the Uttar Pradesh Minor Irrigation

Department Subordinate Engineering Service Rules, 2009 (for

short “Rules 2009”) came into force on 16.10.2009 again framed

under
Article 309
of the Constitution.             Part V of Rules 2009

provided for the procedure for recruitment which comprised of

Rules 14 to 17. Rule 15(4) provided that the Commission would

prepare a list of candidates in order of their proficiency as

disclosed by the aggregate of marks obtained by each candidate in

the written examination as well as interview and accordingly

recommend such number of candidates as they consider fit for

appointment. After preparation of the said list, the Commission

would forward it to the Appointing Authority. Sub-Rule (5) of the
18
Rule 15 further provides that if recruitment was being made for

more than one branch of Engineering then in such case, the

Commission would prepare a combined select list of candidates in

order of their proficiency as disclosed by the aggregate of marks

obtained by the candidates in the written examination and

interviews accordingly and shall also forward the same list to the

Appointing Authority in addition to the list forwarded under Rule

15(4). Rules 14-17 of Rules 2009 are reproduced below: -
“Rule 14 Determination of vacancies

          The appointing authority shall determine and intimate to the
          Commission the number of vacancies to be filled during the
          course of the year of recruitment as also the number of
          vacancies to be reserved for candidates belonging to the
          Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other categories
          under rule 6.
Rule 15 Procedure for Direct Recruitment

          (1) Applications for permission to appear in the competitive
          exam shall be called by the Commission in the prescribed form
          published in the advertisement issued by the Commission.
(2) No candidate shall be admitted to the examination unless
          he holds a certificate of admission, issued by the Commission.
(3) After the results of the written examination have been
          received and tabulated, the Commission shall, having regard
          to the need for securing due representation of the candidates
          belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
          other categories in accordance with rule 6, summon for
          interview such number of candidates as have come up to
          standard fixed by the Commission in this respect. The marks
          awarded to each candidate at the interview shall be added to
          the marks obtained by him in the written examination.
(4) The Commission shall prepare a list of candidates in order
          of their proficiency as disclosed by the aggregate of marks
          obtained by each candidate at the written examinations and
19
interview and recommend such number of candidates as they
          consider fit for appointment. If two or more candidates obtain
          equal marks in the aggregate, the name of the candidate
          obtaining higher marks in the written examinations shall be
          placed higher in the list. If two or more Candidates obtain
          equal marks in the written examination also, the name of the
          candidate a senior in age shall be placed higher in the list. The
          Commission shall forward the list to the appointing authority.
(5) If the recruitment is being made in more than one branch
          of Engineering as specified in clause (1) of rule 5, then in such
          the Commission shall also prepare a combined list of
          candidates in order of the proficiency as disclosed by the
          aggregate of marks obtained by each candidate in written
          examination and interview and shall also forward the same to
          the appointing authority along with the list under sub rule (4)



          Rule 16 Procedure for recruitment by promotion

          Recruitment by promotion shall be made on the basis of
          seniority subject to the rejection of unfit in accordance with
          the Uttar Pradesh Promotion by Selection in Consultation with
          the Public Service Commission (Procedure) Rules, 1970, as
          amended from time to time.
Rule 17 Combined Select list

          If, in any year of recruitment, appointments are made both by
          direct recruitment and by promotion, a combined select list
          shall be prepared by taking the names of the candidates from
          the relevant lists, in such manner that prescribed percentage
          is maintained, the first name in the list being of the person
          appointed by promotion.”Rule 21 Seniority

          Seniority of the persons substantively appointed in any
          category of posts in the service shall be determined in
          accordance with the Uttar Pradesh Government Servants
          Seniority Rules 1991, as amended from time to time.
13. Apart from the above, Rule 21 thereof clearly provided that

the seniority of all persons substantively appointed shall be

determined as per Rules 1991. Another relevant aspect of the said

Rules 2009 was that all the three branches i.e. Agriculture, Civil
20
and   Mechanical      would    together     constitute     one      cadre   of

Subordinate    Engineering      Service.    Rule     21    is    reproduced

hereunder:
Rule 21 Seniority

          Seniority of the persons substantively appointed in any
          category of posts in the service shall be determined in
          accordance with the Uttar Pradesh Government Servants
          Seniority Rules 1991, as amended from time to time.
14. Before Rules 2009 of the Minor Irrigation Department, there

was another set of Rules framed in 1991 called the Uttar Pradesh

Engineering Service (Minor Irrigation Department) Rules,

1991. These Rules dealt with the recruitment of Assistant,

Executive, Superintendent and Chief Engineer of the department

but not of Junior Engineer. As reference to these Rules has been

made in the petition they have been mentioned, but may not be of

much relevance.
15. On behalf of the appellants Shri Siddarth Dave, learned

senior counsel and Ms Preetika Dwivedi, learned counsel have

made submissions.        On behalf of the private respondents Shri

Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned senior counsel and Shri Rohit

Sthalekar, learned counsel have addressed the Court. Learned
21
counsel for the State of Uttar Pradesh and learned counsel for the

Commission have also made their respective submissions.



Appellants’ case:
16. On behalf of the appellants, broadly the submissions made

are given below:
a) There is no delay on the part of the appellants in approaching

   the Court, as they learnt for the first time in 2010 when the

   final seniority list was published on 05.03.2010 that there

   were three separate select lists forwarded by the Commission

   and based upon the date of the receipt of such select list, the

   seniority list has been prepared, which was contrary to the

   statutory rules.
b) As the challenge was to the decision-making process in making

   the seniority list contrary to the 1991 Seniority Rules and

   Rules 2009, it was submitted that it was not necessary to

   implead all the affected Engineers. In fact 18 of such affected

   Engineers were already impleaded in the writ petition and

   therefore, for all the affected Junior Engineers, their interests

   were already represented.
22
c) The second seniority list of 2009-2010 had to be prepared as

      Rules 2009 had come into force which required drawing up of

      a fresh seniority list.    A fresh seniority list having been

      published, the earlier seniority list would lose its significance.
The challenge to the subsequent seniority list was within

      reasonable period. As such, the plea of delay raised by the

      respondents, would not have any substance.
Respondents’ Case:
17.    On behalf of the respondents, the submission of learned

counsel are:
(a) that the original writ petitioners i.e. appellants had approached

the Court with extraordinary delay and therefore, their claim was

not entitled to be entertained and the Division Bench of the High

Court rightly upheld the said submission.
(b) they sought to justify the judgment of the Division Bench for

the same reasons as recorded by the Division Bench;
(c) on merits it is submitted that the seniority list had been

prepared in accordance with Rules 1991 and Rules 2009.
23
(d) there is no violation of any statutory provision in preparation of

the seniority lists either of 2006 or 2010.
Discussion:
18. It is an admitted position that there was one selection for the

three streams i.e. Agricultural, Mechanical and Civil. It is also an

admitted fact that there is one cadre of Junior Engineers in the

Minor Irrigation Department and therefore, there has to be one

seniority list of Junior Engineers.       The written examination

conducted by the Commission comprised of two papers, one

compulsory for all streams and the second paper of the specific

stream of Engineering whether Agricultural, Mechanical or Civil.

So, in effect, there was one examination. Thereafter, interviews

were conducted.       The Commission, in its affidavits dated

07.04.2019 and 13.05.2019 filed before the High Court, had

clearly stated that there was one selection for one examination.

However, on account of some litigation and stay granted by the

High Court the list of the stream of the Civil Engineering was sent

much later after about 10 to 11 months.            Commission also

admitted in its supplementary counter affidavit before the High

Court that it had not prepared a combined merit list of all the three
24
streams but had left it for the Appointing Authority to prepare the

same. For sake of accuracy, paragraphs 6, 8, 9 and 10 of the

supplementary counter affidavit dated 07.04.2019 filed on behalf

of the Commission are reproduced below:
“6. That it is noteworthy to state that during the
          selection process against the vacancies available in the
          Civil Branch, stay order dated 01.03.2000 was passed
          by the Lucknow bench of this Hon'ble Court in a writ
          petition no. l066 of 2000,
Siyaram and others versus
          State of U.P. and others
and therefore in compliance of
          order dated 01.03.2000, recommendation was (sent to
          the department at a belated stage i.e. on 07 .11.2000.
xxx   xxx    xxx
8. That since the required educational qualification was
          different for all three branches, therefore the
          recruitment was done separately and thereafter the
          lists/recommendations were sent separately to the
          department in respect of selected candidates.
9. That it is further submitted that recruitment on the
          post of junior engineer is done from two main sources
          i.e. direct recruitment and departmental promotion
          therefore the inter-se seniority list shall be finalized in
          accordance with rule 8 of U.P. Government Servant
          Seniority Rules 1991. Therefore, the seniority list of the
          petitioners shall be finalized by the minor irrigation
          department only and there is no role of the answering
          respondent in preparation of seniority list by the minor
          irrigation department.
10. That it is further submitted that the preparation and
          publication of the seniority list of the junior engineers
          is the job of the concerned department and if any
          discrepancy occurs, the concerned department can
          clarify the same.”
25
19. Further paragraphs 3 to 7 of the second supplementary

counter affidavit dated 13.05.2019 filed by the Commission read as

under:
“3. That it may be submitted before this Hon’ble Court that on
          the basis of requisition for recruitment of junior engineers for
          three branches i.e. Agriculture, civil and Mechanical in ratio of
          50:30:20, made by the minor irrigation department, the
          answering respondent issued advertisement No. 3/1998-99,
          whereby applications were invited from those candidates having
          requisite qualification in the relevant trade.
4. That it is categorically mentioned that the process of ‘election
          for all the three trades i.e. Civil, Mechanical and Agricultural
          was the same. There was a screening test conducted on 18. 10.
1998 and thereafter the qualified candidates were called for
          interview as per the rules and regulations.
5. That for the candidates who were called for interview in
          respect of Agriculture, Civil and Mechanical branch; the
          recruitment process was proceeded with, an interview was
          conducted respectively and out of said three1 branches,
          candidates were selected against the vacancies which were
          available in Agricultural and Mechanical Branch and select lists
          were sent to the department on 28.09. 1999 and 06.01.2000
          respectively.
6. That it is noteworthy that during the selection process
          against the vacancies available in the Civil Branch, stay order
          date 1.03.2000 was passed by the Lucknow bench of this
          Hon’ble Court in Writ Petition no. l066 of 2000,
Siyaram and
          others versus State of U.P. and others
and therefore in
          compliance of order -dated 01.03.2000 recommendation was
          sent to the department at a belated stage i.e. on 07.11.2000.
7.That further, the Commission has been able to trace the
          records of the selection process for all three branches i.e.
          Original Mark Sheet, Merit list etc. and the Commission is in a
          position to produce the same before the Hon’ble Court, as and
          when directed.”
26
20. The Appointing Authority, in fact, committed an error in the

manner in which the seniority list was prepared by placing the

three select lists forwarded by the Commission on different dates

one after the other en bloc as per the date of receipt of three select

lists. It is not the case either of the private respondents, State or

the Commission that appointment letters have been issued

separately as and when the select lists were received. In fact, the

appointment letters of all the three streams were issued in October

2001, after about 10 to 11 months of the receipt of the third list

i.e. of the Civil stream in November 2000.        Apparently by an

oversight, the Appointing Authority failed to prepare the combined

seniority list as required under 1991 Seniority Rules, be it Rule 5

or Rule 8 with respect to the selection of the appellants and

private-respondents.
21. We may now discuss the law on the point regarding delay in

approaching the court and in particular challenge to a seniority

list. The learned Single Judge had placed reliance on a judgment

of this Court in the case of
Shiba Shankar Mohapatra vs. State

of Orissa
(supra). Dr. B.S. Chauhan, J., after considering the
27
question of entertaining the petition despite long standing

seniority filed at a belated stage discussed more than a dozen cases

on the point including Constitution Bench judgments and

ultimately in paragraph 30 observed that a seniority list which

remains in existence for more than three to four years

unchallenged should not be disturbed. It is also recorded in

paragraph 30 that in case someone agitates the issue of seniority

beyond period of three to four years he has to explain the delay

and laches in approaching the adjudicatory forum by furnishing

satisfactory explanation. Paragraph 30 is reproduced below: -
“30. Thus in view of the above, the settled legal
           proposition that emerges is that once the seniority had
           been fixed and it remains in existence for a reasonable
           period, any challenge to the same should not be
           entertained.
In K.R. Mudgal, this Court has
laid down,
           in
crystal clear words that a seniority list which remains
           in existence for 3 to 4 years unchallenged, should not
           be disturbed. Thus, 3-4 years is a reasonable period for
           challenging the seniority and in case someone agitates
           the issue of seniority beyond this period, he has to
           explain the delay and laches in approaching the
           adjudicatory forum, by furnishing satisfactory
           explanation.”
22. On the other hand, the Division Bench while shutting out the

appellants on the ground of delay relied upon following judgments

of this Court.
28
•
Dayaram   Asanand    Gursahani     vs.   State   of
                Maharashtra
and others2
•
B.S. Bajwa and another vs. State of Punjab
and
                others3

              •
Malcom Lawrence Cecil D’Souza vs. Union of India
and others4


              •
R.S. Makashi and others vs. I.M. Menon
and others5
23.
In the case of
Dayaram Asanand Gursahani
(supra), there

was a delay of 9 years.
In the case of
B.S. Bajwa
(supra), there was

a delay of more than a decade.
In
Malcom Lawrence Cecil

D’Souza
(supra), the delay was of 15 years and in
R.S.

Makashi
(supra) there was a delay of 8 years. In all these cases,

this court has recorded that the delay has not been explained.
Shiba Shankar Mohapatra
(Supra) is a judgment of 2010, which

has laid down that, three to four years would be a reasonable

period to challenge a seniority list and also that any challenge
2
(1984) 3 SCC 36
3
(1998) 2 SCC 523
4
(1976) 1 SCC 599
5
(1982) 1 SCC 379
29
beyond    the   aforesaid   period     would   require   satisfactory

explanation.
24. In view of the above legal proposition, we now examine the

facts of the present case, firstly, as to whether there was delay of

more than three to four years and secondly, if there was delay of

more than three to four years, whether the same has been

satisfactorily explained.
25. In October, 2001, when the appointment letters were issued

it carried a stipulation that the seniority would be determined later

on as per rules. It is an admitted position that before 2006, the

seniority list of the appellants was not notified. In March, 2006,

when the tentative list was published, it did not mention about the

three select lists nor was this fact mentioned when the final

seniority list was published on 05.09.2006.        Rather, it clearly

mentioned that the seniority list had been prepared on the basis

of merit. This was in fact an incorrect statement. The seniority list

had not been prepared on the basis of merit but on the basis of

receipt of the three separate select lists one after the other. As the

Agricultural list was received first on 28.09.1999, all the selected
30
candidates of agricultural stream were en bloc placed on the top,

thereafter the Mechanical list was received on 06.01.2000, they

were placed below the Agricultural stream and lastly, the Civil

stream list was received on 07.11.2000, they were placed at the

end.
26. Rules 5 and 8 of Rules 1991 clearly mention that there shall

be one list for one selection of direct recruits.      Creating three

separate lists for one selection was contrary to the provisions

contained in Rules 5 and 8 of Rules 1991. Rules 2009 clearly

mention that seniority would be determined and prepared as per

1991 Rules. Rule 5 of Rules 1991, dealt with the selections made

only through direct recruitment whereas Rule 8 thereof dealt with

the situation where seniority list is to be prepared of both the direct

recruits and the promotees. However, the principles underlined in

both these Rules are the same that there has to be one list for one

selection, as is clear from Rule 8(2)(a) and Rule 5 of Rules 1991.
27. Once it is established that the seniority list was prepared in

contravention to the statutory provisions
laid down in
Rules 1991,

the seniority list could be interfered with. The Appointing Authority
31
would be bound by the statutory rules and any violation or

disregard to the statutory rules would vitiate the seniority list. The

same would be arbitrary, de hors the rules and in conflict with
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution. The only exception to the

above would be where there is unreasonable delay which is

unexplained.
28. In the present case, if we accept the submission of the

appellants then the delay at best could be a few months or a year

however, if we accept the contentions of the private respondents

then the delay could be of five years. In the first contingency, no

explanation    would   be   required.   However,    in   the   second

contingency, if the appellants are successful in satisfactorily

explaining the delay, then even this hurdle could be overcome. In

the facts of the present case what we find from the final seniority

list of 05.09.2006 is that it nowhere mentioned that there were

three separate lists of separate streams and that they were received

on different dates. On the contrary, there was a recital therein and

specific averment to the effect that the list had been prepared on

the basis of merit. Thus, it cannot be said that the appellants were

aware of the three separate select lists dispatched by the
32
Commission on three different dates at the time of publication of

final list dated 05.09.2006.
29. It would also be worthwhile to mention here that the

appellants had no occasion to know about the three separate lists

either at the time they were dispatched by the Commission or at

any time thereafter as the appointment letters of all selected

candidates of all the three streams were issued simultaneously

under Office Order dated 08.10.2001. It would also be relevant to

mention that the order finalizing the seniority list of 05.09.2006

also nowhere mentioned that three separate lists of three streams

were received from the Commission and placed en bloc as received

one after the other.
30. At the time of notifying the tentative list on 29.12.2009, it was

not stated anywhere that there were three separate lists received

on three different dates. As such it could not be alleged that the

appellants even at that stage did not file objections regarding

preparation of common seniority list. It was only when the final

seniority list was published on 05.03.2010 and in the order

finalizing the list, it was mentioned by the department that there
33
were three separate lists received on three separate dates and in

that sequence the combined seniority was prepared. Thus, it is for

the first-time that appellants came to know of the error on

publication of the final seniority list on 05.03.2010.
31. The respondents have not been able to show any material

which could clearly indicate that the appellants had knowledge of

three separate lists and the preparation of the seniority list on its

basis. A frail attempt has been made by the respondents referring

to office order dated 17.03.2006 Annexure-P-30 to the Appeal @

SLP(C) No.5435 of 2020 which is the order notifying the tentative

seniority list. Paragraph 3 thereof mentions that the sequence

whereunder the selection list of Junior Engineers selected by the

Commission has been received, the seniority has been given in that

sequence. Paragraph 3 reads as under:
“3: The sequence, where under the selection list of the
           Junior Engineers selected by the Commission has been
           received, in that sequence, the Seniority has been given
           in accordance with Seniority detailed therein.”
32. A reading of the above paragraph does not refer to any details

either of any stream, the year of selection, the selection being made

on the basis of which advertisement or the dates on which separate
34
lists were received. It is a general statement. This submission of

the respondents stands completely diluted in view of the facts

recorded in paragraph 5 and last sentence as contained in

paragraph 25 of the same office order dated 05.09.2006. We will

analyse the same but before that they are reproduced hereunder:
“5. Shri Vinod Kumar Singh has requested to enter his
          Name in the Seniority List and requested to grant
          Seniority in ratio of 50:30:20 to the Agriculture/
          Mechanical/ Civil Engineering. In this regard, it is clear
          that the above ratio is only for recruitment. From
          Commission, on 6.01.2000, on 27.01.2000 and on
          07.11.2000 list was sent. Therefore, in this sequence,
          on the basis of merit, the Seniority has already been
          assessed. Name of Shri Vinay Kumar has been entered
          at the required place in the Seniority List as his Name
          was left to be entered therein and as requested to
          increase and enter his Name in this Seniority List.
xxx   xxx    xxx    xxx xxx
25. “...The Seniority of the candidates selected from the
          Public Service Commission have been kept in their
          Serial of merit.”
33. Reading of paragraph 5, it is again mentioned that three lists

were received by the Commission and in that sequence, on the

basis of merit, the seniority has been assessed. Paragraph 5 was

dealing with objection of one Vinod Kumar Singh requesting to

enter his name in the seniority list and further requesting to grant

seniority in the ratio of 50:30:20. The competent authority allowed
35
the request finding that the name of Vinod Kumar Singh was left

to be entered and accordingly it was incorporated at the required

place. Further, the last sentence of this office order clearly

mentions that the seniority of the candidates selected from the

Commission has been kept in their serial of merit. It does not refer

to any separate merit being considered for preparing the seniority

list of the three separate streams.
34. After coming of Rules 2009, fresh exercise was undertaken

for preparation of seniority list. A tentative list was notified by the

Office Order dated 29.12.2009. This Office Order mentions that

the seniority list has to be prepared according to 1991 Rules. While

dealing with the finalization of this tentative list, vide office order

dated 05.03.2010, we find reference to disposal of an objection by

Mahesh Chand Bagani and Mahesh Kumar in which they had

apparently sought clarification regarding the requisition send to

the Commission and other related aspects. In paragraph 11 of the

Office Order, it is mentioned that the Commission had forwarded

the three lists of the Agriculture, Mechanical and Civil streams

separately    on   06.01.2000,      27.01.2000     and    07.11.2000

respectively. It further mentioned that it was in that sequence i.e.
36
the date of receiving that the combined seniority was assessed.

Thus, again the seniority list was finalized in the same sequence

as the three lists have been received and in that order. It is

thereafter that the representations were made that the seniority

list of the direct recruits of 2001 was wrongly prepared contrary to

the Rules, however, when no action was taken, Rajiv Nain

Upadhyay and fourteen others approached the High Court by way

of W.P. No.53123 of 2012 in October 2012 which was within a

period of two to two and half years and till such time they had been

pursuing their representation after office order dated 05.03.2010.

From the above facts, it is clear that in the first contingency or in

the second contingency, the appellants cannot be found at fault.

The Division Bench committed an error in holding that the claim

lodged by the appellant suffered from delay and laches.
35. The plea to defend the seniority list prepared contrary to the

statutory provisions on the ground of delay would be a difficult

proposition. Apart from the submission of the appellants that there

is no delay as they came to know of the three separate lists only in

March, 2010, even if it is assumed that there was some delay and

a fresh seniority list was being prepared in 2009-2010 again
37
contrary to the provisions of statutory rules, such seniority list

cannot be sustained or defended on the ground of delay of five

years.
36. It is also admitted by the parties that the next promotion of

Junior Engineers in the higher grade is to the post of Assistant

Engineer. In the cadre of Assistant Engineer, there are no separate

streams but only one cadre of Assistant Engineers.        It is the

seniority list of the cadre of Junior Engineers which would be the

feeder cadre for the post of Assistant Engineers.      The Junior

Engineers of Agricultural stream of the selection of the year 2001,

would have direct march over the Junior Engineers selected in the

same selection of the Mechanical and Civil streams, even though

the overall merit of some or many of Agricultural stream Junior

Engineers could be lower than some or many of the Engineers of

the Mechanical and Civil streams. The appointing authority ought

to have prepared a combined merit list based upon the

performance or the proficiency on the basis of the marks received

in the selection test as prepared by the Commission. Otherwise, it

would amount to denial of the right of consideration for promotion

to a more meritorious candidate as against a candidate having
38
lesser merit.              Right to promotion is not considered to be a

fundamental right but consideration for promotion has now been

evolved as a fundamental right.
37. This Court, time and again, has laid emphasis on right to be

considered for promotion to be a fundamental right, as was held

by K. Ramaswamy, J., in the case of
Director, Lift Irrigation

Corporation Ltd. and Others vs. Pravat Kiran Mohanty and

Others6
in paragraph 4 of the report which is reproduced below:
“4… There is no fundamental right to promotion, but an employee
                   has only right to be considered for promotion, when it arises, in
                   accordance with relevant rules. From this perspective in our view the
                   conclusion of the High Court that the gradation list prepared by the
                   corporation is in violation of the right of respondent/writ petitioner to
                   equality enshrined under
Article 14
read with
Article 16
of the
                   Constitution, and the respondent/writ petitioner was unjustly
                   denied of the same is obviously unjustified.”
38.        A Constitution Bench in case of
Ajit Singh vs. State of

Punjab7
, laying emphasis on
Article 14
and
Article 16(1)
of the

Constitution of India held that if a person who satisfies the

eligibility and the criteria for promotion but still is not considered

for promotion, then there will be clear violation of his/her’s

fundamental right. Jagannadha Rao,J. speaking for himself and
6
(1991) 2 SCC 295
7
(1999) 7 SCC 209
39
Anand,   CJI.,      Venkataswami,                 Pattanaik,           Kurdukar,         JJ.,

observed the same as follows in paragraphs 21 and 22 and 27:
“21:
Articles 14
and
16(1):
is right to be considered for
          promotion a fundamental right

                  22:
Article 14
and
Article 16(1)
are closely connected. They
          deal with individual rights of the person.
Article 14
demands that
          the "State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the
          equal protection of the laws".
Article 16(1)
issues a positive command
          that "there shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters
          relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State".
It has been held repeatedly by this Court that clause (1) of
Article 16
is a facet of
Article 14
and that it takes its roots from Article
14. The said clause particularises the generality in
Article 14
and
          identifies, in a constitutional sense "equality of opportunity in
          matters of employment and appointment to any office under the
          State. The word "employment" being wider, there is no dispute that
          it takes within its fold, the aspect of promotions to posts above the
          stage of initial level of recruitment.
Article 16(1)
provides to every
          employee otherwise eligible for promotion or who comes within the
          zone of consideration, a fundamental right to be "considered" for
          promotion. Equal opportunity here means the right to be "considered"
for promotion. If a person satisfies the eligibility and zone criteria but
          is not considered for promotion, then there will be a clear infraction
          of his fundamental right to be "considered" for promotion, which is
          his personal right.
"Promotion based on equal opportunity and seniority
          attached to such promotion are facets of fundamental right under
Article 16(1)
xxxx    xxxx     xxxx    xxxx     xxxx
27. In our opinion, the above view expressed in Ashok Kumar
          Gupta and followed in Jagdish Lal and other cases, if it is intended
          to lay down that the right guarantee to employees for being
          "considered" for promotion according to relevant rules of recruitment
          by promotion (i.e. whether on the basis of seniority or merit) is only
          a statutory right and not a fundamental right, we cannot accept the
          proposition. We have already stated earlier that the right to equal
          opportunity in the matter of promotion in the sense of a right to be
          "considered" for promotion is indeed a fundamental right guaranteed
          under
Article 16(1)
and this has never been doubted in any other
          case before Ashok Kumar Gupta right from 1950.”
40
39. This Court in
Major General H.M. Singh, VSM vs. UOI and

Another
8 , again reiterated the legal position, i.e. right to be

considered for promotion as a fundamental right enshrined under
Article 14
and
Article 16
of the Constitution of India. The relevant

extract from paragraph 28 is reproduced below:
“28. The question that arises for consideration is, whether
                   the non-consideration of the claim of the appellant would violate the
                   fundamental rights vested in him under
Articles 14
and
16
of the
                   Constitution of India. The answer to the aforesaid query would be in
                   the affirmative, subject to the condition that the respondents were
                   desirous of filling the vacancy of Lieutenant-General, when it
                   became available on 1-1-2007. The factual position depicted in the
                   counter-affidavit reveals that the respondents indeed were desirous
                   of filling up the said vacancy. In the above view of the matter, if the
                   appellant was the senior most serving Major-General eligible for
                   consideration (which he undoubtedly was), he most definitely had
                   the fundamental right of being considered against the above
                   vacancy, and also the fundamental right of being promoted if he was
                   adjudged suitable. Failing which, he would be deprived of his
                   fundamental right of equality before the law, and equal protection of
                   the laws, extended by
Article 14
of the Constitution of India. We are
                   of the view that it was in order to extend the benefit of the
                   fundamental right enshrined under
Article 14
of the Constitution of
                   India, that he was allowed extension in service on two occasions,
                   firstly by the Presidential Order dated 29-2-2008, and thereafter, by
                   a further Presidential Order dated 30-5-2008. The above orders
                   clearly depict that the aforesaid extension in service was granted to
                   the appellant for a period of three months (and for a further period
                   of one month), or till the approval of the ACC, whichever is earlier.
                   By the aforesaid orders, the respondents desired to treat the
                   appellant justly, so as to enable him to acquire the honour of
                   promotion to the rank of Lieutenant-General (in case the
                   recommendation made in his favour by the Selection Board was
                   approved by the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet, stands
                   affirmed). The action of the authorities in depriving the appellant due
                   consideration for promotion to the rank of the Lieutenant-General
                   would have resulted in violation of his fundamental right under
8
(2014) 3 SCC 670
41
Article 14
of the Constitution of India. Such an action at the hands
                   of the respondents would unquestionably have been arbitrary.”
40. If the seniority list is allowed to be sustained then the

engineers who are more meritorious in the Mechanical and Civil

streams than the Junior Engineers of the Agricultural stream

would be deprived of their right of being considered for promotion

and in fact their right would accrue only after all the Junior

Engineers of the Agricultural stream selected in the same selection

are granted promotion. For these reasons also the seniority list in

question must go.
41. The other ground taken by the High Court for non-suiting the

appellants were that they had not impleaded all the affected Junior

Engineers. For the said proposition, the Division Bench of the High

Court has
placed reliance upon
judgment of this Court in the case

of
Ranjan Kumar and Others vs. State of Bihar and Others9
.

The above case was in respect of selection and appointment on the

ground that the same had been made only on the basis of interview

without holding any written test. The High Court had quashed

such selection and appointments even of those appointees who
9
(2014) 16 SCC 187
42
were not even parties to the petition. It was in these circumstances

that this Court held that the appointments of non-parties could

not be quashed. Facts of the said case are clearly distinguishable.
42. The Division Bench of the High Court also relied upon

another judgment of this Court in
Prabodh Verma and others vs.

State of Uttar Pradesh
and others10. This case again related to

challenge to appointments and in the said case there was no

impleadment even in the representative capacity. In such

circumstances, this Court said that the petition was liable to be

dismissed for non-joinder of necessary parties.                                   In fact, this

judgment helps the appellants. Paragraph 50 thereof is reproduced

below:
“50 (1): A High Court ought not to hear and dispose of a writ petition
                   under
Article 226
of the Constitution without the persons who
                   would be vitally affected by its judgment being before it as
                   respondents or at least some of them being before it as
                   respondents in a representative capacity if their number is too
                   large to join them as respondents individually, and, if the petitioners
                   refuse to so join them, the High Court ought to dismiss the petition
                   for non- joinder of necessary parties.”
43. The third case relied upon by the Division Bench for the above

proposition namely State of Uttaranchal vs. Madan Mohan Joshi
10
(1984) 4 SCC 251
43
and others11 was again a case where none of the affected parties

were impleaded not even in the representative capacity. In such

circumstances, this Court remanded the matter to the High Court

leaving it open to the original petitioners therein to move an

appropriate application for impleading some of the affected

teachers in their representative capacity.
44. The fourth case relied upon by Division Bench on the above

proposition is
Indu Shekhar Singh and others vs. State of U.P.

and others
12 .
In this case also, the affected parties were not

impleaded and this Court relied upon the judgment of this Court

in
Prabodh Verma
(supra).
45.
In the case of
Tridip Kumar Dingal and others vs. State of

West Bengal
and others13, C.K. Thakker, J., held that the case

falls within the ambit of non-joinder of necessary parties as none

of the 66 candidates against whom the complaint was made, were

made parties. It further held that some of the respondents should
11
(2008) 6 SCC 797
12
(2006) 8 SCC 129
13
(2009) 1 SCC 768
44
have been arrayed in representative capacity. Paragraph 41 is

reproduced below:
“41: Regarding protection granted to 66 candidates, from the record
                   it is clear that their names were sponsored by the employment
                   exchange and they were selected and appointed in 1998-1999. The
                   candidates who were unable to get themselves. selected and who
                   raised a grievance and made a complaint before the Tribunal by
                   filing applications ought to have joined them (selected candidates)
                   as respondents in the original application, which was not done. In
                   any case, some of them ought to have been arrayed as
                   respondents in a "representative capacity". That was also not
                   done. The Tribunal was, therefore, wholly right in holding that in
                   absence of selected and appointed candidates and without affording
                   opportunity of hearing to them, their selection could not be set aside.”
46.
In the recent case of
Mukul Kumar Tyagi and Ors. vs. The

State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors.
, 14 Ashok Bhushan, J., laid

emphasis that when there is a long list of candidates against whom

the case is proceeded, then it becomes unnecessary and irrelevant

to implead each and every candidate. If some of the candidates are

impleaded then they will be said to be representing the interest of

rest of the candidates as well. The relevant portion of paragraph

75 from the judgment is reproduced below:
“75   ……    We may further notice that Division Bench also noticed
                   the above argument of non-impleadment of all the selected
                   candidates in the writ petition but Division Bench has not based its
                   judgment on the above argument. When the inclusion in the select
                   list of large number of candidates is on the basis of an arbitrary or
                   illegal process, the aggrieved parties can complain and in such cases
                   necessity of impleadment of each and every person cannot be
                   insisted. Furthermore, when select list contained names of 2211
14
(2020) 4 SCC 86
45
candidates, it becomes unnecessary to implead every candidate in
           view of the nature of the challenge, which was levelled in the writ
           petition. Moreover, few selected candidates were also impleaded in
           the writ petitions in representative capacity.”
47. The present case is a case of preparation of seniority list and

that too in a situation where the appellants (original writ

petitioners) did not even know the marks obtained by them or their

proficiency in the examination conducted by the Commission. The

challenge was on the ground that the Rules on the preparation of

seniority list had not been followed. There were 18 private

respondents arrayed to the writ petition. The original petitioners

could not have known who all would be affected. They had thus

broadly impleaded 18 of such Junior Engineers who could be

adversely affected. In matters relating to service jurisprudence,

time and again it has been held that it is not essential to implead

each and every one who could be affected but if a section of such

affected employees is impleaded then the interest of all is

represented and protected. In view of the above, it is well settled

that impleadment of a few of the affected employees would be

sufficient compliance of the principle of joinder of parties and they

could defend the interest of all affected persons in their

representative capacity. Non-joining of all the parties cannot be

held to be fatal.
46
48. The Division Bench has also dealt with an issue which

according to us was totally irrelevant and alien to the adjudication

of the present appeals. In paragraph 45 of the judgment of the

Division Bench there is a reference to an issue where a party takes

calculated chances of participating in selection/appointment

process and later turns around after being unsuccessful would be

hit by doctrine of estoppel. For the said proposition, the Division

Bench made detailed discussions in paragraphs 46, 47, 48 and 49

of the judgment and relied upon a number of case laws. In our

considered view, this issue was not at all relevant. The said issue

does not arise in the present case. The appellants/original writ

petitioners had never challenged the selection process. The

challenge was only to preparation of the seniority list. As such, this

discussion by the Division Bench is totally irrelevant.
49. The Division Bench further in paragraph 51 had in a

generalized and vague manner recorded that the authorities relied

upon by the learned single Judge were rendered in a different fact

situation and were not applicable. The Division Bench did not

consider the judgments relied upon by the learned Single Judge
47
but only made this passing remarks. What we find is that the

authorities relied upon by the learned Single Judge were relevant

and correctly applied.
50. Further, the Division Bench in paragraphs 51, 52, 53

proceeded to deal with the delay stating it to be 11 years, the basis

for calculation of 11 years was that the seniority list of 2006 was

challenged by way of amendment by the appellants in the year

2017 and therefore there was a delay of 11 years. This discussion

by Division Bench also cannot be sustained. The first seniority list

was prepared in 2006. It was not disclosed as to how the seniority

list has been prepared by treating the three separate lists

independently on their merits but not as a result of combined merit

of the three lists. It was only in 2010 that the appellants came to

know of the fallacy and soon thereafter they challenged the

seniority list of 2010. Even if, they did not challenge the seniority

list of 2006, 2010 seniority list could always be revisited, reviewed

and prepared afresh, if the same was quashed. The appellants

could not have been at any loss even if they had not challenged the

2006 seniority list.
48
51. The reasoning given in paragraphs 54, 55, 56 regarding issue

of single selection is also not sustainable in view of Rules 1991 as

also Rules 2009.
52. Lastly, paragraph 57 of the judgment of the Division Bench

which deals with Rule 5 and 8 of 1991 Rules, we may only reiterate

that, whether it was Rule 5 which was applicable or Rule 8 which

was applicable, the seniority inter se of direct recruits to one

selection has to be one combined list based on the performance

and the marks awarded in the examination prepared either by the

Commission or the Committee, as the case may be. True, the

learned Single Judge, in the operative portion mentioned that a

fresh seniority list be prepared in accordance with Rule 5 and

apparently did not consider the effect of Rule 8, would not vitiate

the judgment inasmuch as the basis for preparation of the

seniority list of direct recruits was the same in both the Rules. It

may be noted that there is no lis inter se between direct recruits

and promotees.
53. For all the reasons recorded above, we find that the Division

Bench fell in error in allowing the appeal and dismissing the writ
49
petition. The learned Single Judge was right in his view in setting

aside the final seniority list and directing the appointing authority

for preparation of fresh seniority list in accordance with Rules

1991, be it Rule 5 or Rule 8 thereof.
54. The appeals are, accordingly, allowed.            The impugned

judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court dated

04.12.2019 is set aside and that of the Single Judge dated

14.05.2019 is maintained.
55. There shall be no order as to costs.
56. Pending application(s), if any, is/are also disposed of

accordingly.
…………..........................J.
                                        [DR. D.Y. CHANDRACHUD]



                                        ………….........................J.
                                                    [VIKRAM NATH]



                                        …………..........................J.
                                               [B.V. NAGARATHNA]


NEW DELHI
DECEMBER 08, 2021.
50