[Cites
17
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Goa Public Service Commission vs Pankaj Rane on 6 April, 2022
Author:
K. M. Joseph
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
K.M. Joseph
‘REPORTABLE’

                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2779 OF 2022
                                     (Arising out of SLP (C)No. 3587 of 2018)



                      GOA PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION                                Appellant(s)

                                                           VERSUS

                      PANKAJ RANE & ORS.                                           Respondent(s)




                                                       J U D G M E N T
K. M. JOSEPH, J.
Leave granted.
(1)     By Advertisement No. 14/16 published by the appellant,

                      applications were invited for filling up of six posts of

                      unreserved category and three posts in the reserved category

                      under    the     Goa     Civil     Service      Rules,    2016   (hereinafter

                      referred to as ‘the Rules’).              Pursuant to the advertisement,

                      1866    candidates      appeared     in   the    Computer   Based   screening

                      Test    (CBRT)    held    on     05.03.2017.       When   the    results   were

                      declared, only seven candidates including respondent Nos. 1

                      to 3 before this Court were found to have cleared the test.
Signature Not VerifiedIn terms of the advertisement and the Rules, the written
Digitally signed by
Nidhi Ahuja
Date: 2022.04.12
17:45:22 IST
Reason:               test came to be conducted on 10.04.2017 and 11.04.2017.                     In

                      the results which came to be declared, out of the seven,
1
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

only four candidates were found qualified.                         Respondent Nos.

1 to 3 were among them.               There is one Mr. Vivek Krishna Naik

who, no doubt, stood first.                   On 16.05.2017, the appellant

decided   to     fix    the     cut    off    marks       with    respect       to   the

interview.       The total marks fixed for the interview was 40.

The    appellant       fixed    cut     off       marks    at    26.      The     final

interview took place on 24.05.2017.                       Mr. Vivek Krishna Naik

was declared successful.               The results of respondent Nos. 1

to 3 were not declared.                  Respondents took up the matter

before    the    Chairman       of     the    appellant         pointing    out      the

irregularities          besides        moving        the        Chief     Secretary.

Applications were made under the
Right to Information Act
seeking    the     information          as    to     why        results    were      not

published.       This was done by respondent No. 1.                       We cut the

long story short by indicating that on 21.07.2017, a fresh

advertisement came to be issued inviting applications for 10

posts of Junior Scale officer of Goa Civil Services.

(2)    Respondent        Nos.     1     to    3     filed       writ    petition     on

22.07.2017.       By the impugned judgment, the High Court has

allowed the writ petition and has ordered as follows:
“24. We note that in the affidavit in reply, not
      obtaining minimum qualifying marks in oral interview
      pursuant to the decision in the meeting dated 16 May
      2017 is the sole reason not to send the names of the
      Petitioners to the Respondent-State. No other reason
      than the qualifying marks at the interview is shown to
      us.
25. In these circumstances, we hold that the action of
      the Respondent No. 1-Commission is not recommending
      the names of the Petitioners to the post of Junior
2
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

      Scale Officer of the Goa Civil Services on the ground
      that they have not secured 65% minimum qualifying
      marks in the oral interview, is illegal and beyond the
      powers of the Respondent No. 1-Commission.         The
      decision taken by Respondent No. 1-Commission in the
      meeting dated 16 May 2017 introducing criteria of 65%
      minimum qualifying marks at the interview for the post
      of Junior Scale Officer in the Goa Civil Service,
      therefore, cannot be sustained and it is quashed and
      set aside. The Respondent No. 1-Commission will take
      necessary steps as per Rule 12 of the Rules of 2016 on
      the basis of the consolidated marks of the Petitioners
      in the written examination and oral interview without
      attaching any qualifying criteria to the marks
      obtained at the oral interview. The Respondent No. 1-
Commission will take necessary steps within eight
      weeks from the date the order is uploaded to the
      server.”


(3)    In the appeal, we have heard Shri Pratap Venugopal,

learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, Mr.

Devadatt      Kamat   learned    senior       counsel     appearing     for

respondent No. 1, Mr. Siddharth Dave, learned senior counsel

for respondent No. 2, and Mr. Vinay Navare, learned senior

counsel appearing for respondent No. 3.
(4)    Learned counsel for the appellant would complain that

the    High   Court   has   erred   in    placing       reliance   on   the

judgments which the High Court has indeed placed reliance

on.    The case of the appellant is built around the failure

of the respondents to obtain the minimum marks as prescribed

by the Commission which, according to the Constitution, it

has the power to do.        The Commission is tasked with the job

of conducting the recruitment of candidates and to recommend

their names.      There is nothing illegal with the Commission

in such an event, at fixing a bar and a fairly high bar with
3
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

which   alone,    the    Commission      would    be    in    a    position   to

procure services of the best candidates for appointment in

the   State   service.       This   is    part    of    its    constitutional

imperative    flowing     from
Article    320
of    the      Constitution.

The marks for the examination and interview were indicated

in the Advertisement.         It is pointed out that the decision

of this Court in
K. Manjusree v. State of A.P. & Anr.
(2008)

3 SCC 512 is distinguishable with reference to the facts

which actually arose for consideration in the said case.
Learned counsel also drew our attention to the judgment of

this Court in
Yogesh Yadav v. UOI & Ors.
(2013) 14 SCC 623.

We notice that the attempt made by the appellant based on
the   said    judgment
before    the    High   Court       did    not   yield

success.
The learned counsel also drew our attention to the

judgment of this Court in
M.P. Public Service Commission v.

Navnit Kumar Potdar
(1994) 6 SCC 293.
Finally, Shri Pratap

Venugopal also pointed out that three learned Judges in
Tej

Prakash Pathak and Others v. Rajasthan High
Court and Others

(2013) 4 SCC 540 have referred the issue relating to the

correctness of the judgment in
K. Manjusree
(supra) to a

larger Bench.      The matter is pending consideration before

the larger Bench.        Number of cases have been referred.

(5)     Mr. Pratap Venugopal, learned counsel, also contends

that as far as respondent No. 3 is concerned, there is an

additional factor which would weigh against him.                           It is

pointed out that under the Rules formulated, knowledge of
4
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

Konkani      language       is     an     essential          qualification.          This

requirement      is    reiterated          in     the    advertisement.          It    is

pointed out that a counter affidavit was filed in the High

Court and in the counter affidavit, the proceedings of the

Board    which    took      the    interview        have      been    produced       which

clearly brings out the fact that respondent No. 3 was not

found proficient in the Konkani language which proficiency

was     an   inflexible          requirement            in    the    Rules    and     the

advertisement.
(6)     Per contra, Mr. Devadatt Kamat, learned senior counsel

for respondent No. 1, would point out that on the facts

obtaining in this case, the case on all fours is covered by

a catena of judgments beginning with the decision in
P. K.

Ramachandra Iyer v. UOI
(1984) 2 SCC 141.                            In other words,

it is pointed out that with reference to the statutory rules

in question which governed the destiny of the respondents,

this Court would have to discountenance the case of the

appellant Commission.               The rules in question according to

respondent       No.    1    are        similar     to       the    rules    which    was

considered in P. K. Ramachandra Iyer’s case (supra).
What

is more, the same line of argument appealed to a later Bench

in the decision reported in
Durgacharan Misra v. State of

Orissa
(1987) 4 SCC 646.
It is pointed out by Mr. Kamat,

learned senior counsel, that the decision of this Court in
State of Haryana v. Subhash Chander Marwaha
(1974) 3 SCC 220

which apparently forms the basis for the view taken in Tej
5
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)
Prakash Pathak and Others
(supra) did not involve the Rule

similar to Rule 12 of the Rules obtaining in the facts of

this case.
The facts in
Tej Prakash Pathak and Others
(supra) also did not involve a statutory injunction as is

contained in Rule 12 of the Rules applicable in the facts of

this case.    He would submit that it is not the law that when

the matter is referred to a larger Bench, the decision which

is under a cloud ceases to possess its binding nature.             What

is more, having regard to the distinction in facts and the

similarity which the facts of this case bears with the facts

in P. K. Ramachandra Iyer’s case and Durgacharan Misra’s

case (supra), etc., this case can be dealt with by this

Court without having to refer the same to the larger Bench.

(7)    Shri Siddartha Dave, learned senior counsel appearing

on behalf of the respondent No. 2, would also adopt the same

line of reasoning.
He would, in fact, firmly contend that there is no

power with Public Service Commission to dilute the mandate

of the Rules.       This is not a case he points out where there

were   a   large    number   of   candidates   who   have   been   found

eligible after the conduct of the written examination and as

part of the need to trim the number of candidates to be

finally considered, the Commission took a decision to resort

to a separate minimum in the interview in this regard.                He

drew support from the judgment which is reported in
State of

Punjab and Others v. Manjit Singh and Others
(2003) (11) SCC
6
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)
559.

(8)     Mr.    Vinay   Navare,    learned    senior   counsel,   drew    our

attention to
Article 309
of the Constitution.                 He drew our

attention      to   the    word   “recruitment”.       He   proceeded     to

further refer to
Article 320
and he pointed out that the

role of Commission is to be appreciated with reference to
Article 320(3)(a)
and
320(3)(b).
In other words, he would

ascribe a limited role to the Commission viz., to conduct

examination under
Article 320 (1)
which, no doubt, he agrees

would also include right to conduct interview.                   He would,

therefore, adopt the arguments of the other senior counsel

and submit that a careful perusal of the Rule which is made

under
Article 309
of the Constitution would show that the

impugned judgment is only to be supported.
He would further rely on the judgment of this Court in

Durgacharan Misra’s case (supra).             As far as respondent No.

3 not possessing the essential qualification is concerned,

he would submit that no such case was set up in the High

Court.    When queried about the production of the proceedings

of the Selection Board which took the interview, he would

submit that it may not suffice as a careful perusal of the

counter affidavit filed in the High Court which is produced

along with an affidavit filed in this Court in January 2022

by the appellant, would not show that the appellant has

taken    any    specific    contention      denying   the   right   of   the

respondent No. 3 to be placed in the select list on the
7
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

score that he did not possess the essential qualification as

alleged.    He would further contend that even in the special

leave petition, there is no ground taken that respondent No.

3 was not qualified on the said score.            He would point out

that allowing such a contention to be urged at this stage

would    cause   grave    miscarriage     of    justice   as   far   as

respondent No. 3 is concerned.         He is taken by surprise and

had it been raised before the High Court as such, it could

have been dealt with at that stage he complains.               This is

besides pointing out that a perusal of the impugned judgment

does not show that the appellant attempted to engage the

High Court on this question which is sought to be raised.

It is not a pure question of law which could be raised for

the first time.
ANALYSIS

(9) The High Court has proceeded with this matter on the

basis of a conspectus of the Rules.            The Rules in question,

in turn, are the Rules made under
Article 309
and they are

the Goa Civil Service Rules, 2016.
If we notice Rule 10 to begin with, Rule 10 reads as

follows:
“10. Competitive examination for direct recruitment. -
(1) The Competitive Examination for direct recruitment
    shall comprise a written examination and an Oral
    Interview.    The Competitive Examination shall be
    conducted by the Commission, in the manner notified by
    the Government, from time to time:
Provided  whenever   the   Goa  Public  Service
    Commission is of opinion of conducting screening test
    required for shortlisting of candidates, the same
8
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

    should be conducted by the Commission in       a   manner
    decided by the Commission from time to time.
(2) Whenever Competitive written examination for the
    direct recruitment to the Junior Scale post of Service
    is conducted by the Commission, the results of such
    written   examination   shall  be   declared  by   the
    Commission by displaying the same prominently on the
    notice board and website of the Commission.
(3) The minimum passing percentage for competitive
    written examination shall be 65 percent of the total
    marks, the passing percentage for candidates belonging
    to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall be
    minimum 55 percent of the total marks and Other
    Backward Class, Differently Abled Persons and for
    Children of Freedom Fighters, it shall be minimum 60
    percent of the total marks.
(4) The Commission shall invite five times the number
    of candidates as against the number of vacancies
    advertised, for the oral interview purely on merit
    with due regard to the policy on reservation. In case
    there are more candidates securing the same number of
    marks as the last candidate, all such candidates shall
    also be called for the oral interview.
(5) Marks to be allotted for written examination and
    oral interview shall be notified in advance in the
    advertisement inviting applications by the Commission.
(6) Such oral interview shall be conducted under CCTV
    surveillance   or  videography   and  the   proceedings
    thereof shall also be videorecorded and such recording
    shall form a permanent record of the Commission.
We may also advert to Rule 12:
“12. List of successful candidates. - (1) The
     Commission shall forward to the Government a select
     list, arranged in the order of merit of the candidates
     which shall be determined in accordance with the
     aggregate marks obtained by each candidate at the
     competitive written examination and oral interview:
Provided that if two or more candidates have secured
     equal number of marks in the aggregate, their order of
     merit shall be in the order of the marks secured by
     the candidates in the written examination and if the
     candidates have secured equal marks in the written
9
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

       examination then order of merit shall be as per their
       date of birth and if in case the date of birth is also
       the   same  then   the  candidate   possessing  higher
       educational qualifications will be placed higher in
       the merit list.
(2) The Commission while drawing the list of selected
       candidates  shall   restrict   the  select  list   of
       candidates to the extent of declared number of
       vacancies.
(3) The select list drawn by the Commission shall be
       valid for a period of one year from the date of
       receipt of the same by the Government.
(4) The Commission shall, in addition to the select
       list, also prepare a separate wait list up to 10 % of
       the vacancies based on the merit of the candidates in
       their respective category:
Provided further that the candidates from the wait
       list may be recommended to the Government only on
       requisition being made by the Government if the
       candidates recommended earlier are unablne to accept
       the offer of appointment for any reason.    Such wait
       list shall not be operative for any additional number
       of posts, other than those advertised. The wait list
       shall lapse on the declaration of the date of a
       subsequent examination for the same category or after
       a period of one year from the date of preparation of
       such wait list, whichever is earlier.”


(10)    Rule   10    contemplates    the     holding     of    a    competitive

examination and oral interview.             The competitive examination

is to be conducted by the appellant in the manner notified

by the Government from time to time as pointed out by Mr.

Vinay Navare, learned senior counsel.               The proviso provides

the    appellant     with   the    power    to   hold    a    screening    test

required    for     shortlisting    of     candidates.        The    manner   in

which it is to be held is a matter to be decided by the

Commission from time to time.              It is most pertinent to note
10
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

that Rule 10(3) specifically declares that a candidate must

obtain    a     minimum         passing       percentage        in    the     competitive

written examination.                   It is pegged at 65 per cent of the

total marks.             The percentage is purportedly reduced in the

case of certain categories.
Next,      we      must      notice    that     Rule     10(5)      declares       the

marks    to     be       allotted       for    written        examination       and    oral

interview is to be notified in the advertisement inviting

the applications by the Commission.                            Here, as Mr. Pratap

Venugopal,          learned          counsel,         rightly        points     out        the

Commission cannot be found to have acted contrary to the

Rules insofar as, the Commission has, in the advertisement,

declared the marks to be alloted for the written examination

and oral interview.                  What is conspicuous by its absence in

Rule 10 is any minimum to be obtained by any candidate in

the interview.            The matter does not end here.

(11)    Bearing considerable resemblance as we shall presently

see with the law in the facts is the decision of this Court

starting      with
P.    K.     Ramachandra        Iyer
(supra),    Rule       12

declares that the Commission is duty bound to forward to the

Government         the     select      list.        The     select     list     is    to   be

arranged      in     the       order    of    merit    of     the    candidates.           The

select list is to be sent arranged in the order of merit

which, in turn, is to be determined in accordance with the

aggregate       marks           obtained       by      each      candidate       at        the

competitive        written        examination         and    oral     interview.           The
11
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

rule maker was conscious of the fact that it has prescribed

a   separate      minimum   to   be    obtained   by   candidate     in    the

written examination.        It also contemplated the holding of an

interview but as regards the interview a separate minimum

was not stipulated.         But at the same time, the law giver has

contemplated that the Commission is to prepare a select list

wherein merit would dictate the order in which the select

list is to be prepared and all that it is to do is to total

up the marks obtained by the candidate in the competitive

written examination and the oral interview.               In other words,

the merit list would be dictated by the performance in the

competitive       examination    and     interview     subject     only,    no

doubt, to the qualification that only those candidates who

have obtained 65 marks in the written examination would be

qualified.        We need not be detained by the proviso to Rule
12.

(12)    Rule 12(2) further provides that in drawing the list

of selected candidates it shall limit itself to the declared

number of vacancies.        Wait list is also contemplated.            It is

on a consideration of the statutory Rules that the High

Court has taken the view that the case must be decided in

terms   of
P.    K.   Ramachandra     Iyer
(supra)   and
Durgacharan

Misra
(supra) apart from
K. Manjusree
(supra).
(13)    We may notice in
P. K. Ramachandra Iyer
(supra), the

following:
“43. The relevant rules are Rules 13 and 14 of the
12
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

    1977 Rules, which may be extracted:
“13.Candidates who obtain such minimum marks in the
    written examination as may be fixed by the Board in
    their discretion shall be summoned by them for viva
    voce.
14. After the examination, the candidates will be
    arranged by the Board in the order of merit in each
    category (professional subjectwise) as disclosed by
    the aggregate marks finally awarded to such candidates
    and such candidates as are found by the Board to be
    qualified by the examination shall be recommended for
    appointment upto the number of unreserved vacancies
    decided   to  be   filled  on   the   result  of   the
    examination.”
44.   Mr   Ramachandran,  learned   counsel  for   the
    petitioner contended that Rule 13 does not envisage
    obtaining of minimum marks at the viva voce test even
    though it contemplates obtaining minimum marks at the
    written test so as to be eligible for being called for
    viva voce test. It was further urged that Rule 14
    specified the manner in which merit list is to be
    arranged. Rule 14 provides that after both written and
    viva voce tests are held, the candidates will be
    arranged by the Board in the order of merit in each
    category (professional subjectwise) as disclosed by
    the aggregate marks finally awarded to each candidate
    and such candidates as are found by the Board to be
    qualified by the examination shall be recommended for
    appointment upto the number of unreserved vacancies
    decided to be filled on the result of the examination.
On a combined reading of Rules 13 and 14, two things
    emerge. It is open to the Board to prescribe minimum
    marks which the candidates must obtain at the written
    test before becoming eligible for viva voce test.
    After the candidate obtains minimum marks or more at
    the written test and he becomes eligible for being
    called for viva voce test, he has to appear at the
    viva voce test. Neither Rule 13 nor Rule 14 nor any
    other rule enables the ASRB to prescribe minimum
    qualifying marks to be obtained by the candidate at
    the viva voce test. On the contrary, the language of
    Rule 14 clearly negatives any such power in the ASRB
    when it provides that after the written test if the
    candidate has obtained minimum marks, he is eligible
    for being called for viva voce test and final merit
    list would be drawn up according to the aggregate of
    marks obtained by the candidate in written test plus
    viva voce examination. The additional qualification
13
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

    which ASRB prescribed to itself namely, that the
    candidate must have a further qualification of
    obtaining minimum marks in the viva voce test does not
    find place in Rules 13 and 14, it amounts virtually to
    a modification of the rules. By necessary inference,
    there was no such power in the ASRB to add to the
    required qualifications If such power is claimed, it
    has to be explicit and cannot be read by necessary
    implication for the obvious reason that such deviation
    from the rules is likely to cause irreparable and
    irreversible harm. It however does not appear in the
    facts of the case before us that because of an
    allocation of 100 marks for viva voce test, the result
    has been unduly affected. We say so for want of
    adequate material on the record. In this background we
    are not inclined to hold that 100 marks for viva voce
    test was unduly high compared to 600 marks allocated
    for the written test. But the ASRB in prescribing
    minimum 40 marks for being qualified for viva voce
    test contravened Rule 14 inasmuch as there was no such
    power in the ASRB to prescribe this additional
    qualification,    and   this   prescription    of   an
    impermissible additional qualification has a direct
    impact on the merit list because the merit list was to
    be prepared according to the aggregate marks obtained
    by the candidate at written test plus viva voce test.
    Once an additional qualification of obtaining minimum
    marks at the viva voce test is adhered to, a candidate
    who may figure high up in the merit list was likely to
    be rejected on the ground that he has not obtained
    minimum qualifying marks at viva voce test. To
    illustrate, a candidate who has obtained 400 marks at
    the written test and obtained 38 marks at the viva
    voce test, if considered on the aggregate of marks
    being 438 was likely to come within the zone of
    selection, but would be eliminated by the ASRB on the
    ground that he has not obtained qualifying marks at
    viva voce test. This was impermissible and contrary to
    rules and the merit list prepared in contravention of
    rules cannot be sustained.
(14) We must next notice
Durgacharan Misra
(supra):
“6. Rules 16, 17, 18 and 19 are the relevant rules
    which have a material bearing on the question that
    falls for determination. These rules read as under:
“16. The Commission shall summon for the viva voce
    test all candidates who have secured at the written
    examination not less than the minimum qualifying marks
14
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

    obtained in all subjects taken together which shall be
    30 per cent of the total marks in all the papers:
Provided that government may after consultation with
    the High Court and Commission fix higher qualifying
    marks in any or all of the subjects in the written
    examination in respect of any particular recruitment.
17. The Chief Justice or any of the other Judges of
    the High Court nominated by the Chief Justice shall
    represent the High Court and be present at the viva
    voce test and advise the Commission on the fitness of
    candidates at the viva voce test from the point of
    view of their possession of the special qualities
    required in the judicial service, but shall not be
    responsible for selection of candidates.
18. The marks obtained at the viva voce test shall be
    added   to   the   marks    obtained    in   the  written
    examination. The names of candidates will then be
    arranged by the Commission in order of merit. If two
    or   more  candidates    obtain   equal    marks in   the
    aggregate, the order shall be determined in accordance
    with the marks, secured at the written examination.
Should the marks secured at the written examination of
    the candidate concerned be also equal, then the order
    shall be decided in accordance with the total number
    of marks obtained in the optional papers.
19. (1) The Commission shall then forward to the
    government   in  the   Law  Department the list of
    candidates prepared in accordance with Rule 18
    indicating therein whether a candidate belongs to
    Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribes.
(2) The list prepared shall be            published   by   the
    Commission for general information.
(3) The list, unless the Governor in consultation with
    the High Court otherwise decides, shall ordinarily be
    in force for one year from the date of its preparation
    by the Commission.”
7. The rule-making authorities have provided a scheme
    for selection of candidates for appointment to
    judicial posts. Rules 16 prescribes the minimum
    qualifying marks to be secured by candidates in the
    written examination. It is 30 per cent of the total
    marks in all the papers. The candidates who have
    secured more than that minimum would alone be called
    for viva voce test. The Rules do not prescribe any
15
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

      such minimum marks to be secured at the viva voce
      test. After the viva voce test, the Commission shall
      add the marks of the viva voce test to the marks in
      the written examination. There then, Rule 18 states:
“The names of candidates will then be arranged by the
      Commission in the order of merit”.
11. In the light of these decisions the conclusion is
      inevitable that the Commission in the instant case
      also has no power to prescribe the minimum standard at
      viva voce test for determining the suitability of
      candidates for appointment as Munsifs.
15. The Rules have been framed under the proviso to
Article 309
read with the
Article 234
of the
      Constitution.
Article    234
requires   that   the
      appointment of persons other than District Judge to
      the Judicial Service of State shall be made by the
      Governor of the State. It shall be in accordance with
      the Rules made by the Governor in that behalf after
      consultation with the State Service Commission and
      with the State High Court. The Rules in question have
      been made after consultation with the Commission and
      the State High Court. The Commission which has been
      constituted under the Rules must, therefore faithfully
      follow the Rules. It must select candidates in
      accordance with the Rules. It cannot prescribe
      additional requirements for selection either as to
      eligibility or as to suitability. The decision of the
      Commission to prescribe the minimum marks to be
      secured at the viva voce test would, therefore, be
      illegal and without authority.
(15)   A   question   may    arise    whether      the   Public     Service

Commission can depart from the Rules in this regard.                 Light

is shed by the views expressed by this Court in
Manjit Singh

and    Others
(supra).      We     may   refer    to   the      following

exposition made by this Court.
“9.
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
      …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
      Where no special qualification or any prescribed
      standard of efficiency over and above the eligibility
      criteria is provided by the Rules or the State, it
      would not be for the Commission to impose any extra
16
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

    qualification/standard   supposedly   for   maintaining
    minimum efficiency which, it thinks, may be necessary.
    ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
    …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..
10.   As   observed   earlier,   for    the   purpose  of
    shortlisting it would not at all be necessary to
    provide cut-off marks. Any number of given candidates
    could be taken out from the top of the list up to the
    number of the candidates required in order of merit.
    For example, there may be a situation where more than
    the required number of candidates may obtain marks
    above the cut-off marks, say for example, out of
    10,000 if 8000 or 6000 candidates obtain 45% marks
    then all of them may have to be called for further
    tests and interview etc. It would in that event not
    serve the purpose of shortlisting by this method to
    obtain the given ratio of candidates, and the vacancy
    available.   For   100   vacancies   at   the   most  500
    candidates need be called. If that is so, any
    candidate who is otherwise eligible up to the 500th
    position, whatever be the percentage above or below
    the fixed percentage would be eligible to be called
    for further tests. Thus the purpose of shortlisting
    would be achieved without prescribing any minimum cut-
    off marks.
11. In the case in hand, it was not for the Commission
    to have fixed any cut-off marks in respect of the
    reserved category candidates. The result has evidently
    been that candidates otherwise qualified for interview
    stand rejected on the basis of merit say, they do not
    have up-to-the-mark merit as prescribed by the
    Commission. The selection was by interview of the
    eligible    candidates.    It    is   certainly    the
    responsibility of the Commission to make the selection
    of efficient people amongst those who are eligible for
    consideration. The unsuitable candidates could well be
    rejected in the selection by interview. It is not the
    question of subservience but there are certain matters
    of policies, on which the decision is to be taken by
    the Government. The Commission derives its powers
    under
Article 320
of the Constitution as well as its
    limits too. Independent and fair working of the
    Commission is of utmost importance. It is also not
    supposed to function under any pressure of the
    Government, as submitted on behalf of the appellant
    Commission. But at the same time it has to conform to
    the provisions of the law and has also to abide by the
    rules and regulations on the subject and to take into
    account the policy decisions which are within the
17
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

    domain of the State Government. It cannot impose its
    own policy decision in a matter beyond its purview.”


(16)   In this regard, we must notice that in the facts of

this   case    of    the    1866    candidates        who     appeared     in    the

screening     test    /    computer     test,      only   7    candidates       which

included     respondent      Nos.   1   to    3    cleared     the     test.     The

number stood further reduced to 4 and which again included

respondents Nos. 1 to 3.            Therefore, when the question arose

as to how the interview should be conducted, the Commission

decided on 16.05.2017 to fix 26 marks out of 40 as cut off

marks. It no doubt works out at 60 per cent of the total

marks in the interview segment.               Rules did not provide for a

separate minimum for the interview.                   The advertisement did

not provide for a          separate minimum in the interview.                  It is

almost a week before the interview that the Commission took

the decision in this regard.
We have stated these facts

only   to    highlight      that    this     is     not   a    case     where    the

Commission was faced with the task of having to interview a

very large number of candidates.                  For 6 unreserved posts and

5 reserved posts finally, only 4 emerged as candidates to be

dealt with at the final stage viz., the oral interview.

This, therefore, is distinguishable, in other words, from

the judgment relied upon by Mr. Pratap Venugopal, learned

counsel      for     the    appellant        viz.
M.P.      Public     Service

Commission
(supra).          That was a case where this Court noted

that   the    appellant      Commission       therein         noting    the     large
18
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

number of applications received from the General Category

candidates    against     four       posts    decided     to    call    only    71
1/2
applicants    who   had   7          years     of    practice    although      188

applicants were eligible, in view of the fact that under
Section 8(3)(c)
of the provisions applicable in the said

case, five years of practice as an Advocate or pleader of

Madhya Pradesh was a minimum requirement.                  It was therefore,

a   case   which    though     relied        upon    by   the   appellant      is

distinguishable on facts.            This is apart from noticing that

the appellant has not been able to inform the Court as to

whether there was a Rule in the said case similar to Rule 12

as present in this case.
As far as
Yogesh Yadav
(supra) is

concerned, this again is not a case which involved a Rule

resembling Rule 12 of the Rules.               We further may also notice

that in the said case recruitment was carried out by the

employer itself and it was not done by the recruiting body

which the appellant is and which is limited by statutory

rules made under
Article 309
of the constitution.
(17)
Para   13    of   Yogesh        Yadav
(supra)     is    extracted

hereinbelow:
13. The instant case is not a case where no minimum
    marks are prescribed for viva voce and this is sought
    to be done after the written test. As noted above, the
    instructions to the examinees provided that written
    test will carry 80% marks and 20% marks were assigned
    for   the  interview.  It   was  also   provided  that
    candidates who secured minimum 50% marks in the
    general category and minimum 40% marks in the reserved
    categories in the written test would qualify for the
    interview. The entire selection was undertaken in
    accordance with the aforesaid criterion which was laid
19
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

    down at the time of recruitment process. After
    conducting the interview, marks of the written test
    and viva voce were to be added. However, since a
    benchmark   was   not   stipulated  for   giving   the
    appointment. What is done in the instant case is that
    a decision is taken to give appointments only to those
    persons who have secured 70% marks or above marks in
    the unreserved category and 65% or above marks in the
    reserved category. In the absence of any rule on this
    aspect in the first instance, this does not amount to
    changing the “rules of the game”. The High Court has
    rightly held that it is not a situation where securing
    of minimum marks was introduced which was not
    stipulated in the advertisement, standard was fixed
    for the purpose of selection.
Therefore, it is not a
    case of changing the rules of the game. On the
    contrary in the instant case a decision is taken to
    give appointment to only those who fulfilled the
    benchmark prescribed. The fixation of such a benchmark
    is permissible in law. This is an altogether different
    situation not covered by Hemani Malhotra case [
Hemani
    Malhotra v. High
Court of Delhi, (2008) 7 SCC 11 :
(2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 203] .
(18)         Though    learned     counsel    for   the   appellant   did

emphasise the said observations, we are of the view that it

is distinguishable at any rate having regard to Rule 12

which we have already noticed which is applicable to the

facts of this case.
In other words, we would think that in the facts of

this case, they are closer to the facts of the case in
P. K.

Ramachandra Iyer
case and judgment following the same which

we have already noted.
As far as
Tej Prakash Pathak and

Others
case   is    concerned,    it   again   did   not   specifically

involve a Rule similar to Rule 12.
(19)         It is true that there is a distinction in the

facts with those of the case in
K. Manjusree
(supra).                  We
20
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

notice that that was a case where the requirement of minimum

marks    for   interview     was   made   after   the   entire      selection

process consisting of the written examination and interview

was completed and noticing the facts, the Court declared

that it would amount to changing the Rules after process is

completed. In this case, the stipulation as to the minimum

to be obtained in the interview was announced prior to the

holding of the interview.
However, we would think that this

case must fall to be decided on the principle which has been
laid down in
P. K. Ramachandra Iyer
(supra) and
Durgacharan

Misra
(supra)    for      the   reasons    which     we   have     already

indicated.
(20)    As far as the question relating to the respondent No.

3 not being in possession of the essential qualification, we

may notice the following:
It is true that under the Rules, knowledge of Konkani

is     declared    as   an    essential      qualification       which   the

advertisement also reiterates.            The interview was held.        The

writ petition was filed by all respondents together.                     The

contention which appears to have engaged the High Court in

the impugned judgment related to the power of the appellant

to stipulate for a separate minimum in the interview.                    The

impugned judgment does not reflect even in the slightest way

any attempt on the part of the appellant to non-suit the

third respondent on the ground that apart from there being

no merit in the contention of respondents that Commission
21
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

did not have the power to stipulate for a separate minimum,

respondent No. 3 was even otherwise disqualified.                          We do not

find even a whisper of such a case in the impugned judgment.
We further notice that there is no case that the appellant

has urged this as a ground in the special leave petition.
It is true in objection filed in this case in this Court in

January, 2022, the appellant has produced what is described

as its pleadings in the High Court.                      We have perused the

pleadings.       The appellant has not been able to specifically

point      out   any       allegation      as     such     dealing         with    the

ineligibility of respondent no. 3 on the ground that he is

not possessed of the essential qualification of the kind

complained of.         It is true also no doubt that the question

as   to    whether     a    candidate    is     qualified,     in    that,    he   is

having knowledge of the Konkani language would appear to be

tested in the interview.               It is equally true that it is an

essential qualification.               But as to whether a person would

be   disqualified          on    the   ground    that    he    was    not     having

particular essential qualification in the facts is a pure

question of fact.               This is not seen pleaded as such.                  We

reiterate that the impugned judgment does not show that the

appellant has urged this before the High Court.                        Apart from

the proceedings of the Selection Board, there is no record

produced to show that respondent No. 3 was disqualified on

this ground.
We   would       therefore,     think     that      it     may     not   be
22
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

appropriate to permit the appellant to raise this question.
(21)    We   do   think   that   the   respondents   are    justified     in

pointing out that the High Court is right in not permitting

the    appellant    to    contend   that   the   respondents     cannot   be

treated as entitled to be recommended.             The question however

may arise as to what is the nature of the relief which can

be granted.       We notice from the reliefs which have been set

out in the writ petition that it is as follows:
“(A) This Hon’ble Court be pleased to issue a writ of
      mandamus or a writ in the nature of mandamus or any
      other appropriate writ, order or direction, commanding
      the Respondent No. 1 to prepare a Select List in terms
      of   the    Advertisement   No.   14/2016   and   make
      recommendations to the Government on the basis of the
      said Select List in accordance with law;
(B)    This Hon’ble Court also be pleased to issue an
      appropriate writ, order or direction, to quash and set
      aside the Advertisement dated 21.07.2017 bearing No.
      7/2017.
(C)    Pending the hearing and final disposal of this
      Petition, this Hon’ble Court be pleased to stay the
      execution and operation of the entire Selection
      Process pursuant to the Advertisement No. 7/2017 dated
      21.07.2017;
(D)       Ad-interim relief in terms of prayer clause (C);

      (E)    Any other relief, as deemed fit and proper may
      please be granted in favour of the Petitioners herein;

      (F) For costs.”



        We have already noticed the relief granted by the High

Court.
(22)    There is yet another aspect which we must consider.

As    already     noticed,   even   before   the   filing   of   the   writ
23
CA NO. 2779/ 2022 (@ SLP (C)No. 3587/ 2018)

petition,      the    Commission    commenced           fresh    proceedings.

While there is a stay of the impugned judgment, this Court

had made it clear that the appointments will be subject to

the outcome of the special leave petition.
Since    the   appellant    fails    in    its     challenge      to    the

impugned order, the respondents must finally obtain redress.

Accordingly, while we dismiss the appeal, we reiterate the

directions contained in the impugned order and it is for

Appointing Authority to take the decision in accordance with

law in the matter.
The   appeal    is    dismissed     without      any     orders    as   to

costs.
Appellant      will   forward     the     list    in     terms    of    the

directions by the High Court within a period of four weeks

from today.      Respondent No. 4 will take a decision on the

same in accordance with law within a further period of six

weeks from the date of the receipt of the list from the

appellant.
………………………………………………………………., J.
[ K.M. JOSEPH ]




                                       ………………………………………………………………., J.
[ HRISHIKESH ROY ]
New Delhi;
April 06, 2022.
24