[Cites
2
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Jacob Thudipara vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 April, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2974 OF 2022

         Dr. Jacob Thudipara                                            ..Appellant (S)


                                                Versus


         The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.                         ..Respondent (S)




                                           JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 09.05.2017 passed by the

                         Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh,

                         Principal Seat at Jabalpur in Writ Appeal No. 667/2016,

                         by which the High Court has dismissed the said appeal,

                         original writ petitioner – appellant herein has preferred the

                         present appeal.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.04.21
2.              The appellant herein was serving as a teacher. The dispute
16:56:56 IST
Reason:
arose      with      respect     to      the        age      of
1
superannuation/retirement,          namely,     whether,        the

      appellant­teacher   is   entitled   to   get   the   benefits    of
enhanced age of superannuation of 65 years at par with

      his counterpart teachers serving in Government Colleges

      and Universities.
2.1   The appellant was serving in 1OO% government aided

      private educational institution. At the relevant time, the

      Full Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in the

      case of
Dr. S.C. Jain Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and

      others
(W.A. No. 950/2015) took the view that the teachers

      serving in the aided private educational institutions are

      not entitled to get the benefit of enhanced age of

      superannuation of 65 years.
The appellant and others filed

      Writ Appeals before the High Court which came to be

      dismissed, relying upon the case of
Dr. S.C. Jain
(supra).
However, subsequently the decision of the Full Bench of

      the High Court in the case of
Dr. S.C. Jain
(supra) has

      been set aside by this Court vide judgment and order

      dated 07.05.2019 in C.A. No. 4675­4676 of 2019 in the

      case of
Dr. R.S. Sohane Vs. State of M.P. & others
;
2
(2019) 16 SCC 796, and it is held that the teachers like the

appellant are entitled to get the benefit of enhanced age of

superannuation of 65 years. The parties to the aforesaid

appeals filed M.A. Nos. 1838­1839 of 2019 with I.A. No.

119950 of 2019 before this Court claiming the payment of

outstanding salaries for the intervening period. This Court

disposed of the aforesaid interlocutory application and

clarified that they can approach the High Court for

redressal of their grievances with regard to the payment of

outstanding salaries of intervening period.
As observed

hereinabove, the appeal preferred by the appellant before

the High Court has been dismissed by the Division Bench

of the High Court relying upon the decision of Full Court in

the case of
Dr. S.C. Jain
(supra), which has subsequently

been set aside by this Court. Therefore, it is the case on

behalf of the appellant that he shall be entitled to continue

up to enhanced age of superannuation i.e., 65 years and

shall be entitled to all the monetary benefits as if, he would

have been continued up to the age of 65 years.
3
2.2   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has

      heavily relied upon the subsequent decision of the Division

      Bench of the High Court dated 29.11.2019 passed in Writ

      Appeal No. 1857/2019 filed by a similarly situated teacher

      of a government aided private college by which the Division

      Bench of the High Court has condoned 1227 days of delay

      in filing intra­court appeal and has held him entitled for

      superannuation with all consequential and monetary

      benefits including arrears of salaries and allowances of the

      intervening period, by following the law
laid down by
this

      Court in the case of
Dr. R.S. Sohane
(supra).


2.3   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has

      also relied upon the common judgment and order dated

      07.09.2021 passed by the Division Bench of the High

      Court in Writ Appeal No. 378/2018 and other allied

      appeals, by which, after the review applications were

      allowed, the aforesaid writ appeals were restored to the file

      and the Division Bench of the High Court has directed the

      State to pay all the consequential and monetary benefits to

      all similarly situated teachers and assistant professors for
4
the intervening period between 62 years and 65 years of

     age. It is submitted that all similarly situated teachers are

     therefore, paid all consequential and monetary benefits for

     the period between 62 years and 65 years of age, as if they

     would have been continued up to 65 years of age.
3.   Mrs. Mrinal Gopal Elker, learned counsel appearing on

     behalf of the respondent­ State, as such, is not in a

     position to dispute the aforesaid factual aspects. However,

     she has tried to distinguish the facts by submitting that

     when this Court passed an order earlier to pay the salaries

     to them after they had completed the age of 62 years, all of

     them were directed to be taken on duty by way of an

     interim order and actually they worked up to the age of 65

     years. In the present case, the appellant did not work and

     therefore on the principle of ‘no work no pay’, he is not

     entitled to any monetary benefits for the intervening

     period, between 62 years and 65 years of age.
4.   Having heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

     respective parties and considering the various orders

     passed by the High Court, by which in similar facts and
5
situation and not accepting the submission on behalf of

the State that on the principle of ‘no work no pay’ the

teachers are not entitled to any monetary benefits for the

intervening period between 62 years and 65 years of age,

we are of the opinion that appellant shall be entitled to all

consequential and monetary benefits including the arrears

of salaries and allowances for the intervening period, as if

he would have been retired at the age of 65 years. The

appellant being similarly situated teacher cannot be

singled out. Even in the case of Writ Appeal No. 378/2018

and other allied writ appeals, it was submitted by the State

that on the principle of ‘no work no pay’ such teachers are

not entitled to any monetary benefits. However, the High

Court vide detailed judgment and order has negated such

a plea and defence and has observed that as the teachers

were prevented from serving up to the age of 65 years

though they were entitled to, as held by this Court in the

case of
Dr. R.S. Sohane
(supra), they cannot be denied the

monetary benefits for the intervening period. It is reported

that
the said judgment
and order passed by the Division

Bench of the High Court has been implemented by the
6
State after the Special Leave Petition against
the said

     judgment
and order has been dismissed by this Court.
5.   In view of the above discussion and for the reasons stated

     above,   the   present   appeal   succeeds.   The   impugned

     judgment and order passed by the Division Bench of the

     High Court in W.A. No. 667/2016 is hereby quashed and

     set aside, which was passed relying upon the decision of

     Full Bench of High Court in W.A. No. 950/2015, which has

     been subsequently set aside by this Court in the case of
Dr. R.S. Sohane
(supra). It is held that the appellant

     herein is entitled to the benefit of enhanced age of

     superannuation i.e., 65 years. He shall be entitled to all

     the consequential and monetary benefits including arrears

     of salaries and etc., as if, he would have been continued

     up to the age of 65 years. The arrears etc., shall be paid to

     the appellant within a period of six weeks’ from today.

     However, considering the fact that there was a huge delay

     in preferring the appeal, which has been condoned by this

     Court, the appellant shall not be entitled to any interest on
7
the arrears for the period between 09.05.2017 till the filing

      of the present appeal.
6.    The present appeal is accordingly allowed. In the facts and

      circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to

      costs.
…………………………………J.
                                     (M. R. SHAH)


                                     …………………………………J.
                                     (B.V. NAGARATHNA)
New Delhi,
April 21, 2022.
8