[Cites
4
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Uttarakhand vs Mayan Pal Singh Verma on 19 April, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE


                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2905 OF 2022


         State of Uttarakhand & Anr.                                ..Appellant (S)


                                               Versus


         Mayan Pal Singh Verma                                    ..Respondent (S)




                                          JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned order

                         passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of

                         Uttarakhand at Nainital in WPSB No. 9/2022, by which

                         the High Court has disposed of the said writ petition

                         without deciding the writ petition on merits and has
Signature Not Verified
directed the Department to comply with the order passed
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.04.19
16:53:43 IST
Reason:
1
by the Tribunal which was under challenge before it, the

     State has preferred the present appeal.
2.   Feeling   aggrieved   with        the   order   passed   by    the

     Uttarakhand Public Service Tribunal, Dehradun (for short

     “Tribunal”) in Claim Petition No.104/DB/2009, by which

     the Tribunal directed the Department to ignore the un­

     communicated     “Uttam”         entries   in   the   ACRs    while

     considering the case of the original applicant – private

     respondent herein for his promotion to the post of the

     Chief Engineer Level­2 by the reviewed ACP, the State of

     Uttarakhand had preferred the writ petition before the

     High Court. By the impugned order, the Division Bench of

     the High Court has disposed of the said writ petition

     without deciding the writ petition on merits and without

     expressing anything on the legality and validity of the

     order passed by the Tribunal and has directed the State to

     comply with the order passed by the Tribunal by observing

     that though Tribunal had passed an order on 15 th

     September, 2021, no review ACP has been constituted.

     There is no discussion at all by the High Court on the
2
merits of the order passed by the Tribunal, which was

      under challenge before it. The impugned order reads as

      under: ­

                 “The matter is taken up through virtual hearing.

              Heard Mr. Pradeep Joshi, learned Standing
         Counsel for the appellant.
In this case, the petitioner has assailed the order
         passed by the Uttarakhand Public Service Tribunal,
         Dehradun in Claim Petition No. 104/DB/2009
         directing the opposite party to ignore the un­
         communicated ''Uttam” entries in the ACRs while
         considering the case of the private respondent for his
         promotion to the post of the Chief Engineer level­2 by
         the reviewed ACP. It is further directed that the
         respondent­Department may hold the reviewed ACP
         within three months from the date representation of
         the certified copy of this order. This Order has been
         passed on 15th September, 2021 till then no review
         ACP has been constituted. Let that order passed by
         the Tribunal be complied within 21 days from today.
With such observation, the writ application is
         disposed of.”


2.1    From the writ petition produced on record, it appears

       that the order passed by the Tribunal was challenged on

       a number of grounds. None of the grounds raised in the

       writ petition has been dealt with and/or considered by

       the High Court on merits. There is no discussion at all on

       any of the grounds raised in the writ petition. The

       Division Bench of the High Court has disposed of the writ
3
petition in a most cavalier and cursory manner, which is

      unsustainable. The High Court has disposed of the writ

      petition without deciding the writ petition on merits and

      has directed the Department to comply with the order

      passed by the Tribunal solely by observing that the order

      has been passed on 15th September, 2021 and till date no

      review ACP has been constituted. However, the High

      Court ought to have noted that the order passed by the

      Tribunal was under challenge before it and therefore, the

      High Court was required to decide and dispose of the writ

      petition   on   merits   and   consider   the   legality   and

      correctness of the order passed by the Tribunal.


2.2   The manner in which the High Court has dealt with and

      disposed of the writ petition without deciding the writ

      petition on merits cannot be appreciated at all. When a

      number of issues/grounds were raised in the writ

      petition, there was the duty cast upon the High Court to

      deal with the same and thereafter, to pass a reasoned

      order.
In the recent decision in the case of
Vishal Ashwin

      Patel Vs. Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax
4
Circle
25(3) & Ors. (Civil Appeal No. 2200/2022), it was

observed by this Court that when the Constitution

confers on the High Courts the power to give relief, it

becomes the duty of the High Courts to give such relief in

appropriate cases and the High Courts would be failing to

perform its duty if relief is refused without adequate

reasons. It is further observed that in this case, the High

Court in exercise of powers under
Article 226
of the

Constitution of India was required to have independently

considered the legality and validity of the order passed by

the Tribunal which was under challenge before it. Neither

any submission on merits is recorded nor is there any

discussion on the merits of the matter on the order

passed by the Tribunal. There is no application of mind

at all by the High Court on merits of the order passed by

the Tribunal. It can be seen that the High Court has

failed to exercise its jurisdiction vested in it while

exercising the powers under Article 226/227 of the

Constitution of India.
5
2.3   While emphasising the necessity to pass a reasoned

      order, in the case of
Central Board of Trustees Vs.

      Indore Composite Private Limited
, (2018) 8 SCC 443,

      it was observed and held by this Court that the courts

      need to pass a reasoned order in every case which must

      contain the narration of the bare facts of the case of the

      parties to the lis, the issues arising in the case, the

      submissions urged by the parties, the legal principles

      applicable to the issues involved and the reasons in

      support of the findings on all the issues arising in the

      case and urged by the learned counsel for the parties in

      support of its conclusion. It was further observed in
the

      said decision
that an order bereft of reasoning causes

      prejudice to the parties because it deprives them to know

      the reasons as to why one party has won and other has

      lost.
2.4   In a recent decision in the case of
Union Public Service

      Commission Vs. Bibhu Prasad Sarangi and Ors.
,

      (2021) 4 SCC 516, while emphasising that reasons ought

      to be given by the High Court while exercising powers
6
under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, it was

     observed and held by this Court that the reasons

     constitute the soul of judicial decision and how Judges

     communicate     in    their     judgment   is   a   defining

     characteristic of judicial process since quality of justice

     brings legitimacy to the judiciary. It is further observed

     that though statistics of disposal of cases is important, of

     a higher value, is the intrinsic content and of a quality

     judgment. It is further observed that in exercise of powers

     under
Article 226
the courts require to independently

     consider the issues involved.
3.   Applying the law laid by this Court in the aforesaid

     decisions to the facts of the case on hand and the

     manner in which the High Court has disposed of the writ

     petition, in the interest of sobriety, we may only note that

     the order is bereft of reasoning as diverse grounds were

     urged/raised by the parties which ought to have been

     examined by the High Court in the first place and a clear

     finding was required to be recorded upon analysing the

     relevant documents.
7
4.   Since we cannot countenance the manner in which the

     order has been passed by the High Court which has

     compelled us to remand the matter to the High Court for

     deciding the writ petition afresh on merits, we do so in

     light of the aforesaid observations.
5.   In light of the foregoing discussion, we allow the present

     appeal and set aside the impugned order passed by the

     High Court and remand the matter to the Division Bench

     of the High Court for deciding the writ petition afresh in

     accordance with law, keeping in view our observations

     made supra. We, however, make it clear that we have

     refrained from making any observation on the merits of

     the controversy, having formed an opinion to remand the

     case to the High Court only for the reasons mentioned

     above. The High Court would, therefore, decide the writ

     petition, bearing in mind our observations made above

     and strictly in accordance with law.
With the above directions, the present appeal is

     accordingly allowed and the impugned order is set aside.
8
The matter is remanded to the High Court as aforesaid.
No costs.
…………………………………J.
                                   (M. R. SHAH)




                                   …………………………………J.
                                   (B.V. NAGARATHNA)
New Delhi,
April 19, 2022.
9