[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Wipro Finance Ltd vs The Commissioner Of Income Tax, ... on 12 April, 2022
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
Abhay S. Oka
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
1

2022 INSC 417
                                                                                REPORTABLE


                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6677 OF 2008


         WIPRO FINANCE LTD.                                        …APPELLANT

                                                     VERSUS

         COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX                                …RESPONDENTS



                                                 ORDER
1.      This appeal takes exception to the judgment and order dated

         2.4.2008 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Karnataka

         at Bengaluru in I.T.A. No. 633/2004.
2.      Briefly stated, the appellant company submitted returns of

         income          on      29.11.1997    for    the   assessment   year   1997­1998,

         mentioning loss of income, amongst others, owing to exchange

         fluctuation of Rs.1,10,53,909/­.               After processing the return under
Section 143(1)(a)
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 1, the assessment was

         completed on 16.3.2000. As against the loss declared by the appellant

         due to exchange fluctuation, the assessment was concluded by
         1 for short, “the 1961 Act”
2
positive taxable income. Against that decision, the matter was carried

in appeal by the appellant before the Commissioner of Income Tax

(Appeals)2 and eventually, by way of appeal before the Income Tax

Appellate Tribunal3 being I.T.A. No. 795 (Bang)/2000.
3.      In the appeal before the ITAT, the appellant not only claimed

deduction in respect of loss of Rs.1,10,53,909/­ arising on account of

exchange fluctuation, but also set up a fresh claim in respect of

revenue expenses to the tune of Rs.2,46,04,418/­, erroneously

capitalised in the returns. The ITAT entertained this fresh claim set

forth by the appellant and recorded in its judgment that the

department’s            representative   had   no   objection   in   that   regard.

Additionally, the ITAT adverted to the decision of this Court in
National Thermal Power Co. Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Income

Tax4
in support, for entertaining fresh claim of the appellant in

exercise of powers under
Section 254
of the 1961 Act. The ITAT, in

the first place, reversed the finding given by CIT(A) regarding

application of
Section 43A
of the 1961 Act. The ITAT opined that the

said provision had no application to the fact situation of the present

case.       Having said that, it then proceeded to consider the question

whether the loss suffered by the appellant owing to exchange
2 for short, “CIT(A)”
3 for short, “ITAT”
4 (1997) 7 SCC 489
3
fluctuation can be regarded as revenue expenditure or capital

expenditure incurred by the appellant, and answered the same in

favour of the appellant by holding that it would be a case of

expenditure on revenue account and an allowable deduction.              The

ITAT answered the same in the following words: ­

       “….. So far as the argument whether the impugned
       expenditure or loss is revenue or capital in nature we find
       that the funds borrowed were utilised for the purposes of
       regular finance business carried on by the assessee. Such an
       income has also been offered for taxation and accepted by the
       department. Quantification of exchange fluctuation loss has
       been done as per rule 115 of the I T Rules.
Said rule must be
       applied in computing the total income of the assessee had
       held by the Supreme Court in
CIT vs. Chowgule Co Ltd.
– 218
       ITR 384. Further the exchange fluctuation loss is an
       expenditure incidental to carrying on of business and
       comes within the purview of
section 37
of the Act as the
       same is incurred wholly and exclusively for the purposes
       of business. It is nobody’s case that the funds borrowed
       in foreign exchange have been diverted for non­business
       purposes.
In such a case the decision of the Supreme Court
       in India Cement Case (supra) fully covers the issue in favour
       of the assessee. We also find that in this case, assessee’s
       claim satisfies all the tests laid down by Supreme Court in
       124 ITR 1 extracted supra. In this case entire borrowal of
       loan and the utilisation of the same, is in trading operations
       of the company more profitably and the fixed capital in this
       case is untouched. Hence the expenditure is on revenue
       account and allowable.
We also find the loss incurred by the assessee cannot be
       treated as contingent in nature as the loss on account of
       foreign exchange fluctuation has been quantified in terms of
       rule 115 of IT Rules and further the liability is real as per
       terms of the agreement with CDC. Just because the liability
       is payable in future does not covert the actual liability into
       contingent liability as held by the Supreme Court in
Calcutta
       Co Ltd. vs. CIT
– 37
ITR 1 and Bharat Earth Movers Ltd. vs.
       CIT
– 245 ITR 428.
Similar view has been expressed by ITAT
       special bench in ONGC case 83 ITR 51 (SB). Looking from
       any angle the claim on this issue is allowable. Accordingly,
4
we allow the entire claim of Rs.3,56,57,727/­. We direct the
       AO to do so. This issue is held in favour of the assessee.”
                                                  (emphasis supplied)
4.   The matter was carried before the High Court by the department.

Amongst others, following questions were formulated for consideration

as substantial questions of law concerning subject deduction claimed

by the appellant. The same read thus: ­


       “(3) Whether on facts and in the circumstances of the case,
       the Tribunal is justified in deleting the dis­allowance of claim
       to the tune of Rs.1,10,53,509/­ for the assessment year
       1997­98 in respect of exchange fluctuation that was made by
       the Assessing Officer? (in ITA No. 633/2004 only).

       (4) Whether on facts and in the circumstances of the case,
       the Tribunal is justified in allowing the additional claim of
       Rs.2,46,04,418.00 for the assessment year 1997­98 holding
       that the capitalisation of the said sum is to be treated as
       revenue expenses? (in ITA No. 633/04 only).”


The High Court vide impugned judgment has reversed the view taken

by the ITAT, mainly observing that the ITAT had not recorded

sufficient reasons in support of its conclusion and in any case, the

conclusion was without any basis.
5.   We have heard Mr. S. Ganesh, learned senior counsel for the

appellant and Mr. Vikramjit Banerjee, learned Additional Solicitor

General appearing for the respondent.
5
6.   The broad undisputed relevant facts, as can be culled out from

the record are that the appellant entered into a loan agreement with

one Commonwealth Development Corporation having its registered

office at England in the United Kingdom, for borrowing amount to

carry on its project described in Schedule 1 to the agreement ­ for

expanding its primary business of leasing and hire purchase of capital

equipment to existing Indian enterprises. Schedule 1 of the agreement

reads thus: ­


                              “SCHEDULE 1
                         (referred to in Recital A)
                         Description of the Project
       The Project consists of the financing by the Company of the
       acquisition of plant, machinery and equipment to be used in
       its leasing business in accordance with the applicable laws
       and regulations of India and the Company’s Memorandum
       and Articles of Association.”


The loan was obtained in foreign currency (5 million pounds sterling).

However, while repaying the loan, due to the difference of rate of

foreign exchange, the appellant had to pay higher amount, resulting in

loss to the appellant.   Indeed, the loan amount was utilised by the

appellant for financing the existing Indian enterprises for procurement

of capital equipment on hire purchase or lease basis.                The fact

remains that the activity of financing by the appellant to the existing

Indian enterprises for procurement or acquisition of plant, machinery
6
and equipment on leasing and hire purchase basis, is an independent

transaction or activity being the business of the appellant.
7.     As regards, the transaction of loan between the appellant and

Commonwealth Development Corporation, the same was in the nature

of borrowing money by the appellant, which was necessary for

carrying on its business of financing. It was certainly not for creation

of asset of the appellant as such or acquisition of asset from a country

outside India for the purpose of its business. In such a scenario, the

appellant would be justified in availing deduction of entire expenditure

or loss suffered by it in connection with such a transaction in terms of
Section 37
of the Act. For, the loan is wholly and exclusively used for

the purpose of business of financing the existing Indian enterprises,

who in turn, had to acquire plant, machinery and equipment to be

used by them. It is a different matter that they may do so because of

the leasing and hire purchase agreement with the appellant.        That

would be, nevertheless, an activity concerning the business of the

appellant.
In that view of the matter, the ITAT was right in answering

the claim of the appellant in the affirmative, relaying on the dictum of

this Court in
India Cements Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Income Tax,

Madras5
.
The exposition in this decision has been elaborated in the


5 AIR 1966 SC 1053
7
subsequent decision of this Court in
Empire Jute Co. Ltd. vs.

Commissioner of Income Tax6
.
8.      The ITAT has extracted the relevant portion of the decision in

India Cements Ltd.7, which reads thus: ­


             “7.….. where there is no express prohibition, an outgoing, by
             means of which an assessee procures the use of a thing by
             which it makes a profit, is deductible from the receipts of the
             business to ascertain taxable income. …..
xxx         xxx                xxx
16. ….. the loan obtained is not an asset or advantage of an
             enduring nature….. the expenditure was made for securing
             the use of money for a certain period … and it is irrelevant to
             consider the object with which the loan was obtained. …..
17. ….. the act of borrowing money ….. was not incidental to
             the carrying on of a business. …..”



Similarly, the exposition in the case of Empire Jute Co. Ltd.8 is also

extracted by the ITAT, which reads thus: ­


             “5.….. it is not a universally true proposition that what may
             be capital receipt in the hands of the payee must necessarily
             be capital expenditure in relation to the payer. The fact that a
             certain payment constitutes income or capital receipt in the
             hands of the recipient is not material in determining whether
             the payment is revenue or capital disbursement qua the
             payer. …..
xxx         xxx                xxx
8. ….. There may be cases where expenditure, even if
             incurred for obtaining advantage of enduring benefit, may,
             nonetheless, be on revenue account and the test of enduring

6 (1980) 4 SCC 25
7 supra at footnote No. 5
8 supra at footnote No. 6
8
benefit may break down. It is not every advantage of enduring
       nature, acquired by an assessee that brings the case within
       the principle
laid down in
this test. What is material to
       consider is the nature of the advantage in a commercial
       sense and it is only where the advantage is in the capital
       field that the expenditure would be disallowable on an
       application of this test. If the advantage consists merely
       in facilitating the assessee's trading operations or
       enabling the management and conduct of the assessee's
       business to be carried on more efficiently or more
       profitably while leaving the fixed capital untouched, the
       expenditure would be on revenue account, even though
       the advantage may endure for an indefinite future. The
       test of enduring benefit is therefore not a certain or
       conclusive test and it cannot be applied blindly and
       mechanically without regard to the particular facts and
       circumstances of a given case. …..
xxx               xxx                xxx
11. ….. “What is an outgoing of capital and what is an
       outgoing on account of revenue depends on what the
       expenditure is calculated to effect from a practical and
       business point of view rather than upon the juristic
       classification of the legal rights, if any, secured, employed or
       exhausted is the process.”
          The question must be viewed in the larger context of
       business necessity or expediency. …..”

                                                  (emphasis supplied)
9.   A priori, we are of the considered opinion that the analysis done

by the ITAT and the conclusion arrived at in respect of the subject

claim of the appellant being the correct approach consistent with the

exposition of this Court, needs to be upheld. In our opinion, the High

Court missed the relevant aspects of the analysis of the ITAT

concerning the fact situation of the present case. As a matter of fact,
9
the High Court has not even adverted to the aforementioned reported

decisions, much less its usefulness in the present case.
10.     The learned ASG appearing for the department had faintly argued

that since the appellant in its return had taken a conscious explicit

plea with regard to the part of the claim being ascribable to capital

expenditure and partly to revenue expenditure, it was not open for the

appellant to plead for the first time before the ITAT that the entire

claim must be treated as revenue expenditure.      Further, it was not

open to the ITAT to entertain such fresh claim for the first time. This

submission needs to be stated to be rejected. In the first place, the

ITAT was conscious about the fact that this claim was set up by the

appellant for the first time before it, and was clearly inconsistent and

contrary to the stand taken in the return filed by the appellant for the

concerned assessment year including the notings made by the officials

of the appellant. Yet, the ITAT entertained the claim as permissible,

even though for the first time before the ITAT, in appeal under
Section

254
of the 1961 Act, by relying on the dictum of this Court in

National Thermal Power Co. Ltd.9.          Further, the ITAT has also

expressly recorded the no objection given by the representative of the

department, allowing the appellant to set up the fresh claim to treat
9 supra at footnote No. 4
10
the amount declared as capital expenditure in the returns (as

originally filed), as revenue expenditure.     As a result, the objection

now taken by the department cannot be countenanced.
11.     Learned ASG had placed reliance on the decision of this Court in
Goetze (India) Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Income Tax
10 in support of

the objection pressed before us that it is not open to entertain fresh

claim before the ITAT.        According to him, the decision in National

Thermal Power Co. Ltd.11 merely permits raising of a new ground

concerning the claim already mentioned in the returns and not an

inconsistent or contrary plea or a new claim. We are not impressed by

this argument. For, the observations in the decision in Goetze (India)

Ltd.12 itself make it amply clear that such limitation would apply to

the “assessing authority”, but not impinge upon the plenary powers of

the ITAT bestowed under
Section 254
of the Act. In other words, this

decision is of no avail to the department.
12.     Learned counsel for the department had also relied on the

decision of this Court in
Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax,

Vadodara vs. Elecon Engineering Company Limited13
.                  This


10 [2006] 284 ITR 323
11 supra at footnote No. 4
12 supra at footnote No. 10
13 (2010) 4 SCC 482
11
decision is on the question of application of
Section 43A
of the 1961

Act. Accordingly, the exposition in this decision will be of no avail to

the fact situation of the present case. For, we have already noticed

that the appellant had not acquired any asset from any country

outside India for the purpose of his business.
13.   In view of the above, this appeal ought to succeed.            The

impugned judgment and order of the High Court needs to be set aside

and instead, the decision of the ITAT dated 3.6.2004 in favour of the

appellant on the two questions examined by the High Court in the

impugned judgment, needs to be affirmed and restored.            We order

accordingly.
14.   As a result of allowing the entire claim of the appellant to the

tune of Rs.3,56,57,727/­ being revenue expenditure, suitable amends

will have to be effected in the final assessment order passed by the

assessing officer for the concerned assessment year, thereby treating

the consequential benefits such as depreciation availed by the

appellant­assessee in relation to the stated amount towards exchange

fluctuation    related   to    leased    assets    capitalised     (being

Rs.2,46,04,418/­), as unavailable and non­est.
12
15.   The appeal is allowed in the above terms with no order as to

costs.
Pending interlocutory applications, if any, stand disposed of.
..……………………………J.
                                           (A.M. Khanwilkar)


                                              ………………………………J.
                                           (Abhay S. Oka)


                                              ………………………………J.
                                           (C.T. Ravikumar)
New Delhi;
April 12, 2022.
13
ITEM NO.104                 COURT NO.3                   SECTION IV-A

               S U P R E M E C O U R T O F         I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

                     Civil Appeal   No(s).   6677/2008

WIPRO FINANCE LTD.                                       Appellant(s)

                                    VERSUS

COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX                               Respondent(s)

WITH
SLP(C) No. 9274/2009 (IV-A)

 C.A. No. 2666/2011 (IV-A)

 C.A. No. 7906/2009 (IV-A)

 C.A. No. 2696/2010 (IV-A)
Date : 12-04-2022 These matters were called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. KHANWILKAR
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ABHAY S. OKA
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE C.T. RAVIKUMAR

For Parties:          Mr. S. Ganesh, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Tejveer Bhatia, Adv.
                      Mr. K.R. Pradeep, Adv.
Mr.Rohan Swarup, Adv.
Mr. Gaurav Sharma, Adv.
Mr. Abhinav Mukerji, AOR
                      Ms. Archana Sahadeva, Adv.
                      Ms. Pragati Agrawal, Adv.
Mr. Vikramjit Banerjee, Adv.
                      Mr. Arijit Prasad, Sr. Adv.
                      Mr. Shailesh Madiyal, Adv.
                      Mr. Siddhartah Sinha, Adv.
                      Mr. Jauhri Prakash, Adv.
                      Mr. Tathagat, Adv.
Mr. Nring C. Zehiang, Adv.
                      Mr. Abhishek Mahajan, Adv.
                      Mr. Prashant Rawat, Adv.
                      Mr. O.P. Shukla, Adv.
Mr. Kumar shashank, Adv.
                      Mr. Raj Bahadur Yadav, AOR
14
Mr. Preetesh Kapur, Sr. Adv.
            Mr. Senthil Jagadeesan, AOR
            Ms. Sonakshi Malhan, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                     O R D E R
Civil Appeal     No. 6677/2008
The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed

reportable order.
Pending    applications,      if     any,   shall   stand

disposed of.
SLP(C)   No.   9274/2009,  C.A.   Nos.   2666/2011,
7906/2009 and 2696/2010.__________________________

      It    is   agreed    that    these    matters     involve

different      questions    than     the      leading      case

(C.A.No.6677/2008), listed today. Hence, de-linked.
List these matters next week.
(NEETU KHAJURIA)                             (VIDYA NEGI)
   COURT MASTER                               COURT MASTER

              (Signed reportable order in
C.A. No.6677/2008 is placed on the file.)