[Cites
21
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Manisha vs The State Of Rajasthan on 19 April, 2022
Author:
N.V. Ramana
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
Krishna Murari
,
Hima Kohli
REPORTABLE


                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 649 of 2022
                             (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) No. 7893 of 2021)


       Ms. Y                                                      … APPELLANT


                                               VERSUS


       STATE OF RAJASTHAN AND ANR.                               … RESPONDENTS


                                             JUDGMENT
N.V. RAMANA, CJI.
1.                Leave granted
2.                The present appeal has been filed against the final judgment

       and               order   dated   20.09.2021    passed    in   S.B.   Criminal

       Miscellaneous Bail Application No. 14458 of 2021 by the High

       Court of Rajasthan, at Jaipur, whereby the High Court granted

       regular bail to respondent no. 2 ­ accused.
3.                The counsel for the appellant­prosecutrix submits that the

       High Court erred in granting bail to the respondent no. 2 ­
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
accused in a mechanical manner without any reasoning. Learned
SATISH KUMAR YADAV
Date: 2022.04.19
18:56:14 IST
Reason:
counsel submits that the High Court did not consider the facts of
1
the case before it, more particularly, the gravity of the offences

alleged to have been committed by the respondent no. 2 ­

accused. Additionally, the High Court did not consider that the

respondent no. 2 – accused is a hardened criminal with nearly

twenty   criminal   cases   pending   against   him.   Under   such

circumstances, this Court should exercise its jurisdiction under
Article 136
of the Constitution and set aside the bail granted to

respondent no. 2 ­ accused.
4.    Learned Counsel for respondent no. 1­ State supported the

submissions of the appellant and submitted that the impugned

order is a cryptic one which is liable to be set aside. He submitted

that there is a strong prima facie case against the respondent no.

2 ­ accused who committed the heinous offence of rape and

sexual assault upon his minor niece for nearly three to four years.

Further, respondent no. 2 ­ accused is an infamous criminal who

has twenty criminal cases registered against him, in some of

which he has already been convicted. The list of cases registered

against him include cases relating to murder, attempt to murder,

kidnapping, dacoity, etc. Therefore, the order of the High Court

granting bail to respondent no. 2 ­ accused should be set aside.
2
5.    Per contra, learned counsel for respondent no. 2 submits

that the High Court passed the impugned order granting bail after

hearing the respondent no. 2 ­ accused and the State. No new

materials have been placed on record before this Court, requiring

this Court to interfere with the impugned order. Further, it is a

settled position of law that an appellate Court must be slow to

interfere in an order granting bail to the accused.
6.    Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
7.    Before adverting to the submissions made by the parties

relating to the grant of bail, it is necessary to provide a brief

conspectus of the allegations made against respondent no. 2 –

accused. As per the chargesheet dated 29.06.2021 filed in the

present case, it is stated that the appellant­prosecutrix registered

an FIR on 30.05.2021 wherein it was stated that on the 16­

17.05.2021 the respondent no. 2 – accused, her uncle, had come

to her house. At around mid­night to 1 am the respondent no. 2 –

accused had called her to his room and forcibly raped her on two

occasions. Although, initially, she did not narrate this to anyone

because she was scared, some of her relatives noticed her strange

behaviour. When they asked her why she was sad, she narrated

the entire incident to her family. Even before this incident, the
3
respondent no. 2 – accused had misbehaved with her. In 2014, he

touched her inappropriately. In 2015, he had attempted to rape

her. He used to try to chat with her and used obscene language,

and attempted to establish physical relationship with her on

various occasions. She had never disclosed these incidents to

anyone as he threatened her. It is in the background of these

allegations that the appropriateness of the impugned order passed

by the High Court granting bail to respondent no. 2 – accused

must be considered.
8.    This Court has, in a catena of judgments, outlined the

considerations on the basis of which discretion under
Section

439
, CrPC has to be exercised while granting bail.
In
Gurcharan

Singh v. State (Delhi Administration
), (1978) 1 SCC 118 this

Court has held as to the various parameters which must be

considered while granting bail. This Court held as follows:
“24. …Even so, the High Court or the Court of
            Session will have to exercise its judicial
            discretion in considering the question of
            granting of bail under
Section 439(1)
CrPC of
            the new Code. The overriding considerations in
            granting bail to which we adverted to earlier and
            which are common both in the case of
Section
            437(1)
and
Section 439(1)
CrPC of the new Code
            are the nature and gravity of the circumstances
            in which the offence is committed; the position
4
and the status of the accused with reference to
            the victim and the witnesses; the likelihood, of
            the accused fleeing from justice; of repeating the
            offence; of jeopardising his own life being faced
            with a grim prospect of possible conviction in
            the case; of tampering with witnesses; the
            history of the case as well as of its investigation
            and other relevant grounds which, in view of so
            many valuable factors, cannot be exhaustively
            set out.”
9.    The above factors do not constitute an exhaustive list. The

grant of bail requires the consideration of various factors which

ultimately depends upon the specific facts and circumstances of

the case before the Court. There is no strait jacket formula which

can ever be prescribed as to what the relevant factors could be.

However, certain important factors that are always considered,

inter­alia, relate to prima facie involvement of the accused, nature

and gravity of the charge, severity of the punishment, and the

character, position and standing of the accused [see State of U.P.

v. Amarmani Tripathi, (2005) 8 SCC 21].
10.   At the stage of granting bail the Court is not required to

enter into a detailed analysis of the evidence in the case. Such an

exercise may be undertaken at the stage of trial.
5
11.   Once bail has been granted, the Appellate Court is usually

slow to interfere with the same as it pertains to the liberty of an

individual. A Constitution Bench of this Court in
Bihar Legal

Support Society v. Chief Justice of India
, (1986) 4 SCC 767

observed as follows:
“3. … It is for this reason that the Apex Court
            has evolved, as a matter of self­discipline,
            certain norms to guide it in the exercise of its
            discretion in cases where special leave petition
            are filed against orders granting or refusing bail
            or anticipatory bail.…We reiterate this policy
            principle
laid down by
the bench of this
            Court and hold that this Court should not
            ordinarily, save in exceptional cases,
            interfere with orders granting or refusing bail
            or anticipatory bail, because these are
            matters in which the High Court should
            normally be the final arbiter.”
                                        (emphasis supplied)
12.   The above principle has been consistently followed by this

Court.
In
Prasanta Kumar Sarkar v. Ashis Chatterjee
, (2010)

14 SCC 496 this Court held as under:
“9. We are of the opinion that the impugned
            order is clearly unsustainable. It is trite that
            this Court does not, normally, interfere with an
            order passed by the High Court granting or
            rejecting bail to the accused. However, it is
            equally incumbent upon the High Court to
            exercise its discretion judiciously, cautiously
            and strictly in compliance with the basic
6
principles
laid down in
a plethora of decisions of
this Court on the point. It is well settled that,
among other circumstances, the factors to be
borne in mind while considering an application
for bail are:
(i) whether there is any prima facie or
      reasonable ground to believe that the
      accused had committed the offence;
(ii) nature and gravity of the accusation;
(iii) severity of the punishment in the event of
       conviction;
(iv) danger of the accused absconding or
      fleeing, if released on bail;
(v) character, behaviour, means, position and
      standing of the accused;
(vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated;
(vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses
       being influenced; and
(viii) danger, of course, of justice being
       thwarted by grant of bail.
xxx          xxx        xxx
10. It is manifest that if the High Court does not
advert to these relevant considerations and
mechanically grants bail, the said order would
suffer from the vice of non­application of mind,
rendering it to be illegal…..”
7
13.
In
Mahipal v. Rajesh Kumar
, (2020) 2 SCC 118 this

Court followed the holding in
Prasanta Kumar Sarkar
(supra)

and held as follows:
“17. Where a court considering an application
            for bail fails to consider relevant factors, an
            appellate court may justifiably set aside the
            order granting bail. An appellate court is thus
            required to consider whether the order granting
            bail suffers from a non­application of mind or is
            not borne out from a prima facie view of the
            evidence on record. It is thus necessary for this
            Court to assess whether, on the basis of the
            evidentiary record, there existed a prima facie or
            reasonable ground to believe that the accused
            had committed the crime, also taking into
            account the seriousness of the crime and the
            severity of the punishment…”
14.   Recently, a three Judges’ Bench of this Court in
Jagjeet

Singh & Ors. V. Ashish Mishra @ Monu & Anr.
in Criminal

Appeal No. 632 of 2022, has reiterated the factors that the Court

must consider at the time of granting bail under
Section 439
CrPC, as well as highlighted the circumstances where this Court

may interfere when bail has been granted in violation of the

requirements under the above­mentioned section. This Court

observed as follows:
“28. We may, at the outset, clarify that power to
            grant bail under
Section 439
of CrPC, is one of
8
wide amplitude. A High Court or a Sessions
             Court, as the case may be, are bestowed with
             considerable discretion while deciding an
             application for bail. But, as has been held by
             this Court on multiple occasions, this discretion
             is not unfettered. On the contrary, the High
             Court of the Sessions Court must grant bail
             after the application of a judicial mind, following
             well­established principles, and not in a cryptic
             or mechanical manner.”
15.    It is worth noting that what is being considered in this case

relates to whether the High Court has exercised the discretionary

power under
Section 439
CrPC in granting bail appropriately.

Such    an   assessment    is   different   from   deciding   whether

circumstances subsequent to the grant of bail have made it

necessary to cancel the same. The first situation requires the

Court to analyze whether the order granting bail was illegal,

perverse, unjustified or arbitrary. On the other hand, an

application for cancellation of bail looks at whether supervening

circumstances have occurred warranting cancellation.
In
Neeru

Yadav v. State of U.P.
, (2014) 16 SCC 508 this Court held as

follows:
“12. We have referred to certain principles to be
             kept in mind while granting bail, as has been
laid down by
this Court from time to time. It is
             well settled in law that cancellation of bail after
9
it is granted because the accused has
             misconducted himself or of some supervening
             circumstances warranting such cancellation
             have occurred is in a different compartment
             altogether than an order granting bail which is
             unjustified, illegal and perverse. If in a case, the
             relevant factors which should have been taken
             into consideration while dealing with the
             application for bail have not been taken note of,
             or bail is founded on irrelevant considerations,
             indisputably the superior court can set aside
             the order of such a grant of bail. Such a case
             belongs to a different category and is in a
             separate realm. While dealing with a case of
             second nature, the court does not dwell upon
             the violation of conditions by the accused or the
             supervening circumstances that have happened
             subsequently. It, on the contrary, delves into
             the justifiability and the soundness of the order
             passed by the court.”
16.
In the present case, it is necessary to determine whether the

High Court while granting bail to the respondent no. 2 ­ accused

has properly exercised its discretion under
Section 439
CrPC by

following various parameters
laid down by
this Court. A bare

perusal of the impugned order passed by the High Court does not

suggest that the Court has considered any of the relevant factors

for grant of bail. It would be fruitful to extract the impugned order

at this juncture:
“1. The present bail application has been filed
             under
Section 439
Cr.P.C. The petitioner has
10
been arrested in connection with FIR No.
319/2021 Registered at Police Station Udhyog
Nagar, District Sikar for the offence(s) under
Sections 354
, 354B, 354D,
376(2)
F, 376(2)N,
450, 506, 509
IPC
and
Sections 9N
/
10
,
5L
/
6
,
5(N)
/
6
and
18
of POCSO Act.
2. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits
that the petitioner has been falsely implicated in
this case. He is behind the bars since
30.05.2021. Charge­sheet has been filed against
the petitioner. Learned counsel for the petitioner
further submits that during trial, statement of
the prosecutrix was recorded by the learned
trial Court. Learned counsel for the petitioner
also submits that the prosecutrix has made
improvement in her statement. Conclusion of
trial may take long time.
3. Learned counsel for the complainant has
opposed the bail application and submitted that
the petitioner is a habitual offender and he has
been booked in PASA.
4. Learned Public Prosecutor has opposed the
bail application.
5. Considering the contentions put­forth by the
counsel for the petitioner and taking into
account the facts and circumstances of the case
and without expressing any opinion on the
merits of the case, this court deems it just and
proper to enlarge the petitioner on bail.
6. Accordingly, the bail application under
Section 439
Cr.P.C. is allowed and it is ordered
that the accused­petitioner Omprakash @
Jeevanram @ Oma Thehat S/o Boduram shall
be                                      enlarged
on bail provided he furnishes a personal bond in
11
the sum of Rs.50,000/­ with two sureties of
            Rs.25,000/­ each to the satisfaction of the
            learned trial Judge for his appearance before
            the court concerned on all the dates of hearing
            as and when called upon to do so.”
17.   Apart from the general observation that the facts and

circumstances of the case have been taken into account, nowhere

have the actual facts of the case been adverted to. There appears

to be no reference to the factors that ultimately led the High Court

to grant bail. In fact, no reasoning is apparent from the impugned

order.
18.   Reasoning is the life blood of the judicial system. That every

order must be reasoned is one of the fundamental tenets of our

system. An unreasoned order suffers the vice of arbitrariness.
In
Puran v. Rambilas
, (2001) 6 SCC 338 this Court held as under:
“8. …Giving reasons is different from discussing
            merits or demerits. At the stage of granting bail
            a detailed examination of evidence and
            elaborate documentation of the merits of the
            case has not to be undertaken. What the
            Additional Sessions Judge had done in the order
            dated 11­9­2000 was to discuss the merits and
            demerits of the evidence. That was what was
            deprecated. That did not mean that whilst
            granting bail some reasons for prima facie
            concluding why bail was being granted did
            not have to be indicated.”
                                        (emphasis supplied)
12
19.
In
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan
, (2004) 7

SCC 528 this Court indicated the importance of reasoning in the

matter concerning bail and held as follows:
“11. The law in regard to grant or refusal of bail
            is very well settled. The court granting bail
            should exercise its discretion in a judicious
            manner and not as a matter of course. Though
            at the stage of granting bail a detailed
            examination    of   evidence    and     elaborate
            documentation of the merit of the case need not
            be undertaken, there is a need to indicate in
            such orders reasons for prima facie
            concluding why bail was being granted
            particularly where the accused is charged of
            having committed a serious offence. Any
            order devoid of such reasons would suffer
            from non­application of mind…”

                                        (emphasis supplied)
20.
In
Brij Nandan Jaiswal v. Munna
, (2009) 1 SCC 678,

which concerned a challenge to grant of bail in a serious offence,

this Court has reiterated the same position as was observed in
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar
(supra). This Court has held as under:
“12… However, we find from the order that no
            reasons were given by the learned Judge while
            granting the bail and it seems to have been
            granted    almost     mechanically    without
            considering the pros and cons of the matter.
            While granting bail, particularly in serious
            cases like murder some reasons justifying
            the grant are necessary.”
13
(emphasis supplied)
21.   From the above, it is clear that this Court has consistently

upheld the necessity of reasoned bail orders, with a special

emphasis on matters involving serious offences. In the present

case, respondent no. 2 ­ accused has been accused of committing

the grievous offence of rape against his young niece of nineteen

years. The fact that the respondent no. 2 ­ accused is a habitual

offender and nearly twenty cases registered against him has not

even found mentioned in the impugned order. Further the High

Court has failed to consider the influence that the respondent no.

2 ­ accused may have over the prosecutrix as an elder family

member. The period of imprisonment, being only three months, is

not of such a magnitude as to push the Court towards granting

bail in an offence of this nature.
22.   The impugned order passed by the High Court is cryptic,

and does not suggest any application of mind. There is a recent

trend of passing such orders granting or refusing to grant bail,

where the Courts make a general observation that “the facts and

the circumstances” have been considered. No specific reasons are
14
indicated which precipitated the passing of the order by the

Court.
23.   Such a situation continues despite various judgments of

this Court wherein this Court has disapproved of such a practice.
In the case of
Mahipal
(supra) this Court observed as follows:
“25. Merely recording “having perused the
            record” and “on the facts and circumstances
            of the case” does not subserve the purpose of
            a reasoned judicial order. It is a fundamental
            premise of open justice, to which our judicial
            system is committed, that factors which have
            weighed in the mind of the Judge in the
            rejection or the grant of bail are recorded in the
            order passed. Open justice is premised on the
            notion that justice should not only be done, but
            should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to
            be done. The duty of Judges to give reasoned
            decisions lies at the heart of this commitment.
            Questions of the grant of bail concern both
            liberty of individuals undergoing criminal
            prosecution as well as the interests of the
            criminal justice system in ensuring that those
            who commit crimes are not afforded the
            opportunity to obstruct justice. Judges are
            duty­bound to explain the basis on which
            they have arrived at a conclusion.”

                                        (emphasis supplied)
24.   In view of the above, the impugned order passed by the High

Court is set aside. The Criminal Appeal is accordingly allowed.

Bail bonds stand cancelled. Respondent no. 2 ­ accused is
15
directed to surrender within one week from the receipt of this

order, failing which, the concerned police authorities shall take

him into custody.
.............................CJI.
(N.V. RAMANA)


                                           ...............................J.
                                          (KRISHNA MURARI)


NEW DELHI;
APRIL 19, 2022
16