[Cites
9
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Evergreen Land Mark Pvt. Ltd. vs John Tinson And Company Pvt. Ltd. on 19 April, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2783 OF 2022

         Evergreen Land Mark Pvt. Ltd.                                ..Appellant (S)

                                                Versus

         John Tinson & Company Pvt. Ltd. & Anr.                      ..Respondent (S)




                                          JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with impugned judgment

                         and order dated 10.02.2022 passed by the High Court of

                         Delhi at New Delhi in ARB.A. (Comm.) No.9/2022 under
Section 37(2)(b)
of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996

                         (hereinafter referred to as the “
Arbitration Act
”), by which

                         the High Court has dismissed the said appeal in which the

                         appellant   herein   challenged   order   dated   05.01.2022

                         passed by the Arbitral Tribunal in two applications filed by
Signature Not Verified
respondent No. 1 and 2 herein under
Section 17
of the
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Arbitration Act, seeking deposit of the rental amount for
Date: 2022.04.19
16:53:45 IST
Reason:
1
the period between March, 2020 and December, 2021, the

     appellant herein – lessee has preferred the present appeal.
2.   The dispute is with respect to two separate premises

     owned by respondent No. 1 and 2 herein which were given

     on lease to the appellant, who is running a Restaurant and

     Bar in the premises in question. The lease agreement came

     to be terminated by respondent No. 1 and 2 – original

     owners. The dispute with respect to the termination of

     lease agreement is the subject matter before the Arbitral

     Tribunal. Before the Arbitral Tribunal, respondent No. 1

     and 2 filed two separate applications under
Section 17
of

     the Arbitration Act seeking deposit of the rental amount

     due and payable for the period between March, 2020 to

     December, 2021. By way of an interim measure, in

     exercise of powers under
Section 17
of the Act, the

     Arbitrator vide order/orders dated 05.01.2022 directed the

     appellant to deposit 100% of rental amount due and

     payable of the period between March, 2020 to December,

     2021. At this stage, it is required to be noted that before

     the Arbitral Tribunal, it was the case on behalf of the

     appellant that due to the Covid­19 Pandemic, there was a
2
lockdown declared by the Government and therefore, there

was a complete closure/partial closure and therefore,

invoking clause 29 (Force Majeure) of the lease deed, the

appellant disputed the liability to pay the rental amount

for     the     period      during      which      there      was    a

lockdown/complete closure/partial closure. Despite the

above submissions, the Arbitral Tribunal directed the

appellant to deposit the rental amount from March, 2020

onwards and up to December, 2021. The Arbitral Tribunal

also passed an order that amount so deposited shall be

kept in fixed deposit accounts. The operative portion of the

order contained in para 43 is as under: ­

      “43.(a) The Respondent shall compute the arrears
      towards rent separately in respect of each premises under
      lease at the agreed rate ­ Rs. 10,35,000/­ per month
      (subject to applicable taxes) for the period from
      01.05.2018 to 30.04.2021 and Rs. 11,90,250/­ from
      01.05.2021 onwards in respect of leased premises of
      JTCPL and Rs. 2,39,390/­ per month (inclusive of GST) in
      respect of leased premises of BIET ­ for the period of
      default and pendency of the matter thus far, i.e. from
      March 2020 onwards for and up to December 2021,
      adjusting the amounts already paid (as per declarations
      made before this tribunal), deducting the TDS as per law,
      and communicate the same to the respective Claimants
      within a week of this order.
(b) The amounts of money equivalent to the arrears
      computed as above shall be deposited by the Respondent
      in Fixed Deposit (FD) accounts ­ separately in relation to
      the respective Claimants ­ in a public sector Bank,
      initially for a period of six months with provision of auto­
3
credit of Interest and periodical auto­renewal within four
         weeks of this order.”


2.1   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the order passed by

      the Arbitral Tribunal by way of an interim arrangement in

      exercise of powers under
Section 17
of the Arbitration Act,

      the appellant preferred an appeal before the High Court

      under
Section 37(2)(b)
of the Arbitration Act. By the

      impugned judgment and order, the High Court has

      dismissed the said appeal and has confirmed the interim

      order passed by the Arbitral Tribunal passed in exercise of

      powers under
Section 17
of the Arbitration Act. Hence, the

      present appeal.
3.    Ms. Aastha Mehta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

      the appellant has vehemently contended that in the

      present case, both, Arbitral Tribunal as well as the High

      Court have not at all considered the submissions on behalf

      of the appellant on clause 29 of the agreement and the

      aspect of force majeure as prayed on behalf of the

      appellant. It is submitted by Ms. Mehta that even the

      Arbitral Tribunal has specifically observed in para 39 of
4
the order that at this stage, the Arbitral Tribunal is not

      deciding anything on the import and effect of the force

      majeure clause (No. 29) contained in the lease deed. It is

      contended that therefore when the liability to pay the

      rentals during the lockdown period while applying the

      force majeure clause is seriously disputed by the appellant

      – lessee, such an order to deposit 100% rental amount by

      way of an interim measure under
Section 17
of the

      Arbitration Act, ought not to have been passed by the

      Arbitral Tribunal.
3.1   It is further submitted by Ms. Mehta that even the learned

      Arbitral Tribunal has also observed that there is no

      evidence showing that the appellant is disposing of any

      part of its property much less removing itself or its assets

      out of India so as to create a possibility of frustrating the

      monetary award that may be passed in favour of the

      claimants upon conclusion of arbitration proceedings

      within the scope of
Order XXXVIII of CPC
. It is submitted

      that therefore, in absence of such evidence the impugned

      order which can be said to be akin to Order XXXVIII Rule 5
5
could not have been passed unless the conditions while

      invoking powers under Order XXXVIII Rule 5 are satisfied.

      Reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in the case

      of Raman Tech. &
Process Engg. Co. & Anr. Vs. Solanki

      Traders
; (2008) 2 SCC 302.
While relying upon the

      decision of this Court in the case of
Adhunik Steels Ltd.

      Vs. Orissa Manganese and Minerals (P) Ltd.
; (2007) 7

      SCC 125, it is urged by Ms. Mehta, learned counsel

      appearing on behalf of the appellant that as held by this

      Court, even while passing an order under
Section 9
of the

      Arbitration Act, the court has to bear in mind and consider

      principles applicable for exercise of general power to grant

      an interim injunction under
Order XXXIX of CPC
.


3.2   It is contended by Ms. Mehta, learned counsel appearing

      on behalf of the appellant that apart from the fact that

      there was a complete closure due to complete lockdown for

      the   period    between      22.03.2020    to    09.09.2020    and

      thereafter     for    the    period    between    19.04.2021    to

      28.06.2021      and    the    period   between    11.01.2022    to

      27.01.2022 due to the pandemic, for the remaining period
6
the appellant was allowed to run the Restro/Bar with only

      50% capacity and that too, from 12:00 noon to 10:00 pm.

      It is submitted that therefore, clause 29 of the agreement

      (force majeure clause) shall be applicable. It is submitted

      that the appellant could not use the rented premises for

      the aforesaid period either fully and/or partially due to Act

      of God and which was beyond the control of the appellant.

      It is submitted that therefore, the force majeure clause

      contained in clause 29 of the agreement shall be

      applicable. It is urged that whether in the facts and

      circumstances of the case, the principle of force majeure

      contained in clause 29 is applicable or not is yet to be

      considered by the Arbitral Tribunal at the time of the final

      adjudication and therefore, the Arbitral Tribunal has

      committed an error in directing the appellant to pay the

      full rental amount for the aforesaid period, by way of

      interim measure.
3.3   Ms. Mehta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      appellant has also submitted that it is not that the

      appellant has not paid any amount at all and/or that the
7
intention of the appellant is to defraud the landlords. It is

     contended that the dispute raised by the appellant is a

     bonafide dispute. It is pointed out that undisputedly

     during the pendency of the arbitration proceedings, the

     appellant itself had paid a substantial amount towards

     rentals of the two rented premises. That an amount of Rs.

     87,64,133.76/­ has been paid towards rentals for the

     period from October, 2020 to March, 2021 and July, 2021

     to December, 2021. The appellant had also incurred other

     over head expenses, TDS dues, electricity and water

     charges. That even during the lockdown period, the

     appellant paid wages to its employees. Therefore, it will be

     too harsh on the appellant to pay the entire rental amount

     for the period between March, 2020 to December, 2021, as

     per the order passed by the learned Arbitral Tribunal

     confirmed by the High Court is the submission of the

     learned counsel for the appellant.
4.   The present appeal is opposed by Ms. Shyel Trehan,

     learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents. It

     is contended that in the facts and circumstances of the
8
case no error has been committed by the learned Arbitral

      Tribunal in directing the appellant to deposit the entire

      amount which is admittedly due and payable by the

      appellant. It is pointed out that on one hand, the appellant

      has continued to remain in possession of the leased

      properties and at the same time, he is not paying the

      rental amount. It is submitted that therefore, the learned

      Tribunal has rightly passed an order by way of an interim

      measure directing the appellant to deposit the rental

      amount due and payable under the lease agreement.


4.1   According to learned counsel for the respondents neither

      the principles applicable under Order XXXVIII Rule 5 nor

      Order XXXIX Rule 1 are appliable in case of a direction

      issued by way of an interim measure, as in the instant

      case, directing the lessee to deposit the rental amount due

      and payable while the lessee is continued to be in

      possession.
4.2   It is further submitted that in the present case the

      principles of force majeure would not apply as the

      appellant – lessee continued to remain in possession of the
9
leased premises. It is submitted that none of the decisions

      relied upon by the counsel appearing on behalf of the

      appellant, is applicable.
4.3   It is pointed out that as rightly observed by the High

      Court, the business of the appellant may have been

      impacted due to the outbreak of Covid­19 pandemic but

      that may not absolve the appellant from its contractual

      obligations to pay the lease rent. It is submitted that so

      long the appellant continues to occupy the premises, the

      liability of the appellant to pay the rental amount

      continues. It is urged that no error has been committed by

      the Arbitral Tribunal by directing the appellant to deposit

      the rental amount for the period between March, 2020 and

      December, 2021 and the same is rightly confirmed by the

      High Court.
5.    We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      respective parties at length.
6.    At the outset, it is required to be noted that the dispute is

      with respect to the rental amount for the period between
10
March, 2020 to December, 2021, for which the Arbitral

Tribunal has directed the appellant to deposit while

passing the order by way of an interim measure on the

applications under
Section 17
of the Arbitration Act. The

liability to pay the lease rental for the period between

March, 2020 to December, 2021 is seriously disputed by

the appellant by invoking the force majeure principle

contained in clause 29 of the lease agreement. It is the

case on behalf of the appellant that for a substantial

period there was a total closure due to lockdown and for

the remaining period the appellant was allowed with 50%

capacity   and   therefore,    the   force   majeure   principle

contained in clause 29 shall be applicable. When the same

was submitted before the Arbitral Tribunal, no opinion,

even a prima facie opinion on the aforesaid aspect was

given by the Arbitral Tribunal. In para 39, it is observed

that “it would not be fair at this stage of the proceedings,

where evidence is yet to be adduced by the parties in

support their rival contentions on the issues that arise, to

record any definitive opinion on the import and effect of

the force majeure clause (clause no. 29) contained in the
11
lease deed”.    Therefore, applicability of the force majeure

principle contained in clause 29 is yet to be considered by

the Arbitral Tribunal at the time of final adjudication.

Hence, the liability to pay the rentals for the period during

lockdown is yet to be adjudicated upon and considered by

the Tribunal. Therefore, no order could have been passed

by the Tribunal by way of interim measure on the

applications filed under
Section 17
of the Arbitration Act in

a case where there is a serious dispute with respect to the

liability of the rental amounts to be paid, which is yet to be

adjudicated upon and/or considered by the Arbitral

Tribunal. Thus, no such order for deposit by way of an

interim measure on applications under
Section 17
of the

Arbitration Act could have been passed by the Tribunal.

However,   at   the   same      time,   the   aforesaid   can   be

considered only for the period of complete closure due to

lockdown. As per the available record, there was complete

closure for the period between 22.03.2020 to 09.09.2020;

for the period between 19.04.2021 to 28.06.2021 and for

the period between 11.01.2022 to 27.01.2022 and for the

remaining period the appellant was allowed to run the
12
Restro/Bar with 50% capacity. The appellant will therefore

     have to deposit the entire rental amount except the period

     for which there was complete closure due to lockdown. As

     the applicability of force majeure principle (clause 29) is yet

     to be considered at least, for the period during the

     complete closure, it would not be justified to direct the

     appellant to deposit the rental amount for the said period

     of complete closure by way of an interim measure, pending

     final adjudication.
7.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

     present appeal succeeds in part. The order passed by the

     Arbitral Tribunal passed in applications under
Section 17
of the Arbitration Act, directing the appellant to deposit the

     entire rental amount for the period between March, 2020

     to December, 2021, confirmed by the High Court by the

     impugned judgment and order, is modified and it is

     directed that the appellant to deposit the entire rental

     amount for the period other than the period during which

     there   was   complete    lockdown     i.e.,   22.03.2020   to

     09.09.2020 and for the period between 19.04.2021 to
13
28.06.2021. However, non­deposit of the rental amount for

the aforesaid period during which there was a complete

closure/lockdown shall be subject to the ultimate outcome

of the Arbitration Proceedings and the Arbitral Tribunal

shall have to adjudicate and consider the principle of force

majeure contained in clause 29 as contended on behalf of

the appellant in accordance with law and on its own

merits. All contentions which may be available to either

party are kept open to be considered by the learned

Arbitral Tribunal. The learned Tribunal to adjudicate and

consider the aforesaid issue in accordance with law and on

its own merits uninfluenced by the present order and

observations by this Court in the present order shall be

treated to be confined to while deciding the applications

under
Section 17
of the Arbitration Act and the interim

measure order in exercise of powers under
Section 17
of

the Arbitration Act only, and the same shall not have any

bearing on the final adjudication on the liability to pay the

rentals even for the aforesaid period. The balance amount

as per the present order shall be deposited by the

appellant as observed by the learned Arbitral Tribunal in
14
para 43(b) of interim order. The learned Tribunal to

      conclude the arbitration proceedings at the earliest

      preferably within a period of nine months, subject to the

      co­operation of both the parties. With this the present

      appeal is partly allowed to the aforesaid extent. There shall

      be no order as to costs.
…………………………………J.
                                      (M. R. SHAH)




                                      …………………………………J.
                                      (B.V. NAGARATHNA)
New Delhi,
April 19, 2022.
15