[Cites
29
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Akhilesh Prasad vs Jharkhand Public Service Commission on 26 April, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Uday Umesh Lalit
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
1


                                                                                       REPORTABLE


                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.                       OF 2022
                               (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.18890 of 2021)


                          AKHILESH PRASAD                                            …Appellant

                                                               versus

                          JHARKHAND PUBLIC SERVICE
                          COMMISSION AND ORS.                                        …Respondents


                                                        JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.      Leave granted.
2.      This appeal challenges the judgment and final order dated 12.05.2021

                          passed by the Division Bench of High Court1 in LPA No.609 of 2017.
3.      In the Graduate Level (Special) Competitive Examination held in the
Signature Not Verified    year 1994 for filling up the posts of Cooperative Development Officers, the
Digitally signed by Dr.
Mukesh Nasa
Date: 2022.04.26
17:15:39 IST
Reason:                   then Bihar Public Service Commission vide letter dated 24.07.1995
1
High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi.
2
recommended the name of the appellant, who was at serial No.98 in the merit

list, under Scheduled Tribe (‘ST’, for short) category. The claim that the

appellant belonged to ST category (Gond) was supported by a Certificate

issued to that effect on 03.06.1995 by the Scrutiny Officer, Sonpur (Saran)

which place now falls in the newly carved State of Bihar after reorganization

of States. Later, appointment letter dated 10.11.1995 was issued to the

selected candidates including the appellant. The appropriate entry in the

service book shows the name and category of the appellant as belonging to ST

(Gond).
4.    The then State of Bihar was bifurcated as a result of
Bihar

Reorganization Act, 2000
[Act 30 of 2000] (‘the Act’, for short), which came

into force on 15.11.2000. The erstwhile State of Bihar was bifurcated in

successor States viz. State of Bihar comprising of 38 districts and newly

formed State of Jharkhand comprising of 18 districts.
Sections 73
and
74
of

the Act are as under:-
“73. Other provisions relating to services.—(1) Nothing in
section 72
shall
      be deemed to affect on or after the appointed day the operation of the
      provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to
      determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection
      with the affairs of the Union or any State: Provided that the conditions of
      service applicable immediately before the appointed day in the case of any
      person deemed to have been allocated to the State of Bihar or to the State
      of Jharkhand under
section 72
shall not be varied to his disadvantage except
      with the previous approval of the Central Government. (2) All services prior
      to the appointed day rendered by a person— (a) if he is deemed to have been
      allocated to any State under
section 72
, shall be deemed to have been
3
rendered in connection with the affairs of that State; (b) if he is deemed to
      have been allocated to the Union in connection with the administration of
      the Jharkhand shall be deemed to have been rendered in connection with the
      affairs of the Union, for the purposes of the rules regulating his conditions
      of service. (3) The provisions of
section 72
, shall not apply in relation to
      members of any All-India Service.
74. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same post.—Every person
      who, immediately before the appointed day is holding or discharging the
      duties of any post or office in connection with the affairs of the existing
      State of Bihar in any area which on that day falls within any of the successor
      States shall continue to hold the same post or office in that successor State,
      and shall be deemed, on and from that day, to have been duly appointed to
      the post or office by the Government of, or any other appropriate authority
      in, that successor State: Provided that nothing in this section shall be
      deemed to prevent a competent authority, on and from the appointed day,
      from passing in relation to such person any order affecting the continuance
      in such post or office.”
5.    After reorganization of the States, the appellant’s service was allocated

to the successor State of Jharkhand and since then the appellant has been in

the service of State of Jharkhand.
6.    On 14.08.2008, a letter was issued by the Principal Secretary,

Government of Jharkhand to all the Secretaries of departments regarding

reservation in promotion in various categories of services under the State of

Jharkhand. Paragraphs 1 and 4 of the communication were as under: -
“Sir, with reference to above subject, I, as directed, have to submit that,
      certain departments are expecting guidelines/counselling from this
      department on the following point:
“The benefit of reservation in promotions should only be given
             to the government servants of Scheduled Caste / Scheduled
             Tribes if they are permanent residents of Jharkhand State, even
             if they were appointed in undivided Bihar.”
4
…      …       …
4. In this connection, the State Government, after due deliberations, has
      decided as under:
“The reserved category of employees, who were appointed in
             reserved categories prior to constitution of State and were posted
             in Jharkhand State on the basis of division of cadre and they are
             permanent residents of Bihar State, will be unaffected and they
             shall be considered as government employees of reserved
             category.”
7.    Advertisement No.9 of 2010 was issued by the Jharkhand Public

Service Commission (‘the Commission’, for short) for filling up the posts of

Deputy Collectors through limited departmental examination. Said

Advertisement issued on 09.10.2010, however, prescribed that the benefit of

reservation would be extended only to those who submit the appropriate caste

Certificate from the Sub-Divisional Officer posted in State of Jharkhand. The

appellant having offered his candidature for the limited departmental

examination, the same was forwarded by the office of the Registrar,

Cooperative Societies, Jharkhand to the Commission.
8.    In the results of the examination declared on 04.05.2013, the appellant

was declared unsuccessful though he had secured 123.68 marks as against the

cut-off at 113.70 for ST category.
5
9.    The appellant challenged his non-selection by filing Writ Petition (S)

No.3480 of 2013, which was allowed by the Single Judge of the High Court

by his judgment and order dated 22.09.2017 with following observations:-
“8. The aforesaid provision makes it abundantly clear that so far as the
      limited examination of the State of Jharkhand is concerned, the benefit
      of reservation may be extended to such candidates also, who are born
      on the reserved category post under the unified State of Bihar. The
      appointment to the post of Deputy collector may be a fresh appointment,
      but the process of the said appointment has to be seen. This examination
      is not a general open competitive examination rather it is open for in
      service candidates of Government of Jharkhand only. Thus, the persons
      who are not employed under the State of Jharkhand, are not entitled to
      appear in the said examination. That means only a Government
      employee is entitled to appear in the said examination. The said
      employee, if succeeds in the examination and is appointed on the post
      of Deputy Collector, his past services with the State are also counted for
      all purposes. Thus, it is in continuation of his earlier service. In the case
      in hand, the petitioner was already working in the co-operative
      Department as a reserved category candidate and thereafter by virtue of
      his employment in the Cooperative Department under the State of
      Jharkhand, he qualified to appear in the examination. Admittedly he is
      a reserved category Scheduled tribe candidate and after bifurcation of
      the State he was allocated the Jharkhand cadre. He carried his reserved
      category with him after bifurcation also. Thus, the Resolution number
      4722 dated 14.08.2008 applies to the Petitioner. The State
      acknowledges the petitioner as Scheduled Tribe category while he is
      working in Co-operative Department under the State, but not treating
      him as reserved category i.e. scheduled tribe for the purpose of limited
      examination, is not acceptable to this Court neither his tenable in the
      eyes of law. The appointed cannot be said to be a fresh appointment.
      The petitioner, after reorganization of the State, was allocated the
      Jharkhand State cadre as a Scheduled Tribe candidate. Thus, his status
      as Scheduled Tribe candidate for the purpose of service has to be
      maintained. Thus, the claim of the Respondents that the Petitioner
      cannot be treated as a scheduled tribe candidate is not tenable in the eyes
      of law. Similar view has been reiterated by this Court in W.P. (s)No.488
      of 2013. The reliance has been placed by the Respondents on the
      judgment delivered by this Court in Division Bench is of no help to them
      as they were on different ground and the present case is not a case of
      submission of certificate after the cut-off date.
9. As a cumulative effect of the aforesaid rules, guidelines and judicial
      pronouncements, I hereby direct the respondent - JPSC to consider the
6
case of the petitioner for appointment on the post of Deputy Collector,
      pursuant to the Advertisement No. 09/10, as a Reserved category
      (scheduled tribe). The respondents are directed to consider the
      candidature of the petitioner on the post of Deputy Collector, if he is
      found to be within consideration zone on the basis of marks obtained by
      him vis-a-vis other candidates of his category within a period of two
      months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.”
                                                            (Emphasis added)
10.   The Commission as well as State of Jharkhand being aggrieved,

preferred LPA No.609 of 2017 and LPA No.164 of 2018 respectively

challenging the view taken by the Single Judge. It was submitted that as

required by condition No.13 of the Advertisement, the caste certificate, as well

as the proof of residence had to be obtained from Sub-Divisional Magistrate

posted within the jurisdiction of State of Jharkhand, and the appellant having

failed to comply with such requirement, he could not be considered as a

candidate belonging to the reserved category in State of Jharkhand.
In response, it was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the limited

competitive examination could not be construed to be a fresh appointment;

rather it was a case of promotion to the higher post and as such the appellant

who was already in the service under State of Jharkhand was entitled to offer

his candidature as a candidate belonging to ST category.
11.   Following questions were framed by the Division Bench of the High

Court for its consideration: -
7
“(i)    Whether the appointment through limited competitive
              examination is a fresh appointment or by way of promotion?
(ii)    Whether the provision of
Section 73
of the Bihar Reorganization
              Act, 2000 will be applicable in the process of selection to be
              made through limited competitive examination after final order
              passed by the Central Government under
Section 72(2)
of the
              Act?
(iii)   Whether condition of advertisement can be allowed to be
              assailed by the candidates who have participated in the process
              of selection but declared unsuccessful?
(iv)    Whether in the matter of fresh appointment, reservation can be
              said to be a condition of service for making applicable the
              provision of
Section 73
of the Bihar Reorganization Act, 2000?”
12.   The Division Bench of the High Court found that 25% of posts to be

filled through the limited competitive examination would be by way of fresh

appointment and as such, the appellant could not rely upon the provisions of
Sections 72
and
73
of the Act. Since the appellant had failed to comply with

condition No.13 of the Advertisement and since there was no certificate

issued by any of the competent authorities that he belonged to ST (Gond)

category in State of Jharkhand, the appellant could not be said to be belonging

to the reserved category of STs for the purposes of limited departmental

examination.
13.   The correctness of the decision is presently under challenge.
14.   Mr. Manoj Tandon, learned counsel appearing for the appellant

submits inter alia that :-
8
(a)   The ST known as Gond in the then undivided State of Bihar,

      after reorganization is part of the Constitution [Scheduled

      Tribes] Order, 1950 at Sl. No.10 in respect of newly carved State

      of Bihar as well as at Sl. No.11 in respect of State of Jharkhand.
(b)   The appellant having been in the service of the then undivided

      State of Bihar and his services having been allocated to State of

      Jharkhand, is entitled to the benefits and protection under
Sections 72
and
73
of the Act.
(c)   The status as a person belonging to ST category would entitle

      him to claim benefit of reservation in promotion even with

      respect to service under State of Jharkhand after reorganization.
d)    The nature of limited departmental examination is nothing but

      accelerated promotion; in that as against the regular mode of

      promotion those who are competent and are found meritorious

      in the limited departmental examination, can be promoted even

      if they are comparatively juniors.
e)    A limited departmental examination can be taken only by those

      who are presently in service and is not available for any direct

      recruitment from open market.
9
f)     Reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in
Pankaj

                      Kumar v. State of Jharkhand2
.
15.   Mr. Arunabh Chowdhury, learned Additional Advocate General

         appearing for State of Jharkhand and Mr. Himanshu Shekhar, learned

         Advocate appearing for the Commission have reiterated the submissions

         which were accepted in the decision under challenge. It is submitted that

         condition No.13 was an integral part of the process of selection and non-

         compliance of said condition would disentitle a candidate from claiming

         status as one belonging to ST in the State. To a pointed query whether the

         appellant would be entitled to claim that he belonged to said reserved

         category if a regular promotion was in issue, the learned counsel fairly

         accepted that he would certainly be so entitled.
16.   In Pankaj Kumar,2 the father of the appellant belonged to District

         Patna (which, after reorganization, is now part of successor State of Bihar)

         but resided in Hazaribagh (which is now part of State of Jharkhand) where

         the appellant was born. The appellant was appointed as Assistant Teacher on

         21.12.1999 and after reorganization, his service was allocated to State of

         Jharkhand. While serving as a teacher, he appeared as a member of SC
2
2021 (9) SCALE 576
10
category in the Combined Civil Services Examination, and though his name

appeared at Sl. No.5 against 17 vacancies reserved for SC Category, he was

not selected on the ground that he being permanent resident of Patna, he

would be treated as a migrant in State of Jharkhand.
In this factual backdrop, the question that arose for consideration was

as under:
“46. The question that emerges for our consideration in the instant appeals
      is whether a person, who has been a resident of the State of Bihar and
      where the Constitution (Scheduled Castes)/ (Scheduled Tribes) Order,
      1950 identifying castes/ tribes is issued extending the benefit to members
      of SC/ST throughout the integrated State of Bihar which was later on
      bifurcated by virtue of a statutory instrument, i.e., the Act, 2000, into two
      successor States (State of Bihar and State of Jharkhand) with their rights
      and privileges to the extent being protected by legislative enactment under
      the provisions of the Act 2000, could still be considered to be a migrant to
      the successor State of Jharkhand depriving them of their privileges and
      benefits to which the incumbent or their lineal descendants has availed
      from the very inception of the Presidential Order 1950 in the integrated
      State of Bihar.”


      Thereafter, the effect of
Sections 73
and
74
of the Act was considered

and it was observed:
“49. The scheme of the Act 2000 postulates that employees who are
      working immediately on or before the appointed date, in the State of Bihar,
      has either domicile of the districts that formed part of State of Jharkhand
      under
Section 3
of the Act or opted or joined being junior in their
      respective seniority, stands absorbed in the successor State of Jharkhand
      and by virtue of a statutory instrument, their service conditions stand
      protected and became entitled to claim privileges and benefits to which the
      members of scheduled castes/ scheduled tribes/ OBC are entitled for in
      terms of the Presidential Order 1950 as amended from time to time.
50. This Court, while examining almost a similar nature of controversy in
Sudhakar Vithal Kumbhare v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
, 2004 (9) SCC
      481 held as under:-
11
“5. But the question which arises for consideration herein
appears to have not been raised in any other case. It is not in
dispute that the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes have
suffered disadvantages and been denied facilities for
development and growth in several States. They require
protective preferences, facilities and benefits inter alia in the
form of reservation, so as to enable them to compete on equal
terms with the more advantaged and developed sections of the
community. The question is as to whether the appellant being
a Scheduled Tribe known as Halba/Halbi which stands
recognized both in the State of Madhya Pradesh as well as in
the State of Maharashtra having their origin in Chhindwara
region, a part of which, on States' reorganisation, has come to
the State of Maharashtra, was entitled to the benefit of
reservation. It is one thing to say that the expression “in
relation to that State” occurring in
Article 342
of the
Constitution of India should be given an effective or proper
meaning so as to exclude the possibility that a tribe which has
been included as a Scheduled Tribe in one State after
consultation with the Governor for the purpose of the
Constitution may not get the same benefit in another State
whose Governor has not been consulted; but it is another thing
to say that when an area is dominated by members of the same
tribe belonging to the same region which has been bifurcated,
the members would not continue to get the same benefit when
the said tribe is recognized in both the States. In other words,
the question that is required to be posed and answered would
be as to whether the members of a Scheduled Tribe belonging
to one region would continue to get the same benefits despite
bifurcation thereof in terms of the
States Reorganization Act
.
With a view to find out as to whether any particular area of the
country was required to be given protection is a matter which
requires detailed investigation having regard to the fact that
both Pandhurna in the district of Chhindwara and a part of the
area of Chandrapur at one point of time belonged to the same
region and under the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order,
1950 as it originally stood the tribe Halba/Halbi of that region
may be given the same protection. In a case of this nature the
degree of disadvantages of various elements which constitute
the input for specification may not be totally different and the
State of Maharashtra even after reorganisation might have
agreed for inclusion of the said tribe Halba/Halbi as a
Scheduled tribe in the State of Maharashtra having regard to
the said fact in mind.”
12
51. It was a case where the person was a member of Scheduled Tribe
known as Halba/Halbi. The tribe had its origin in District Chhindwara
region which is a part of State of Madhya Pradesh, a part of the district of
Chhindwara place Chandrapur, on States’ reorganization, came to the
existing State of Maharashtra from the State of Madhya Pradesh, it was
not considered a case of migration from State of Madhya Pradesh to State
of Maharashtra. But the State of Maharashtra being the existing State and
degree of disadvantages of various elements may be different on the
objection being raised by the State of Maharashtra City Board where the
incumbent was employed, it was left open for examination by the scrutiny
committee constituted and established pursuant to a judgment of this Court
in
Kumari Madhuri Patil and Another vs. Addl
. Commissioner, Tribal
Development and Others, 1994 (6) SCC 241.
52. There is a fundamental dichotomy in the submissions made by the
counsel for the State of Jharkhand that the existing service conditions
including benefit of reservation in the promotional cadre post shall not be
varied to his disadvantage but he shall be considered to be a migrant to the
State of Jharkhand while participating in public employment to compete
in open/general category and asked to seek the benefit of reservation in the
neighboring State of Bihar, to hold different status in his parent State of
Jharkhand after he became a member of service of the State of Jharkhand,
serving for sufficient long time on and after the appointed day, i.e. 15th
November, 2000 in the State is unsustainable in law and in contravention
to the scheme of the Act 2000.
53. It will be highly unfair and pernicious to their interest if the benefits of
reservation with privileges and benefits flowing thereof are not being
protected in the State of Jharkhand after he is absorbed by virtue to
Section
73
of the Act 2000 that clearly postulates not only to protect the existing
service conditions but the benefit of reservation and privileges which he
was enjoying on or before the appointed day, i.e. 15th November, 2000 in
the State of Bihar not to be varied to his disadvantage after he became a
member of service in the State of Jharkhand.
54. The collective readings of the provisions of the Act, 2000 makes it
apparent that such of the persons whose place of origin/domicile on or
before the appointed day was of the State of Bihar now falling within the
districts/regions which form a successor State, i.e., State of Jharkhand
under
Section 3
of the Act, 2000 became ordinary resident of the State of
Jharkhand, at the same time, so far as the employees who were in public
employment in the State of Bihar on or before the appointed day, i.e. 15th
November, 2000 under the Act 2000, apart from those who are domicile
of either of the district which became part of the State of Jharkhand, such
of the employees who have submitted their option or employees who are
junior in the cadre of their seniority as per the policy of the Government
of India of which a reference has been made, either voluntarily or
13
involuntarily call upon to serve the State of Jharkhand, their existing
      service conditions shall not be varied to their disadvantage and stands
      protected by virtue of
Section 73
of the Act, 2000.
55. In our considered view, such of the employees who are members of the
      SC/ST/OBC whose caste/tribe has been notified by an amendment to the
      Constitution(Scheduled Castes)/(Scheduled Tribes) Order 1950 under Vth
      and VIth Schedule to
Sections 23
and
24
of the Act 2000 or by the separate
      notification for members of other backward class category, benefit of
      reservation including privileges and benefits flowing thereof, shall remain
      protected by virtue of
Section 73
of the Act 2000 for all practical purposes
      which can be claimed (including by their wards) for participation in public
      employment.
56. It is made clear that person is entitled to claim benefit of reservation in
      either of the successor State of Bihar or State of Jharkhand, but will not be
      entitled to claim benefit of reservation simultaneously in both the
      successor States and those who are members of the reserved category and
      are resident of the successor State of Bihar, while participating in open
      selection in State of Jharkhand shall be treated to be migrants and it will
      be open to participate in general category without claiming the benefit of
      reservation and vice-versa.
57. We are of the view that the present appellant Pankaj Kumar in Civil
      Appeal @ SLP (Civil) No.13473 of 2020, being a serving employee in the
      State of Jharkhand by virtue of
Section 73
of the Act 2000, would be
      entitled to claim the benefit of reservation including the privileges and
      benefits admissible to the members of Scheduled Caste category in the
      State of Jharkhand for all practical purposes including participation in
      open competition seeking public employment.”
17.   As has been clarified in the decision in Pankaj Kumar2, such of the

employees who opt for service under a successor State after reorganization,

their existing service conditions would not be varied to their disadvantage

and would stand protected by virtue of
Section 73
of the Act. Further, subject

to the condition that such person would not be entitled to claim the benefit of

reservation simultaneously in both the successor States, such employees

would be entitled to claim not only the benefit of reservation in the service
14
of the successor State to which they had opted and were allocated, but they

would also be entitled to participate in any subsequent open competition with

the benefit of reservation.
18.   It must be stated that the decision in Pankaj Kumar2 was rendered by

this Court on 19.8.2021, while the judgment presently under challenge was

delivered by the High Court on 12.5.2021. The High Court thus did not have

the benefit of the decision of this Court. The law having been settled in

Pankaj Kumar2, the judgment under appeal has to be read in light of the

decision in Pankaj Kumar2. It would therefore be immaterial whether or not

the nature of limited departmental examination is to be taken as direct

recruitment, as found by the Division Bench of the High Court.
19.   However, in order to have clarity in the matter, it must be noted that

the benefit of reservation was claimed in the limited departmental

examination for the purpose of promotion to the next higher level. It must

therefore be relevant to consider the nature of such limited departmental

examination and what it seeks to achieve as against direct recruitment from

the open market, where a person who was not part of the concerned service,

gets a chance to offer his candidature and enter the service under a State for

the first time. Limited departmental examination affords an opportunity for
15
persons who are already in service at a lower level to have accelerated

           promotion depending upon the merit of such candidates.
In
All India

           Judges’ Association & Ors. v. Union of India and Ors.3
, the issue was

           considered in paragraphs 27 and 28 as under:
“27. Another question which falls for consideration is the method of
                   recruitment to the posts in the cadre of Higher Judicial Service i.e. District
                   Judges and Additional District Judges. At the present moment, there are
                   two sources for recruitment to the Higher Judicial Service, namely, by
                   promotion from amongst the members of the Subordinate Judicial Service
                   and by direct recruitment. The subordinate judiciary is the foundation of
                   the edifice of the judicial system. It is, therefore, imperative, like any other
                   foundation, that it should become as strong as possible. The weight on the
                   judicial system essentially rests on the subordinate judiciary. While we
                   have accepted the recommendation of the Shetty Commission which will
                   result in the increase in the pay scales of the subordinate judiciary, it is at
                   the same time necessary that the judicial officers, hard-working as they
                   are, become more efficient. It is imperative that they keep abreast of
                   knowledge of law and the latest pronouncements, and it is for this reason
                   that the Shetty Commission has recommended the establishment of a
                   Judicial Academy, which is very necessary. At the same time, we are of
                   the opinion that there has to be certain minimum standard, objectively
                   adjudged, for officers who are to enter the Higher Judicial Service as
                   Additional District Judges and District Judges. While we agree with the
                   Shetty Commission that the recruitment to the Higher Judicial Service i.e.
                   the District Judge cadre from amongst the advocates should be 25 per cent
                   and the process of recruitment is to be by a competitive examination, both
                   written and viva voce, we are of the opinion that there should be an
                   objective method of testing the suitability of the subordinate judicial
                   officers for promotion to the Higher Judicial Service. Furthermore, there
                   should also be an incentive amongst the relatively junior and other officers
                   to improve and to compete with each other so as to excel and get quicker
                   promotion. In this way, we expect that the calibre of the members of the
                   Higher Judicial Service will further improve. In order to achieve this, while
                   the ratio of 75 per cent appointment by promotion and 25 per cent by direct
                   recruitment to the Higher Judicial Service is maintained, we are, however,
                   of the opinion that there should be two methods as far as appointment by
                   promotion is concerned : 50 per cent of the total posts in the Higher
                   Judicial Service must be filled by promotion on the basis of principle of
                   merit-cum-seniority. For this purpose, the High Courts should devise and
                   evolve a test in order to ascertain and examine the legal knowledge of those
3
(2002) 4 SCC 247
16
candidates and to assess their continued efficiency with adequate
      knowledge of case-law. The remaining 25 per cent of the posts in the
      service shall be filled by promotion strictly on the basis of merit through
      the limited departmental competitive examination for which the qualifying
      service as a Civil Judge (Senior Division) should be not less than five
      years. The High Courts will have to frame a rule in this regard.
28. As a result of the aforesaid, to recapitulate, we direct that recruitment
      to the Higher Judicial Service i.e. the cadre of District Judges will be:
(1)(a) 50 per cent by promotion from amongst the Civil Judges
            (Senior Division) on the basis of principle of merit-cum-seniority
            and passing a suitability test;
(b) 25 per cent by promotion strictly on the basis of merit through
            limited competitive examination of Civil Judges (Senior Division)
            having not less than five years' qualifying service; and
(c) 25 per cent of the posts shall be filled by direct recruitment from
            amongst the eligible advocates on the basis of the written and viva
            voce test conducted by respective High Courts.
(2) Appropriate rules shall be framed as above by the High Courts as
            early as possible.”
                                                                (Emphasis added)
20.   By very nature, the promotion to the next higher level is from and

amongst those who are at a lower level in the service. The avenue of

promotion is not available to persons from the open market, which talent is

to be garnered through direct recruitment. The promotion as a channel to

reach the higher level is only available to the persons already belonging to

the service. In normal circumstances, the promotion would go by the concept

of merit linked with seniority subject to suitability. In order to encourage

meritorious candidates who may be comparatively junior in service, a

window of opportunity is opened through limited departmental examination.
Those who pass the examination are entitled to have an accelerated
17
promotion. This process does not change the character of movement to the

higher post and it continues to be a promotional channel. The Single Judge

of the High Court was therefore right in allowing the writ petition. The

underlined portion from the order passed by the Single Judge shows that the

matter was considered in the correct perspective. The Division Bench of the

High Court was not justified in concluding that limited departmental

examination was nothing but direct recruitment from the open market.
21.   Before we part, we must deal with some of the observations in Pankaj

Kumar2.
22.   In the instant case and in the case of Pankaj Kumar,2 the appellants

belonged to a particular community or tribe which was specified in the

erstwhile State of Bihar as Scheduled Castes/ Scheduled Tribes when they

entered public service in the erstwhile State of Bihar. The appellants in both

the cases were allocated to the service under State of Jharkhand though they

belonged to the areas which after re-organization are now part of the

successor State of Bihar. By virtue of
Sections 73
and
74
of the Act, they

could certainly claim benefit in the service under the newly carved State of

Jharkhand. On the strength of the view taken in Pankaj Kumar2, the

entitlement in a fresh service in State of Jharkhand as well as in accordance
18
with the view taken by us in the instant case, the entitlement in the limited

departmental examination in State of Jharkhand is definitely made out. The

basis for their entitlement is primarily because of
Sections 73
and
74
of the

Act. It is quite possible that the progeny of such persons may have stayed

back or may later decide to go back to their roots, that is to say, to the area

which now falls in the newly carved State of Bihar; and since their lineage is

from that area and the State, they may contend that they are entitled to

benefits of reservation in the newly carved State of Bihar in relation to which

State, the community that they belong, is a Scheduled Caste/ Scheduled

Tribe. Paragraph 55 of the decision in Pankaj Kumar2 is capable of being

read as conferring entitlement on the wards or the progeny of the appellants

in State of Jharkhand alone where in contradistinction to their lineage, they

can claim to have connection only through their parent(s) and the effect of

the provisions of the Act.
23.   It must be stated that the entitlement of the progeny or the wards of the

appellant in State of Jharkhand had not strictly arisen for consideration in

Pankaj Kumar2. In our view, the issue, if any, can and must be gone into in

detail in an appropriate case.
19
24.   We, therefore, allow this appeal and set aside the judgment and order

passed by the Division Bench of the High Court and restore the judgment and

order dated 22nd September 2017 passed by the Single Judge of the High

Court. No costs.
…………………………………J.
                                              [Uday Umesh Lalit]



                                         …………………………………J.
                                        [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha]
New Delhi;
April 26, 2022.
1
REPORTABLE
                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                      (CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION)

                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. _____OF 2022
                           @ SLP (C) 18890 OF 2021



AKHILESH PRASAD                                                   ...APPELLANT(S)

                                      VERSUS

JHARKHAND PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION & ORS.
...RESPONDENT(S)



                                    JUDGMENT

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.
1.    I have gone through the judgment of Justice U.U. Lalit, and agree with his

reasoning and conclusions. In addition, there are some other reasons, which I feel

are necessary, and need to be noticed, in the context of this case. I proceed with those

reasons, hereafter.
2.    The framers of the Constitution were acutely aware of the existing divide

within Indian society by reason of caste and other factors. Millennia old layered caste

realities which had resulted in generations of exploitation and oppression of sections

of society was sought to be undone through the Constitution, which we gave onto

ourselves. To achieve this end: of equalizing society, the Indian Constitution makes

elaborate provisions – not merely by declaring the right to equality, which is so
2
essential in every democracy – but in also making provisions ensuring that the erst-

while oppressed classes or sections of citizens are given benefits which would ensure

their full and effective participation in society and governance. Apart from making

special provisions under
Articles 15
and
16
, the methodology for identification of

Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes has been provided for the purpose through
Articles 341
and
342
of the Constitution. Furthermore, these provisions also direct

that any change or amendment to the Presidential Orders (initially issued in the year

1950) can be only through future Parliamentary enactments and not by any other

mode, thereby ensuring that local influences and prejudices within states do not pre-

vail. The special protections to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is also man-

ifest in the protection of the areas in which they inhabit, such as Fifth and Sixth

Scheduled Areas.
3.    While this is so, it is also a reality that ours is not a nation of indestructible

states - it is often described as an indestructible union of destructible states. This

means that as and when demands are made by sections of society, which feel the

need for separate states due to local aspirations, Parliament, in consultation with the

concerned State through their elected assemblies, effects reorganisation of states by

law. This reorganisation inevitably has the effect of disrupting pre-existing arrange-

ments. In this litigation we are concerned with the disruption caused with respect to

the service benefits of existing employees and officials in the erstwhile state of
3
Bihar, which was bifurcated by the
Bihar Reorganisation Act
in 2000, and its effect

on the respondent.
4.     The Constitution uses the expression “in relation to”, in both
Articles 341
and
342
, while prescribing the mode for determination of Scheduled Castes and Sched-

uled Tribes, for the purposes of the Constitution. Quite naturally, the Constitution

makers decided that the State or Union Territory ought to be the unit in relation to

which the backwardness of the relative backwardness of communities is to be deter-

mined for notifying one or some of them as Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

In other words, the determination as to whether a community can be notified as a

Scheduled Caste or Tribe, has to be with respect to the territory. From the manner

in which the Presidential Order (both in respect to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled

Tribes, for states and union territories) issued in 1950 has notified communities, it is

evident that an elaborate and extensive exercise was undertaken. In some instances,

communities or castes have been notified as Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes,

only in respect of certain districts in a state or even in relation to certain taluks and

in all others, it is in relation to entire states.
5.     Interestingly, the present case highlights an issue which conflates two issues:
on the one hand, the determination of a community as a Scheduled Caste or a Sched-
uled Tribe in relation to a certain specified area or territory, given that the area or

territory has been determined by the Constitution to be a unit of the State or Union

territory; the other is the reality of political divisions of states through bifurcation or
4
reorganisation (as the Parliament has chosen to express it), which has been occa-
sioned a number of times. What then happens in the event of a reorganisation? The

members of the caste or community that is designated as Scheduled Caste living

within the larger area of the erstwhile united state, would face disruption in the event

of bifurcations, at the time of reorganisation. Where reorganization enactments pro-
vide that the caste or community concerned would continue to be a notified caste or

community in relation to both the states, there would be minimal disruption. How-
ever, where a caste or community in an undivided state, upon bifurcations ceases to

be notified as a Scheduled Caste in relation to one of the bifurcated states, within

which the concerned member of the community lives or works, problems would in-
evitably arise.
6.        As has been pointed out, by the judgment of Justice Lalit, this problem was

addressed in
Pankaj Kumar v. State of Jharkhand & Ors.1
where the court discussed

it in the following terms:
“52. There is a fundamental dichotomy in the submissions made by the counsel
          for the State of Jharkhand that the existing service conditions including benefit of
          reservation in the promotional cadre post shall not be varied to his disadvantage
          but he shall be considered to be a migrant to the State of Jharkhand while partici-
          pating in public employment to compete in open/general category and asked to seek
          the benefit of reservation in the neighbouring State of Bihar, to hold different status
          in his parent State of Jharkhand after he became a member of service of the State
          of Jharkhand, serving for sufficient long time on and after the appointed day, i.e.
          15th November, 2000 in the State is unsustainable in law and in contravention to
          the scheme of the Act 2000.
53.     It will be highly unfair and pernicious to their interest if the benefits of
          reservation with privileges and benefits flowing thereof are not being protected in
1
2021 SCCOnline (SC) 616
5
the State of Jharkhand after he is absorbed by virtue to Section 73 of the Act 2000
          that clearly postulates not only to protect the existing service conditions but the
          benefit of reservation and privileges which he was enjoying on or before the ap-
pointed day, i.e. 15th November, 2000 in the State of Bihar not to be varied to his
          disadvantage after he became a member of service in the State of Jharkhand.”
Earlier, this court had to consider this issue in
Sudhakar Vithal Kumbhare v. State of

Maharashtra & Ors.2
where the problem was flagged, and the solution left to be

worked out in the following manner:
“4.     It is no doubt true that a Scheduled Tribe notified in one State may not be
          given the benefits therefore in another State having regard to the plain expression
          "in relation to that State" in
Article 342
of the Constitution. [See Action Committee
          on Issue of Caste Certificate to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the State
          of Maharashtra and Anr. v. Union of India & Anr. (1994) Supp (1) SCR 714 and
          U.P. Public Service Commission, Allahabad v. Sanjay Kumar Singh 2003 (7) SCC
657.
5.      But the question which arises for consideration herein appears to have not
          been raised in any other case. It is not in dispute that the Scheduled Castes and
          Scheduled Tribes have suffered disadvantages and denied facilities for develop-
ment and growth in several States. They are required protective preferences, facil-
          ities and benefits inter alia in the form of reservation, so as to enable them to com-
          pete on equal terms with the more advantageous and developed sections of the
          community. The question is as to whether the appellant being a Scheduled Tribe
          known as Halba/Halbi which stands recognized both in the State of Madhya Pra-
          desh as well as in the State of Maharashtra having their origin in the Chhindwara
          region, a part of which, on States' reorganization has come to State of Maharash-
          tra, was entitled to the benefit of reservation? It is one thing to say that the expres-
          sion "in relation to that State" occurring in
Article 342
of the Constitution of India
          should be given an effective or proper meaning so as to exclude the possibility that
          a tribe which has been included as a Scheduled Tribe in one State after consultation
          with the Governor for the purpose of the Constitution may not get the same benefit
          in other State whose Governor has not been consulted; but it is another thing to say
          that when an area dominated by members of the same tribe belonging to the same
          region which has been bifurcated, the members would not continue to ge the same
          benefit when the said tribe is recognized in both the States. In other words, the
          question that is required to be posed and answered would be as to whether the
          members of the Scheduled Tribe belonging to one region would continue to get the
          same benefits despite bifurcation thereof in terms of
States' Reorganization Act
.
          With a view to find out as to whether any particular area of the country was re-
          quired to be given protection is a matter which requires detailed investigation hav-
          ing regard to the fact that both Pandhurna in the District of Chhindwara and the
2
2003 Supp (5) SCR 746
6
part of area of Chandrapur at one point of time belonged to the same region and
          under the Constitutional Scheduled Tribe Order 1950 as it originally stood the
          Tribe Halba/Halbi of that region may be given the same protection. In a case of
          this nature the degree of disadvantages of various elements which constitute the
          input for specification may not be totally different and the State of Maharashtra
          even after reorganization might have agreed for inclusion of the said Tribe
          Halba/Halbi as a Scheduled Tribe in the State of Maharashtra having regard to the
          said fact in mind.”
7.
In another decision,
State of Jharkhand v. Bhadey Munda3
the argument was

that upon reorganization, the chances of promotion in the newly reorganized state

were less, and consequently, the official should be protected. This court negatived

the argument, holding as follows:
“All that was submitted (for the first time and that too orally) is that the reservation
          percentage as it existed in the State of Bihar for scheduled caste and scheduled
          tribe candidates had been varied in the State of Jharkhand, thereby reducing the
          possibility of their promotion”.
This court followed the older decision in
State of Mysore v. G.B. Purohit4
which held that changes in chances of promotion do not amount to adverse change

in service conditions.
8.        In my opinion, given that determination of whether a community or caste has

to be notified as Scheduled Caste, or Tribe, is in relation to a state or union territory

(i.e., it is primarily people-centric having regard to the existing geo-political unit),

and when a determination is so made that a particular community belongs to such

state, in the event of re-organization, then, Parliament has a duty to provide clarity,
3
(2014)10 SCC 398
4
(1967) 1 SLR 753
7
by way of express provision. The settled law, in respect of persons going from one

state to another is that the status of “belonging to” a caste or tribe in relation to one

state would not apply once a member of that community goes to another, (per
Marri

Chandra Shekhar Rao v. Dean Seth GS Medical College5 and Action Committee
on

Issue of Caste Certificate to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the
State of

Maharashtra and Anr. v. Union of India & Anr.6
). In that sense, the choice which an

individual - who belonged to the erstwhile unified state - but who has to agree, for

whatever reason, to settle in the bifurcated state, in a place or region where he orig-

inally did not reside, is involuntary.
It is precisely to cater to such situations, that a

provision was made expressly protecting benefits which such individuals had hith-

erto been enjoying in the erstwhile unified states, such as Section 73 of the Bihar

Re-organization Act, 2000, which
Pankaj Kumar
(supra) dealt with. Such provisions

were made in the past, and more recently, as well.7
9.      Another instance where Parliament has accommodated disruptions which are

likely to impact members of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe communities, is

in the event of acquisition of their lands – especially if those are located as described

in the Fifth Schedule (to the Constitution of India). The Right to Fair Compensation
5
1990 (2) SCR 843
6
(1994) Supp (1) SCR 714
7
Section 115 (7), States Re-organization Act, 1956; Sections 69-70 Madhya Pradesh Re-organization Act, 2000;
Sections 74-75 Uttar Pradesh Re-organization Act, 2000; Section 78, Andhra Pradesh Re-organization Act, 2014
8
and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013,

by
Section 42
provides as follows:
“42. Reservation and other benefits.–(1) All benefits, including the reservation
      benefits available to the Scheduled Tribes and the Scheduled Castes in the affected
      areas shall continue in the resettlement area.
(2)     Whenever the affected families belonging to the Scheduled Tribes who are
      residing in the Scheduled Areas referred to in the Fifth Schedule or the tribal areas
      referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution are relocated outside those
      areas, than, all the statutory safeguards, entitlements and benefits being enjoyed
      by them under this Act shall be extended to the area to which they are resettled
      regardless of whether the resettlment area is a Scheduled Area referred to in the
      said Fifth Schedule, or a tribal area referred to in the said Sixth Schedule, or not.
      (3)     Where the community rights have been settled under the provisions of the
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest
      Rights) Act, 2006
(2 of 2007), the same shall be quantified in monetary amount and
      be paid to the individual concerned who has been displaced due to the acquisition
      of land in proportion with his share in such community rights.”
10.   In my considered opinion, given that states reorganizations occur as a conse-

quence of political demands, or as an articulation of regional aspirations, there is no

agency of the individual (i.e., members of Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe com-

munities) in such eventuality. This situation is radically different from one, where a

member of such community, voluntarily seeks opportunities outside her or his state-

in which case, the rule in
Marri Chandra Shekhar Rao
(supra) would apply. There

is, consequently, an obligation on the part of Parliament, to provide clarity about the

kind of protection, regarding the status of such individuals forced to chose one

among the newly reorganized states, and ensure that they are not worse off as a result

of reorganization.
A different kind of involuntary movement was also contemplated

in
Marri Chandra Shekhar Rao
(supra), where this court had in fact commended

Parliament (or the concerned state legislatures) to make provisions for the future
9
prospects of wards of members of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes who be-

cause of their conditions of public employment, have to go from one state to another.

Furthermore, the duty to provide clarity and protection, generally speaking has to be

consistent - i.e., in the case of one states’ reorganization, the protection should not

be greater than in the case of reorganization of another state. That would defeat the

command of
Articles 14
and
15 (1) (i.e.
, in the latter case, there can possibly be

discrimination on the ground of place of birth). In my opinion, this duty stems from

a co-joint reading of Part I (
Articles 1
to 4),
Articles 14
, 15(1)
, 341
, and
342
of the

Constitution, and the overarching concern that the individual should not be worse

off, due to disruption not of her or his making. The duty of Parliament in such cases,

is a Constitutional obligation, to ensure that no one individual or group is disadvan-

taged.
11.      I am in agreement with Justice Lalit, that the observations in
Pankaj Kumar
(supra) which went beyond what was required to be decided, cannot be considered

as its ratio. There can be myriad situations which may arise directly for decision-

such as for instance, where caste A is not designated as a Scheduled Caste in one of

the newly reorganized states, where the individual is forced to locate; or where the

children of the concerned individual were studying in state A, and the parent was in

state B (and continued to be so) and in the former state, the concerned caste is not

notified as a scheduled caste-or, even that the children are not treated as “belonging

to” that state, etc. Each such situation needs to be examined, having regard to the
10
legal regime in question. So far, the instances of decided cases, have inevitably been

in the context of reservations in public employment (
Article 16
). However, there

may arise, possibly, in the future, other kinds of disputes, which this court should be

careful not to pre-judge without careful scrutiny.
12.   I agree with the observations and conclusions of Justice Lalit, additionally,

also for the reasons mentioned above.
.......................................................J.
                                                       [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]

New Delhi,
April 26, 2022