[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sarepalli Sreenivas vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh on 6 April, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1

                                                                                   NON-REPORTABLE


                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1630 OF 2018


                          SAREPALLI SREENIVAS & ORS.                                        Appellants

                                                             VERSUS

                          STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH                                         Respondent



                                                         JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.      This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and order

                          dated 29.03.2018 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad for

                          the States of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh in Criminal Appeal No.97 of

                          2013.
2.      Accused no.3 is stated to have expired during the pendency of this

                          appeal i.e. on 04.11.2020. Therefore, the proceedings in relation to accused

                          no.3 stand abated.
Signature Not Verified
3.      The basic facts leading to the initiation of prosecution against accused
Digitally signed by Dr.
Mukesh Nasa
Date: 2022.04.08
09:52:59 IST
Reason:
persons have been set out in paragraphs 1 and 2 of the judgment of the High

                          Court and for facility, we may reproduce said portion as under:
2
“i)   Accused No.1 is the husband of one Sridevi (hereinafter referred
      to as “the deceased”), while accused Nos.2 and 3 are parents of
      accused No.1 and accused Nos.4 and 5 are the married sisters-in-
      law of the deceased. PW.1 is the mother of the deceased, PW.2 is
      the brother of the deceased and PW.3 acted as an elder, for the
      marriage of accused No.1 with the deceased, which took place on
      27.05.2005. At the time of marriage, cash of Rs.2.00 lakhs dowry
      and Rs.25,000/- towards adapaduchu katnam was paid. The
      parents of the deceased also gave silver plate, silver tumbler and
      silver wedding card. At the time of marriage, accused No.1 was
      working as an Electrical Operator in Railways, Guntakal. After
      the marriage, the deceased joined her husband in Dharmavaram,
      Kovvur Mandal, West Godavari District. It is said that accused
      No.1 and the deceased used to come to the house of PW.1 and to
      the house of accused Nos.2 and 3 during first 10 days of the
      marriage. For about nine months thereafter the deceased was kept
      in the house of her parents. During that period, accused No.1 did
      not visit the house of PW.1. It is said that prior to the said
      marriage, there was an alliance to the deceased, in which the
      parents agreed to give dowry of Rs.4.00 lakhs. Having come to
      know about the same, the accused started demanding the deceased
      to bring Rs.2.00 lakhs, thinking that there was a deposit of
      Rs.2.00 lakhs in the name of the deceased. Further, the family of
      the deceased own a house in Rajahmundry which was named as
      “Sridevi Nilayam”. Thinking that the deceased would get a share
      in the house, the accused were demanding the deceased to get a
      share in the said house. It is said that accused Nos.1 to 5 used to
      harass the deceased to bring Rs.2.00 lakhs and also a share in the
      house at Rajahmundry.
ii)   The evidence on record also shows that elders including the
      family members of the deceased were requesting the accused
      No.1 to take back the deceased, as the mother of the deceased,
      who is a widow, was not in a position to give anything more.
      Thereafter, accused No.3 is said to have gone to the house to
      bring back the deceased to his house. At that time, sare saman
      were arranged. Accused No.3 is said to have demanded that the
      sare saman should be brought and handed over to them at
      Guntakal. When the same was informed to elders, they asked
      accused No.3 to take the sare saman, instead of asking PW.1 to
      bring them and deliver at their house. Accused No.3 took sare
      saman to Guntakal along with the deceased. This incident of
      accused No.3 taking back the deceased to their house took place
      about five months prior to the date of incident. It appears that
      accused No.2 also accompanied accused No.3 when he went to
      the house of PW.1. The evidence further discloses that when
      accused No.1 set up a house at Guntakal, accused Nos.2 to 4 went
      to Guntakal. On the said occasion, accused Nos.2 and 4 are
      alleged to have beat the deceased on the ground that she did not
      bring cash of Rs.2.00 lakhs and a share in the building. The son of
      PW.1 by name Sridhar, who was examined as PW.2, accompanied
3
the deceased, stayed for two days in the house of accused No.1 at
       Guntakal and thereafter returned to his house. The deceased lived
       with accused No.1 for five months in Guntakal. At that time,
       accused No.4 was also living with accused No.1. During the said
       period, the accused No.4 harassed the deceased on the ground that
       she did not bring Rs.2.00 lakhs and a share in the building. The
       evidence on record shows that accused Nos.2, 3 and 5 used to
       harass the deceased on phone, with a demand to bring Rs.2.00
       lakhs and a share in the building. On 15.08.2006 at about 4.30
       a.m., PW.1 received a phone call from Ramachandra Rao (not
       examined), asking her and her son PW.2 to come over to
       Dharmavaram. On receipt of the said information, PWs.1,2,8 and
       Prasad went to Dharmavaram to the house of accused. By the time
       they reached, accused Nos.1 to 5 were sitting in the varanda of
       their house. They noticed the deceased in a corner of small room,
       in a standing posture, with the help of a stick kept at her waist.
       After they opened the door the deceased fell down. They found
       the deceased dead and her tongue protruding out of the mouth.
       They also noticed bleeding from nose. The deceased was wearing
       a jacket and without any saree and a petty coat. They found burn
       injuries on the private parts and also on the face. The accused
       were pretending that the deceased committed suicide by pouring
       kerosene on her and setting herself on fire. Immediately
       thereafter, ie., on 15.08.2016 PW.1 lodged a report with PW.12-
       the Sub-Inspector of Police, which came to be registered as Crime
       No.80 of 2006 for the offence punishable under
Section 304-B
IPC. Ex.P1 is the report and Ex.P8 is the first information report.
       PW.12 handed over the investigation to S.D.P.O., Kovvur. As per
       the instructions of S.D.P.O., Kovvuru, PW.12 gave a requisition to
       PW.11-the Mandal Revenue Officer, Kovvur, to conduct inquest
       over the dead body of the deceased.
iii)   PW.13-the S.D.P.O., Kovvur Sub-Division, after collecting copy
       of the first information report, proceeded to the scene of offence
       ie., house of accused No.3, bearing Door No.2-2 (2) in
       Dharmavaram Village. He observed the scene of offence in the
       presence of PW.9 and others and got prepared a scene of offence
       panchanama. During scene observation, he seized MOs. 6 to 10
       from the scene. Ex.P5 is the scene of offence panchanama. He
       also prepared a rough sketch of the scene, which is placed on
       record as Ex.P10. He got the scene of offence photographed
       through one Srinivasa Rao, which are placed on record as Ex.P9.
       On the same day at about 1.30 to 3.30 p.m., PW.11-the Mandal
       Revenue Officer, conducted inquest over the dead body of the
       deceased in the presence of PW.9 and another. Ex.P6 is the
       inquest report. During inquest, he examined Pws.1 to 3 and
       others. Thereafter, the dead body was sent for postmortem
       examination.
iv)    PW.10-the Deputy Civil Surgeon, Community Health Centre,
       Kovvur, conducted autopsy over the dead body and issued Ex.P7-
4
postmortem certificate. According to him, the cause of death was
             “due to cardio respiratory failure due to shock and asphyxia due to
             smothering”. He also observed that the burn injuries on the body
             are postmortem burn injuries. On the same day PW.13 arrested
             accused Nos.1 to 5 at the house of accused No.3 and brought them
             to police station. After receipt of the postmortem report, the
             section of law was altered from 304-B to 302, 498-A and 201
IPC
. After completing the examination of all the witnesses and
             after collecting all the documents, PW.13 filed a charge sheet
             before the Court of II Additional Judicial Magistrate of First
             Class, Kovvur, who inturn committed the case to the Sessions
             Division under
Section 209
of Cr.P.C., wherein it came to be
             numbered as S.C.No.1 of 2007.”
3.    In support of its case, the prosecution examined 13 witnesses, PWs 1,

2 and 3 being the witnesses pertaining to dowry related harassment meted

out to the deceased. According to PW1 - mother of the deceased, at the time

of marriage, cash in the sum of Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupees Two Lakhs Only) was

given by way of dowry and Rs.25,000/- were given to the sisters of accused

no.1 – husband. Certain jewellery and other items were also given at the

time of marriage. The mother also deposed about the harassment narrated by

the deceased and the demands made by accused no.1 – husband.
The witness was cross-examined at length but nothing substantial

could be elicited from her cross-examination.
4.    PW2 - brother of the deceased reiterated the basic factual parts

deposed to by PW1 – mother. The witness also stated about dowry related

harassments faced by the deceased. His cross-examination also did not lead

to anything substantial to discredit the testimony of the witness.
5
5     PW3 - co-brother of accused no.3 also supported the case of the

prosecution and deposed about the demands and harassment.
6.    PW4 – a neighbour deposed that on the intervening night of

15.08.2006, he had heard shouts and cries coming from the house of accused

no.3 and next day morning it was stated by the accused that the deceased had

died of burn injuries.
7.    The medical evidence on record is quite clear that the deceased was

strangulated first and after the life was extinguished, the body was subjected

to post-mortem burn injuries.
8.    Considering the entirety of material on record, the Trial Court

convicted all five accused of the offences punishable under
Sections 302
,
498A
,
201
read with 34 of the
Indian Penal Code
, 1860 (“
IPC
” for short) and

sentenced them to suffer life imprisonment as substantive sentence under
Section 302
IPC with other sentences for subsidiary offences.
9.    The appeal preferred by the convicted accused was dealt with by the

High Court vide its judgment and order presently under challenge. The High

Court found that the case against the husband and the parents-in-law of the

deceased was clearly made out while two sisters of the husband, who were

ordinarily not residing at the same place, were entitled to benefit of doubt.
Granting such benefit to accused nos.4 and 5, the High Court acquitted them
6
of all the charges but affirmed the conviction and sentences recorded against

accused nos.1 to 3.
10.   In this appeal, we have heard Ms. Gouri Karuna Das Mohanti, learned

Advocate for the appellants, and Mr. Mahfooz Ahsan Nazki, learned

Advocate for the State.
11.   The evidence on record clearly shows that the deceased was done to

death by strangulation and thereafter an attempt was made to camouflage the

death as one which arose out of burn injuries. The evidence of PWs 1, 2 and

3 is quite consistent, cogent and firmly establishes not only the demands for

dowry but dowry related harassments that the deceased was subjected to.
12.   Considering the entirety of material on record, in our view, it is not

possible to take a different view than the one that weighed with the Courts

below. We, therefore, dismiss this appeal.
13.   It must also be stated that accused no.2 – mother-in-law was given the

facility of bail considering her medical condition.
14.   We, therefore, direct:
a. Accused no.2 shall surrender within seven days from today,

             failing which the bail-bonds furnished at the time of her release

             on bail shall stand forfeited and accused no.2 shall be taken in
7
custody forthwith.
b. Since accused no.2 has certain medical issues, we direct the Jail

            Authorities to extend to accused no.2 all medical facilities.
c. The accused shall undergo the sentences awarded to them.
15.   With these observations, the appeal is dismissed.
…………………………………………….J.
                                           (UDAY UMESH LALIT)



                                   …………………………………………….J.
                                           (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)



                                   …………………………………………….J.
                                    (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)
New Delhi;
April 06, 2022