[Cites
33
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Augustan Textile Colours Limited (Now ... vs Director Of Industries on 8 April, 2022
Author:
Hrishikesh Roy
Bench:
K.M. Joseph
,
Hrishikesh Roy
REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.2830 OF 2022
                            (Arising out of SLP(C)No. 24288 OF 2018)


          Augustan Textile Colours Limited           Appellant(s)
          (Now Augustan Textile Colours Pvt Limited)


                                              VERSUS


          Director of Industries & Anr.                       Respondent(s)




                                          J U D G M E N T
Hrishikesh Roy, J.
Leave granted.
1.             Heard Mr. Ritin Rai, the learned Senior Counsel

          representing the appellant. Also heard Mr. C.K. Sasi,

          the learned counsel representing the respondents.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
Date: 2022.04.09
11:59:38 IST
Reason:
1
2.    The issue to     be considered here is                whether the

benefit of tax exemption in respect of works contract

granted   in   the   process    of    revival    of    the    industry,

under the relevant provisions of the
Sick Industrial

Companies Act, 1985
(for short “the SICA”) based on the

Kerala Government communication dated 20.3.2004 (Ext.

P-2) can be withdrawn, by the subsequent government

order dated 21.11.2006 (Ext. P-3).
3.    It was the appellant’s say that they had taken over

a sick industrial unit by the name of M/s Teak Tex

Processing Complex Ltd., which was engaged in dyeing of

clothes. The Kerala based unit was not operational for

a    considerable    period    when     attempt       was    made,   for

revival of the unit under SICA.                 In the proceedings

that were pending before the Board for Industrial and

Financial      Reconstruction        (for   short      “BIFR”),      the

authorities were assessing the possibility of revival

of the unit. At that stage, the appellant offered to

make investment for revival of the company following
2
which, discussions were held amongst the stakeholders

and various concessions were offered to the appellant.

4.1 In tune with the recommendation of the Empowered

Committee constituted for the purpose, the Government

Order     was     issued       on       20.3.2004      whereby     the

recommendations    of    the   Committee       were    accepted.   The

relevant clause incorporating the measures relating to

Sales Tax/Works Contract Tax, are as under:-
“Sales Tax/Works Contract Tax
(a)   The past arrears of Sales Tax/Works
          contract tax will be completely waived.
(b)   Works contract Tax on processing of
          Fabrics like bleaching and dyeing etc.
          will be exempted in the State”

4.2 In furtherance of the 2004 Government Order, the

revival   proposal      envisaged       the   taking   over   by   the

appellant entire assets of the sick unit for a sum of

Rs.10   crores    and    the   BIFR      Sanctioned    Scheme    dated

17.01.2005 mentioned the relief measures under clause

7.2.1 pertaining to sales tax/works contract tax. They

read as follows:-
“7.2.1      Sales Tax/Works Contract Tax
3
(a) To waive past arrears of Sale Tax
           Works Contract Tax completely
(b) To exempt works contract tax on
           processing of fabrics like bleaching
           and dyeing etc. in future.”
5.   The appellant availed the waiver benefit of past

tax arrears of the sick unit on the basis of the BIFR

Sanctioned    Scheme    dated   17.01.2005   (Ext.   P-1)   which

assured waiver of Works Contract Tax on processing of

fabrics like bleaching and dyeing etc. After about 30

months   of   such     arrangement,   the    Government     issued

another Order on 21.11.2006 exercising the power under
Section 10(3)
of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963

(for short “the
KGST Act
”) where it was said that the

benefit of exemption can only be granted to a specified

class of goods or a particular class of persons, and

the appellant who is one amongst several industrial

units doing similar nature of work within the State of

Kerala, cannot be allowed the benefits of exemption of

Works Contract Tax.      After issuance of G.O. order dated

21.11.2006, withdrawing the concession in question, on

1.10.2007,       the       Government        has      withdrawn
4
G.O.No.110/06/1D      dated       21.11.2006,           as   the   concession

was one already allowed in the rehabilitation scheme of

the BIFR of the company. However, on 29.02.2008 again,

the   Government      in    the     Tax         Department    requested     to

cancel the GO dated 01.10.2007 as it did not have any

legally     binding        effect          and     thereupon       GO     dated

01.10.2007 in turn was cancelled with immediate effect.

Accordingly,     it    was     decided            to    withdraw    the    tax

waiver/exemption       granted             to     the    appellant        which

prompted them to file the W.P.(C) No. 5677 of 2007

before the High Court of Kerala.
6.    It   was   contended        by       the     appellant       that    they

attempted to revive and nurse back a sick company under

BIFR and with due deliberations and the recommendations

of the Empowered Committee, the incentive measures to

be offered to the appellant, have been worked out and

finalized as per the scheme. The appellant is actively

working in the process of revival of the sick unit and

at that stage, it was not open to the State of Kerala

to resile from their promise by issuing the Government
5
Order dated 21.11.2006. According to the appellant, the

exemption granted vide the 2004 Government Order was

issued as a “package deal” in course of revival of the

sick unit in conformity with the relevant provisions of

the SICA and once consent was given and proceedings

were finalized in terms of
Section 19(1)
or 19(2), the

same would be binding upon all the stakeholders as is

provided under
Section 19(3)
of SICA. It was therefore

argued that the benefit of tax exemption granted by the

State under the Scheme, is binding on the State under

the provisions of
Section 19(3)
of SICA and the State

must be held accountable to their promise. It was the

say   of   the   appellant   that    the   incentives    were    not

granted    under
Section   10(1)
of   the   KGST    Act,   and

therefore    the   tax   exemption     could     not    have    been

withdrawn by invoking the powers under
Section 10(3)
of

the same Act. The appellant unequivocally rejected a

suggestion by this Court that the appellant might not

constitute a unique class of one, in whose favour a tax

exemption under
Section 10(1)
KGST Act can be granted
6
legally. The appellant however failed to point out any

other provision in any statute, which empowered the

State Government to grant such tax exemptions. While

reviving the sick unit, the appellant earned profit in

2015, but incurred loss in subsequent three years. The

recent years i.e., 2019 and 2020 are however profitable

years for the appellant.
7.    The respondents, on the other hand, contend that

the     20.03.2004     Government        Order    confers        various

benefits,      and    the    exemption    from    sales      tax/works

contract tax is only one of those benefits offered for

revival   of    the   sick   unit.    According       to   the   learned

Government Counsel, the source of power to grant tax

exemption is traceable only to
Section 10(1)
of the

KGST Act and merely because the 20.03.2004 Government

Order   does    not   specifically     refer     to    the   source   of

power, the same cannot aid the appellant, as specific

reference is made to
Section 10(3)
of the KGST Act,

while withdrawing the exemption. The learned government

advocate further argues that when exemption is given,
7
it is always open for the government to cancel, vary or

modify the same, bearing the public interest in mind,

and since no time limit was specified on the liability

in   respect   of   sales   tax/works   contract   tax,   the

withdrawal of benefit by the Government Order dated

21.11.2006, is well within the power and competence of

the government.
8.   The records available would show that the following

benefits/concessions were extended to the appellant for

revival of the sick unit:
“1) Sales Tax/Works Contract Tax
2) Electricity Dues
3) Water Charges
4) Pollution Control Water Cess
5) Panchayat Taxes and Levies
6) The ownership of land”
9.   It is further seen that the benefits offered, inter

alia, were waiver of past arrears particularly under

the Sales Tax/Works Contract Tax.        For other charges

like electricity dues, water charges, Pollution Control

Water Cess, the principal amount in the arrears were to

be paid without the obligation to bear the interest or
8
penalty burden, from the date of commencement of the

commercial     production.      Specifically            for    the   Sales

Tax/Works Contract Tax, under clause 1(b), it is not

very   clear   as    to    whether       the   benefit    intended     for

process of fabrics like bleaching, dyeing etc. will be

available individually to the appellant or was intended

to be availed by this class of industries, many of

which are operating in the State of Kerala. It further

raises questions in regard to the scope and extent of

exemption that could be provided under
Section 10
of

the KGST Act.
10. Adverting to the mandate of
Section 10
of the KGST

Act, the learned Single Judge of the High Court doubted

whether the exemption could have been extended to the

appellant alone as opposed to a class of industries and

the court commented that “such a course of exemption

throughout     the   State    was        not   brought   about”.       The

learned Judge observed that the 2004 Government Order

was    based   on    the    recommendation         of    the    Empowered

Committee with due discussion amongst the stakeholders,
9
and    those     were     with     specific          reference       to    the

concessions to be extended to new promoters for revival

of sick units, in light of the government order dated

25.11.1994.
11.   It   was   noted    by     the    learned       Single   Judge       upon

perusal of the 1994 Government Order that there are two

separate    channels      of   benefits/reliefs            i.e.   (a)      non-

fiscal;    and   (b)     fiscal,       and    under    item    no.   2,     the

exemption      was   granted       for       works    contract       tax    on

processing of fabrics like bleaching, dyeing etc.
12. The above would show that the fiscal measures refer

to    exemption/deferment         of        sales   tax,   purchase        tax,

electricity dues for two years, but not exceeding five

years or till the date, the net worth of the company

became positive, whichever is earlier. Thus, the outer

cap of five years was specified in the 1994 Government

order and the benefits could not have been intended to

continue without limit.
13. Even though the 2004 Government Order, and the BIFR

Sanctioned Scheme of 2005 were enacted in furtherance
10
of 1994 Government Order, both these documents do not

specify the time line for tax exemptions prescribed in

the 1994 government order.
14. Recently this Court in the case of
State of Gujarat

Vs. Arcelor Mittal Nippon Steel India Ltd.1
has held

that exemption provisions and notifications are to be

strictly        interpreted    in   accordance   with   legislative

intent without any addition or subtraction. A Division

Bench of this Court speaking through Justice M. R. Shah

held that:
“14.2 It    is    settled   law  that  the
          notification has to be read as a whole. If
          any of the conditions
laid down in
the
          notification is not fulfilled, the party is
          not entitled to the benefit of that
          notification.    An    exception  and/or  an
          exempting provision in a taxing statute
          should be construed strictly and it is not
          open to the court to ignore the conditions
          prescribed in industrial policy and the
          exemption notifications.
14.3 The exemption notification should be
          strictly   construed   and  given    meaning
          according to legislative intendment. The
          Statutory    provisions    providing     for
          exemption have to be interpreted in the
          light of the words employed in them and
1
(2022) SCC OnLine SC 76.
11
there cannot be any addition or subtraction
          from the statutory provisions.
14.4 As per the law
laid down by
this
          Court in catena of decisions, in the taxing
          statute, it is the plain language of the
          provision that has to be preferred, where
          language is plain and is capable of
          determining    defined    meaning.   Strict
          interpretation to the provision is to be
          accorded to each case on hand. Purposive
          interpretation can be given only when there
          is an ambiguity in the statutory provision
          or it alleges to absurd results, which is
          so not found in the present case.”
15.       Accordingly,    in    the    present        matter,    the   2004

government order granting tax exemptions should be read

as    a    whole   and   in    absence     of   any    time     line   being

prescribed, such a time line in our opinion, cannot be

imported from the 1994 government order.
16. Furthermore, Sales tax in the State of Kerala is

chargeable under
Section 5
of the KGST Act which makes

it obligatory upon the State to realize the tax in

respect of sales transaction.
Section 10
deals with the

power of exemption and sub-Section (3) thereof confers

the power to have the order of exemption “varied or

modified”, in the manner specified.
12
17. The benefit of exemption to tax must therefore be

traceable to powers conferred under the
KGST Act
and

such benefits could not have been granted in terms of

the BIFR Scheme dated 17.01.2005 giving effect to the

Government         Order       issued   on    20.3.2004.      In   the   2006

Government           Order      withdrawing        the      benefits,      the

government has specifically adverted to
Section 10
of

KGST       Act     and    as    such    the    non-mentioning       of     the

provisions of
Section 10(1)
of the KGST Act in the 2004

Government Order, would not assist the appellant in any

significant measure.
18. In        Pournami     Oil    Mills      and   Others    vs.   State    of

Kerala and Anr.2, Justice Ranganath Misra, as he was

then, opined as follows:-
“6……It is a well settled principle of law that
        where the authority making an order has power
        conferred upon it by statute to make an order made
        by it and an order is made without indicating the
        provision under which it is made, the order would
        be deemed to have been made under the provision
        enabling the making of it….”
2
1986 (Supp) SCC 728
13
The present understanding finds support from the

above proposition of law laid down by this Court in

Pournami Oil Mills (supra).
19. Insofar as the benefits of tax exemption from the

works    contract     on    processing         of    fabrics,       being    in

conformity with the stipulations under paragraph 7.2.1

of the BIFR Scheme dated 17.01.2005, it must be noticed

that Sub-clause (b) of paragraph 7.2.1 is not exactly

the   same   as     paragraph      1(b)    of       the    2004    Government

Order, as in the latter case, it is with reference to

proposed     plan    of    action,        to    provide         exemption     to

similar units within the state of Kerala.
20. What is of significance is that similarly situated

fabric processing units in the state are obliged to

meet their tax obligation for the Works Contract Tax

and that is why in the 2006 Government Order, it was

specifically      stated    that     exemption            for   such    taxable

events, cannot be confined to the appellant alone. The

gap     between     the     2004    Government             Order       and   the

Government     Order       dated    21.11.2006            shows    that      the
14
appellant was enjoying the benefit for a fair duration.

Significantly, the power to grant such tax benefit is

not seen in any other State Legislation but only in
Section     10(1)
of    the       KGST    Act.    The     power    to    grant

exemption under
Section 10(1)
is however in respect of

a   class   of    persons          and    was    never        intended     for   an

individual industrial unit like the appellant.                                 When

this   aberration           was    noticed       and     it    was     seen    that

amongst similarly engaged units in the same business,

the appellant was the only one enjoying the benefit of

exemption,       the        2006       government        order       was     issued

withdrawing the exemption granted on 20.3.2004.
21. Undoubtedly,            the    government          was    empowered       under
Section 10(3)
to withdraw the exemption at any time and

therefore,       it   cannot       be    said     that       the   principle     of

promissory       estoppel         by     itself,      will     facilitate        the

appellant to challenge the 2006 Government Order. It

must be pointed out that a number of concessions were

offered     to   the    appellant             under    the    2004     Government

Order and it is discernible that payments under several
15
heads     were        not      set      apart     for      the     appellant,

notwithstanding their role in revival of the sick unit.
22. The present dispute pertinently is only with regard

to the exemption relatable to sales tax/works contract

tax and it is nobody’s case that past arrears of sales

tax/works contract tax payable by the sick units, were

completely waived. Factoring this, the writ court as

well    as   the      Division       Bench      opined     that    sub-clause

(1)(b) of 2004 Government Order relating to waiver of

tax in the State is of such wide amplitude that the

same     must    be     seen       as   uncertain         and    vague.   Also

importantly,            such         exemption          cannot       continue

indefinitely and particularly not beyond the point at

which the revival of the sick unit is seen.
23. As earlier discussed,
Section 10(1)(ii)
of the KGST

Act enables the State to grant exemption from sales tax

only with respect to “any specific class of persons in

regard to the whole or any part of their turnover” and

since    the     2004       Government       Order    benefitted      only   a

single    unit     i.e.      the     appellant,      it    is    difficult   to
16
accept     that   the     solitary     industrial        unit    which    was

being revived under the BIFR Scheme, would form a class

by itself. Therefore, contention to the contrary by the

appellant is considered and rejected with the reasoning

that the exemption by 2004 Government Order was not

made applicable to all sick industrial units of the

state, engaged in the            like activities of bleaching,

dyeing etc.
24. It     is     also    relevant         to    point    out    that     the

government order dated 25.11.1994 clearly reflected the

government’s intention to consider each sick industrial

unit on a case to case basis.
25. Next, the Court must examine whether the appellant

can raise contention on the validity of 2006 Government

Order    in     the    context   of        the   sanctioned      scheme   of

restriction approved by the BIFR and the binding nature

of   the      scheme     under
Section         19(3)
of     SICA.    This

question arises since the contentions in this regard

were earlier argued and rejected by the learned Single

Judge,     and    the     judgment,        dated    13.3.2012     in     Writ
17
Petition No.5677 of 2007 has worked itself out with the

representations submitted by the appellant pursuant to

the Writ Court’s judgment and the speaking order passed

thereafter by the government on 5.10.2012 rejecting the

appellant’s representation. Significantly, the speaking

order was not challenged. Instead, the appellant filed

the   Writ    Appeal       against     the    learned      Single       Judge’s

order, granting limited relief of enabling them to file

a   representation         and    directing        the   State     to    pass    a

speaking      order        after       affording         hearing        to    the

appellant.         As     the     appellant        had    presented          their

representation on the strength of the order of the Writ

Court   and    thereby          have   accepted      the     judgment,        the

appellant cannot thereafter in our view, challenge the

said judgment through a Writ Appeal when an adverse

order is passed against them, by the government.
26. One       is        certain     that      it     would       be     legally

impermissible to grant tax exemption, contrary to the

provisions of the
KGST Act
. The special exemption is

provided to a single unit under the BIFR proceeding and
18
the State cannot in our opinion be compelled to act

contrary to the provisions of the
KGST Act
, on the

strength of binding nature of the scheme under
Section

19(3)
of SICA.
27. On     the      argument    of    the     appellant   based    on   the

principles of promissory estoppel, as earlier noted,

the tax exemption in the present matter was not given

to a class of persons and the appellant is made the

sole beneficiary.            This is contrary to
Section 10
of

the   KGST     Act.    The     21.11.2006       withdrawal      order   was

therefore issued, when it was discovered that this was

a case of exemption to an individual unit and that is

impermissible under
Section 10
of the KGST Act. Such

being    the     position,      the     benefit     of    the   equitable

doctrine       of    estoppel        cannot    be   extended      for   the

appellant as in that case the State authority would be

obliged to act in a manner which is contrary to the

legislative mandate.
28. The equitable principle of promissory estoppel was

propounded by this Court in the case of M/s.
Motilal
19
Padampat Sugar Mills Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.3

In
the same very case, it was however observed that the

legal principle cannot be invoked to compel anyone to

do anything, contrary to law. Justice P. N. Bhagawati

for the Division Bench wrote the following:-
“28…It may also be noted that promissory
         estoppel cannot be invoked to compel the
         Government or even a private party to do
         an act prohibited by law…”
29. The above judgment in
Motilal Padampat
(Supra) was

followed in the case of
Amrit Banaspati Co. Ltd. Vs.

State of Punjab & Anr.4
wherein, this Court carved out

unlawful/illegal          promise        as        an   exception     to   the

principle of promissory estoppel. But, the observation

in this case in reference to an unlawful promise was

not laid down as a ratio, but at best an Obiter dicta.
30.
In     the      later     case        of
Bangalore      Development

Authority Vs. R. Hanumaiah5
, it was however specifically

declared      that     the     equitable          principle   of    promissory


3  (1979) 2 SCC 409.
4
(1992) 2 SCC 411.
5
(2005) 12 SCC 508.
20
estoppel cannot be invoked for condoning or enforcing a

promise, expressly prohibited by a statute. This Court

speaking     through    Justice       Ashok   Bhan    pronounced   as

under:
“34. …In absence of any provision in the
         Act   or   the  Rules   framed   thereunder
         authorizing BDA to reconvey the land,
         direction cannot be issued to BDA to
         reconvey a part of the land on the ground
         that it had promised to do so. The rule of
         promissory estoppel cannot be availed to
         permit or condone a breach of law. It
         cannot be invoked to compel the Government
         to do an act prohibited by law. It would
         be   going   against   the   statute.   The
         principle of promissory estoppel would
         under the circumstances be not applicable
         to the case in hand.”
31. From the above reading of the relevant judgments,

it is abundantly clear that the equitable principle of

promissory    estoppel       cannot    be   invoked   for   enforcing

promises in the teeth of the provisions of law. Having

concluded     that     the    Government      Order    (20.03.2004),

granting Sales Tax/ Works Contract Tax exemption was

ultra vires the
Section 10(1)
of the KGST Act, the

promise, in furtherance of Government Order, in the
21
form of BIFR Scheme dated 17.01.2005 being unlawful,

cannot     in    our    view,        be    enforced     on     equitable

consideration.
32. Further, in
Arcelor Mittal Nippon Steel
(Supra)

this Court has held that:
“22….The principle of promissory estoppel
         shall not be applicable contrary to the
         Statute. Merely because erroneously and/or
         on misinterpretation, some benefits in the
         earlier assessment years were wrongly
         given, cannot be a ground to continue the
         wrong   and  to   grant  the   benefit  of
         exemption though not eligible under the
         exemption notification.”
33. In the case at hand, even though the appellant was

granted    benefit     of    tax     exemptions       under    the   2004

government order, this was ultra vires the
Section 10
KGST     Act.   Such   exemption          cannot   be   continued       for

further    assessment       years,    as    that   would      amounts    to

perpetuating and condoning a wrong, which is opposed to

public policy.
22
34. It would be apposite now to advert to Voltas Ltd.
Vs. State of A.P.,6 where a BIFR proceeding was being

considered and the ratio therein will shed some light

on the present matter. In that case, the Voltas Ltd.

agreed         to    take      over     the        refrigeration        unit        of

‘Hyderabad           Allwyn     Ltd.’       (A      Sick    Company)        vide     a

Memorandum of Understanding with the state government,

subject to BIFR approval. The state government, for

incentivizing            the   appellant,          issued       government    order

dated       20.01.1994         granting      sales        tax    deferral    for     a

period of 7 years. The said deferral was reflected in

the BIFR Sanctioned Scheme dated 04.04.1994. Later, the

state government issued another order on 18.08.1995,

whereby        18%       interest     was        levied    on    the   sales       tax

component so deferred. The interest sum was payable

after 7 years in lump sum. Dealing with the challenge

to the government decision, this Court by a short order

upheld the Government Order dated 18.08.1995 with the

observation           that      the    interest           was     imposed     under

relevant provisions of AP General Sales Tax Act, 1957
6
(2004) 11 SCC 569.
23
(APGST Act
). Further, even though the payment of sales

tax   was   deferred       for   7   years      vide    Government         Order

dated 20.01.1994 and the BIFR sanctioned scheme dated

04.04.1994,        both     pertinently         were     silent      on      the

interest aspect. Hence, this Court held that as there

was no express waiver of interest, the provisions of
APGST Act
would prevail over the BIFR scheme.
35. In the case at hand, the government order dated

20.03.2004, as well as the BIFR sanctioned scheme, are

silent on the duration of tax exemption for the works

contract.     In     any     case    the     tax       exemptions      cannot

continue indefinitely. Hence, the ratio in
Voltas Ltd.
(Supra)     involving       a    BIFR     scheme       and   a   government

decision     which        diminishes      the    incentives          for    the

company, do lend support for the impugned decisions of

the High Court. In other words, the Kerala government,

notwithstanding the BIFR scheme for the sick company

was entitled to withdraw the tax exemptions, by issuing

the   government      order      dated     21.11.2006        under
Section

10(3)
of the KGST Act.
24
36. Justice H. L. Gokhale, in his concurring judgment

in the case of
Monnet Ispat & Energy Ltd. Vs. Union of

India,7
highlighted the difference between the doctrine

of promissory estoppel and the doctrine of legitimate

expectation:
“289. As we have seen earlier, for
            invoking   the  principle   of  promissory
            estoppel there has to be a promise, and on
            that basis the party concerned must have
            acted to its prejudice…
            290…. Alternatively, the appellants are
            trying to make a case under the doctrine
            of legitimate expectations. The basis of
            this doctrine is in reasonableness and
            fairness. However, it can also not be
            invoked where the decision of the public
            authority is founded in a provision of
            law, and is in consonance with public
            interest…”
37.       While        the   equitable     principle   of   promissory

estoppel requires a valid promise, based on which the

promisee has changed its position, it is necessary to

observe that the principle of legitimate expectation

does        not    take      into   account    such    considerations.
7
(2012) 11 SCC 1.
25
Instead,         it       is    rooted        in     fundamental       ideas    like

reasonableness, fairness and non-arbitrariness.
38.
In   the      case     of
MRF        Ltd.,    Kottayam    Vs.    Asst
.

Commissioner (Assessment) Sales Tax & Ors.8 the Kerala

government           in       order    to     incentivize         investment    and

industrial            growth,         entered        into     a   Memorandum      of

Understanding on 06.10.1993, under which tax incentives

were offered to the company if they invested above Rs.

50 crores for expanding the existing industrial unit in

the State. In the government order dated                                03.11.1993

issued under
Section 10
of KGST Act, exemptions were

provided         for      7    years     for       all     expanding    industrial

units. An addendum to the Memorandum of Understanding

was executed on 10.04.1996, explicitly stating that the

industry         was          eligible       for      tax     exemptions       under

government         Order        dated       03.11.1993.       Pursuant    to    such

encouragement,             MRF    Ltd.       invested       Rs.   80   Crores   for

expansion, and then commenced operations on 31.12.1996.

They were also issued the eligibility certificate on
8
(2006) 8 SCC 702.
26
10.11.1997, granting tax exemption from 31.12.1996 to

29.12.2003, by the Kerala government. Subsequently the

government order was issued on 15.01.1998, amending its

1993 Order adding sub-clause (h) to the negative list.

This excluded MRF’s activities from the definition of

‘manufacture’. The same in effect extinguished the tax

exemptions granted vide the 1993 government order. By

another      Notification        dated       31.12.1999,       the        Kerala

government         notified    that        the    exemptions     sanctioned

before      01st    January,     2000       in     furtherance       of     1993

government order would continue for full period of 7

years. In this background, the authorities issued a

demand      notice,     seeking       to    levy     purchase      tax     from

15.01.1998, relying on the 15.1.1998 government order.

When this was challenged and the matter eventually came

to   this    Court,     the    Division          Bench   speaking     through

Justice Ashok Bhan, held that the state authority’s

demand for purchase tax under
KGST Act
from 15.01.1998,

is barred by principle of promissory estoppel since the

state     cannot      renegade    its       earlier      promise      of    tax
27
exemption for 7 years until 29.12.2003. This Court held

that the state’s action of retrospectively amending its

1993   government        order,     by    subsequent      order      dated

15.01.1998      was    arbitrary    and    unreasonable.       The   1998

government order was found to be discriminatory and hit

by the principles of
Article 14
of the Constitution.

Thus, holding the state bound to its promise, MRF was

found to be entitled for tax exemptions for the 7 year

period, in terms of government order dated 03.11.1993.
39. But, the above judgment of this Court in the case

of
MRF Ltd., Kottayam
(Supra) is distinguishable from

the facts in the present case.                 In
the above case
, the

government      order     granting       tax     exemptions,      clearly

mentioned a period of 7 years, before which the tax

exemptions could not have been revoked. But, in this

case, no such time period was explicitly prescribed.

Neither   did    the    state     seek    to    revoke   the   exemption

retrospectively.        The     appellant        here,    enjoyed     the

benefit of exemptions for a considerable period and is

now in profit. Hence, it is not open for the appellant
28
to claim legal entitlement to tax exemption for the

period of 5 years.
40. The learned Division Bench of the Kerala High Court

has   given    categorical      findings          in   reference    to   the

20.03.2004 government order i.e. a) the said government

order is issued only in the appellant’s favor; b) It

was     not   contended     that          similar      concessions       were

accorded      to   any    other      sick      industry       engaged      in

activities of bleaching, dyeing, etc.; c) Vide the 1994

government     order,    the    state       has     simply    promised     to

consider other sick industries for similar exemptions.
41. Based on the above findings, the learned Division

Bench    concluded   that      the    appellant        does   not   form    a

separate class of its own. Hence, the 2004 government

order was held to be ultra vires the
Section 10(1)
of

the KGST Act. The appellant has failed to bring to our

attention, any intelligible differentia, based on which

it can be said that they constitute a unique, separate

class of its own. In absence of such differentiating

factor, the benefit of tax exemptions being granted to
29
the      appellant,          to     the     exclusion          of   all    other       sick

industries             involved       in     similar       activities,           do     not

appear        to       be        reasonable        and    should          be    seen     as

arbitrary. The 2004 government order was not only ultra

vires
Section 10(1)
of KGST Act, but also falls short

by      principle           of    reasonableness,          fairness,           and     non-

arbitrariness.              The     2006    government          order      withdrawing

the tax exemption was in fact issued to remedy this

very mischief. Hence, the appellant cannot invoke the

principle of legitimate expectation against the 2006

government order.
42.      Reverting          now     to     another       appropriate           aspect   as

presented in
Pawan Alloys & Casting Pvt. Ltd., Meerut

Vs. U.P. State Electricity Board and Others9
where it

was propounded that if the state, in exercise of its

sovereign          powers,         grants      any       tax    exemptions        for    a

specified period, the principle of promissory estoppel

does not bar the grantor from prematurely withdrawing

such exemptions, if such measure is necessitated for
9
(1997) 7 SCC 251
30
protecting      public    interest.          In    other      words,    public

interest would outweigh the interest of the individual

grantee.
43.   While       reflecting        upon     the       element     of   public

interest   as      enunciated       in
Pawan       Alloys
(supra),      in

granting     or    refusing         relief        on    the     principle     of

promissory estoppel, the              last public address of the

lawyer statesman Abraham Lincoln who served as the 16th

President of USA, intrudes into our thought process.

Taking a strong stand in support of Black suffrage,

Abraham    Lincoln,      soon       after    winning       the    Civil      War,

refused    to     give   in    to    his     earlier       promise      of   re-

construction       to    the    state       of     Louisiana,       with      the

following resounding words:-
“But, as bad promises are better broken
        than kept, I shall treat this as a bad
        promise, and break it, whenever I shall be
        convinced that keeping it is adverse to
        the public interest. But I have not yet
        been so convinced.”


      Taking a cue from above, and bearing in mind that

the appellant here has already availed the exemption
31
benefits for a substantial period and was the only one

of its category which enjoyed such advantage in the

State of Kerala and also regard being had for the fact

that now the appellant        is out of the red and more

importantly in a situation where enforcing the promise

against the State is likely to affect public interest,

we     find   supplementary      support      for    our     present

conclusion, in the above         quoted insightful words of

Abraham Lincoln.
44. In view of the foregoing discussion, this Court,

with    the   additional      reasoning      in     the    preceding

paragraphs,     is   persuaded        to   uphold    the    impugned

judgment of the High Court. Accordingly, the appeal

stands dismissed without any order on cost.
……………………………………………………J.
                                           [HRISHIKESH ROY]
NEW DELHI
APRIL 8, 2022
32
Reportable

           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2830 OF 2022
     (Arising out of SLP (CIVIL)NO.24288/2018)

AUGUSTAN TEXTILE COLOURS LIMITED
(NOW AUGUSTAN TEXTILE COLOURS PVT LTD) ..APPELLANT(S)

                          VERSUS


DIRECTOR OF INDUSTRIES & ANR.                 ..RESPONDENT(S)


                      JUDGMENT
K.M. JOSEPH, J.
1.   While I am in agreement with the final conclusion

reached by my esteemed and learned brother that the

appeal   must   be   dismissed,    in   the   nature   of   the

questions which arise and the reasoning which appeals

to me, I am inclined to author a separate though

concurring judgment.
2.   The facts have been set out by my learned brother.

The principal contention of the appellant is that
Section 10
of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963
1
(hereinafter referred to as ‘the State Act’) does not

exhaust   the   power   to   grant   exemption   inter   alia.

Section 10 of the State Act reads as follows:
“10. Power of Government to grant
       exemption and reduction in rate of tax: -
(1) The Government may, if they consider
       it necessary in the public interest, by
       notification in the Gazette, make an
       exemption or reduction in rate, either
       prospectively   or    retrospectively   in
       respect of any tax payable under this Act,
(i) on the sale or purchase of any
         specified goods or class of goods, at
         all points or at a specified point or
         points in the series of sales or
         purchases by successive dealers, or
(ii) by any specified class of persons
         in regard to the whole or any part of
         their turnover
       (2) Any exemption from tax, or reduction
       in the rate of tax, notified under sub-
       section (1) -
(a) may extend to the whole State or to
         any specified area or areas therein,
(b) may be subject to such restrictions
         and conditions as may be specified in
         the notification
       (3) The Government may by notification in
       the   Gazette,   cancel   or   vary   any
       notification issued under sub-section(1).
3.   In order to appreciate whether the exemption in

favour of the appellant would be ultra vires
Section

10
of the State Tax Law and whether there is merit in
2
the case of the appellant that actually the exemption

was not given under
Section 10
, I may briefly evaluate

the
Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act,

1985
, hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’.
The Act
defined ‘Sick Industrial Company’ w.e.f. 01.02.1994 as

follows:
“3(o) sick industrial company means an
       industrial company (being a company
       registered for not less than five
       years) which has at the end of any
       financial year accumulated losses
       equal to or exceeding its entire net
       worth.
Explanation:   For   the  removal   of
       doubts, it is hereby declared that an
       industrial       company      existing
       immediately before the commencement of
       the
Sick Industrial Companies (Special
       Provisions)   Amendment   Act,   1993
,
       registered for not less than five
       years and having at the end of any
       financial year accumulated losses
       equal to or exceeding its entire net
       worth, shall be deemed to be a sick
       industrial company;”
4.
The Act
envisaged a Board and also an appellate

authority.
Section 15
contemplated a reference by the

Board of Directors of Sick Companies. The Board under

the Act was to conduct an inquiry as to whether any

industrial unit had become a sick industrial company.
3
Section 17
contemplated, inter alia, suitable orders

being passed on completion of inquiry.
Section 17
reads

as follows: -
“17. Powers of Board to make suitable order on the
     completion of inquiry. — (1) If after making an
     inquiry under
section 16
, the Board is
     satisfied that a company has become a sick
     industrial company, the Board shall, after
     considering    all   the  relevant    facts    and
     circumstances of the case, decide, as soon as
     may be by order in writing, whether it is
     practicable for the company to [make its net
     worth exceed the accumulated losses] within a
     reasonable time.
(2) If the Board decides under sub-section (1)
     that it is practicable for a sick industrial
     company to make its net worth positive within
     a reasonable time, the Board, shall, by order
     in writing and subject to such restrictions or
     conditions as may be specified in the order,
     give such time to the company as it may deem
     fit to [make its net worth exceed the
     accumulated losses].
Sub-Section   (3)   of
Section   17
dealt   with   a

different class of sick company:
(3) If the Board decides under sub-section (1)
     that it is not practicable for a sick
     industrial company to [make its net worth
     exceed the accumulated losses] within a
     reasonable time and that it is necessary or
     expedient in the public interest to adopt all
     or any of the measures specified in
section 18
in relation to the said company it may, as soon
     as may be, by order in writing, direct any
     operating agency specified in the order to
     prepare, having regard to such guidelines as
4
may be specified in the order, a scheme
       providing for such measures in relation to such
       company.
Section 17
further provided:
(4) The Board may, —
(a) if any of the restrictions or conditions
       specified in an order made under sub-section
       (2) are not complied with by the company
       concerned, 1 [or if the company fails to revive
       in pursuance of the said order,] review such
       order on a reference in that behalf from any
       agency referred to in sub-section (2) of
section 15
or on its own motion and pass a
       fresh order in respect of such company under
       sub-section (3);
(b) if the operating agency specified in an
       order made under sub-section (3) makes a
       submission in that behalf, review such order
       and modify the order in such manner as it may
       deem appropriate.”
5.     It is clear that under
Section 17(3)
if the Board

decided that it is not practicable within a reasonable

time    to   make   the   company’s   net   worth   exceed   the

accumulated losses, a scheme may be provided as provided

under
Section 18
.
Section 18
, therefore, dealt with the

circumstances obtaining under
Section 17(3)
to prepare

and sanction the scheme.
Section 18
provided in detail

as to what could be provided for in the scheme. It reads

as follows: -
“18. Preparation and sanction of schemes. — (1)
       Where an order is made under sub-section (3)
5
of
section 17
in relation to any sick
industrial company, the operating agency
specified in the order shall prepare, as
expeditiously as possible and ordinarily
within a period of ninety days from the date
of such order, a scheme with respect to such
company providing for any one or more of the
following measures, namely:—
(a) the financial reconstruction of the sick
    industrial company;
(b) the   proper   management   of  the   sick
    industrial company by change in, or take
    over of, management of the sick industrial
    company;
(c) the amalgamation of—
(i) the sick industrial company with any
  other company, or
(ii) any other company with the sick
  industrial company;
(hereafter in this section, in the case of
 sub-clause (i), the other company, and in the
 case of sub-clause (ii), the sick industrial
 company, referred to as “transferee company”;
(c) the sale or lease of a part or whole of
    any industrial undertaking of the sick
    industrial company;
(da)the    rationalisation  of    managerial
personnel, supervisory staff and workmen in
accordance
with law;
(d) such other preventive, ameliorative and
    remedial measures as may be appropriate;
(f)   such   incidental,   consequential  or
supplemental measures as may be necessary or
expedient in connection with or for the
6
purposes of the measures specified in clauses
(a) to (e).
(2) The scheme referred to in sub-section (1)
may provide for any one or more of the
following, namely: —
(a) the constitution, name and registered
office, the capital, assets, powers, rights,
interests, authorities and privileges, duties
and obligations of the sick industrial company
or, as the case may be, of the [transferee
company];
(b) the transfer to the transferee company of
the   business,    properties,   assets   and
liabilities of the sick industrial company on
such terms and conditions as may be specified
in the scheme;
(c) any change in the Board of Directors, or
the appointment of a new Board of Directors,
of the sick industrial company and the
authority by whom, the manner in which and the
other terms and conditions on which, such
change or appointment shall be made and in the
case of appointment of a new Board of Directors
or of any director, the period for which such
appointment shall be made;
(d) the alteration of the memorandum or
articles of association of the sick industrial
company or, as the case may be, of the
transferee company for the purpose of altering
the capital structure thereof or for such other
purposes as may be necessary to give effect to
the reconstruction or amalgamation;
(e) the continuation by, or against, the sick
industrial company or, as the case may be, the
transferee company of any action or other legal
proceeding pending against the sick industrial
company immediately before the date of the
order made under sub-section (3) of
section 17
;
7
(f) the reduction of the interest or rights
which the shareholders have in the sick
industrial company to such extent as the Board
considers necessary in the interests of the
reconstruction, revival or rehabilitation of
the sick industrial company or for the
maintenance of the business of the sick
industrial company;
(g) the allotment to the shareholders of the
sick industrial company of shares in the sick
industrial company or, as the case may be, in
the   [transferee   company]   and  where   any
shareholder claims payment in cash and not
allotment of shares, or where it is not
possible to allot shares to any shareholder the
payment of cash to those shareholders in full
satisfaction of their claims—
(i) in respect of their interest in shares
 in the sick industrial company before its
 reconstruction or amalgamation; or
(ii) where such interest has been reduced
 under clause (f) in respect of their interest
 in shares as so reduced;
(h) any other terms and conditions for the
reconstruction or amalgamation of the sick
industrial company;
(i) sale of the industrial undertaking of the
sick   industrial   company   free   from   all
encumbrances and all liabilities of the company
or other such encumbrances and liabilities as
may be specified, to any person, including a
co-operative society formed by the employees
of such undertaking and fixing of reserve price
for such sale;
(j) lease of the industrial undertaking of the
sick   industrial company    to any    person,
including a co-operative society formed by the
employees of such undertaking;
8
(k) method of sale of the assets of the
industrial undertaking of the sick industrial
company such as by public auction or by
inviting tenders or in any other manner as may
be specified and for the manner of publicity
therefor;
(l) transfer or issue of the shares in the sick
industrial company at the face value or at the
intrinsic value which may be at discount value
or such other value as may be specified to any
industrial company or any person including the
executives and employees of the sick industrial
company;
(m)   such   incidental,   consequential   and
supplemental matters as may be necessary to
secure that the reconstruction or amalgamation
or other measures mentioned in the scheme are
fully and effectively carried out.
(3) (a) The scheme prepared by the operating
agency shall be examined by the Board and a
copy of the scheme with modification, if any,
made by the Board shall be sent, in draft, to
the sick industrial company and the operating
agency and in the case of amalgamation, also
to any other company concerned, and the Board
shall publish or cause to be published the
draft scheme in brief in such daily newspapers
as the Board may consider necessary, for
suggestions and objections, if any, within such
period as the Board may specify;
(b) The Board may make such modifications, if
any, in the draft scheme as it may consider
necessary in the light of the suggestions and
objections received from the sick industrial
company and the operating agency and also from
the transferee company and any other company
concerned in the amalgamation and from any
shareholder or any creditors or employees of
such companies:
9
Provided that where the scheme relates to
amalgamation the said scheme shall be laid
before the company other than the sick
industrial company] in the general meeting for
the approval of the scheme by its shareholders
and no such scheme shall be proceeded with
unless it has been approved, with or without
modification, by a special resolution passed
by the shareholders of the company other than
the sick industrial company.
(4) The scheme shall thereafter be sanctioned,
as soon as may be, by the Board (hereinafter
referred to as the “sanctioned scheme”) and
shall come into force on such date as the Board
may specify in this behalf:
Provided that different dates may be specified
for different provisions of the scheme.
(5) The Board may on the recommendations of the
operating agency or otherwise, review any
sanctioned scheme and make such modifications
as it may deem fit or may by order in writing
direct any operating agency specified in the
order, having regard to such guidelines as may
be specified in the order, to prepare a fresh
scheme providing for such measures as the
operating agency may consider necessary.
(6) When a fresh scheme is prepared under sub-
section (5), the provisions of sub-sections (3)
and (4) shall apply in relation thereto as they
apply to in relation to a scheme prepared under
sub-section (1).
(6A) Where a sanctioned scheme provides for the
transfer of any property or liability of the
sick industrial company in favour of any other
company or person or where such scheme provides
for the transfer of any property or liability
of any other company or person in favour of
the sick industrial company, then, by virtue
10
of, and to the extent provided in, the scheme,
on and from the date of coming into operation
of the sanctioned scheme or any provision
thereof, the property shall be transferred to,
and vest in, and the liability shall become the
liability of, such other company or person or,
as the case may be, the sick industrial
company.
(7) The sanction accorded by the Board under
sub-section (4) shall be conclusive evidence
that all the requirements of this scheme
relating     to   the    reconstruction    or
amalgamation, or any other measure specified
therein have been complied with and a copy of
the sanctioned scheme certified in writing by
an officer of the Board to be a true copy
thereof, shall, in all legal proceedings
(whether in appeal or otherwise) be admitted
as evidence.
(8) On and from the date of the coming into
operation of the sanctioned scheme or any
provision thereof, the scheme or such provision
shall be binding on the sick industrial company
and the transferee company or, as the case may
be, the other company and also on the
shareholders, creditors and guarantors and
employees of the said companies.
(9) If any difficulty arises in giving effect
to the provisions of the sanctioned scheme, the
Board may, on the recommendation of the
operating agency or otherwise, by order to
anything,    not   inconsistent    with    such
provisions, which appears to it to be necessary
or expedient for the purpose of removing the
difficulty.
(10) The Board may, if it deems necessary or
expedient so to do, by order in writing, direct
any operating agency specified in the order to
implement a sanctioned scheme with such terms
and conditions and in relation to such sick
11
industrial company as may be specified in the
     order.
(11) Where the whole of the undertaking of the
     sick industrial company is sold under a
     sanctioned scheme, the Board may distribute the
     sale proceeds to the parties entitled thereto
     in accordance with the provisions of section
     529A and other provisions of the
Companies Act,
     1956
(1 of 1956).
(12) The Board may monitor periodically the
     implementation of the sanctioned scheme.”
6.
Section   19
provided    for   rehabilitation   giving

financial assistance.    It reads as follows:
“19.    Rehabilitation   by   giving   financial
     assistance.—(1) Where the scheme relates to
     preventive, ameliorative, remedial and other
     measures with respect to any sick industrial
     company, the scheme may provide for financial
     assistance by way of loans, advances or
     guarantees or reliefs or concessions or
     sacrifices from the Central Government, a State
     Government, any scheduled bank or other bank,
     a public financial institution or State level
     institution or any institution or other
     authority (any Government, bank, institution
     or other authority required by a scheme to
     provide for such financial assistance being
     hereafter in this section referred to as the
     person required by the scheme to provide
     financial assistance) to the sick industrial
     company.
(2) Every scheme referred to in sub-section (1)
     shall be circulated to every person required
     by the scheme to provide financial assistance
     for his consent within a period of sixty days
     from the date of such circulation [or within
     such further period, not exceeding sixty days,
12
as may be allowed by the Board, and if no
      consent is received within such period or
      further period, it shall be deemed that consent
      has been given].
(3) Where in respect of any scheme the consent
      referred to in sub-section (2) is given by
      every person required by the scheme to provide
      financial assistance, the Board may, as soon
      as may be, sanction the scheme and on and from
      the date of such sanction the scheme shall be
      binding on all concerned.
(3A) On the sanction of the scheme under sub-
section (3), the financial institutions and the
      banks required to provide financial assistance
      shall designate by mutual agreement a financial
      institution and a bank from amongst themselves
      which   shall   be responsible    to disburse
      financial assistance by way of loans or
      advances   or    guarantees   or   reliefs   or
      concessions or sacrifices agreed to be provided
      or granted under the scheme on behalf of all
      financial institutions and banks concerned.

      (3B) The financial institution and the bank
      designated   under  sub-section   (3A)   shall
      forthwith proceed to release the financial
      assistance to the sick industrial company in
      fulfilment of the requirement in this regard.

      (4) Where in respect of any scheme consent
      under sub-section (2) is not given by any
      person required by the scheme to provide
      financial assistance, the Board may adopt such
      other measures, including the winding up of the
      sick industrial company, as it may deem fit.”

                                      (Emphasis supplied)
7.
Section 20
provided for winding up. Even though

the   Sick   Industrial   Companies    (Special   Provisions)
13
Repeal Act, 2003
was passed repealing the Act, it was

not enforced, and it is only with effect from 1.12.2016

when the IBC came into force that the Act was repealed.
8.    The definition of Sick Industrial Company has been

noticed. It is to be further noticed that not every

sick industrial company becomes the subject matter of

a    scheme    contemplated    under
Section    18
read      with
Section 19
of the Act. Not every sick industrial unit

which becomes the subject matter of the draft scheme

becomes       the   beneficiary    of   the   final     scheme      or

sanctioned scheme. The procedure by which it attains

finality does involve affording an opportunity to every

person required by the scheme to providing financial

assistance. Either express consent is granted or there

is   deemed     consent   under
Section     19(2)
.    It   may    be

possible to find that a sick industrial company as

defined is different from a sick industrial company

which is the subject matter of the final scheme under
Section 19(3)
. The processes that are involved and the

procedures      that   are    undergone   may     result     in    the

particular company which is at the centre stage of the
14
final scheme being entitled to be treated in terms

thereof.
9.   Therefore, on the scheme of the Sick Industrial

Companies Act, the law contemplated concessions, and

sacrifices inter alia being undertaken by the State

Government inter alia in terms of financial assistance.
Section 19(4)
appears to indicate that if consent is

not given to any person, the Board is free to adopt

other   measures   including    winding   up   of   the   sick

industrial   company.    A   sick   industrial   company   is

defined in the Act.     In terms of the definition, it is

undoubtedly true that there may be more than one sick

industrial companies operating in the same business or

rather dealing in the same goods and services. The

scheme of
Section 17
appears to be that such sick

industrial companies that         could be nursed    back to

health under
section 17(1)
and
17(2)
, did not go on to

be dealt with under
Section 18
and
19
. It is in regard

to a sick industrial company which fell within the four

walls of
Section 17(3)
that the special provisions

under
sections 18
and
19
were applicable. It is such a

company on account of the acuteness of the problem that
15
cried out to be dealt with, as contemplated in
Sections

18
and
19
.       The    law   contemplated    the       deliberative

process involving all parties having a stake. Draft

scheme may give way to a final one.
Section 19
dealt

with a scheme envisaging financial assistance. Having

regard     to
Section      19(1)
,     which,     inter      alia,

contemplated         financial     assistance     in    the     form   of

concessions or sacrifices from the State Government,

it may be incongruous to not read the words ‘reliefs

or concessions or sacrifices’ as not meaning a tax

exemption or a reduction in the rate of tax. It is only

when the State gave consent or there was deemed consent

under
Section 19(2)
, that
Section 19(3)
kicked in, and

the scheme on being sanctioned by the Board was binding

on all concerned.
10. There       is    the    aspect    of   fairness    involved.      An

exemption under
Section 10
cannot ordinarily be claimed

as a legal right. The provisions of
Section 19
of the

Act made an inroad into the said principle. In other

words, when to a scheme under
Section 19
of the Act the

State    Government         has   given     consent    or    its   deemed

consent, the law commanded the State Government to
16
honour its consent. In this regard we may notice that

under
Section 19(4)
, if consent is not given, the Board

was left free to take appropriate steps including the

winding up of the company. To give consent and to allow

the State to renege on its consent and defy the binding

nature of the sanctioned scheme would enable the State

to frustrate the scheme. In fact, if consent is refused

at the early and appropriate stage, as contemplated

under
Section 19(4)
, then the Board is left free to

take action including winding up the company as is

considered appropriate.
11. There is merit in the contention of the appellant

that the exemption granted initially, dated 20.03.2004,

was not one which is premised under
Section 10
of the

Act. The exemption was granted in terms of the scheme

under
Section 19
of the Act. This is an exemption which

was given under statutory provisions. In other words,

consent being forthcoming from the state, a scheme

being   sanctioned   under
section   19
providing   for

financial assistance in the form of tax exemption,

inter alia, the Government became obliged to honour its

consent and the dictate of the statute.
17
12. It will be inequitable to the company and against

public interest also, as it frustrates the object of

law to allow a scheme to be sanctioned inducing all

parties to proceed on the basis that a company would

be redeemed from its financial dire-straits and the

crucial financial assistance indispensable to the said

process    is   not    forthcoming        from   the    State.    The

aforesaid interpretation placed in para 11 hereinbefore

would harmonise the Central and the State Act. It will

also give life to the Sick Companies Act as it would

clearly further the object of the law. Therefore, the

exemption granted can be understood as springing from

the provisions of
Section 19(3)
read with 19(1) in this

regard. Thus, the exemption is not to be treated as

falling under Section 10 of the State Act. In other

words,
Section     10
cannot    be   treated      as   the   sole

repository of power to grant exemption.
13.   The Government of Kerala, had in fact issued

G.O.M.S. dated 25th November 1994.               It, inter alia,

deals with the aspect of benefits given under the Act.

In fact, the said order provided for guidelines in the

model package which is appended to be followed by
18
government     while    formulating    rehabilitation    scheme

within the purview of the
Sick Industrial Companies

(Special Provisions) Act, 1985
. Relief and concessions

were to be extended on a case-to-case basis, keeping

in view all relevant factors by the government in the

Industries Department.          Therein, under the heading

‘fiscal’, the following is relevant:
“FISCAL
1. Exemption/deferment    of   sales    tax,
         purchases tax and electricity duty for
         two years but not exceeding 5 years or
         the date the net worth of the company
         become positive, which ever is earlier.
The    deferment    will   be    interest
         free/simple interest not exceeding 12 per
         cent per annum. Dues deferred repayable
         in,   say,    36  monthly    instalments,
         repayment commencing after one/two years’
         moratorium from date of sanction of
         B.I.F.R. scheme.”
14.   This again fortifies the view that no resort to

Section   10    of     the   State   Act   is   necessary.   The

Government Order dated 25.11.1994 provides support to

the working of the scheme.
15. The expression ‘class of persons’ in Section 10 of

the State Act, no doubt, acts as a limitation on the
19
power of the state in exercise of its power. It also

is an indication of the extent of the power. Then the

question would arise as to whether a class of persons

includes a single person. To break it down, whether the

words ‘persons’ is capable of comprehending a single

person. Would the plural include the singular?
16. The High Court has proceeded on the basis that the

power under
Section 10(1)
can be exercised in favour

of only a class of persons and not qua an individual

unit like the appellant. It has also proceeded on the

basis that had the exemption been made applicable to

all sick industrial units which is in the activity of

bleaching etc, there would have been force in the

contention that the appellant would form a class by

itself.    The sick company, which falls to be dealt with

under
Section 17(3)
read with
Section 18
and finally
Section 19
, is clearly distinct from the generality of

sick companies both under the definition of a sick

company and even those which are covered by
Section

17(1)
and
17(2)
of the Act. Therefore, the question

would     arise   as   to   whether   the   appellant   would

constitute a class by itself.
In this regard, we may
20
notice the decision of Andhra Pradesh High Court in
Mahindra and Mahindra Limited and Ors. vs. State of

Andhra Pradesh and Ors.1
.
Section 9
of the Andhra

Pradesh General Sales Tax Act is similarly worded as
Section 10
of the State Tax Law with which we are

concerned. A reduction of tax was given to the second

respondent     therein.    The    second       respondent   was   a

Government      Company.     We       notice      the   following

observations:
“27. …. Apart from that, we are of the
          opinion taking into account that the
          second   respondent   is   a   Government
          company, and, it is established in a
          centrally notified backward area, and it
          provides employment opportunities to
          those people in that area and it is a new
          entrant in the filed, the concession
          shown to the second respondent is clearly
          sustainable as the second respondent unit
          constitutes a class by itself and the
          classification so made in its favour is
          justified with the object in view as
          stated above.”
17.     A sick industrial company which is the subject

matter of the sanctioned scheme may constitute a class

by itself. However, it is not necessary to explore this
1
1986 (63) STC 274
21
aspect further as the exemption granted to the sick

company covered by
Section 19(3)
is safely anchored in
Section 19
of the Act.
18. The question would arise as to whether on the said

view the appellant should be granted relief? There is

merit in the view that the exemption does not envisage

any outer time limit. But it is obvious that it could

not be an unending bonanza even after the company

breaks even and even made profits.
19. It is quite clear that the appellant cannot pitch

its case higher than at the limit under Order dated

25.11.1994 referred to in paragraph-14.            Therefore,

exemption of sales tax is contemplated for a period of

two years. However, it further provides that it cannot

be for more than five years or beyond the date the net

worth of the company becomes positive whichever is

earlier. Therefore, the maximum period in any case is

5 years. In the case of the appellant, the appellant

enjoyed   the   benefit   of   the   exemption   till   it   was

withdrawn on 21.11 2006. The said order in turn was

withdrawn on 01.10.2007. It is no doubt true that on

29.02.2008, the    order dated 01.10.2007         came to be
22
withdrawn.   The    writ   petition   was   filed   by   the

appellant. It would appear that for a period of nearly

4 years, the appellant enjoyed the benefit of exemption

in all. No doubt, the learned counsel for the appellant

did point out that there is no exercise carried out to

find out as to when the net worth has turned positive.

The   conduct      of    the    appellant   submitting     a

representation in terms of the judgment of the learned

judge has been noticed by my learned brother.
20. As noted in the Judgment of my learned Brother,

appellant is a company which is out of the woods and

making profits. Therefore, I would concur with the

final conclusion that the appeal must fail though on

grounds as stated hereinbefore. The appeal will stand

accordingly dismissed, however, without any order as

to costs.
………………………………………….J.
                                      [ K.M. JOSEPH ]


NEW DELHI,
DATED: 8TH APRIL, 2022
23