[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Bharat Cooking Coal Ltd. vs Mahendra Pal Bhatia . on 1 April, 2022
Author:
V. Ramasubramanian
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Hemant Gupta
REPORTABLE



                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.5377 OF 2015



         M/S BHARAT COKING COAL LTD.                            ...APPELLANT(S)


                                              VERSUS


         MAHENDRA PAL BHATIA AND ORS.                          ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                           JUDGMENT
V. Ramasubramanian
1.              What was contemplated to be a summary proceeding for the

         eviction of unauthorized occupants from public premises under the
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971
(hereinafter referred to as the “Act”), having turned out to be a

         frustrating legal marathon spread over a period of 38 years,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
eventually culminating in the High Court setting aside the orders of
Jayant Kumar Arora
Date: 2022.04.02
12:00:22 IST
Reason:
eviction passed under the Act, the Government Company which
1
initiated the proceedings way back in 1984, has come up with the

above appeal.
2.   We have heard Mr. Anupam Lal Das, learned senior counsel

appearing for the appellant and Mr. Shambo Nandy, learned

counsel appearing for the respondents.
3.   The Parliament enacted the
Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act,

1973
, (hereinafter referred to as the “Nationalisation Act”) providing

for the acquisition and transfer of the right, title and interest of the

owners in respect of coal mines specified in the Schedule. The

Schedule to the Nationalisation Act contained a list of about 711

coal mines located in different parts of the country. The Schedule

also contained the names and addresses of the owners of each of

those mines and the amount payable to those owners in terms of

Section 8 of the Nationalisation Act. Serial No.92 of the Schedule

contained the name of the coal mine “East Godhur”. The owner of

the coal mine was indicated to be “East Godhur Colliery Company

(Private) Limited, P.O. Dhandad” and the amount of compensation

payable to the owner was also shown as Rs.4000/.
2
4.    In the year 1984, the Estate Officer, Dhanbad initiated

proceedings in Case No.210 of 1984 under the provisions of the Act,

against Bhatia brothers and others, on the ground that they are un­

authorised occupants of plot nos. 553, 554, 555, 556 and 559 to

564   located    in   Village   Matkuria,   District   Dhanbad.    These

proceedings culminated in an order of eviction dated 18.09.1985.
5.    But this order was set aside by the District Court, Dhanbad in

an appeal under
Section 9
of the Act, by an order dated 04.12.1986

and the matter was remanded back to the Estate Officer.
6.    The Estate Officer passed a fresh order dated 08.03.1989

dropping   the   eviction   proceedings     on   the   ground   that   the

respondents were authorized occupants. But the said order of the

Estate Officer was set aside by the District Court by an order dated

08.08.1990 in an appeal filed by the appellant herein under
Section

9
of the Act.
7.    But the order of the District Court was set aside by the High

Court by an order dated 17.07.1998 in a writ petition filed by the

respondents and the matter got back to the District Court by way of
3
remand for a fresh disposal.
8.   The District Court passed an order dated 28.09.2000 allowing

the appeal of the appellant herein and directing eviction. This order

of the District Court was set aside by a learned Single Judge of the

High Court by an order dated 20.06.2013 in a writ petition filed by

the respondents. The said order of the learned Single Judge was

confirmed by the Division Bench in an intra­court appeal by

judgment dated 19.02.2015, which is what is impugned before us

in the above appeal.
9.   The only question which the Estate Officer, the District Court

and the High Court dabbled with, was as to whether the property in

the occupation of the respondents and their predecessor in interest

was covered by the definition of the expression “mine” in Section

2(h) of the Nationalisation Act. This question arose in the context of

two limited facts namely,
(i) The property in question was purchased by an individual by

name Jamini Mohan Majumdar, under a registered sale deed dated

05.02.1945, long prior to 01.05.1973, the date of coming into force
4
of the Nationalisation Act. In this sale deed dated 05.02.1945

Jamini Mohan Majumdar’s occupation was described as “Manager”,

East Godhur Colliery;
(ii) The said Jamini Mohan Majumdar sold the property in question

under four different sale deeds dated 17.01.1984. It was only

thereafter that proceedings under the Act, were initiated.
10.   In view of the above two facts, the objection raised by the

respondents to the proceedings under the Act was that the property

was a private property, not forming part of a “mine”. Reliance was

also placed upon the Report of the Court Commissioner, according

to which there was no mark of any colliery in the disputed land and

that there was a two storey building on the disputed plot, with

Godhur Colliery being located 3 Kilometers away.
11.   In other words the objection of the respondents was two­fold

namely, (i) that the property did not belong to the company which

owned the East Godhur Coal Mine; and (ii) that the land in question

was not used as a coal­mine.
12.   But, unfortunately for the respondents, both the objections
5
cannot stand in the light of the statutory prescriptions. Section 3(1)

of the Nationalisation Act, declares that on the appointed day,

which was 01.05.1973, the right, title and interest of the owners in

relation to the coal­mines specified in the Schedule shall stand

transferred to and shall vest absolutely in the Central government

free from all encumbrances.
Section 3(1)
of the Nationalisation Act,

1973 reads as follows:­


        “3. Acquisition of rights of owners in respect of coal
        mines.­(1) On the appointed day, the right, title and
        interest of the owners in relation to the coal mines
        specified in the Schedule shall stand transferred to, and
        shall vest absolutely in, the Central Government free
        from all incumbrances.”

        xxxx                       xxxx                     xxxx
13.   As could be seen from the vesting provision, what was

transferred to and vested in the Central Government, were not

corporate houses or business entities owning coal­mines. What was

transferred to and vested in the Central Government were the coal­

mines. In other words this Nationalisation Act, was little different

from the statutory enactments nationalizing institutions such as

banks, insurance companies etc. Therefore, the ownership of the

land was immaterial. If the land fell within the definition of the
6
expression “mine” under the Nationalisation Act, the same stood

transferred to and vested in the Central Government under
Section

3(1)
.
14.     The definition of the expression “mine” under Section 2(h) of

the Nationalisation Act, is very wide. It reads as follows:­
2. Definitions.­ In this Act, unless the context otherwise
          requires,­­

          xxx                      xxx                      xxx
(h)   " mine" means any excavation where any operation
          for the purpose of searching for or obtaining minerals has
          been or is being carried on, and includes—
(i) all borings and bore holes;
(ii) all shafts, whether in the course of being sunk or not;
(iii) all levels and inclined planes in the course of being
          driven;
(iv) all open cast workings;
(v) all conveyors or aerial ropeways provided for bringing
          into or removal from a mine of minerals or other articles
          or for the removal of refuse therefrom;
(vi) all lands, buildings, works, adits, levels, planes,
          machinery and equipments, instruments, stores,
          vehicles, railways, tramways and sidings in, or adjacent
          to, a mine and used for the purposes of the mine;
(vii) all workshops (including buildings, machinery,
          instruments, stores, equipment of such workshops and
          the lands on which such workshops stand) in, or
          adjacent to, a mine and used substantially for the
7
purposes of the mine or a number of mines under the
        same management;
(viii) all coal belonging to the owner of the mine, whether
        in stock or in transit, and all coal under production in a
        mine;
(ix) all power stations in a mine or operated primarily for
        supplying electricity for the purpose of working the mine
        or a number of mines under the same management;
(x) all lands, buildings and equipments belonging to the
        owner of the mine, and in, adjacent to or situated on the
        surface of, the mine where the washing of coal obtained
        from the mine or manufacture, therefrom, of coke is
        carried on;
(xi) all lands and buildings[ other than those referred to
        in sub­ clause (x), wherever situated, if solely used for the
        location of the management, sale or liaison offices, or for
        the residence of officers and staff, of the mine;
(xii) all other fixed assets, movable and immovable,
        belonging to the owner of a mine, wherever situated, and
        current assets, belonging to a mine, whether within its
        premises or outside.”
15.   As could be seen from clause (xi) of
Section 2(h)
, even the

lands and buildings used solely for the location of the management,

sale or liaison offices or for the residence of officers and staff were

also included in the definition of the word “mine”. Therefore, the

contention that the property was the private property of Jamini

Mohan Majumdar, and that his occupation as Manager of a colliery

was irrelevant, would fall to the ground. The focus of Section 2(h)

read with Section 3(1) is on the property and not on who the owner
8
of the property is.
16.   Similarly, the objection that the land in question was not used

as a colliery is also irrelevant in view of the fact that clause (xi) of
Section 2(h)
uses the words “wherever situated”. In any case the

contention that the property was not part of a colliery, may be

factually incorrect.     The sale deed dated 05.02.1945 by which

Jamini Mohan Majumdar purchased the property in question

contains a very specific recital which reads as follows:
“…This deed witnesseth that in the schedule land in view of
           the ongoing colliery workings the fertility of the schedule
           land has been reduced for that reason and for monetary
           reason being in special need and having no alternative when
           I offered for absolute sale of the land in schedule as receipt
           of consideration price of Rs.575/­ on this day by way of
           absolute sale this sale deed is being executed in your favour.
           You are at liberty to carry on all nature of colliery work
           both underground and surface and enjoy the name TO
           HAVE AND HOLD the same to and upto the purchaser
           absolutely and forever in any manner whatsoever without
           any hindrance or interruption from us together with all right,
           benefit, easement, privileges, liberties which he hereto begins
           enjoyed… ”


Therefore, the respondents cannot now rely upon the Report of a

Court Commissioner who carried out inspection probably after

two/three decades of nationalization.
9
17.   The learned counsel for the respondents placed reliance upon

the judgment of this Court in
New Satgram Engineering Works

& Another vs. Union of India & Ors.1
, in support of his

contention that the question whether something is a “mine" or not is

essentially a question of fact and that when the facts are seriously

controverted it was appropriate for the High Court to relegate the

parties to the civil court.
18.   Though paragraph 16 of the decision in
New Satgram
(supra)

appears     to       support   the   contention   of   the   respondents   by

highlighting the difference between the language employed in

clauses (vii) and clause (xi) of
Section 2(h)
, a subsequent decision of

this Court (also of a 3 member bench) in
Bharat Coking Coal Ltd.

Vs. Madanlal Agrawal2
, steers clear any air of suspicion. In this

case, this Court clarified that the extended meaning given to the

word “mine” was to ensure that the activity of mining coal could be

carried on in an uninterrupted fashion. This Court also cautioned

“that the Act should not be construed in a way to frustrate the


1 (1980) 4 SCC 570
2 (1997) 1 SCC 177
10
working of the coal mines altogether, thereby stop or bring down

production of coal by the nationalization of coal mines”.
19.   Therefore, the impugned orders of the High Court run contrary

to the statutory prescriptions and hence liable to be set aside.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed, the impugned orders of the High

Court are set aside and the writ petition filed by the respondents is

dismissed. The order of eviction shall stand confirmed. There will be

no order as to costs.
…..…………....................J.
                                                 (Hemant Gupta)




                                          .…..………......................J.
                                             (V. Ramasubramanian)



New Delhi
April 1, 2022
11