[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Jeetu Khatik vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 11 April, 2022
Author:
Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench:
Aniruddha Bose
,
Dinesh Maheshwari
1

                                                                                   REPORTABLE
2022 INSC 414

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.603 OF 2022
                         (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) No. 875 OF 2022)

            JEETU KHATIK                                                  ………APPELLANT(S)

                                              VERSUS


            STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                                         ………RESPONDENT(S)


                                               O R D E R
Leave granted.
The      challenge        herein    is        to    the     order        dated

            09.11.2021,    whereby    the     High       Court      of    Chhattisgarh      at

            Bilaspur     has    declined     the     prayer         for     suspension       of

            execution    of    sentence     during       the    pendency      of    Criminal

            Appeal No. 1219 of 2021.
The      appeal     aforesaid       has        been       filed     by     the

            petitioner-appellant against the judgment and order dated

            24.09.2021     passed     by     the     Additional           Sessions        Judge

            (F.T.C.), Manendragarh, District Koriya, Chhattisgarh in

            Special Criminal Case No. 15 of 2019.
The substance of the accusation against the appellant

            had been that he kidnapped the 9-year-old victim from the

            custody of her legal guardian and with intention to outrage

            her modesty, used criminal force and with sexual intention,

            held her hand so as to forcefully take her to a place away

            from road. It had been the prosecution’s case that the
2
victim   got    released     her   hand      and    ran    while    shouting.

The   Trial    Court    found   the    appellant         guilty    and   after

recording conviction awarded sentences as follows: -
Conviction                       Sentence
      Under   Section                  R.I. for 2 years and
      363 of Indian                    fine of R.500/-, in
      Penal Code.                      default of payment
                                       of fine additional
                                       R.I. for 1 month.
      Under   Section                  R.I. for 2 years and
      354 of Indian                    fine of Rs.500/-, in
      Penal Code.                      default of payment
                                       of fine additional
                                       R.I. for 1 month.
      Under    Section                 R.I. for 3 years and
      8     of     the                 fine of Rs.500/-, in
      Protection    of                 default of payment
      Children    from                 of fine additional
      Sexual                           R.I. for 1 month.
Offences
      (POCSO)     Act,
      2012
.
      (All the sentences             were    directed      to     run
      concurrently)
The submissions on behalf of the appellant before the

Appellate Court seeking suspension of execution of sentence

had   been     that    the   Trial    Court        had    overlooked     major

contradictions        and    omissions       in     the     statements     of

witnesses; and that he was on bail during the trial but did

not misuse his liberty and even after pronouncement of

judgment, he was granted bail for a limited period. It was

also submitted that the disposal of the appeal was likely

to take some time and, therefore, the appellant may be

released on bail.
The High Court has proceeded to reject the prayer for

suspension of execution of sentence with reference to the
3
deposition of the prosecutrix, who was nine years of age,

with its corroboration from the medical evidence. The High

Court, of course, made no comments on the merits of the

case   but    then,     ordered    that      the        appeal    be       listed    for

hearing in due course.
Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that

the High Court has taken too strict and stern view of the

matter      and   has   failed    to    appreciate          that       the    maximum

sentence of imprisonment awarded in this matter is of three

years and all the sentences are to run concurrently; and

the appellant had already served two months of imprisonment

until consideration of the prayer for suspension by the

High Court.
It is submitted that if further execution of sentence

is denied, the appellant is likely to serve out the entire

or substantial part of the sentence of imprisonment and,

thereafter, even if the Appellate Court would be persuaded

to reverse the order of conviction, the deprivation of

liberty for all this time could never be undone.
Learned    counsel      for    the       respondent,          on    the    other

hand, has strenuously argued that for grant of suspension

of    execution    of    sentence,      special          reasons       were       indeed

required in this case; and, with reference to the decision

of this Court in the case of
Preet Pal Singh v. State of

U.P. & Anr.
:(2020) 8 SCC 645 (particularly paragraphs 35

and    38    thereof),    has     argued         that    for     no    special       and

compelling reason forthcoming in this case, the prayer for
4
suspension      of    execution      of    sentence    has    rightly        been

rejected.
Having    given      anxious       consideration      to   the    rival

submissions     and    having     examined     the    material    placed       on

record with reference to the law applicable, we are unable

to   agree   with     the   submissions        made   on     behalf     of    the

respondent that, in this matter, where the maximum sentence

of imprisonment is of three years, the appellant ought to

be denied the concession of bail during the pendency of

appeal.
The   observations       in    paragraphs      35   and    38    of    the

decision in
Preet Pal Singh
(supra), as sought to be relied

upon by the learned counsel for the respondent, read as

under: -
“35. There is a difference between grant of bail
       under
Section 439
CrPC in case of pre-trial
       arrest and suspension of sentence under
Section
       389
CrPC and grant of bail, post conviction.
In
       the earlier case, there may be presumption of
       innocence, which is a fundamental postulate of
       criminal jurisprudence, and the courts may be
       liberal, depending on the facts and circumstances
       of the case, on the principle that bail is the
       rule and jail is an exception, as held by this
       Court in
Dataram Singh v. State of U.P.
(2018) 3
       SCC 22. However, in case of post-conviction bail,
       by suspension of operation of the sentence, there
       is a finding of guilt and the question of
       presumption of innocence does not arise. Nor is
       the principle of bail being the rule and jail an
       exception attracted, once there is conviction
       upon trial. Rather, the court considering an
       application for suspension of sentence and grant
       of bail, is to consider the prima facie merits of
       the appeal, coupled with other factors. There
5
should be strong compelling reasons for grant of
        bail, notwithstanding an order of conviction, by
        suspension of sentence, and this strong and
        compelling reason must be recorded in the order
        granting bail, as mandated in
Section 389(1)
CrPC.
***                     ***                   ***
38. In considering an application for suspension
        of sentence, the appellate court is only to
        examine if there is such patent infirmity in the
        order of conviction that renders the order of
        conviction prima facie erroneous. Where there is
        evidence that has been considered by the trial
        court, it is not open to a court considering
        application under Section 389 to reassess and/or
        re-analyse the same evidence and take a different
        view, to suspend the execution of the sentence
        and release the convict on bail.”

        Significant     aspect    of    the    matter      is     that    the

observations       aforesaid   have    been   made   by    the    Court    in

relation to a case where the accused was convicted, inter

alia,   of   the    offence    under
Section    304-B
IPC    and    was

awarded      varying    sentences,      including       that      of     life

imprisonment. Obviously, the observations aforesaid have to

be   read    with   reference    to    the    factual     background      and

context.
The relevant aspects of the present case are that the

maximum sentence awarded is of three years’ imprisonment.

As   regards    the    requirement      of    special     or     compelling

reasons, noteworthy it is that one of the grounds urged

before the High Court on behalf of the appellant was that

looking to the term of sentence awarded, when the disposal

of the appeal is likely to take time, he may be ordered to

be released on bail.
6
The     High    Court,        while   referring         to    the   basis     of

conviction of the appellant, did not make any comment as

regards the fact that the maximum sentence of imprisonment

is of three years and that the hearing of appeal is likely

to take time. On the contrary, in the concluding part of

the order impugned, the High Court ordered that the appeal

be listed for hearing ‘in due course’.
Obviously, the High Court has not found the appeal

worth assigning a priority for hearing. That being the

position, if the appeal is to be heard only on its turn,

the likely scenario is that it would not be taken up for

hearing      immediately         by    the    High    Court.         If   the    appeal

remains pending in due course and the appellant by that

time serves out the sentence of imprisonment, and then, if

there     be     any      possibility         of     his    acquittal           or   any

modification         of     the       conviction/sentence,                the    injury

suffered by him would be practically irreparable.
In our view, these aspects, in the given set of facts

and circumstances of the present case, are themselves of

the   compelling          reasons      for    suspension        of    execution      of

sentence during the pendency of appeal. There does not

appear any other adverse reason to deny the relief to the

appellant,       like      any        criminal     antecedents            before     the

incident in question or any blame in the jail conduct.
In     the   overall      circumstances,           we   are       inclined    to

order suspension of execution of the remaining part of the

sentence awarded to the appellant.
7
Accordingly, the appeal is allowed; execution of the

remaining part of the sentence awarded to the appellant is

ordered to be suspended during the pendency of appeal in

the High Court; and he is ordered to be released on bail on

such terms and conditions as may be imposed by the Trial

Court.
……………………………………………J.
                                        (DINESH MAHESHWARI)



                                       ……………………………………………J.
                                       (ANIRUDDHA BOSE)

New Delhi;
April 11, 2022.
8
ITEM NO.26                COURT NO.14                     SECTION II-C

                 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F     I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No. 875/2022

(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 09-11-2021
in IA No. 01/2021 passed by the High Court of Chhatisgarh at
Bilaspur)

JEETU   KHATIK                                           Petitioner(s)
                                  VERSUS
STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                                    Respondent(s)

(IA No. 14895/2022 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)

Date : 11-04-2022 These matters were called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE DINESH MAHESHWARI
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIRUDDHA BOSE

For Petitioner(s)    Dr. Sangeeta Verma, Adv.
Mr. Sameer Shrivastava, AOR

For Respondent(s)    Ms. Asmita Singh, Adv.
Mr. Gautam Narayan, AOR


           UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                              O R D E R

    Leave granted.
The appeal is allowed in term of the Signed Reportable Order.
Execution of the remaining part of the sentence awarded to the

appellant is ordered to be suspended during the pendency of appeal

in the High Court; and he is ordered to be released on bail on such

terms and conditions as may be imposed by the Trial Court.
(SHRADDHA MISHRA)                               (RANJANA SHAILEY)
SENIOR PERSONAL ASSISTANT                       COURT MASTER (NSH)
          (Signed Reportable Order is placed on the file)