[Cites
0
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
The Principal Commissioner Of Income ... vs M/S Bajaj Herbals Pvt. Ltd. on 7 April, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M. R. Shah
NON­REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2659 OF 2022

          The Principal Commissioner of Income Tax­1                 ..Appellant (S)

                                                Versus

          M/s. Bajaj Herbals Pvt. Ltd.                             ..Respondent (S)

                                          JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with impugned order

                         dated 01.10.2020/02.12.2020 (modification order) passed

                         by the Division Bench of the High Court of Gujarat at

                         Ahmedabad in R/Tax Appeal No. 278 of 2020, by which

                         the High Court has dismissed the said appeal preferred by

                         the appellant herein – Revenue, the present appeal has

                         been preferred by the Revenue.
2.             As per the office report the respondent is served. From the

                         office report, it appears that the respondent – assessee

                         sent a letter to the Registry of this Court on 22.10.2021 to
Signature Not Verified
grant an adjournment of three months. The time was
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2022.04.07
16:17:59 IST
Reason:
accordingly granted. Despite the same no one has filed
1
vakalatnama and none has appeared on behalf of the

       respondent. Hence, service of notice on the respondent is

       complete.
3.     By the impugned order the High Court has dismissed the

       said appeal simply by observing that none of the questions

       as proposed by the revenue could be termed as the

       substantial questions of law and all the questions

       proposed are on factual aspects of the matter. However, it

       is required to be noted that except re­producing the

       proposed questions of law, there is no further discussion

       on the factual matrix of the case. While issuing the notice,

       this Court passed the following order: ­

            “Mr. Balbir Singh, learned ASG, has vehemently submitted that
       in the impugned order except narrating the proposed questions of
       law, there is no independent reasoning given by the High Court while
       dismissing the appeal except recording that “having gone through
       the materials on record, we are of the view that none of the
       questions as proposed by the revenue could be termed as the
       substantial questions of law. All the questions proposed are on
       factual aspects of the matter”.
Hence, issue notice for final disposal returnable within six
       weeks.
Counter be filed within four weeks from the date of receipt of the
       notice.
Dasti, in addition, is permitted.”



3.1   As the impugned order passed by the High Court is a non­

      speaking and non­reasoned order and even the submissions
2
on behalf of the revenue are not recorded, the impugned

      order passed by the High Court dismissing the appeal is

      unsustainable.
3.2   Under the circumstances, the impugned order is hereby

      quashed and set aside. The matter is remanded to the High

      Court to decide and dispose of the appeal afresh in

      accordance with law and on its own merits. If the High

      Court is of the opinion that the proposed questions of law

      are not substantial questions of law and they are on factual

      aspects, it will be open for the High Court to consider the

      same in accordance with law, however, the High Court to

      pass a speaking and reasoned order after recording the

      submissions made on behalf of the respective parties.
4.    The present appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent. No

      costs.
…………………………………J.
                                     (M. R. SHAH)


                                     …………………………………J.
                                     (B.V. NAGARATHNA)
New Delhi,
April 07, 2022.
3