[Cites
8
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Indrajeet Yadav vs Santosh Singh on 19 April, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M. R. Shah
1


                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 577 OF 2022


                         Indrajeet Yadav                        .. Appellant

                                                Versus


                      Santosh Singh and Anr.                    .. Respondents


                                                 With


                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 578 OF 2022


                      Indrajeet Yadav                            ..Appellant

                                                Versus


                      Avdhesh Singh @ Chhunnu Singh and Anr.     ..Respondents


                                            JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
M. R. Shah, J.
Digitally signed by
NEETU KHAJURIA
Date: 2022.04.19
17:48:52 IST
Reason:
2
1.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

common judgment and order dated 30.03.2019 passed by the

High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Criminal Appeal

No.1083 of 2012 and Criminal Appeal No.1178 of 2012 by which

the High Court has allowed the said appeals preferred by the

original accused and has acquitted them for the offences

punishable under Section 302 read with
Section 34
of the Indian

Penal Code (for short, ‘
IPC
’), the original complainant/informant

has preferred the present appeals.
2.   We have heard learned counsel appearing for the respective

parties.
3.   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant –

original complainant/informant and learned counsel appearing

on behalf of the State have drawn our attention to the fact that

in the present case the arguments in the appeals were concluded

on 30.03.2019 and the High Court allowed the said appeals on

the very day and pronounced the operative portion of the order

and set aside the judgment and order of conviction passed by

the learned Trial Court and directed the accused who was in jail
3
to be released, but a reasoned judgment and order was

pronounced after a period of approximately five months.

3.1   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant –

original complainant/informant has heavily relied upon the

recent decision of this Court dated 29.10.2020 in Civil Appeal

No.3564 of 2020 in the case of
Balaji Baliram Mupade & Anr.

versus The State of Maharashtra
, by which such a practice of

pronouncing the final order without a reasoned judgment has

been deprecated.
It is submitted that in the aforesaid case this

Hon’ble Court considered another decision of this Court in the

case of
State of Punjab & Ors. versus Jagdev Singh Talwandi
,

(1984) 1 SCC 596 as well as other decisions referred in para 4

of
the said decision
.
It is submitted that this Court also

considered in detail another decision in the case of
Anil Rai

versus State of Bihar
, (2001) 7 SCC 318 by which guidelines

have been issued by this Court regarding the pronouncement of

judgments and orders.
4
4.    Applying the law
laid down in
the case of
Balaji Baliram

Mupade
(supra) and the earlier decisions of this Court in the

case of
Jagdev Singh Talwandi
(supra) to the facts of the case

on hand, the impugned judgment and order passed by the High

Court is unsustainable.
4.1   In   the   case   of
Balaji       Baliram   Mupade
(supra)   in

paragraphs 1 to 4 it is observed and held as under:
“1. Judicial discipline requires promptness in
            delivery of judgments – an aspect repeatedly
            emphasized by this Court. The problem is
            compounded where the result is known but not
            the reasons. This deprives any aggrieved party of
            the opportunity to seek further judicial redressal
            in the next tier of judicial scrutiny.
2. A Constitution Bench of this Court as far back
            as in the year 1983 in the State of Punjab & Ors.
v. Jagdev Singh Talwandi ­ 1984 (1) SCC 596 drew
            the attention of the High Courts to the serious
            difficulties which were caused on account of a
            practice which was increasingly being adopted by
            several High Courts, that of pronouncing the final
            orders 2 without a reasoned judgment. The
            relevant paragraph is reproduced as under:
“30. We would like to take this opportunity to
            point out that serious difficulties arise on account
            of the practice increasingly adopted by the High
            Courts, of pronouncing the final order without a
            reasoned judgment. It is desirable that the final
            order which the High Court intends to pass
            should not be announced until a reasoned
            judgment is ready for pronouncement. Suppose,
5
for example, that a final order without a reasoned
judgment is announced by the High Court that a
house shall be demolished, or that the custody of
a child shall be handed over to one parent as
against the other, or that a person accused of a
serious charge is acquitted, or that a statute is
unconstitutional or, as in the instant case, that a
detenu be released from detention. If the object of
passing such orders is to ensure speedy
compliance with them, that object is more often
defeated by the aggrieved party filing a special
Leave Petition in this Court against the order
passed by the High Court. That places this Court
in a predicament because, without the benefit of
the reasoning of the High Court, it is difficult for
this Court to allow the bare order to be
implemented. The result inevitably is that the
operation of the order passed by the High Court
has to be stayed pending delivery of the reasoned
judgment.”
3. Further, much later but still almost two
decades ago, this Court in
Anil Rai v. State of
Bihar
­ 2001 (7) SCC 318 deemed it appropriate to
provide    some      guidelines   regarding     the
pronouncement of judgments, expecting them to
be followed by all concerned under the mandate of
this Court. It is not necessary to reproduce the
directions except to state that normally the
judgment is expected within two months of the
conclusion of the arguments, and on expiry of
three months any of the parties can file an
application in the High Court with prayer for early
judgment. If, for any reason, no judgment is
pronounced for six months, any of the parties is
entitled to move an application before the then
Chief Justice of the High Court with a prayer to
re­assign the case before another Bench for fresh
arguments.
4. The       aforementioned principle has been
forcefully    restated by this Court on several
occasions    including in
Zahira Habibulla H. Sheikh
& Ors. v.     State of Gujarat & Ors.
[AIR 2004 SC
6
3467 paras 80­82],
Mangat Ram v. State of
           Haryana
(2008) 7 SCC 96 paras 5­10] and most
           recently in Ajay Singh & Anr. Etc. v. State of
           Chhattisgarh & Anr.­ AIR 2017 SC 310.”

4.2   Despite the strong observations made by this Court as far

as back in the year 1984 and thereafter repeatedly reiterated,

still the practice of pronouncing only the operative portion of the

judgment without a reasoned judgment and to pass a reasoned

judgment subsequently has been continued. Such a practice of

pronouncing the final orders without a reasoned judgment has

to be stopped and discouraged.
4.3   For immediate reference the order passed in the present

case speaks for itself. The High Court heard the arguments on

30.03.2019 and passed only the following order on that day:
"Heard Sri V. M. Zaidi, Senior Advocate
           assisted by Sri M. J. Akhtar, learned counsel for
           the appellant in the Criminal Appeal No. 1083 of
           2012 and Sri Sunil Kumar, learned counsel for the
           appellant in connected Criminal Appeal No. 1178
           of 2012, Sri J. K. Upadhyay, learned A.G.A. for the
           State and Sri P. C. Srivastava, learned counsel for
           the informant.
We are making the operative order here and
           now. We will give reasons later.
Both the appeals are allowed. The impugned
           judgement and order dated 24.02.2012 passed by
           Additional District and ∙ Session Judge, T.E.C.P.,
7
Court No. 1, Azamgarh in S.T. No. 151 of 2009 is
          hereby set­aside.
Appellant Santosh Singh in Criminal Appeal
          No. 1083 of 2012 is on bail. He need not
          surrender. His bail bonds are cancelled and his
          sureties discharged.
Appellant Avdhesh Singh @ Chhunnu Singh
          in connected Criminal Appeal No. 1178 of 2012 is
          in jail. He shall be released forthwith unless he is
          wanted in some other case.
Both the appellants shall comply with the
          provisions of
Section 437
­A Cr.P. C. within one
          month from today.
There shall however, be no order as to costs."
4.4   From the record of proceedings it appears that the

reasoned judgment was pronounced and uploaded after a period

of almost five months. Therefore, applying the law
laid down by
this Court in the decisions referred to hereinabove, we set aside

the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court

without further entering into the merits of the case nor

expressing anything on merits in favour of either party.         We

remand the appeals to the High Court to decide the same afresh

in accordance with law and on its own merits. We request the

High Court to finally decide and dispose of the appeals at the

earliest and preferably within a period of six months from the
8
date of the receipt of the present order. However, it is observed

that during the pendency of the appeals before the High Court

the accused need not surrender and they may be treated to have

been released on bail and continued to be released on bail,

however subject to the ultimate outcome of the appeals before

the High Court. If the conviction is sustained the accused shall

surrender within a period of two weeks from the date of the

pronouncement of the judgment.
Present appeals are accordingly allowed to the aforesaid

extent.    Registry is directed to return the record of

proceedings of the case received to the High Court forthwith.
….…………………………….J.
                                     [M. R. Shah]




                                     …………………………………J
                                     [B.V. Nagarathna]


New Delhi,
April 19, 2022