[Cites
4
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Waqf Board, Rajasthan vs Jindal Saw Limited on 29 April, 2022
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Hemant Gupta
REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2788 OF 2022
                           (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 16196 OF 2021)


         WAQF BOARD, RAJASTHAN                                               .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                           VERSUS

         JINDAL SAW LIMITED & ORS.                                        .....RESPONDENT(S)


                                                       WITH

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2789 OF 2022
                           (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 17334 OF 2021)




                                                 JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.              The challenge in the present appeals is to an order dated

                         29.9.2021 passed by the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan

                         at Jodhpur, whereby the writ petition filed by respondent No. 1 1

                         was allowed directing the appellant and respondent Nos. 2 to 8

                         not to interfere with the action of the writ petitioner in removal of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
Date: 2022.04.29         the structure forming part of Khasra No. 6731 at Village Pur,
16:15:46 IST
Reason:
Bhilwara, Rajasthan.
1         For short, the ‘writ petitioner’
1
2.   The writ petitioner was granted lease of an area admeasuring

     1556.7817 hectares vide lease deed dated 8.12.2010 for the

     mining of Gold, Silver, Lead, Zinc, Copper, Iron, Cobalt, Nickle

     and associated minerals near Village Dhedwas, Tehsil and District

     Bhilwara, Rajasthan.
3.   It was pointed out that the Tehsildar, Bhilwara had submitted a

     report on 3.12.2010 after conducting an inquiry along with Rev-

     enue Record Super Impose Site Plan in respect of Land Numbers,

     admeasuring 142-15 bigha of village Samodi; Land Numbers ad-

     measuring 33-09 bigha of village Dariba; Land Numbers admea-

     suring 40-03 bigha of village Pansal; Land Numbers admeasuring

     127-02 bigha of village Malola; Land Numbers admeasuring 241-

     14 bigha of village Dhulkheda; Land Numbers admeasuring 748-

     02 bighas of village Pur after obtaining report from the con-

     cerned Patwaris. Such report shows that Land Number 897 of vil-

     lage Samodi is a Devsthan i.e. place of worship. It was commu-

     nicated that if the mining work is carried out without causing

     harm to Devsthan and not using the harmful explosives, then

     there is no objection in carrying out mining work in that survey

     number. In the detailed report, certain survey numbers in differ-

     ent villages such as Samodi, Dariba, Pansal, Malola are men-

     tioned wherein there was a proposal not to grant permission and
2
also certain other survey numbers wherein permission was pro-
posed to be given. In Survey Nos. 543 (6 Bigha 11 Biswa), 498

     Min. (8 Bigha 6 Biswa) and 42 (3 Biswa) of Malola Village, there

     was a proposal not to grant permission in view of barren land

     near religious place. Similarly, in Dhulkheda Village, the proposal

     to undertake mining was not granted in Survey Nos. 219 and 220

     on account of religious place and in Survey No. 365 for the rea-

     son of graveyard. However, in respect of the area in question in

     Village Pur, the mining was proposed to be carried out in Land

     Survey No. 235. The permission was proposed to be granted in

     respect of Survey No. 6731 measuring 158 Bigha 12 Biswa. It

     was thus proposed that permission is not to be granted in total of

     213 Bigha 11 Biswa, for the mining work whereas in 325 Bigha

     19 Biswa, permission was to be granted. It is thereafter that the

     lease was executed on 8.12.2010 by the State in favor of the writ

     petitioner.
4.   The Survey Commissioner, Waqf of the State of Rajasthan, con-
ducted survey of the waqf properties in the year 1963. In the

     said survey, a structure was found named as ‘Tiranga Ki Qalan-

     dari Masjid’ in the survey report. On the basis of said Survey re-

     port, a notification was published on 23.9.1965 in which ‘Qalan-

     dari Masjid of Tiranga’ located at village Pur was notified as wakf.

     Later, on the basis of the said Gazette Notification, the ‘Tiranga
3
Ki Qalandari Masjid’ was entered in the waqf register as admea-
suring 12x9=108. Another survey was conducted in village Pur,

        Bhilwara in accordance with the
Waqf Act, 1995
2. The ‘Qalandari

        Masjid Tiranga’ was found in existence in Survey Number 931 as

        per the report dated 15.1.2002. Part III (b) of the said survey re-

        port gives dimension of the mosque as 25x25x25x25, bounded

        on all sides by Hills.
5.      It may be stated that Survey No. 931 is not included in the list of

        survey numbers of which lease was granted. There is no refer-

        ence to Survey No. 931 as to whether lease is to be granted or

        not to be granted for the same.
6.      It appears that the Anjuman Committee addressed a letter to the

        Chairman of the appellant-Board on 17.4.2012 to the effect that

        on Tiranga Hill in Village Pur, there is a wall and Chabutrah (plat-

        form) on so-called Qalandari Masjid where in olden times labor-

        ers used to offer prayers.    The elders had informed that they

        have not seen anybody praying Namaaz nor there is access to

        water and stairs to reach the platform. The office of the appel-

        lant responded on 18.4.2012 that the area consisting of the plat-

        form over the Tiranga Hill should be saved from mining. The said

        letters, when translated, read thus:-
“17.4.2012


2    For short, the ‘Act’
4
“It is submitted that there is a wall and delipidated
         platforms/chabutrah at the so-called Qalandari Masjid situated at
         Tiranga Hills where earlier some laborers used to offer prayers. By
         enquiring from the elderly people, it came to our knowledge that
         no one was seen offering prayer/namaz at such place. Further,
         neither there is any water there, nor there are stairs.
The miners informed that due to mining, the wall and chabutrah,
         which are already in a dilapidated condition, could fall.

         When we talked about this to the miners present there, then they
         respectfully agreed to reach to a settlement. Hence, kindly oblige
         us by issuing directions/guidance to settle the issue.”



         18.4.2012

         “Subject- Relating to taking steps for the chabutara/platform as
         per the Shariyat.
In reference to your letter dated 17 April 2012.



         In relation to the abovesaid letter, it is stated that there is a
         chabutara/dilapidated platform at the Tiranga Hill situated at Vil-
         lage Pur which is sought to be protected from mining activities
         and there have been talks of arriving at a settlement.

         Hence, considering the present circumstances in this context as
         well as keeping in mind the benefit of Wakf, take the requisite de-
         cisions at your end and also inform the Wakf Board about the
         same. Original is attached herewith.”
7.   On 23.4.2012, the Chairman of the appellant-Board communi-
cated to the Collector and to the Superintendent of Police that

     the communication dated 18.4.2012 is being misinterpreted as

     the purpose was to safeguard the interest of the waqf but the

     members of the Anjuman Committee have acted for personal

     gain and, therefore, action should be taken. In response to the

     said letter, the District Magistrate communicated that an FIR has
5
been registered and a sum of Rs.65 lakhs has been recovered. It

     was in this background, respondent No. 1 herein filed a writ peti-

     tion before the High Court.
8.   The High Court constituted an Expert Committee to examine the

     following two questions:
“(i) As to whether the structure existing within the mining
           lease area of the Petitioner was a mosque or structure
           which can be removed for the purpose of carrying out
           lease hold activities within the said area.
(ii) The Committee shall also ascertain as to whether any
           illegal mining activity within the mining lease area of the
           petitioner and if so whether the same was carried out by
           the petitioner-company or any other entity.”
9.   It has come on record that such Committee was chaired by Shri

     R.K. Sinha, Controller General (Retd.) of India Bureau of Mines

     along with Shri O.P. Kabra, nominee of the Secretary Mines, De-

     partment of Mines and Geology, Rajasthan and Smt. Nandini

     Bhattacharya Sahu, Regional Director (West), Archaeological

     Survey of India. Shri O.P. Kabra, nominee of the Secretary Mines

     was later substituted by Shri A.K. Nandwana, Superintending

     Mining Engineer, Bhilwara. The Committee submitted its report

     on 10.1.2021, reporting that the dilapidated structure existing at

     Khasra No. 6731 is neither a mosque nor any structure with ar-

     chaeological or historical relevance. Shri A.K. Nandwana, one of
6
the members had partially dissented with the report by a hand-
written note stating that steps should be taken to stop the illegal

     mining.
10. Learned counsel for the appellant argued that such Expert

     Committee constituted had no representative of the appellant

     and the appellant was not associated with the report so

     submitted, therefore, the report cannot be made basis of

     rejecting the structure on the Hill as not a religious structure. It

     was contended that whether the structure is a waqf or not has to

     be decided by the Waqf Tribunal in terms of
Section 83
of the Act

     and not in a writ petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of

     India.
11. Dr. Manish Singhvi, learned senior advocate for the State

     supplemented the arguments raised to contend that in terms of

     the lease dated 8.12.2010, the decision as to whether the place

     is a public ground over which the mining activity can be carried

     out has to be determined by the State Government. The State

     Government has determined that mining lease is not permissible

     over Survey No. 6731. The relevant conditions read as under:
“No building etc. upon certain places:-
1. No building or thing shall be erected, set up or placed
              and no surface operations shall be carried on in or upon
              any public pleasure ground, burning or burial ground or
              place held sacred by any class of persons or any house or
              villages site, public road or other place which the State
7
Government may determine as public ground nor in such
           a manner as to injure or prejudicially effect any buildings
           works property or rights of other persons and no land will
           be used for surface operations which is already occupied
           by persons other than the State Government for works or
           purposes not included in this lease. The lessee/lessees
           shall not also interfere with any right of way well or talk.”
12. On the other hand, Mr. Ranjit Kumar and Mr. C.S. Vaidyanathan,

     learned senior counsels appearing for the writ petitioner

     contended that as per the detailed report submitted by the

     Tehsildar, on the basis of which permission to lease was granted,

     Survey No. 931 over which the said structure is found in the

     survey report was not part of the lease. Survey No. 6731

     measuring 158 Bigha 12 Biswa was the one over which the writ

     petitioner was granted permission to do the mining work but

     there is no document or report to show that any part of Survey

     No. 6731 was ever declared to be a religious structure within the

     meaning of waqf as defined under the Act. The learned counsel

     for the parties furnished the photocopies of the original

     documents on the basis of which reliance was placed by the

     appellant that the Tiranga Qalandari Masjid in Village Pur is a

     mosque and, therefore, no mining activity can be undertaken.
13. The first document so produced is undated but the subject shows

     that it is in respect of Auqaf to be registered in Ajmer and Sunel

     Regions of the State till 5.1.1959 and in the rest of Rajasthan by
8
1.4.1955.   A reading of the said report shows that it does not

     have any survey number, though the value of waqf was assessed

     at Rs.900/- and the purpose of use was for Namaaz. Thereafter,

     a notification was published on 23.9.1965 declaring Qalandari

     Masjid of Tiranga as the waqf property as the nature and object

     are pious, religious and for offering prayers. The appellant has

     produced an extract from its register pointing out that 12 x 9

     measuring 108 is Tiranga Ki Qalandari Masjid. Another document

     produced by the appellant is the survey report dated 15.1.2002

     to the effect that the Qalandari Masjid on Tiranga Hill is situated

     in Survey No. 931.
14. With this factual background, Mr. Ranjit Kumar and Mr. C.S.

     Vaidyanathan have argued that the claim of the appellant is

     wholly untenable as at no point of time, any revenue record

     shows any religious structure on the land comprising in Survey

     No. 6731.     In fact, the religious structure is said to be in

     existence over Survey No. 931. Still further, the record of the

     appellant shows that the area of the religious structure is 108

     feet whereas in the second survey report, the area is shown to

     be 525 feet. Hence, there is a discrepancy about the area over

     which the religious structure is in existence.
15. It has also been contended that a perusal of the photographs
9
shows that the structure is totally dilapidated without any roof

        and in fact a wall and some broken derelict platform exist at the

        spot.     The area is surrounded by vegetation and there is also

        nothing to suggest that the structure was ever used for offering

        prayers (Namaaz) as neither the area is accessible, nor there is

        any facility of Wazoo3, which is stated to be an essential step

        before offering prayer.             The experts from the Archaeological

        Department have reported that the structure has no historical or

        archaeological importance.                It is further contended that the

        Tehsildar, before the possession was delivered, had given an

        extensive report of each of the structure existing on the land

        proposed to be given.                 The lands for graveyard and other

        religious     structures       have      been      excluded       from     the    lease.

        Therefore, the act of identification carried out years before

        raising of the dispute done by the revenue officials in the course

        of their official duties carry presumption of correctness. It shows

        that the structure had no religious value.
16. We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length and find

        no merit in the appeals. The Qalandari Masjid on Tiranga Hill as

        per the document produced by the appellant is located on

        Survey No. 931. There is no assertion that the Survey No. 931 is

        changed as Survey No. 6731. In fact, the old number of Survey

3   The practice of ritual purification i.e., to wash face, hands, arms and feet before daily
    prayer.
10
No. 6731 is 9646 or may be some other number but positively

     not the survey number 931.           Therefore, the claim of the

     appellant is on a different portion of land and not the land leased

     to the writ petitioner. There is discrepancy in the total area of the

     Masjid in the two documents, i.e., the extract produced by the

     appellant from the register and the second survey report. The

     letter dated 17.4.2012 by the Anjuman Committee is based upon

     hearsay and is not of any binding value.
17. Still further, there is no evidence at any given point of time that

     the structure was being used as a mosque.               There is no

     allegation or proof of either of dedication or user or grant which

     can be termed as a waqf within the meaning of the Act.
Section

     3 (r)
of the Act reads thus:-
“[(r) “waqf” means the permanent dedication by any
              person, of any movable or immovable property for any
              purpose recognised by the Muslim law as pious, religious
              or charitable and includes—
(i) a waqf by user but such waqf shall not cease to be a
              waqf by reason only of the user having ceased
              irrespective of the period of such cesser;
(ii) a Shamlat Patti, Shamlat Deh, Jumla Malkkan or by
              any other name entered in a revenue record;
(iii) xxx                       xxx”
18. The report of the experts is relevant only to the extent that the

     structure has no archaeological or historical importance. In the

     absence of any proof of dedication or user, a dilapidated wall or

     a platform cannot be conferred a status of a religious place for
11
the purpose of offering prayers/Namaaz.
19. The stand of the State Government that they have identified it to

     be a religious structure comprising in Khasra No. 6731 has not

     been produced on record. There is nothing on record that such

     decision if any, was arrived at after associating the writ

     petitioner. It is always open to the State as lessor to exercise the

     powers conferred in it by the lease deed after complying the

     principles of natural justice and on good and sufficient grounds.
20. In view of the above, we do not find any merit in the present

     appeals. Consequently, the appeals are dismissed.
.............................................J.
                                                         (HEMANT GUPTA)




                                    .............................................J.
                                              (V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 29, 2022.
12