[Cites
19
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of West Bengal vs Gitashree Dutta (Dey) on 20 April, 2022
Author:
S. Abdul Nazeer
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
S. Abdul Nazeer
REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4254 OF 2022
                              (Arising out of S.L.P. (C.) No. 30438 of 2019)


          THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ORS.                         …APPELLANT(S)


                                                VERSUS


          GITASHREE DUTTA (DEY)                                  …RESPONDENT(S)




                                            JUDGMENT
S. ABDUL NAZEER, J.
Leave granted.
2.             This appeal is directed against the judgment dated 06.03.2019

          in M.A.T No.1341 of 2018 whereby the Division Bench of the High

          Court of Calcutta has allowed the appeal and set aside the order of

          the learned Single Judge in Writ Petition No. 661(W) of 2017. The
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Charanjeet kaur
question for consideration in this appeal is whether the State of
Date: 2022.05.24
12:50:12 IST
Reason:
West Bengal was justified in cancelling the declaration of FPS (Fair
1
Price Shop) vacancies in view of the implementation of
National

Food Security Act, 2013
(for short ‘2013 Act’).
3.   Shorn of details, by a Gazette Notification dated 30.01.2014,

the vacancy for FPS dealership was declared in the District of

Alipurduar.   The respondent participated in the selection process

and was recommended as a first priority candidate in respect of the

said vacancy. However, no final order appointing the respondent

was issued by the State Authority. While the application of the

respondent was pending, a notification dated 17.08.2015 was

issued by the Food and Supplies Department of the State of West

Bengal cancelling the declaration of vacancies.   This notification

was issued in the light of implementation of the 2013 Act, which is

as under:
“In view of the implementation of the National Food Secu­
     rity Act, 2013 in the State, the Governor is pleased to
     cancel with immediate effect the FPS vacancies notified
     vide Memo. Nos. 2480/FS/O/Sectt./CSS/7S­16/2013
     dated 26.08.2013, 3062­FS/Sectt/Food/4M­04/2013
     dated    06.11.2013,    152­FS/Sectt/Food/4M­16/2013
     dated    20.01.2014,    540­FS/Sectt/Food/4M­16/2013
     dated    04.03.2014    and    G­295/FS/Sectt/Food/6F­
     19/2009 dated 08.01.2015. No further action will be
     taken in connection with applications received against
     such vacancies.”
2
4.   Being aggrieved by the cancellation of declaration of vacancies,

the respondent moved an application under
Article 226
of the

Constitution before the High Court of Calcutta inter alia praying for

quashing of the Notification dated 17.08.2015. The State of West

Bengal contested the writ petition by filing affidavit in opposition

and the said writ petition was dismissed by the learned Single

Judge. The said judgment of the learned Single Judge was assailed

by the respondent before the Division bench of the Calcutta High

Court. This intra Court appeal along with three other matters were

taken up by the Division Bench simultaneously and decided finally

by a judgment dated 06.03.2019.          The Division Bench while

deciding the said appeals held that the State of West Bengal has

failed to justify the decision to recall the vacancies and that it has

acted in an arbitrary and unreasonable manner, and hence,

quashed the Notification dated 17.08.2015. As noticed above, the

State of West Bengal and its functionaries have challenged the

legality and correctness of the said judgment in this appeal.
5.   We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
3
6.   The contention of the learned counsel for the appellants is that

the Notification dated 17.08.2015 was issued in public interest in

view of the 2013 Act. Therefore, the plea of legitimate expectation of

the respondent is without any basis. It is argued that there is no

estoppel against the statute. It is further argued that the Division

Bench failed to appreciate that due to the implementation of the

2013 Act, the number of beneficiaries has been reduced in the State

at that time after mapping of ration card holders, thus it was no

more viable to create or go through with the process of filling up of

vacancies. It is urged that the selection shown pursuant to the

Notice dated 30.01.2014 does not vest the respondent with any

justiciable right to agitate before the Writ Court.
7.   However, the learned counsel for the respondent while

supporting the judgment of the Division Bench submits that the

respondent had participated in the selection process and became

successful thereat. The respondent altered the material position to

her prejudice, on the basis of the directions issued by the State in

terms of the said notification. The justification for cancellation given

in the impugned notification dated 17.08.2015 is the coming into

effect of the 2013 Act.     The said Act was in force prior to the
4
notification dated 30.01.2014.        Therefore, the Authorities are

deemed to have taken into consideration the parameters laid down

in the 2013 Act while declaring vacancy on 30.01.2014. At this

stage, the Authorities cannot resile from their declared position.
8.    We have carefully considered the submission of the learned

counsel made at the bar and perused the materials placed on

record.
9.    The respondent has contended that she has legitimate

expectation to be treated fairly even if she may not have a vested

right in getting the appointment. It is the duty and the obligation of

the State to act fairly and not arbitrarily. A decision not to fill up

the vacancies must be bona fide and for justifiable and appropriate

reasons.
10.   The doctrine of “legitimate expectation” has been developed in

the context of principles of natural justice. ‘Legitimate expectation’

is a public law right whereas ‘promissory estoppel’ is a private law

right. The doctrine of legitimate expectation in public law is based

on the principle of fairness and non­arbitrariness in governmental

actions.
5
11.   However, the doctrine of legitimate expectation ordinarily

would not have any application when the legislature has enacted

the statute. Further, the legitimate expectation cannot prevail over

a policy introduced by the Government, which does not suffer from

any perversity, unfairness or unreasonableness or which does not

violate any fundamental or other enforceable rights vested in the

respondent. When the decision of public body is in conformity with

law or is in public interest, the plea of legitimate expectation cannot

be sustained.
In
Punjab Communications Ltd. v. Union of India

and Ors.1
this Court held that policy decision creating the

legitimate expectation which is normally binding on the decision

maker, can be changed by the decision maker in overriding public

interest. It was held as under:
“37. The above survey of cases shows that the doc­
      trine of legitimate expectation in the substantive
      sense has been accepted as part of our law and that
      the decision­maker can normally be compelled to
      give effect to his representation in regard to the ex­
      pectation based on previous practice or past con­
      duct unless some overriding public interest comes
      in the way…….”



1 1999 (4) SCC 727
6
12.
In
Sethi Auto Service Station and Another v. Delhi

Development Authority and Others2
, this Court after referring to

various precedents observed as under:
“32. An examination of the aforenoted few decisions
      shows that the golden thread running through all
      these decisions is that a case for applicability of the
      doctrine of legitimate expectation, now accepted in
      the subjective sense as part of our legal jurispru­
      dence, arises when an administrative body by rea­
      son of a representation or by past practice or con­
      duct aroused an expectation which it would be
      within its powers to fulfil unless some overriding
      public interest comes in the way. However, a person
      who bases his claim on the doctrine of legitimate ex­
      pectation, in the first instance, has to satisfy that he
      has relied on the said representation and the denial
      of that expectation has worked to his detriment. The
      Court could interfere only if the decision taken by
      the authority was found to be arbitrary, unreason­
      able or in gross abuse of power or in violation of
      principles of natural justice and not taken in public
      interest. But a claim based on mere legitimate ex­
      pectation without anything more cannot ipso facto
      give a right to invoke these principles.
33. It is well settled that the concept of legitimate
      expectation has no role to play where the State ac­
      tion is as a public policy or in the public interest
      unless the action taken amounts to an abuse of
      power. The court must not usurp the discretion of
      the public authority which is empowered to take the
      decisions under law and the court is expected to ap­
      ply an objective standard which leaves to the decid­
      ing authority the full range of choice which the leg­
      islature is presumed to have intended. Even in a
2 (2009) 1 SCC 180
7
case where the decision is left entirely to the discre­
      tion of the deciding authority without any such legal
      bounds and if the decision is taken fairly and objec­
      tively, the court will not interfere on the ground of
      procedural fairness to a person whose interest
      based on legitimate expectation might be affected.
Therefore, a legitimate expectation can at the most
      be one of the grounds which may give rise to judi­
      cial review but the granting of relief is very much
      limited. [Vide:
Union of India v. Hindustan Devel­
opment Corporation – (1993) 3 SCC 499]”
13.
In
Union of India v. Lt. Col
. P.K. Choudhary3, this Court

held that the legitimate expectation, as an argument, cannot prevail

over the policy introduced by the Government which does not suffer

from any perversity, unfairness or unreasonableness or which does

not violate any fundamental or other enforceable rights vested in

the respondents.
14.   There is a necessary inter­play between the plea of legitimate

expectation and
Article 14.
For a decision to be non­arbitrary, the

reasonable/legitimate expectations of the claimant have to be

considered.    However, to decide whether the expectation of the

claimant is reasonable or legitimate in the context, is a question of

fact in each case.      Whenever the question arises, it is to be

determined not according to the claimant’s perception but in larger
3 2016 (4) SCC 236
8
public interest wherein other more important considerations may

outweigh    what    would   otherwise   have   been   the     legitimate

expectation of the claimant. In Food Corporation of India v. M/s

Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries4, this Court has pointed out as

under:
“8. The mere reasonable or legitimate expectation of
     a citizen, in such a situation, may not by itself be a
     distinct enforceable right, but failure to consider
     and give due weight to it may render the decision
     arbitrary, and this is how the requirement of due
     consideration of a legitimate expectation forms part
     of the principle of non­arbitrariness, a necessary
     concomitant of the rule of law. Every legitimate ex­
     pectation is a relevant factor requiring due consider­
     ation in a fair decision­making process. Whether the
     expectation of the claimant is reasonable or legiti­
     mate in the context is a question of fact in each
     case. Whenever the question arises, it is to be deter­
     mined not according to the claimant’s perception
     but in larger public interest wherein other more im­
     portant considerations may outweigh what would
     otherwise have been the legitimate expectation of
     the claimant. A bona fide decision of the public au­
     thority reached in this manner would satisfy the re­
     quirement of non­arbitrariness and withstand judi­
     cial scrutiny. The doctrine of legitimate expectation
     gets assimilated in the rule of law and operates in
     our legal system in this manner and to this extent.”
4 (1993) 1 SCC 71
9
15.    Bearing in mind the above legal principles, let us examine the

present case. The 2013 Act was enacted to provide for food and

nutritional security in human life cycle approach, by ensuring

access to adequate quantity of quality food at affordable prices to

people to live a life with dignity and for matters connected therewith

or incidental thereto. It is beneficial to refer to the ‘Introduction’ to

the 2013 Act in order to understand the scope and purpose of the

Act:
“INTRODUCTION
               Eradicating extreme poverty and hunger is one of
       the goals under the Millennium Development Goals of the
       United Nations.     It casts responsibilities on all State
       parties to recognize the right of everyone to adequate
       food.     Food security means availability of sufficient
       foodgrains to meet the domestic demand as well as
       access, at the individual level, to adequate quantities of
       food at affordable prices.
Providing adequate food has always been focus of
       the Government’s planning and policy.        However, this
       legislation marks a paradigm shift in addressing the
       problem of food security from the current welfare
       approach to a right based approach.        This legislation
       would confer legal rights on eligible beneficiaries to
10
receive   entitled   quantities    of   foodgrains   at   highly
      subsidized prices. Besides, it also confers legal rights on
      women and children and other special groups such as
      destitute, homeless, disaster and emergency affected
      persons and persons living in starvation to receive meal
      free of charge or at affordable price.”
16.   The ‘Statement of Objects and Reasons’ of 2013 Act, inter alia,

states as follows:
“(i) progressively undertake necessary reforms
      by the Central and State Governments in the
      Targeted Public Distribution System in consonance
      with the role envisaged for them in the proposed
      legislation.”
17.
Section 3
of the 2013 Act provides for the right to receive

foodgrains at subsidized prices and
Section 4
provides for

nutritional support to pregnant women and lactating mothers.

Similarly,
Section 5
provides for the nutritional support to the

children.
Section 6
provides for prevention and management of

child malnutrition.
18.
Section 12
reposes a duty on the State to progressively

undertake reforms necessary in the Targeted Public Distribution
11
System and the same should be in consonance with the Act. The

same is reproduced as under:
“12. (1) The Central and State Governments shall
     endeavour to progressively undertake necessary reforms
     in the Targeted Public Distribution System in
     consonance with the role envisaged for them in this Act.”


     Further under
Section 12(2)(e)
, the Act envisages power of the

State to undertake various steps in furtherance to reform the

system, which shall, inter alia, include that the state can give

preference to any public bodies/panchayats/SHGs/cooperative

societies etc. The same has been reproduced herein :­


     “12. (2) The reforms shall, inter alia, include—
(e) preference to public institutions or public bodies such
     as Panchayats, self­help groups, co­operatives, in
     licensing of fair price shops and management of fair price
     shops by women or their collectives;”



     Sub­section (23) of
Section 2
defines the expression “Targeted
Public Distribution System” is as under:
“Targeted Public Distribution System” means the system
     for distribution of essential commodities to the ration
     card holders through fair price shops”.
12
19.   It is clear from the different provisions of the 2013 Act that

there is a paradigm shift in addressing the problem of food security

from the current welfare approach to a right based approach.
The

Act
confers legal right on the eligible beneficiaries to get the

essential commodities through fair price shops at a highly

subsidized price.
The Act
also envisages reforms necessary for

distribution of essential commodities to the ration card holders.
20.   This Court in
Swaraj Abhiyan v. Union of India & Ors.
5 has
held that the 2013 Act is a social welfare legislation and its
provisions are mandatory. It is held thus:
“42. The provisions in the NFS Act mentioned
      above are mandatory and yet almost four years
      down the line they have not been fully implemented
      by some States.
XXXXX
44. These questions have been troubling us since
      this matter was listed on 24­10­2016 subsequent to
      our order dated 13­5­2016 in
Swaraj Abhiyan
      (II) [Swaraj Abhiyan (2) v. Union of India
, (2016) 7
      SCC 498 : (2016) 7 SCC 534 : AIR 2016 SC 2953] .
We had expected the State Governments concerned
      to implement the provisions of the NFS Act with all
      due seriousness since it is a social welfare legisla­
      tion enacted by Parliament.”
21.   In the present case, upon scrutiny, it was found that

declaration of vacancies vide notification dated 30.01.2014 was not
5 (2018) 12 SCC 170
13
in conformity with the 2013 Act and thus, cancellation of the said

notification was necessary for the implementation of the provisions

of the said Act. In view of above, the plea of legitimate expectation

of the respondent is without having any basis.
22.   We are also of the view that, in the instant case, no promise of

any kind was made to continue the existing policy on the part of the

State. Furthermore, Clause 4 of the Conditions of the Notification

dated 30.01.2014, calling for vacancies, provided that the State

could reject applications without ascertaining any reasons.       The

agency which initiated the selection process is entitled to recall it

upon reasonable grounds. Participation in the selection process or

being a selected candidate does not vest such candidate with the

right to direct the Authorities to give him appointment.      Having

regard to the above, it cannot be said that the State has acted with

material irregularity in issuing the impugned notification dated

17.08.2015.
23.   This Court in
Sarkari Sasta Anaj Vikreta Sangh v. State of

M.P.6
has held that no person can claim a right to run a fair price

shop as an agent of the government and he could only have a right

6 (1981) 4 SCC 471
14
to be considered for appointment.       In this context, this Court

observed as follows:
“11. ……………… No one could claim a right to run
           a fair price shop as an agent of the Government. All
           that he could claim was a right to be considered to
           be appointment to run a fair price shop. If the
           Government took a policy decision to prefer
           cooperative societies for appointment as their
           agents to run fair price shops, in the light of the
           frustrating and unfortunate experience gathered in
           the last two decades, we do not see how we can
           possibly hold that there was any discrimination.”
24.   The appellant has contended that the State Government was

reposed with a responsibility for implementing the 2013 Act which,

inter alia, entrusted a responsibility to reform the existing Targeted

Distribution System. The respondent in an unfinalized selection

process has no vested right in his favour to seek continuation of the

notified vacancies. Hence, by recalling the vacancy notification, the

State endeavored to enforce the statute and that there can be no

estoppel against a statute.
25.   It is trite law that there can be no estoppel against a statute.
This Court has settled this principle in a catena of judgments,
15
starting as early as 1955. A Constitution Bench of this Court in
Thakur Amar Singhji v. State of Rajasthan7
held as follows:
“….We are unable on these facts to see any basis for
      a plea of estoppel. The letter dated 28.11.1953 was
      not addressed to the petitioner; nor does it amount
      to any assurance or undertaking not to resume the
      jagir. And even if such assurance had been given, it
      would certainly not have been binding on the
      Government, because its powers of resumption are
      regulated by the statute, and must be exercised in
      accordance with its provisions.
The Act
confers no
      authority on the Government to grant exemption
      from resumption, and an undertaking not to resume
      will be invalid, and there can be no estoppel against
      a statue”.
26.   A Constitution of Bench of this Court in Electronics Corpn.
of
India Ltd. v. Secy. Revenue Deptt., Govt. of A.P.
8 also upheld

this principle and held as follows:
“21. There are two short answers to this contention.
      In the first place, there can be no estoppel against a
      statute…….”
27.   This Court in A.P. Dairy Development Corpn. Federation v.
B Narasimha Reddy9, has held that when the actions of the
7 (1955) 2 SCR 303

8 (1999) 4 SCC 458

9 (2011) 9 SCC 286
16
government are not in conformity with law, the doctrine of estoppel

would not apply. This Court observed:
“40.….The State, being a continuing body can be
      stopped from changing its stand in a given case, but
      where after holding enquiry it came to the conclu­
      sion that action was not in conformity with law, the
      doctrine of estoppel would not apply.”
28.   It is clear that this Court in several judgments has also upheld

that the plea of promissory estoppel would stand negated when the

mandate of a statute is followed. This Court in A.P. Pollution Con­

trol
Board II v. Prof. M.V. Nayudu
& ors.10, held as under:
“69. The learned Appellate Authority erred in
      thinking that because of the approval of plan by the
      Panchayat, or conversion of land use by the
      Collector or grant of letter of intent by the Central
      Government, a case for applying principle of
      “promissory estoppel” applied to the facts of this
      case.   There could be no estoppel against the
      statute….”
29.   In the instant case, we have already noticed that the

appellants were reposed with a responsibility of implementing the

mandate of the 2013 Act, and more importantly, to bring about

reforms in the existing Public Distribution System as stipulated

under
Section 12
of the said Act. The respondent herein being a
10 (2001) 2 SCC 62
17
mere applicant in an un­finalised selection process, has no vested

right in his favour to seek continuation of the notified vacancies,

when    by   recalling   the   vacancy   notification,   the   appellants

endeavored to enforce the statute. Moreover, as discussed above,

there can be no estoppel against a statute. Even going by the

observations of the Division Bench in the impugned judgment, that

the State was aware of the 2013 Act while issuing the 30.01.2014

vacancy notification, the said notification cannot be sustained, be­

ing contrary to the mandate of the
National Food Security Act,

2013
, more importantly of
Section 12
thereof as held in
A.P. Dairy

Development Corpn. Federation
(supra).
30.   There is also no merit in the contention of the respondent that

the Authorities have taken into consideration the parameters
laid

down in
2013 Act while declaring the vacancies on 30.01.2014.

There is nothing on record to suggest that when the vacancies were

declared on 30.01.2014, the Authorities kept in mind the provision

of the 2013 Act. The 2013 Act came into effect on 10.09.2013. The

vacancy notice is dated 30.01.2014. The vacancy notice does not

refer to the provisions of 2013 Act.        In our view, it would be
18
improper to infer that the provisions of 2013 Act were kept in mind

while issuing vacancy notice dated 30.01.2014.       The respondent

has not made out a case of arbitrariness or unreasonableness or

mala fide. In our view, the Division Bench ought to have held that

the notification dated 17.08.2015 was issued to keep the public

distribution system in tune with the mandate of 2013 Act, more

specifically
Section 12
which provides for reform in the public

distribution system.
31.   Resultantly, the appeal succeeds and it is accordingly allowed.

The judgment of the Division Bench impugned herein is set aside

and the judgment of the learned Single Judge is restored. Parties

are directed to bear their respective costs.
32.   All pending applications also stand disposed of.
…………………………………J.
                                        (S. ABDUL NAZEER)



                                       …………………………………J.
                                        (VIKRAM NATH)
New Delhi;
April 20, 2022.
19
NON­REPORTABLE


            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4255 OF 2022
        (Arising out of S.L.P. (C.) No. 30439 of 2019)


THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ORS.             …APPELLANT(S)

                          VERSUS

PRADIP GUHA                                 …RESPONDENT(S)
                            WITH

              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4257 OF 2022
         (Arising out of S.L.P. (C.) No. 740 of 2020)

THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ORS.             …APPELLANT(S)

                          VERSUS

KAMAL SARKAR                                …RESPONDENT(S)
                            WITH

              CIVIL APPEAL NO.4256 OF 2022
         (Arising out of S.L.P. (C.) No. 739 of 2020)

THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ORS.             …APPELLANT(S)

                          VERSUS

ASIM SARKAR                                 …RESPONDENT(S)
1
ORDER

      Leave granted.
(2)   In terms of the order passed by this Court in Civil Appeal

No. 4254 of 2022 (Arising out of SLP(C)No.30438 of 2019)

dated 20th April, 2022, these appeals are also allowed and the

judgment(s) of the Division Bench impugned herein is set aside

and the judgment(s) of the learned Single Judge dated

24.08.2018 is restored. Parties are directed to bear their

respective costs.
All pending applications also stand disposed of.
…………………………………J.
                                     (S. ABDUL NAZEER)



                                    …………………………………J.
                                     (VIKRAM NATH)
New Delhi;
April 20, 2022.
2