[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Milan Rana vs Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi on 5 April, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.2722 OF 2022
                                       (Arising out of SLP (C) No.1076 of 2021)



          MILAN RANA                                                                    Appellant
                                                       VERSUS


          GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI & ORS.                                                  Respondents



                                                        ORDER
1.              Leave granted.
2.              This appeal challenges the judgment and order dated 13.05.2019 passed by

          the High Court1 in LPA No.329 of 2019.
3.              We need not set-out the factual details which have given rise to the instant

          appeal as the controversy in the matter is quite limited and the only issue is whether

          the appellant can claim parity with the case of one Harbhajan Kaur.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by Dr.
Mukesh Nasa
Date: 2022.04.07
4.
17:48:45 IST
Reason:                   In Writ Petition (Civil) No.1053 of 2001 initiated by said Harbhajan Kaur,

          following order was passed by the High Court on 05.04.2010:
1 The High Court of Delhi at New Delhi
            “A writ is therefore issued to the respondents to regularize the
            appointment of the petition as PET in Central Academy Senior
            Secondary School, Sector-13, R.K. Puram, New Delhi w.e.f. 15"
July, 2001 and to pay to her within six weeks hereof the arrears of
            wages/emoluments to which she would be so entitled as a PET
            and to, for all other aspects/benefits, also treat her as in the
            regular employment of the school w.e.f. 15" July, 2001.
            Considering the fact that the Supreme Court has in the past also
            deprecated the practice of such ad-hoc appointment of teachers
            and notwithstanding the same the respondents continued to
            indulge in the same practice and also contested the present
            petition, the respondents are also burdened with costs of
            Rs.10,000/of this petition, payable to the petitioner.”
5.    The appeal arising therefrom was dismissed by the Division Bench and finally

the Special Leave Petition arising from the dismissal of the appeal by the Division

Bench, was also rejected by this Court.
6.    The directions issued in the case of Harbhajan Kaur thus attained finality.
7.     It is accepted that said Harbhajan Kaur was granted full benefits in terms of

said directions. She was not only treated to be in regular employment with effect

from 15.07.2001 but all the monetary benefit including arrears of wages and

emoluments were granted to her.
8.    Though the appellant stands on similar footing as said Harbhajan Kaur, her

petition claiming identical relief was dismissed by the Single Judge of the High

Court vide order dated 24.03.2015 passed in Writ Petition (Civil) No.1909 of 2002.
9.    In appeal arising therefrom, the Division Bench of the High Court allowed the

appellant to withdraw the original writ petition in view of certain circulars, with

which we need not burden the instant order. Suffice it to say that the subsequent

challenge raised by the appellant in the second round found favour with the High

Court and she was granted the relief of regularization with all consequential benefits

but the benefit was restricted from the date of filing of the second writ petition. Said

Order of the Division Bench of the High Court is now under challenge.
10.   The entitlement of the appellant to the relief of regularization and all

consequential benefits is not disputed by the respondent.
11.   Having considered the facts and circumstances on record and the rival

submissions, in our view, the appellant is entitled to the benefits as were granted to

said Harbhajan Kaur and there was no occasion to limit the operation of such

‘benefits with effect from the day of filing of the second writ petition.
12.   The facts on record indicate that Harbhajan Kaur was granted benefit from the

beginning of the Academic Session when she had filed the writ petition. Applying

the same analogy, in our view, the appellant is entitled to the benefit of regularization

and all other consequential benefits from the beginning of Academic Session of 2002

when her initial writ petition was filed.
13.   Ordered accordingly.
14.   The order shall be implemented within eight weeks from today and the arrears

shall be paid to the appellant within two weeks from thereafter.
15.   With these observations, the appeal is allowed, without any order as to costs.
………………………….J.
                                                          (UDAY UMESH LALIT)



                                                         …………………………J.
                                                          (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)



                                                   …………………………J.
                                        (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)

New Delhi
April 05, 2022