[Cites
47
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs M/S Willowood Chemicals Pvt. Ltd. on 19 April, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1


                                                                                 REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                      CIVIL APPEAL NOS.2995-2996 OF 2022
                         (Arising out of Special Leave to Appeal (C) Nos. 7312-7313 of 2022)
                                @ Special Leave Petition (C) Diary No.27099 of 2020

                         UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                   …Appellants
                                                       versus
                         M/S. WILLOWOOD CHEMICALS PVT. LTD.
                         & ANR.                                                  …Respondents
                                            AND
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2997-2998 OF 2022
                         (Arising out of Special Leave to Appeal (C) Nos. 7314-7315 of 2022)
                                @ Special Leave Petition (C) Diary No.28455 of 2020

                         UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                   …Appellants
                                                       versus
                         M/S. SARAF NATURAL STONE & ANR.                   …Respondents


                                                 JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.          Delay condoned. Leave granted.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2022.04.20
10:48:01 IST
Reason:      2.          Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) Diary No.27099 of 2020

             is directed against the judgment and order dated 10.07.2019 passed by the High
2
Court1 in Special Civil Application No.18591 of 2018 and against the order

dated 13.03.2020 passed in Review Petition arising therefrom being Misc. Civil

Application No.1 of 2019. (For facility, hereinafter referred to as, “the first

case”)

         Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) Diary No.28455 of 2020

is directed against the judgment and order dated 10.07.2019 passed by the High

Court1 in Special Civil Application No.15925 of 2018 and against the order

dated 13.03.2020 passed in Review Petition arising therefrom being Misc. Civil

Application No.1 of 2019. (For facility, hereinafter referred to as, “the second

case”)
3.       The second case arises out of a Writ Petition, being Special Civil

Application No.15925 of 2018 filed by M/s. Saraf Natural Stone submitting

inter alia that:
“2.5 The Petitioner states that in terms of
Section 16
of the IGST
                 Act2, 2017, a registered person making exports of goods
                 outside India, shall be eligible to claim, refund of either
                 unutilized input tax credit on export of goods under bond or
                 letter of undertaking or refund of Integrated tax paid on
                 export of goods.
2.6 The Petitioner further states that
Section 16(3)
of the IGST
                 Act, provides that refund should be claimed in accordance
                 with the provisions of
Section 54
of the CGST Act 3 or the
                 rules made thereunder.
Section 20
of the IGST Act further
                 provides that provisions of
CGST Act
relating to refunds

1 High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad.
2
The Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017
3
The Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017
3
shall, mutatis mutandis, apply, so far as may be, in relation to
               Integrated tax as they apply in relation to central tax as if they
               are enacted under this Act.
2.7. The Petitioners further states that Rule 2 of the Integrated
                Goods and Services Tax Rules, 2017 provides that the
                Central Goods and Services Tax Rules, 2017, for carrying out
                the provisions specified in
Section 20
of the Integrated Goods
                and Services Tax Act, 2017 shall, so far as may be, apply in
                relation to Integrated tax as they apply in relation to Central
                tax.
***                     ***                     ***
         2.15 The petitioner further states that the Central Government vide
              Notification No.13/2017- Central Tax, dated 28.06.2017 and
              Notification No.6/2017 – integrated tax dated 28.06.2017 has
              fixed the rate of interest from the 1 st day of July, 2017 at 6%
              p.a. and 9% p.a. for the purposes of Section 56 and proviso to
Section 56
of CGST Act, 2017 respectively. Copies of the
              aforesaid notifications are enclosed herewith marked at
              Annexure & and Annexure B respectively.
***                     ***                     ***
         2.19 The petitioner states further that it received the refund of
              integrated tax paid on export of goods after substantial period
              of delay. Details of refund claimed, date of application of
              refund and actual date of grant of refund for the month of
              July is enclosed herewith and marked as Annexure-D”


3.1   Details of 15 (Fifteen) refunds made to said writ petitioner showed that

there was delay ranging from 94 to 290 days.
3.2   In the circumstances it was prayed inter alia:-
“a)   to issue writ of mandamus and/ or any other appropriate
               writ(s) for directions is the Respondents for providing
               appropriate compensation as well as interest, for delay in the
               granting of refund;”
4
4.    The first case arises out of Special Civil Application No.18591 of 2018

filed by M/s. Willowood Chemicals Pvt. Ltd. submitting that said Writ Petitioner

was entitled on the basis of
Section 16
of the IGST Act read with
Section 54
of

the CGST Act for compensation in receipt of delayed payment as detailed in

Annexure D of the petition, which in turn dealt with 12 refunds with delay

ranging between 94 to 290 days. The special civil application had thus prayed

for appropriate compensation.
5.    In both the petitions it was submitted that inaction leading to inordinate

delay in granting refunds was per se arbitrary and that the inordinate delay

impacted the working capacity of the Writ Petitioners thereby reducing their

ability to conduct business and as such appropriate compensation ought to be

awarded along with interest for delay.
The submissions were opposed by the learned counsel appearing for the

Revenue.
6.    The High Court considered the rival submissions in light of the statutory

provisions and relied upon certain decisions including the decision of this Court

in
K.T. Plantation Pvt. Ltd. and Anr. v. State of Karnataka
4 , Sandvik Asia Ltd.
v. Commissioner of Income Tax-I Pune and others5 and Commissioner of

4 (2011) 9 SCC 1
5 (2006) 2 SCC 508
5
Income Tax, Gujarat v. Gujarat Fluoro Chemicals6. In its judgment dated

10.7.2019 which is under challenge in the second case, the High Court

concluded:
“22. The position of law appears to be well settled. The
             provisions relating to an interest of delated payment of refund
             have been consistently held as beneficial and non-
             discriminatory. It is true that in the taxing statute the principles
             of equity may have little role to play, but at the same time, any
             statute in taxation matter should also meet with the test of
             constitutional provision.
23. The respondents have not explained in any manner the issue
             of delay as raised by the writ applicants by filing any reply.
24.      The chart indicating the delay referred to above speaks
             for itself.
25.     In the overall view of the matter, we are inclined to hold
             the respondents liable to pay simple interest on the delayed
             payment at the rate of 9% per annum. The authority concerned
             shall nook into the chart provided by the writ-applicants, which
             is at Page-30, Annexure-D to the writ application and calculate
             the aggregate amount of refund. On the aggregate amount of
             refund, the writ-applicants are entitled to 9% per annum interest
             from the date of filing of the GSTR-03. The respondents shall
             undertake this exercise at the earliest and calculate the requisite
             amount toward the interest. Let this exercise be undertaken and
             completed within a period of two months from the date of
             receipt of the writ of this order. The requisite amount towards
             the interest shall be paid to the writ-applicants within a period of
             two months form the date of receipt of the writ of this order.”
7.    The first case was then disposed of on the same day with the following

observations:-
“4.     For the reasons assigned in the Special Civil Application
             No15925 of 2018, decided on 10/07/2019, this writ application
             is allowed to the extent that the writ applicants are entitled to the
             interest for the delayed payment at the rate of 9% per annum.
6 (2014) 1 SCC 126
6
The authority concerned shall look into the chart provided by
             the writ applicants, which is at Page 30, Annexure D to the writ
             application and calculate the aggregate refund, the writ
             applicants are entitled to 9% per annum interest from the date of
             filing of the GSTR38. The respondents shall undertake this
             exercise at the earliest and calculate the requisite amount
             towards interest. Let this exercise be undertaken and completed
             within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the
             writ of this order. The requisite amount towards the interest
             shall be paid to the writ applicants within a period of two
             months from the date of receipt of the writ of this order.”
8.    The appellant being aggrieved, preferred Review Petitions in both the

cases. It was submitted inter alia:
“4. It is respectfully submitted that this Hon’ble Court has
             directed the respondent authority to pay simple interest on the
             delayed payment at the rate of 9% per annum from the date of
             filing of the GSTR-3B.
5. It is respectfully submitted that as per section 56 of the IGST
             Net Interest at the rate of not exceeding six percent may be
             given whereas by order dated 10.07.2011 this Hon’ble court was
             pleased to give interest at the rate of 9%.”


      By separate orders dated 13.3.2020 passed in both the cases, the Review

Petitions preferred by the appellant were dismissed.
9.    The aforestated judgments and orders passed by the High Court are under

challenge in these appeals. The appellants do not dispute the eligibility of the

respondents for receiving interest for delayed payment of claims but their

submission is that in terms of the relevant statutory provision, the interest could

be awarded at the rate of 6 per cent and not 9 per cent per annum. Considering

the stand taken by the appellants, at the interim stage, this Court directed the
7
appellants to make good payment of interest at the rate of 6 per cent.
Accordingly, the amounts representing interest at that rate have since then been

made over.
10.   We have heard Mr. N. Venkataraman, learned Additional Solicitor General

on behalf of the appellants in both the matters while Mr. Vinay Shraff, learned

Advocate appeared for the respondents in both the cases.
11.   Before we deal with the controversy in question, we may extract the

relevant statutory provisions: -
A)
Sections 16
and
20
of the IGST Act are as follows:-
“16. Zero rated supply - (1) “zero rated supply” means any of
             the following supplies of goods or services or both, namely:––
(a) export of goods or services or both; or
(b) supply of goods or services or both to a Special Economic
             Zone developer or a Special Economic Zone unit.
             (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5) of
section 17
of
             the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, credit of input tax may
             be availed for making zero-rated supplies, notwithstanding that
             such supply may be an exempt supply.
(3) A registered person making zero rated supply shall be
             eligible to claim refund under either of the following options,
             namely:––
(a) he may supply goods or services or both under bond or
             Letter of Undertaking, subject to such conditions, safeguards
             and procedure as may be prescribed, without payment of
             integrated tax and claim refund of unutilized input tax credit; or
(b) he may supply goods or services or both, subject to such
             conditions, safeguards and procedure as may be prescribed, on
8
payment of integrated tax and claim refund of such tax paid on
goods or services or both supplied.
***                         ***                      ***
20. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder, the provisions of
Central Goods and Services Tax
Act
relating to,––
(i) scope of supply;
(ii) composite supply and mixed supply;
(iii) time and value of supply;
(iv) input tax credit;
(v) registration;
(vi) tax invoice, credit and debit notes;
(vii) accounts and records;
(viii) returns, other than late fee;
(ix) payment of tax;
(x) tax deduction at source;
(xi) collection of tax at source;
(xii) assessment;
(xiii) refunds;
(xiv) audit;
(xv) inspection, search, seizure and arrest;
(xvi) demands and recovery;
(xvii) liability to pay in certain cases;
(xviii) advance ruling;
(xix) appeals and revision;
(xx) presumption as to documents;
(xxi) offences and penalties;
(xxii) job work;
(xxiii) electronic commerce;
(xxiv) transitional provisions; and
9
(xxv) miscellaneous provisions including the provisions relating
      to the imposition of interest and penalty,
      shall, mutatis mutandis, apply, so far as may be, in relation to
      integrated tax as they apply in relation to central tax as if they
      are enacted under this Act:
Provided that in the case of tax deducted at source, the
      deductor shall deduct tax at the rate of two per cent. from the
      payment made or credited to the supplier:
Provided further that in the case of tax collected at
      source, the operator shall collect tax at such rate not exceeding
      two per cent, as may be notified on the recommendations of the
      Council, of the net value of taxable supplies:
Provided also that for the purposes of this Act, the value
      of a supply shall include any taxes, duties, cesses, fees and
      charges levied under any law for the time being in force other
      than this
Act, and the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to
      States) Act
, if charged separately by the supplier:
Provided also that in cases where the penalty is leviable
      under the
Central Goods and Services Tax Act and the State
      Goods and Services Tax Act
or the
Union Territory Goods and
      Services Tax Act
, the penalty leviable under this Act shall be the
      sum total of the said penalties.
Provided also that in cases where the appeal is to be filed
      before the Appellate Authority or the Appellate Tribunal, the
      maximum amount payable shall be fifty crore rupees and one
      hundred crore rupees respectively.”


(B)
Sections 54
and
56
of the CGST Act are as under:-
“54. Refund of tax - (1) Any person claiming refund of any tax
      and interest, if any, paid on such tax or any other amount paid by
      him, may make an application before the expiry of two years
      from the relevant date in such form and manner as may be
      prescribed:
Provided that a registered person, claiming refund of any
      balance in the electronic cash ledger in accordance with the
      provisions of sub-section (6) of
section 49
, may claim such
      refund in the return furnished under
section 39
in such manner
      as may be prescribed.
10
(2) A specialised agency of the United Nations Organisation or
any Multilateral Financial Institution and Organisation notified
under the
United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947
,
Consulate or Embassy of foreign countries or any other person
or class of persons, as notified under
section 55
, entitled to a
refund of tax paid by it on inward supplies of goods or services
or both, may make an application for such refund, in such form
and manner as may be prescribed, before the expiry of six
months from the last day of the quarter in which such supply
was received.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (10), a registered
person may claim refund of any unutilised input tax credit at the
end of any tax period:
Provided that no refund of unutilised input tax credit shall be
allowed in cases other than––
(i) zero rated supplies made without payment of tax;
(ii) where the credit has accumulated on account of rate of tax
on inputs being higher than the rate of tax on output supplies
(other than nil rated or fully exempt supplies), except supplies of
goods or services or both as may be notified by the Government
on the recommendations of the Council:
Provided further that no refund of unutilised input tax credit
shall be allowed in cases where the goods exported out of India
are subjected to export duty:
Provided also that no refund of input tax credit shall be allowed,
if the supplier of goods or services or both avails of drawback in
respect of central tax or claims refund of the integrated tax paid
on such supplies.
(4) The application shall be accompanied by—
(a) such documentary evidence as may be prescribed to establish
that a refund is due to the applicant; and
(b) such documentary or other evidence (including the
documents referred to in
section 33
) as the applicant may
furnish to establish that the amount of tax and interest, if any,
paid on such tax or any other amount paid in relation to which
such refund is claimed was collected from, or paid by, him and
the incidence of such tax and interest had not been passed on to
any other person:
Provided that where the amount claimed as refund is less than
two lakh rupees, it shall not be necessary for the applicant to
furnish any documentary and other evidences but he may file a
11
declaration, based on the documentary or other evidences
available with him, certifying that the incidence of such tax and
interest had not been passed on to any other person.
(5) If, on receipt of any such application, the proper officer is
satisfied that the whole or part of the amount claimed as refund
is refundable, he may make an order accordingly and the amount
so determined shall be credited to the Fund referred to in section
57.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), the
proper officer may, in the case of any claim for refund on
account of zero-rated supply of goods or services or both made
by registered persons, other than such category of registered
persons as may be notified by the Government on the
recommendations of the Council, refund on a provisional basis,
ninety per cent. of the total amount so claimed, excluding the
amount of input tax credit provisionally accepted, in such
manner and subject to such conditions, limitations and
safeguards as may be prescribed and thereafter make an order
under sub-section (5) for final settlement of the refund claim
after due verification of documents furnished by the applicant.
(7) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub-section (5)
within sixty days from the date of receipt of application
complete in all respects.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), the
refundable amount shall, instead of being credited to the Fund,
be paid to the applicant, if such amount is relatable to—
(a) refund of tax paid on export of goods or services or both or
on inputs or input services used in making such exports;
(b) refund of unutilized input tax credit under sub-section (3);
(c) refund of tax paid on a supply which is not provided, either
wholly or partially, and for which invoice has not been issued, or
where a refund voucher has been issued;
(d) refund of tax in pursuance of
section 77
;
(e) the tax and interest, if any, or any other amount paid by the
applicant, if he had not passed on the incidence of such tax and
interest to any other person; or
(f) the tax or interest borne by such other class of applicants as
the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council,
by notification, specify.
12
(8A) The Government may disburse the refund of the State tax
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(9) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
judgment, decree, order or direction of the Appellate Tribunal or
any court or in any other provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder or in any other law for the time being in force, no
refund shall be made except in accordance with the provisions
of sub-section (8).
(10) Where any refund is due under sub-section (3) to a
registered person who has defaulted in furnishing any return or
who is required to pay any tax, interest or penalty, which has not
been stayed by any court, Tribunal or Appellate Authority by the
specified date, the proper officer may—
(a) withhold payment of refund due until the said person has
furnished the return or paid the tax, interest or penalty, as the
case may be;
(b) deduct from the refund due, any tax, interest, penalty, fee or
any other amount which the taxable person is liable to pay but
which remains unpaid under this Act or under the existing
law. Explanation.––For the purposes of this sub-section, the
expression “specified date” shall mean the last date for filing an
appeal under this Act.
(11) Where an order giving rise to a refund is the subject matter
of an appeal or further proceedings or where any other
proceedings under this Act is pending and the Commissioner is
of the opinion that grant of such refund is likely to adversely
affect the revenue in the said appeal or other proceedings on
account of malfeasance or fraud committed, he may, after giving
the taxable person an opportunity of being heard, withhold the
refund till such time as he may determine.
(12) Where a refund is withheld under sub-section (11), the
taxable person shall, notwithstanding anything contained
in
section 56
, be entitled to interest at such rate not exceeding
six per cent. as may be notified on the recommendations of the
Council, if as a result of the appeal or further proceedings he
becomes entitled to refund.
(13) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
section, the amount of advance tax deposited by a casual taxable
person or a non-resident taxable person under sub-section (2)
of
section 27
, shall not be refunded unless such person has, in
respect of the entire period for which the certificate of
registration granted to him had remained in force, furnished all
the returns required under
section 39
.
13
(14) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no
refund under sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) shall be paid to
an applicant, if the amount is less than one thousand rupees.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,––
(1) “refund” includes refund of tax paid on zero-rated supplies
of goods or services or both or on inputs or input services used
in making such zero-rated supplies, or refund of tax on the
supply of goods regarded as deemed exports, or refund of
unutilised input tax credit as provided under sub-section (3).
(2) “relevant date” means—
(a) in the case of goods exported out of India where a refund of
tax paid is available in respect of goods themselves or, as the
case may be, the inputs or input services used in such goods,––
(i) if the goods are exported by sea or air, the date on which the
ship or the aircraft in which such goods are loaded, leaves India;
or
(ii) if the goods are exported by land, the date on which such
goods pass the frontier; or
(iii) if the goods are exported by post, the date of despatch of
goods by the Post Office concerned to a place outside India;
(b) in the case of supply of goods regarded as deemed exports
where a refund of tax paid is available in respect of the goods,
the date on which the return relating to such deemed exports is
furnished;
(c) in the case of services exported out of India where a refund
of tax paid is available in respect of services themselves or, as
the case may be, the inputs or input services used in such
services, the date of––
(i) receipt of payment in convertible foreign exchange 3 “or in
Indian rupees wherever permitted by the Reserve Bank of
India”, where the supply of services had been completed prior to
the receipt of such payment; or
(ii) issue of invoice, where payment for the services had been
received in advance prior to the date of issue of the invoice;
(d) in case where the tax becomes refundable as a consequence
of judgment, decree, order or direction of the Appellate
Authority, Appellate Tribunal or any court, the date of
communication of such judgment, decree, order or direction;
14
(e) in the case of refund of unutilised input tax credit under
clause (ii) of the first proviso to sub-section (3), the due date for
furnishing of return under
section 39
for the period in which
such claim for refund arises;
(f) in the case where tax is paid provisionally under this Act or
the rules made thereunder, the date of adjustment of tax after the
final assessment thereof;
(g) in the case of a person, other than the supplier, the date of
receipt of goods or services or both by such person; and
(h) in any other case, the date of payment of tax. Refund in
certain cases.
***                             ***                            ***
56. Interest on delayed refunds - If any tax ordered to be
refunded under sub-section (5) of
section 54
to any applicant is
not refunded within sixty days from the date of receipt of
application under subsection (1) of that section, interest at such
rate not exceeding six per cent. as may be specified in the
notification issued by the Government on the recommendations
of the Council shall be payable in respect of such refund from
the date immediately after the expiry of sixty days from the date
of receipt of application under the said sub-section till the date
of refund of such tax:
Provided that where any claim of refund arises from an order
passed by an adjudicating authority or Appellate Authority or
Appellate Tribunal or court which has attained finality and the
same is not refunded within sixty days from the date of receipt
of application filed consequent to such order, interest at such
rate not exceeding nine per cent. as may be notified by the
Government on the recommendations of the Council shall be
payable in respect of such refund from the date immediately
after the expiry of sixty days from the date of receipt of
application till the date of refund.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, where any order
of refund is made by an Appellate Authority, Appellate Tribunal
or any court against an order of the proper officer under sub-
section (5) of
section 54
, the order passed by the Appellate
Authority, Appellate Tribunal or by the court shall be deemed to
be an order passed under the said sub-section (5)”
15
12.   These provisions show that a registered person making export of goods

outside India, is entitled in terms of
Section 16
of the IGST Act to claim refund

of either unutilized input tax credit of export of goods under bond or letter of

undertaking or refund of integrated tax paid on export of goods. In terms of
Section 20
of the IGST Act, any claim for refund is to be governed by the

provisions of the
CGST Act
which would apply mutatis mutandis as if they were

enacted in the
IGST Act
. The application for refund, therefore, is required to be

preferred in accordance with
Section 54
of the CGST Act. According to
Section

56
of the CGST Act, if an applicant is not refunded any tax ordered to be

refunded by the Proper Officer under
Section 54(5)
within 60 days from the

receipt of the application, interest at such rate not exceeding 6 per cent would

become payable after the expiry of 60 days from the date of receipt of

application till the date of refund of such tax. The proviso to said Section

prescribes that where any claim of refund arises from an order passed by an

Adjudicating Authority or Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or Court

and if the same is not refunded within 60 days from the date of receipt of an

application filed consequent to such an order, the rate of interest payable would

be 9 per cent.
13.   The instant cases have not arisen from any order passed by an

Adjudicating Authority or Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or Court
16
and the cases are strictly within the scope of the principal provision of
Section

56
and not under the proviso thereof. In light of these provisions, the question

which arises for consideration is whether the High Court was justified in

awarding interest at the rate of 9 per cent per annum.
14.   Before we deal with the question, it must be stated that initially a bench of

two Judges of this Court in
Union of India and others v. Orient Enterprises

and Another7
had observed that a Writ Petition under
Article 226
of the

Constitution filed solely for relief for payment of interest on delayed refund

would not be maintainable. For facility, the relevant portion from
the said

decision
is quoted here:
“6. In Suganmal [AIR 1965 SC 1740 : 56 ITR 84 : 16 STC 398]
             this Court has laid down that a writ petition under
Article 226
of
             the Constitution solely praying for the issue of a writ of
             mandamus directing the State to refund the money is not
             ordinarily maintainable for the simple reason that a claim for
             such a refund can always be made in a suit against the authority
             which had illegally collected the money as a tax. This Court has
             made a distinction between a direction for refund given by way
             of consequential order in a case where the legality of the
             assessment is questioned and a case where the petition is only
             for the purpose of seeking refund. It has been observed:
“We do not consider it proper to extend the principle
                   justifying the consequential order directing the refund of
                   amount illegally realised, when the order under which the
                   amounts had been collected has been set aside, to cases in
                   which only orders for the refund of money are sought. The
                   parties had the right to question the illegal assessment
                   orders on the ground of their illegality or
                   unconstitutionality and, therefore, could take action under
Article 226
for the protection of their fundamental right,

7 (1998) 3 SCC 501
17
and the courts, on setting aside the assessment orders,
      exercised their jurisdiction in proper circumstances to
      order the consequential relief for the refund of the tax
      illegally realised. We do not find any good reason to
      extend this principle and, therefore, hold that no petition
      for the issue of a writ of mandamus will be normally
      entertained for the purpose of merely ordering a refund of
      money to the return of which the petitioner claims a right.”
7. The Court has emphasised that there was no legal right in the
appellant who had filed the writ petition to claim the refund
under the relevant statute.
8. In the present case also till the insertion of Section 27-A in the
Act by Act 22 of 1995 there was no right entitling payment of
interest on delayed refund under the Act. Such a right was
conferred for the first time by the said provision. Act 22 of 1995
also inserted Section 28-AA which provides for payment of
interest on delayed payment of duty by a person who is liable to
pay the duty. Thus at the relevant time there was no statutory
right entitling the respondents to payment of interest on delayed
refund and the writ petition filed by them was not for the
enforcement of a legal right available to them under any statute.
The claim for interest was in the nature of compensation for
wrongful retention by the appellants of money that was
collected from the respondents by way of customs duty,
redemption fine and penalty.
In view of the law
laid down by
this Court in Suganmal [AIR 1965 SC 1740: 56 ITR 84: 16 STC
398] a writ petition seeking the relief of payment of interest on
delayed refund of the amount so collected could not, in our
opinion, be maintained. The decisions on which reliance has
been placed by Shri Rawal were cases where the legality of the
orders requiring payment of tax or duty were challenged and the
High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under
Article 226
of
the Constitution, while setting aside the said orders, has directed
the refund of the amount so collected with interest. The direction
for payment of interest in these cases was by way of
consequential relief along with the main relief of setting aside
the order imposing the tax or duty. Those cases stand on a
different footing and have no application to the present case.
The appeal is, therefore, allowed, the impugned judgment of the
High Court is set aside and the writ petition filed by the
respondents before the High Court is dismissed. No order as to
costs.”
18
15.   However, subsequently another bench of two Judges of this Court in

Godavari Sugar Mills Ltd.7 in more or less identical circumstances settled the

issue and found the Writ Petition to be maintainable. The observations of this

Court were:
“7. The High Court relying upon the decision of this Court
              in
Suganmal v. State of M.P.
[AIR 1965 SC 1740] has held that
              the prayer in the writ petition being one for payment of interest,
              it should be considered to be a writ petition filed to enforce a
              money claim and therefore, not maintainable. The observations
              in Suganmal [AIR 1965 SC 1740] related to a claim for refund
              of tax and have to be understood with reference to the nature of
              the claim made therein.
The decision in Suganmal [AIR 1965
              SC 1740] has been explained and distinguished in several
              subsequent cases, including in
U.P. Pollution Control
              Board v. Kanoria Industrial Ltd.
[(
2001) 2 SCC 549] and ABL
              International Ltd. v. Export Credit GuaranteeCorpn
. of India
              Ltd. [(2004) 3 SCC 553] The legal position becomes clear when
              the decision in Suganmal [AIR 1965 SC 1740] is read with the
              other decisions of this Court on the issue, referred to below:
(i) Normally, a petition under
Article 226
of the
              Constitution of India will not be entertained to enforce a civil
              liability arising out of a breach of a contract or a tort to pay an
              amount of money due to the claimants. The aggrieved party will
              have to agitate the question in a civil suit. But an order for
              payment of money may be made in a writ proceeding, in
              enforcement of statutory functions of the State or its officers.
(
Vide Burmah Construction Co. v. State of Orissa
[AIR 1962
              SC 1320 : 1962 Supp (1) SCR 242] .)
(ii) If a right has been infringed—whether a fundamental
              right or a statutory right—and the aggrieved party comes to the
              Court for enforcement of the right, it will not be giving
              complete relief if the Court merely declares the existence of
              such right or the fact that existing right has been infringed. The
              High Court, while enforcing fundamental or statutory rights, has
              the power to give consequential relief by ordering payment of
              money realised by the Government without the authority of law.
              (
Vide State of M.P. v. Bhailal Bhai
[AIR 1964 SC 1006] .)
19
(iii) A petition for issue of writ of mandamus will not
normally be entertained for the purpose of merely ordering a
refund of money, to the return of which the petitioner claims a
right. The aggrieved party seeking refund has to approach the
civil court for claiming the amount, though the High Courts
have the power to pass appropriate orders in the exercise of the
power conferred under
Article 226
for payment of money.
(
Vide Suganmal v. State of M.P.
[AIR 1965 SC 1740] )
(iv) There is a distinction between cases where a
claimant approaches the High Court seeking the relief of
obtaining only refund and those where refund is sought as a
consequential relief after striking down the order of assessment,
etc. While a petition praying for mere issue of a writ of
mandamus to the State to refund the money alleged to have been
illegally collected is not ordinarily maintainable, if the
allegation is that the assessment was without a jurisdiction and
the taxes collected was without authority of law and therefore
the respondents had no authority to retain the money collected
without any authority of law, the High Court has the power to
direct refund in a writ petition. (
Vide Salonah Tea Co.
Ltd. v. Supdt. of Taxes
[(1988) 1 SCC 401 : 1988 SCC (Tax) 99
(2)]
(v) It is one thing to say that the High Court has no
power under
Article 226
of the Constitution to issue a writ of
mandamus for making refund of the money illegally collected.
It is yet another thing to say that such power can be exercised
sparingly depending on facts and circumstances of each case.
For instance, where the facts are not in dispute, where the
collection of money was without the authority of law and there
was no case of undue enrichment, there is no good reason to
deny a relief of refund to the citizens. But even in cases where
collection of cess, levy or tax is held to be unconstitutional or
invalid, refund is not an automatic consequence but may be
refused on several grounds depending on facts and
circumstances of a given case. (
Vide U.P. Pollution Control
Board v. Kanoria Industrial Ltd.
[(2001) 2 SCC 549] )
(vi) Where the lis has a public law character, or involves
a question arising out of public law functions on the part of the
State or its authorities, access to justice by way of a public law
remedy under
Article 226
of the Constitution will not be denied.
(
Vide Sanjana M. Wig v. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
(2005) 8 SCC 242)
20
We are therefore of the view that reliance upon
            Suganmal was misplaced to hold that the writ petition filed by
            the appellant was not maintainable.”
16.   We, therefore, proceed to consider the merits. Turning to the basic

question it must be noted that in the following cases, this Court dealt with the

question as to payment of interest on the amount due by way of refund:
(A)   In
Modi Industries Ltd. and another v. Commissioner of Income Tax

and Another8
a bench of three Judges of this Court was called upon to consider

the effect of
Section 214
of the Income Tax Act, 1961, and the questions which

arose were set out as under:
“We shall now indicate how the controversy relating to the
               meaning of the expression "regular assessment" arises: an
               assessee pays advance tax according to his estimate of his
               income during the financial year relevant to the particular
               assessment year. He then files a return and an assessment is
               made under
Section 143
. It is found that he has paid more
               amount by way of advance tax than the amount of tax
               assessed. He will be refunded the extra amount with interest
               calculated from the first day of April of that assessment year
               to the date of assessment. No difficulty arises in such a case.
               The difficulty arises in the following situation: indeed it is
               one of the many situations - not satisfied with the order of
               assessment, the assessee files an appeal. The appeal is
               allowed as a consequence of which, the assessment order is
               revised. As a result of such revised assessment made pursuant
               to the appellate order, the tax refundable to the assessee
               becomes larger - say whereas, according to the original
               assessment he was entitled to refund of Rs.10,000/-, he
               becomes entitled to a total refund of Rs.15,000/- as a result of
               revised assessment made pursuant to the appellate order. The
               question is - on what amount and upto which date is the
               interest payable? On being elaborated, the question yields the
               following sub-questions:
8 (1995) 6 SCC 396
21
(a) is the interest payable only on Rs. 10,000/- and if
                     so, whether the interest is payable till the date of
                     first/original assessment or till the date of the revised
                     assessment?
(b) is the interest payable on Rs.15,000/- and if
                     payable, is it payable only till the date of first/original
                     assessment or till the date of the revised assessment?
After considering various decisions on the point, the conclusion drawn by

the Court was:
“The argument, which was upheld in some of the cases now
            under appeal, is that it will be inequitable if the assessee does
            not get interest on the amount of advance tax paid, when the
            amount paid in advance is refunded pursuant to an appellate
            order. This is not a question of equity. There is no right to get
            interest on refund except as provided by the statute. The interest
            on excess amount of advance tax under Section 214 is not paid
            from the date of payment of the tax. Nor is it paid till the date of
            refund. It is paid only upto the date of the regular assessment.
            No interest is at all paid on excess amount of tax collected by
            deduction at source. Before introduction of Section 244(1A) the
            assessee was not entitled to get any interest from the date of
            payment of tax upto the date of the order as a result of which
            excess realisation of tax became refundable. Interest
            under Section 243 or Section 244 was payable only when the
            refund was not made within the stipulated period upto the date
            of refund. But, if the assessment order was reduced in appeal, no
            interest was payable from the date of payment of tax pursuant to
            the assessment order to the date of the appellate order.
Therefore, interpretation of Section 214 or any other
            section of the Act should not be made on the assumption that
            interest has to be paid whenever an amount which has been
            retained by the tax authority in exercise of statutory power
            becomes refundable as a result of any subsequent proceeding.
(Emphasis supplied)
22
(B)   In Godavari Sugar Mills Ltd.7, a bench of two Judges of this Court

considered the question whether interest on the compensation amount at the rate

of 9 per cent per annum could be awarded when the terms of
Section 6
of the

Maharashtra Agriculture Lands (Ceiling of Holdings) Act, 1961 prescribed

payment of interest only at the rate of 3 per cent per annum. The discussion on

the point was:
“9. There is considerable force in the submissions of Ms
            Madhavi Divan, the learned counsel for the respondents that the
            decisions of the Bombay High Court in Krishnakumar [ WP No.
            83 of 1986 decided on 29-6-1991 (Bom)] and Changdeo [ WP
            No. 3805 of 2000 decided on 7-7-2000 (Bom)] are not sound, as
            they completely ignore
Section 26
of the Act, while awarding
            interest at 9% per annum on the belated payment of
            compensation.
10. The question as to when and in what circumstances, interest
            could be awarded on belated payment of compensation, was
            considered by this Court in
Union of India v. Parmal
            Singh
[(2009) 1 SCC 618] . This Court first referred to the
            general principle and then the exceptions thereto, as under:
(SCC pp. 624-25, paras 12-13)
            “12. When a property is acquired, and law provides for payment
            of compensation to be determined in the manner specified,
            ordinarily compensation shall have to be paid at the time of
            taking possession in pursuance of acquisition. By applying
            equitable principles, the courts have always awarded interest on
            the delayed payment of compensation in regard to acquisition of
            any property. …
13. … The said general principle will not apply in two
            circumstances. One is where a statute specifies or regulates the
            interest. In that event, interest will be payable in terms of the
            provisions of the statute. The second is where a statute or
            contract dealing with the acquisition specifically bars or
            prohibits payment of interest on the compensation amount. In
            that event, interest will not be awarded. Where the statute is
            silent about interest, and there is no express bar about payment
            of interest, any delay in paying the compensation or enhanced
23
compensation for acquisition would require award of interest at
a reasonable rate on equitable grounds.”

This Court, dealing with an acquisition under the
Defence of
India Act, 1962
(which did not contain any provision either
requiring or prohibiting payment of interest), upheld the award
of interest at 6% per annum.
11.
Section 24
of the Act requires the Collector, after possession
of surplus land was taken over under
Section 21(4)
of the Act, to
cause public notice requiring persons interested to lodge their
claims.
Section 25
of the Act provides for determination of
compensation and apportionment thereof.
Section 26
deals with
mode of payment of amount of compensation and the same is
extracted below:
“26. Mode of payment of amount of compensation.—(1) The
amount of compensation may, subject to the provisions of sub-
section (3), be payable in transferable bonds carrying interest at
three per cent per annum.
(2) The bonds shall be—
(a) of the following denominations, namely— Rs. 50; Rs. 100;
Rs. 200; Rs. 500; Rs. 1000; Rs. 5000 and Rs. 10,000; and
(b) of two classes—one being repayable during a period of
twenty yearsfrom the date of issue by equated annual instalment
of principal and interest, and the other being redeemable at par
at the end of a period of twenty years from the date of issue. It
shall be at the option of the person receiving compensation to
choose payment in one or other class of bonds, or partly in one
class and partly in another.
(3) Where the amount of compensation or any part thereof,
cannot be paid in the aforesaid denomination, it may be paid in
cash.”
                                           (emphasis supplied)

The said section contemplates the payment of compensation
with interest at 3% per annum in annual instalments spread over
a period of 20 years or at the end of 20 years. It also
contemplates payment being made either by transferable bonds
or in cash. Sub-section (3) of
Section 26
enabling payment of
compensation by cash, in cases where it could not be paid by
such bonds, does not disturb the rate of interest, which is 3% per
annum for 20 years, provided in sub-section (1) thereof. We are
therefore of the view that whether the payment is made by
24
transferable bonds or by cash, the rate of interest can be only at
             3% per annum for a period of 20 years from the date of taking
             possession.
12. The next question that requires consideration is about the
             rate of interest if the payment is not made even after 20 years,
             and whether it should be only at the rate of 3% per annum, even
             after 20 years.
Section 26
is silent about the rate of interest
             payable, if the compensation is not paid within 20 years. We are
             therefore of the view that
Section 26
contemplates payment of
             the compensation within 20 years from the date of taking
             possession with interest at 3% per annum; and for the period
             beyond 20 years, the said provision regarding interest will cease
             to apply and the general equitable principles relating to interest
             will apply; and interest can be awarded at any reasonable rate, in
             the discretion of the court. Interest at the rate of 6% per annum,
             beyond 20 years would be appropriate and payable on equitable
             principles.”


(C)   In Sandvik Asia Ltd.5, a bench of two Judges of this Court was called

upon to consider whether the inordinate delay of about 12 to 17 years in making

a refund would entitle grant of interest. In the facts of that case, interest at the

rate of 9 per cent per annum from 31.03.1986 to 27.03.1998 was granted. Even

while doing so this Court observed:
“48. There cannot be any doubt that the award of interest on the
             refunded amount is as per the statutory provisions of law as it
             then stood and on the peculiar facts and circumstances of each
             case. When a specific provision has been made under the statute,
             such provision has to govern the field. Therefore, the court has
             to take all relevant factors into consideration while awarding the
             rate of interest on the compensation.”


(D)   In Gujarat Fluoro Chemicals6, the correctness of the decision in Sandvik

Asia Ltd.5 came up for consideration before a bench of three Judges of this

Court, and the matter was considered thus:
25
“3.
In order to answer the aforesaid issue before us, we have
carefully gone through the judgment of this Court in Sandvik
case [
Sandvik Asia Ltd. v. CIT
, (2006) 2 SCC 508] and the order
of reference. We have also considered the submissions made by
the parties to the lis.
4. We would first throw light on the reasoning and the decision
of this Court on the core issue in
Sandvik
case [
Sandvik Asia
Ltd. v. CIT
, (2006) 2 SCC 508]. The only issue formulated by
this Court for its consideration and decision was whether an
assessee is entitled to be compensated by the Income Tax
Department for the delay in paying interest on the refunded
amount admittedly due to the assessee. This Court in the facts of
the said case had noticed that there was delay of various periods,
ranging from 12 to 17 years, in such payment by the Revenue.
This Court had further referred to the several decisions which
were brought to its notice and also referred to the relevant
provisions of the Act which provide for refunds to be made by
the Revenue when a superior forum directs refund of certain
amounts to an assessee while disposing of an appeal, revision,
etc. Since there was an inordinate delay on the part of the
Revenue in refunding the amount due to the assessee this Court
had thought it fit that the assessee should be properly and
adequately compensated and therefore in para 51 of the
judgment, the Court while compensating the assessee had
directed the Revenue to pay a compensation by way of interest
for two periods, namely, for Assessment Years 1977-1978, 1978-
1979, 1981-1982, 1982-1983 in a sum of Rs 40,84,906 and
interest @ 9% from 31-3-1986 to 27-3-1998 and in default, to
pay the penal interest @ 15% per annum for the aforesaid
period.
5. In our considered view, the aforesaid judgment has been
misquoted and misinterpreted by the assessees and also by the
Revenue. They are of the view that in
Sandvik
case [
Sandvik
Asia Ltd. v. CIT
, (2006) 2 SCC 508] this Court had directed the
Revenue to pay interest on the statutory interest in case of delay
in the payment. In other words, the interpretation placed is that
the Revenue is obliged to pay an interest on interest in the event
of its failure to refund the interest payable within the statutory
period.
6. As we have already noticed, in
Sandvik
case [
Sandvik Asia
Ltd. v. CIT
, (2006) 2 SCC 508] this Court was considering the
issue whether an assessee who is made to wait for refund of
interest for decades be compensated for the great prejudice
26
caused to it due to the delay in its payment after the lapse of
             statutory period. In the facts of that case, this Court had come to
             the conclusion that there was an inordinate delay on the part of
             the Revenue in refunding certain amount which included the
             statutory interest and therefore, directed the Revenue to pay
             compensation for the same not an interest on interest.”
17.   Since reliance was placed by the High Court on the decision of the

Constitution Bench of this Court in K.T. Plantation Pvt. Ltd. and Anr.4, we must

note that what arose for consideration
in that case
, was the constitutional validity

of the Devika Rani Roerich Estate (Acquisition & Transfer) Act, 1996, and

Section 110 of the Karnataka Lands Reforms Act, 1996 and certain notifications

issued by the State Government. The questions which arose for consideration

were set out in paragraph 25 of the decision as under:-
“Whether the relevant provisions violated the basic structure of
             the Constitution in so far as they conferred power on the
             executive government for withdrawal of exception without
             hearing and without reasons and whether the provisions of the
             Acquisition Act were protected by
Article 31(A)
of the
             Constitution and whether they were violative of
Article 300(A)
of the Constitution?”


      After dealing with these questions, the reference was answered thus:
We, therefore, answer the reference as follows:
(a)
Section 110
of the Land Reforms Act and the Notification
             dated 8-3-1994 are valid, and there is no excessive delegation of
             legislative power on the State Government.
(b) Non-laying of the Notification dated 8-3-1994 under
Section
             140
of the Land Reforms Act before the State Legislature is a
             curable defect and it will not affect the validity of the
             notification or action taken thereunder.
27
(c) The Acquisition Act is protected by
Article 31-A
of the
             Constitution after having obtained the assent of the President
             and hence immune from challenge under
Article 14
or 19 of the
             Constitution.
(d) There is no repugnancy between the provisions of the
Land
             Acquisition Act, 1894
and the Rocrich and Devika Rani Rocrich
             Estate (Acquisition & Transfer) Act, 1996 (in short “the
             Acquisition Act”), and hence no assent of the President is
             warranted under
Article 254(2)
of the Constitution.
(e) Public purpose is a precondition for deprivation of a person
             from his property under
Article 300-A
and the right to claim
             compensation is also inbuilt in that article and when a person is
             deprived of his property the State has to justify both the grounds
             which may depend on scheme of the statute, legislative policy,
             object and purpose of the legislature and other related factors.
(f) Statute, depriving a person of his property is, therefore,
             amenable to judicial review on grounds hereinbefore discussed.”


      The aforestated answers and especially one at serial (e) show the context

in which the issue of compensation was considered by this Court, which is

completely distinct and different from the issue with which we are presently

concerned.
18.   Coming back to the present cases, the relevant provision has prescribed

rate of interest at 6 per cent where the case for refund is governed by the

principal provision of
Section 56
of the CGST Act. As has been clarified by this

Court in Modi Industries Ltd.9 and Godavari Sugar Mills Ltd.7 wherever a

statute specifies or regulates the interest, the interest will be payable in terms of

the provisions of the statute. Wherever a statute, on the other hand, is silent
28
about the rate of interest and there is no express bar for payment of interest, any

delay in paying the compensation or the amounts due, would attract award of

interest at a reasonable rate on equitable grounds. It is precisely for this reason

that paragraph 9 of the decision in Godavari Sugar Mills Ltd.7 accepted the

submission made by the learned counsel for the respondents and confined the

rate of interest to the prescription made in the statute. The award of interest at a

rate in excess of what was prescribed by the statute was only for a period

beyond 20 years where the matter was not strictly covered by the statute and as

such it would be in the realm of discretion of the Court. It must also be noted

here that the inordinate delay of up to 17 years in making refunds was a special

circumstance when this Court was persuaded to accept grant of interest at the

rate of 9 per cent per annum in Sandvik Asia Ltd.5 Even while doing so, the

observations made by this Court in Paragraph 48 of the decision are quite clear

that “the award of interest in refund and amount must be as per the statutory

provisions of law and whenever a specific provision has been made under the

statute such provision has to govern the field.” The subsequent decision of the

bench of three Judges in Gujarat Fluoro Chemicals6 noticed that the grant of

interest at the rate of 9 per cent was in the facts of the case in Sandvik Asia Ltd.5
19.   Since the delay in the instant case was in the region of 94 to 290 days and

not so inordinate as was the case in Sandvik Asia Ltd.5, the matter has to be seen
29
purely in the light of the concerned statutory provisions.       In terms of the

principal part of
Section 56
of the CGST Act, the interest would be awarded at

the rate of 6 per cent. The award of interest at 9 per cent would be attracted only

if the matter was covered by the proviso to the said
Section 56
. The High Court

was in error in awarding interest at the rate exceeding 6 per cent in the instant

matters.
20.   We, therefore, allow these appeals and direct that the original writ

petitioners would be entitled to interest at the rate of 6 per cent per annum on

amounts that they were entitled by way of refund of tax. Since the concerned

amounts along with interest at the rate of 6 per cent per annum have already

been made over to them, nothing further need be done in both the cases.
21.   The instant Civil Appeals are thus allowed to the extent indicated above

without any order as to costs.
………………………………..J.
                                                      [Uday Umesh Lalit]




                                                 ………………………………..J.
                                                       [S. Ravindra Bhat]
New Delhi;
April 19, 2022.