[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
All India Judges Association vs Union Of India on 19 April, 2022
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
Aniruddha Bose
,
B.R. Gavai
,
L. Nageswara Rao
REPORTABLE

            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                 I.A. NO. 89454 OF 2021
                            IN
           WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 1022 OF 1989

ALL INDIA JUDGES ASSOCIATION
AND OTHERS                               ...PETITIONER(S)
                     VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS               ...RESPONDENT(S)

AND

IN THE MATTER OF

MS. SHEETAL CHAUDHARY PRADHAN
AND ANOTHER                                …APPLICANT(S)

                           WITH

                  I.A. NO. 89450 OF 2021
                  I.A. NO. 88976 OF 2021
                     I.A. No. 249 of 2009
     I.A. NO. 44132 OF 2022 IN I.A. NO. 89450 OF 2021
                               IN
            WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 1022 OF 1989

                          ORDER
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.    I.A. No. 89454 of 2021 has been filed by two judicial

officers in the cadre of Delhi Judicial Service (hereinafter
1
referred to as “DJS”) namely Ms. Sheetal Chaudhary Pradhan

and Dr. Shirish Aggarwal, for modification of the orders

dated 21st March 20021 and 20th April 20102 passed by this

Court in the present writ petition. I.A. No. 89450 of 2021

has been filed by the same judicial officers seeking

permission to participate in the Limited Departmental

Competitive Examination (hereinafter referred to as “LDCE”)

initiated by the High Court of Delhi through its letter No. 38­

49/Exam.Cell/DHJSCL Exam/2021 dated 15th July 2021,

for   promotion       to   the   Delhi   Higher   Judicial   Service

(hereinafter referred to as “DHJS”) District Judge Cadre and

to consider the candidature of the judicial officers­applicants

on merits, subject to the outcome of the application for

modification.     I.A. No. 44132 of 2022 in I.A. No.89450 of

2021 has been filed by the same judicial officers praying for a

direction to the High Court of Delhi to identify two seats of

LDCE quota of DHJS from the roster under Rule 7(2) of the

Delhi Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1970 (hereinafter

referred to as the “said Rules”) and to reserve them for the

judicial officers­applicants. I.A. No.88976 of 2021 has also
1 (2002) 4 SCC 247
2 (2010) 15 SCC 170
2
been filed by the same judicial officers praying for their

impleadment as co­petitioners in the present writ petition.
2.      I.A. No.249 of 2009 has been filed by the High Court of

Delhi praying for reducing the minimum qualifying service to

7 years from 10 years for promotion to the DHJS under 25%

quota of LDCE.
3.      We have heard Shri P.S. Patwalia, learned Senior

Counsel     appearing      on     behalf    of   the   judicial   officers­

applicants,    Shri      A.D.N.    Rao,     learned    Senior     Counsel

appearing on behalf of the High Court of Delhi and Shri

Siddharth Bhatnagar, learned Senior Counsel appearing as

amicus curiae.
4.      The present writ petition pertains to the working

conditions     of   the    members         of    subordinate      judiciary

throughout the country.            This Court has issued various

directions from time to time.              Pursuant to the directions

issued by this Court, the then Ministry of Law, Justice and

Company Affairs (Department of Justice), Government of

India constituted the First National Judicial Pay Commission

(also     known     as     “Shetty       Commission”)       under      the
3
Chairmanship of Mr. Justice K.J. Shetty vide Resolution

dated 21st March 1996. The Shetty Commission, after due

deliberation, submitted its report on 11 th November 1991.

The recommendations of the Shetty Commission came to be

considered by this Court in its order dated 21 st March 2002,

passed in the present writ petition. It will be apposite to refer

to the observations made by this Court in paragraph (27) of

the said order, which read thus:
“27. Another question which falls for consideration
     is the method of recruitment to the posts in the
     cadre of Higher Judicial Service i.e. District Judges
     and Additional District Judges. At the present
     moment, there are two sources for recruitment to
     the Higher Judicial Service, namely, by promotion
     from amongst the members of the Subordinate
     Judicial Service and by direct recruitment. The
     subordinate judiciary is the foundation of the edifice
     of the judicial system. It is, therefore, imperative,
     like any other foundation, that it should become as
     strong as possible. The weight on the judicial
     system essentially rests on the subordinate
     judiciary.    While    we    have      accepted    the
     recommendation of the Shetty Commission which
     will result in the increase in the pay scales of the
     subordinate judiciary, it is at the same time
     necessary that the judicial officers, hard­working as
     they are, become more efficient. It is imperative that
     they keep abreast of knowledge of law and the latest
     pronouncements, and it is for this reason that the
     Shetty     Commission     has    recommended       the
     establishment of a Judicial Academy, which is very
     necessary. At the same time, we are of the opinion
     that there has to be certain minimum standard,
4
objectively adjudged, for officers who are to enter
the Higher Judicial Service as Additional District
Judges and District Judges. While we agree with the
Shetty Commission that the recruitment to the
Higher Judicial Service i.e. the District Judge cadre
from amongst the advocates should be 25 per cent
and the process of recruitment is to be by a
competitive examination, both written and viva
voce, we are of the opinion that there should be an
objective method of testing the suitability of the
subordinate judicial officers for promotion to the
Higher Judicial Service. Furthermore, there should
also be an incentive amongst the relatively junior
and other officers to improve and to compete with
each other so as to excel and get quicker promotion.
In this way, we expect that the calibre of the
members of the Higher Judicial Service will further
improve. In order to achieve this, while the ratio of
75 per cent appointment by promotion and 25 per
cent by direct recruitment to the Higher Judicial
Service is maintained, we are, however, of the
opinion that there should be two methods as far as
appointment by promotion is concerned : 50 per
cent of the total posts in the Higher Judicial Service
must be filled by promotion on the basis of principle
of merit­cum­seniority. For this purpose, the High
Courts should devise and evolve a test in order to
ascertain and examine the legal knowledge of those
candidates and to assess their continued efficiency
with adequate knowledge of case­law. The
remaining 25 per cent of the posts in the service
shall be filled by promotion strictly on the basis of
merit through the limited departmental competitive
examination for which the qualifying service as a
Civil Judge (Senior Division) should be not less than
five years. The High Courts will have to frame a rule
in this regard.”
5
5.   A perusal thereof would reveal that this Court has

observed that there should also be an incentive amongst the

relatively junior and other officers to improve and to compete

with each other so as to excel and get quicker promotion.

This Court was of the view that in this way, the calibre of the

members of the Higher Judicial Service will further improve.

This Court, therefore, observed that to achieve the same,

while the ratio of 75% appointment by promotion and 25% by

direct   recruitment   to   the       Higher   Judicial   Service   is

maintained, there should be two methods for appointment by

promotion.   50% of the total posts in the Higher Judicial

Service must be filled by promotion on the basis of principle

of merit­cum­seniority and the remaining 25% of posts in the

service should be filled by promotion strictly on the basis of

merit through LDCE for which the qualifying service as a

Civil Judge (Senior Division) should be not less than 5 years.

This Court, accordingly, issued the following directions:
“28. As a result of the aforesaid, to recapitulate, we
     direct that recruitment to the Higher Judicial
     Service i.e. the cadre of District Judges will be:
(1)(a) 50 per cent by promotion from
          amongst the Civil Judges (Senior
          Division) on the basis of principle of
6
merit­cum­seniority     and    passing     a
          suitability test;
(b) 25 per cent by promotion strictly on
          the basis of merit through limited
          competitive examination of Civil Judges
          (Senior Division) having not less than five
          years' qualifying service; and
(c) 25 per cent of the posts shall be filled
          by direct recruitment from amongst the
          eligible advocates on the basis of the
          written and viva voce test conducted by
          respective High Courts.
(2) Appropriate rules shall be framed as
          above by the High Courts as early as
          possible.”
6.   In pursuance of the directions of this Court, the High

Court of Delhi amended Rule 7 of the said Rules vide Delhi

Higher Judicial Service (Amendment) Rules, 2008 dated 22 nd

October 2008, which reads thus:
“7. Regular recruitment.­ (1) Recruitment to the
     posts in the cadre of District Judge at Entry Level
     shall be as under:­
(a) 50 percent by promotion from amongst the Civil
     Judges (Senior Division), having a minimum ten
     years service in the cadre of Delhi Judicial Service,
     on the basis of principle of merit­cum­seniority and
     passing a suitability test;
(b) 25 percent by promotion strictly on the basis of
     merit through limited competitive examination of
     Civil Judges (Senior Division) having not less than
     five years qualifying service; and
(c) 25 percent of the posts shall be filled by direct
     recruitment from amongst the persons eligible as
7
per rule 7C on the basis of the written and viva voce
     test, conducted by the High Court.
(2) The first and second posts will go to category (a)
     (by promotion on the basis of seniority­cum­
     suitability), the third post will go to category (c)
     (direct recruitment from the Bar), and the fourth
     post will go to category (b) (by limited competitive
     examination) under this rule, and so on.
7A. ……
     7B. Selection for promotion by holding limited
     competitive examination:­ The High Court shall hold
     a limited written competitive examination for
     promotion of member of the Delhi Judicial Service
     as per clause (b) of sub­rule (1) of rule 7 in the
     following manner:­
(i)   Written Examination ­ 600 marks
(ii) Assessment of Record ­150 marks
(iii) Viva voce ­ 250 marks

     Provided that the High Court may, in addition to the
     above    competitive    examination,   take     into
     consideration any of the materials as prescribed in
     rule 7A above.
Provided further that any officer having grading as
     'C' (Integrity doubtful) in any year, shall not be
     eligible to appear in the limited competitive
     examination.
7C. ……..”
7.   In the meantime, the issue with regard to eligibility

requirement for recruitment to the posts in DHJS under 25%

quota by promotion on the basis of merit through LDCE
8
came up for discussion before the Full Court of the High

Court of Delhi in its meeting dated 5 th September 2008. In

the said meeting, it was considered that a Civil Judge (Junior

Division) is not eligible to become Civil Judge (Senior

Division) until he completes 5 years qualifying service. It was

further discussed that under the said Rules, a Civil Judge

(Junior Division) would be required to have a minimum of 10

years qualifying service to be considered even for the 25%

quota through LDCE. The Full Court of the High Court of

Delhi was of the view that in order to make the quota of

LDCE an effective scheme of promotion for meritorious

officers, it was appropriate that the eligibility requirement of

10 years be reduced to 7 years [(5 years as Civil Judge

(Junior Division) and 2 years as Civil Judge (Senior Division)

under the 25% quota]. The High Court of Delhi was of the

view that the same would also be in conformity with
Article

233 (2)
of the Constitution of India and the eligibility

conditions for direct recruitment from the Bar.         In this

background, I.A. No. 249 of 2009 came to be filed by the

High Court of Delhi.
9
8.   Various I.As. were filed in the present writ petition.

Some of the I.As. came to be decided by this Court vide order

dated 20th April 2010.    It will be apposite to refer to the

following paragraphs of the said order:
“5. In some of the States sufficient number of
     candidates are not available for being promoted
     under this particular category as a Civil Judge
     (Senior Division) in the normal course gets
     promotion before the completion of period of 5
     years. As 25% quota is prescribed, a large number
     of vacancies remained unfilled and that is not good
     for the judicial administration in that State.
6. Having regard to various strategies available, we
     are of the considered view that suitable amendment
     is to be made for this 25% quota of limited
     departmental competitive examination. We are also
     of the view, with the past experience, that it is
     desirable that 25% quota be reduced to 10%. We
     feel so as the required result, which was sought to
     be achieved by this process could not be achieved,
     thus it calls for modification.
7. Thus, we direct that henceforth only 10% of the
     cadre strength of District Judges be filled up by
     limited departmental competitive examination with
     those candidates who have qualified service of five
     years as Civil Judge (Senior Division). Every year
     vacancies are to be ascertained and the process of
     selection shall be taken care of by the High Courts.
If any of the post is not filled up under 10% quota,
     the same shall be filled up by regular promotion. In
     some of the High Courts, process of selection of
     these 25% quota by holding limited departmental
     competitive examination is in progress, such
10
process can be continued and the unfilled seats, if
     meritorious candidates are available, should be
     filled up. But if for some reason the seats are not
     filled up, they may be filled up by regular promotion
     and apply the usual mode of promotion process.
     Thus we pass the following order.
8. Hereinafter, there shall be 25% of seats for direct
     recruitment from the Bar, 65% of seats are to be
     filled up by regular promotion of Civil Judge (Senior
     Division) and 10% seats are to be filled up by
     limited departmental competitive examination. If
     candidates are not available for 10% seats, or are
     not able to qualify in the examination then vacant
     posts are to be filled up by regular promotion in
     accordance with the Service Rules applicable.
9. All the High Courts are hereby directed to take
     steps to see that existing Service Rules be amended
     positively with effect from 1­1­2011. If the Rules are
     not suitably amended, this order shall prevail and
     further recruitment from 1­1­2011 shall be
     continued accordingly as directed by us. The time
     schedule prescribed in the order dated 4­1­2007
     (in Malik Mazhar Sultan case [
Malik Mazhar Sultan
     (3) v. U.P. Public Service Commission
, (2008) 17 SCC
     703 : (2010) 1 SCC (L&S) 942] ) shall be strictly
     adhered to for the purpose of selection. All the
     vacancies are to be filled up in that particular year
     and there shall not be any carry forward of the
     unfilled posts.”
9.   It could thus be seen that this Court found that it was

difficult to find candidates for LDCE for the 25% posts

reserved for the said category and in many High Courts, the
11
said posts remained unfilled. This Court, therefore, reduced

the said 25% quota to 10%.
10. I.A. No. 249 of 2009 filed by the High Court of Delhi has

been pending for more than a decade. In the meantime, two

judicial officers­applicants herein have filed the aforesaid

I.As. The first one being for modification of the orders of this

Court dated 21st March 2002 and 20th April 2010.
11. It is not in dispute that in the High Court of Delhi, the

nature of work to be performed by the Civil Judge (Junior

Division) and Civil Judge (Senior Division) is the same. This

is a peculiar situation prevailing in the High Court of Delhi

where except for the difference in Pay Scale, there is no

difference with regard to the powers to be exercised and the

duties to be discharged by the said judges. It is also not in

dispute that the present ratio of Civil Judge (Junior Division)

to Civil Judge (Senior Division) is 80 : 20. The High Court of

Delhi has already moved the Principal Secretary (LJ & LA),

Government of NCT of Delhi for increase of quota of Civil

Judge (Senior Division) to 25% from 20% i.e. an increase
12
from 96 Civil Judges (Senior Division) to 121 Civil Judges

(Senior Division), out of a total strength of 482.
12. It is the grievance of the said two judicial officers­

applicants that on account of this peculiar situation, for 10%

quota under the LDCE, there are no candidates available for

promotion through merit. It is their further grievance that in

ordinary course, a person would get promoted even to DHJS

in 10 years. In this premise, the judicial officers­applicants

pray for modification of the orders dated 21 st March 2002

and 20th April 2010 passed by this Court in the present writ

petition so as to do away with the requirement of 5 years

qualifying service as Civil Judge (Senior Division) and modify

the same with the requirement of 10 years total qualifying

service as Civil Judge.
13. This position is not disputed by the High Court of Delhi.

On the contrary, it is the prayer made by the High Court of

Delhi that the order be modified and the requirement of 10

years minimum qualifying service be reduced to 7 years

minimum qualifying service [(5 years as Civil Judge (Junior
13
Division) and 2 years as Civil Judge (Senior Division) under

the 25% quota].
14. The very purpose for providing the channel of promotion

through LDCE was to provide an incentive to the officers

amongst the relatively junior officers to improve and to

compete with each other so as to excel and get quicker

promotion. In the peculiar situation prevailing in the High

Court of Delhi, the very purpose is frustrated.     We are,

therefore, of the considered view that in the peculiar facts

and circumstances, both I.A. No.249 of 2009 and I.A.

No.89454 of 2021 deserve to be allowed.
15. Shri Rao, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of

the High Court of Delhi has fairly stated that the High Court

of Delhi, on its own, has reserved two seats for the present

judicial officers­applicants so that their claims are not

defeated by passage of time or by delay in holding of the

examination.
16. In view of the submission made by Shri Rao, no orders

are necessary to be passed in I.A. No. 89450 of 2021, I.A.
14
No.44132 of 2022 in I.A. No. 89450 of 2021 and I.A. No.88976

of 2021.
17. In the result, I.A. No. 89454 of 2021 filed by the judicial

officers­applicants and I.A. No. 249 of 2009 filed by the High

Court of Delhi are allowed in the following terms:
(i)      Paragraph 28 (1) (b) of the order dated 21 st March

           2002 passed by this Court, is modified and

           substituted as under:
“25% by promotion strictly on the basis of
             merit through LDCE of Civil Judges having
             7 years qualifying service [(5 years as
             Civil Judge (Junior Division) and 2 years
             as Civil Judge (Senior Division) or 10
             years qualifying service as Civil Judge
             (Junior Division).”
(ii)     Similarly, in the order dated 20th April 2010 passed

           by this Court, the direction in paragraph (7), i.e.,

           “Thus, we direct that henceforth only 10% of the

           cadre strength of District Judges be filled up by

           limited departmental competitive examination with

           those candidates who have qualified service of five
15
years as Civil Judge (Senior Division)”, is modified

           and substituted as under:
“Thus, we direct that henceforth only 10%
             of the cadre strength of District Judges be
             filled    up    by     Limited      Departmental
             Competitive         Examination      with      those
             candidates who have qualified service of
             7 years [(5 years as Civil Judge (Junior
             Division) and 2 years as Civil Judge
             (Senior Division) or 10 years qualifying
             service as Civil Judge(Junior Division).”
18.   It    is   needless   to    state   that   since   the    aforesaid

modifications are being directed in the peculiar facts and

circumstances pertaining to the DHJS, the said modifications

shall apply only insofar as the DHJS is concerned.
……..….......................J.
                                            [L. NAGESWARA RAO]


                                              …….........................J.
                                                         [B.R. GAVAI]

                                           ……..….......................J.
                                             [ANIRUDDHA BOSE]

NEW DELHI;
APRIL 19, 2022.
16