[Cites
53
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Maharashtra vs 63 Moons Technologies Ltd on 22 April, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Bela M Trivedi
,
Surya Kant
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Reportable

                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                              Civil Appeal Nos. 2748-49 of 2022



          The State of Maharashtra                                .…Appellant

                                           Versus

          63 Moons Technologies Ltd.                              …Respondent
And With

                              Civil Appeal Nos. 2750-51 of 2022
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Chetan Kumar
Date: 2022.04.22
12:24:08 IST
Reason:
1
JUDGMENT



Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J


Contents

A.     Facts ............................................................................................................ 3

B.     Submissions ............................................................................................. 17

C.     Analysis..................................................................................................... 25

 C. 1
Framework of the MPID Act
................................................................... 25

 C. 2 Framework of NSE .................................................................................. 27

 C. 3 Definitions of „Deposit‟ and „Financial Establishment‟: Interpretation

 of
Section 2(c)
and
2(d)
of the MPID Act ...................................................... 40

     C. 3.1 Settlement Guarantee Fund: Deposit under
Section 2(c)
of the

     MPID Act ....................................................................................................... 46

     C. 3. 2 Receipt of commodities: Deposit under
Section 2(c)
of the Act . 49

 C.4 Uncovering the Conspiracy .................................................................... 55

     C. 4.1 The Grant Thornton Report .............................................................. 55

     C. 4. 2 63 Moons Judgment ........................................................................ 56

 C. 5 Constitutional Validity of the MPID Act ................................................. 65

 C. 6 The High Court‟s Judgment ................................................................... 71
2
PART A

1          The appeal arises from a judgment dated 22 August 2019 of the Bombay

    High Court, by which certain notifications attaching the property of the respondent

    under
Section 4
of the Maharashtra Protection of Interest of Depositors (in

    Financial Establishments) Act 19991 have been quashed. The respondent holds

    99.99% of the shareholding of National Spot Exchange Ltd2. At the core of the

    dispute is whether NSEL is a ‗financial establishment‘ within the meaning of
Section 2(d)
of the MPID Act.
A.     Facts

2          NSEL is a company incorporated under the
Companies Act
1956, and is a
wholly owned subsidiary of Financial Technologies (India) Limited, which is now

    known as 63 Moons Technologies Limited3. On 5 June 2007, the Union of India

    issued a notification under
Section 27
of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act

    19524 exempting forward contacts of one-day duration for sale and purchase of

    commodities traded on NSEL from the application of the provisions of the

    enactment. NSEL started operating as an exchange for spot trading in

    commodities. NSEL launched contracts for buying and selling of commodities on

    its trading platform with different settlement periods, ranging from T+0 to T+36

    days. ‗T‘ indicates the trade date, that is the date on which the trade took place

    and +0 or +36, indicates the number of business days after the trading day when

    the delivery of the commodity and the payment of price is made.

3           NSEL offered ‗paired‘ contracts. Such contracts enabled traders either by

    themselves or through their brokers, to simultaneously enter into paired
1
“
MPID Act
”
2
“NSEL”
3
“FCIL or 63 Moons”
4
“FCRA”
3
PART A

contracts, such as of T+2 and T+25 duration. The seller through his broker puts

the commodities on sale and the buyer through his broker looks to purchase

commodities of specific requirements. NSEL then pairs the buyer and the seller if

there is a match between the requirement of the buyer and the available

commodities with the seller. The buyer and the seller simultaneously enter into

T+2 and T+25 contracts. For example, if ‗A‘ (the buyer) wants to buy one ton of

basmati rice, he would trade on NSEL‘s platform through his broker. The platform

would identify that ‗B‘ (the seller) has an offer to sell the quantified commodity.

NSEL would then match both the contracts. The date of matching of the contracts

is termed as the trade date or ‗T‘. ‗A‘ must then pay the price of the commodity to

NSEL, which checks if ‗B‘ has deposited the stock in a warehouse accredited to

NSEL for delivery within two days. Once NSEL has confirmed that ‗B‘ has

deposited the stock in the warehouse, it transfers the money to ‗B‘.

Simultaneously, the same parties enter into a T+25 contract by which ‗A‘ (who

was the buyer in the T+2 contract) would sell the same quantity of commodity

purchased to ‗B‘ (who was the seller in the T+2 contract). The difference between

the purchasing cost and the selling cost is the profit that the trading member

acquires through the trade.     A flow chart indicating a representation of the

transaction is set out below:
4
PART A

                               T+2

                         Commodity Seller

Money is transferred                 Deposits commodity in
from NSEL’s settlement               NSEL accredited
account to seller’s                  warehouse
settlement account
                          NSEL

 Money is transferred                  Issues warehouse receipt
 from broker’s                         and displays it on
 settlement account to                 exchange terminal
 NSEL’s settlement
 account
                          Broker


  Pay money to brokers                 Places order on behalf of
                                       investor for purchasing of
                                       commodity


                            T+25
                           Investor
                                     Sells back the same
                                     commodity purchased on
                                     T+2


                         Commodity Seller

                                     NSEL pays the commodity
                                     seller


                             NSEL

                                     The seller’s broker pays
                                     NSEL for the sale of
                                     commodity
5
PART A
4             A detailed step-wise trading process of the paired contracts is indicated

    below:
(i)        A trading member of NSEL who wishes to trade in the platform is

                 required to place a specific quantity of the commodity in a warehouse

                 accredited to NSEL. The warehouse would then generate a warehouse

                 receipt;
(ii)       The registered trading member or his broker who had placed his

                 commodity    in the warehouse could on the basis of the standard

                 proforma contracts offered by NSEL place offers for sale of the

                 commodity on the platform, stipulating the price and quantity offered;
(iii)      The buying trading member or his broker would input buy orders of a

                 particular commodity and quantity on the NSEL trading platform;
(iv)       When a sale offer and a buy offer coincide, the exchange would be

                 matched by NSEL, stipulating the commodity, the price, and the

                 quantity;
(v)        The Exchange would communicate all the trades effected at the end of

                 the day;
(vi)       On the next day, an obligation report recording the pay-in and delivery

                 obligations would be forwarded to the trading members;
(vii)      On the day after (that is, settlement date), NSEL would debit the

                 trading member‘s designated settlement account for the amount of the

                 buying member‘s pay in obligations and it would be credited to NSEL‘s

                 exchange settlement account. NSEL‘s Operations Department would

                 inform NSEL‘s Delivery Department of the selling member‘s delivery
6
PART A

                   obligations. Based on the intimation, NSEL‘s Delivery Department

                   would confirm to the Operations Department if the requisite quantity of

                   the particular commodity is available according to the Warehouse

                   receipts. After such confirmation, the Operations Department would

                   release the purchase price to the selling broker‘s designated bank

                   account. Simultaneously, a Delivery Allocation Report would be issued

                   to the buyer‘s broker or the buyer informing him that the commodity

                   purchased was allotted to him; and
(viii)    NSEL would then send the buyer‘s details to the selling trading

                   Member and the selling trading member would arrange for the non-
member client/seller to generate a VAT paid sale invoice of the

                   commodity. On the basis of the Delivery Allocation Report and the VAT

                   Paid Invoice, NSEL would issue a Delivery Note authorizing the buyer

                   to take delivery from the designated warehouse. If the buyer choses to

                   not take delivery, he would be put in constructive possession of the

                   commodity where he would be entitled to take possession at any time.

5               On 27 April 2012, the Department of Consumer Affairs5 issued a show

    cause notice to NSEL on why action should not be taken against it for permitting

    transactions in violation of the exemption notification. On 12 July 2012, the DCA

    directed NSEL to give an undertaking that no contracts shall be launched until

    further instructions, and that all existing contracts must be settled on the due

    dates. In July 2013, about 13,000 persons who traded on the platform of NSEL

    claimed that other trading members had defaulted in the payment of
5
“DCA”
7
PART A

approximately Rs 5,600 crores. NSEL issued a circular on 31 July 2013

suspending its spot exchange operations. It stated that the delivery and

settlement of all pending contracts would be merged and the contracts would be

settled after the expiry of 15 days. NSEL published a statement on 6 August 2013

representing that it had sufficient stocks valued at Rs 6,032 crores in its

warehouses. A new pay-in schedule was announced by NSEL on 14 August

2013 by which the Exchange commenced the pay-in schedule from 16 August

2013 and pay-out schedule from 20 August 2013, in the same manner every

week. It was also represented that the members would be entitled to get simple

interest on their outstanding dues with effect from 16 August 2013 on a reducing

balance at 8% per annum till the end of the settlement calendar. The notification

is extracted below:
―National Spot Exchange Limited
                                                         Circular

                                                  August 14, 2013
                             Settlement Schedule
            In terms of the provisions of the rules, Bye-Laws and
            Business Rules of the Exchange and further to circular
            no. NSEL/TRD/2013/065/ dated July 31 2013, the
            Members of the Exchange are hereby notified that the
            Exchange has finalised the following revised schedule for
            settlement of outstanding dues payable to the members.
            This schedule has been prepared taking into account the
            exigencies emerging from sudden closure of trading
            operation, liquidity problem accentuated by withdrawal of
            buyers credit limits by the banks from the members, who
            are in pay in and the extensive discussion done by the
            members who have to complete pay in and members
            who have to receive the payments. Considering the
            challenges, the revised schedule of settlement has been
            prepared to ensure reduction in payment rist and meet
            the settlement obligation:
1. The Exchange will commence the Pay-in schedule from
            Friday, the 16th August, 2013 and pay-out from Tuesday,
            the 20th August, 2013 and thereafter in the same manner
            every week.
8
PART A
2. The Exchange shall effect pay out on a pro-rata basis
                     every week based on the money recovered as per the
                     settlement calendar attached herewith. These payments
                     are subject to realization of cheques of the members,
                     who have to complete pay-in. In case any payment is not
                     realised, then the Exchange shall take measures as per
                     its Rules and Bye laws.
3. All funds realized up to Friday every week starting from
                     August 16, 2013 shall be disbursed on Tuesday of the
                     subsequent week.
4. The schedule has taken into account all promised or
                     expected payment from the members, who have given
                     post-dated cheques or letters of commitment.
5. Members/clients shall be entitled to get interest on their
                     outstanding dues with effect from 16th August 2013 on
                     reducing balance method, based on simple interest rate
                     of 8% per annum till end of settlement calendar. Interest
                     amount shall be paid at end of the settlement.
6. A detailed settlement Calendar is being enclosed
                     herewith.
For and on behalf of

                     National Spot Exchange Ltd.
Santhosh Mansingh

                     Asst. Vice President‖



6               By a Notification dated 19 September 2014, the Central Government

    withdrew the exemption granted on 23 July 2008. The Forward Markets

    Commission6 recommended to DCA that steps be taken to ascertain the quantity

    and quality of commodities at accredited warehouses, the financial status of

    buyers and trading members, and that liability be fixed on the promoters of NSEL,

    i.e 63 Moons. On 27 August 2013, FMC directed a forensic audit of NSEL by

    Grant Thornton LLP. The Union of India ordered an inspection of accounts of

    NSEL and 63 Moons under
Section 209A
of the Companies Act. The Economic

    Offences Wing registered cases against the directors and key management
6
“FMC”
9
PART A

    personnel of the NSEL and 63 Moons and against trading members and brokers

    of NSEL under the provisions of the Indian Penal Code and the MPID Act.

7            Pankaj Ramnaresh Saraf, a Director of Vostak Far East Securities Prvt.

    Ltd., a company involved in the business of investment, trading, and financing

    filed a complaint7 on 30 September 2013 against the directors and persons

    holding key management posts in NSEL, 25 borrowers/trading members and

    some brokers of NSEL for offences under
Sections 120B
,
409
,
465
,
468
,
471
,
474
and
477A
of the Indian Penal Code 1860. The complainant stated that he had

    primarily been transacting in T+2 and T+25 contracts. He further stated that since

    NSEL suspended trading and deferred settlement of all one-day forward

    contracts by fifteen days, he had not received payment of Rs 202 lakhs that was

    due to him under various contracts. On 14 August 2013, he was informed by his

    broker that NSEL had issued a settlement schedule for the payment of

    outstanding dues after seven months. He alleged that the commodities were

    traded by providing ‗false‘ warehouse receipts of ‗non - existent commodities‘. It

    was also alleged in the complaint that NSEL held the commodities in warehouses

    accredited to it as a ‗trustee‘ on behalf of the depositors (buyers) and that the

    misappropriation is a criminal breach of trust. In addition to the above, he also

    alleged that the Settlement Guarantee Fund8 had been misused by NSEL.

8           The FIR was later transferred to the Economic Offences Wing9 of Mumbai

    Police. The case was registered and
Sections 3
and
4
of the MPID Act were

    added to the FIR. The case was transferred to the Special Court constituted
7
FIR No 216 of 2013
8
“SGF”
9
“EOW”
10
PART A

under the
MPID Act
.10 NSEL filed a writ petition challenging the invocation of the
MPID Act
on the ground that the exchange is not a ‗financial establishment‘ under

the provisions of the Act. By an order dated 1 October 2015, the petition was

dismissed by a Division Bench of the High Court on the following grounds:
(i)     The material collected by EOW during the course of the investigation

               revealed that NSEL did not carry out its exchange operations according

               to the bye-laws. It was prima facie evident that NSEL represented to

               the traders that they would be provided security free loans and that

               they would receive fixed returns of 14% to 16% pa;
(ii)    The record indicates that the transactions were not accompanied by

               physical delivery of goods. In many cases, the accounts of NSEL and

               the suppliers of the goods did not tally. The record also indicates that

               there were multiple accommodation entries due to collusion between

               NSEL and the trading members;
(iii)
Section 2(d)
of the MPID Act defines ‗financial establishment‘ as any

               person accepting any deposit under a scheme.
Section 2 (c)
of the

               MPID Act provides an inclusive definition of the term ‗deposit‘. Since

               NSEL assured the traders that their investments in paired contracts

               would secure them a return of 14 to 16% pa, the receipt of the returns

               would prima facie fall within the definition of ‗deposit‘; and
(iv)    A charge-sheet and supplementary charge-sheets have been filed.
NSEL has an alternative remedy of applying for discharge before the

               trial Court.
10
The case was registered as MPID Case 1 of 2014
11
PART A

 9         The State of Maharashtra issued a notification on 21 September 2016

     under
Section 4
of the MPID Act by which the properties of the respondent were

     attached. The relevant extract of the notification is reproduced below:
―No. MPI 2016/C.R.541/B/Pol II:- Whereas complaints
                  have been received from number of depositors against
                  M/s La-Fin Financial Services Pvt. Ltd. and M/s La-
                  Financial Services Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as
                  ―the said Financial Establishment‖) complaining that they
                  had collected the Fund and have defaulted to return the
                  said deposits made by the depositors , on demand;
And whereas, the State Government is satisfied that the
                  said Financial Establishment and its Chairman/Directors
                  are not likely to return the deposits to the depositors and
                  hence the Government has to protect the interests of the
                  depositors;
And whereas the properties in the Scheduled appended
                  hereto are alleged to have been acquired by the said
                  Financial Establishment and its Chairman/Directors from
                  and out of the deposits collected by the Financial
                  Establishment;
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by
                  sub-Section (1) of
Section 4
,
Section 5
and
Section 8
of
                  the Maharashtra Protection of Interest of Deposits (in
                  Financial Establishment) Act, 1000 (Mah. XVI of 2000)
                  (hereinafter referred to as ―the said Act‖) the Government
                  of Maharashtra hereby attaches the properties of the said
                  financial Establishment and in the name of its
                  Chairman/Directors as specified in the Schedule.‖
10         The Supreme Court on 26 October 2016 dismissed as withdrawn, the

     Special Leave Petition filed against the order of the Bombay High Court. The

     appellants filed a Writ Petition before the Bombay High Court challenging the

     notification dated 21 September 2016 issued under
Section 4
of the MPID Act

     attaching the properties of the respondent. The validity of
Sections 4
and
5
of the

     MPID Act was challenged on the ground that they are violative of
Articles 14
, 19
12
PART A

     and 300-A of the Constitution. The reliefs sought                           in the writ petition are

     extracted below:
―a. The Hon‘ble Court may declare that
Sections 4
and
5
of the MPID Act are violative of
Articles 14
and
19
of the
                      Constitution and
Article 300-A
of the Constitution and
                      consequently issue a Writ of Mandamus and/or any other
                      appropriate Writ, Order or Direction restraining the
                      Respondent Writ, Order or Direction restraining the
                      Respondent, its servants and/or agents from acting in
                      pursuance of those provisions;
b. In view of Prayer A above, issue a Writ, Order or
                      Direction under
Article 226
of the Constitution quashing
                      and setting aside the Impugned Notification dated
                      21.09.2016 (being Exhibit-S herein) issued by the
                      Respondent exercising the power under
Section 4
of the
                      MPID Act;
c. In the alternative, issue a Writ, Order or Direction in the
                      nature of Certiorari or any other appropriate Writ, Order
                      or Direction under
Article 226
of the Constitution
                      quashing and setting aside the Notification dated
                      21.09.2016 as being ultra-vires
Section 4
and
5
of the
                      MPID Act.
11           The State of Maharashtra issued further notifications dated 4 April 2018 11,

     7 April 201812, 11 April 201813, 19 April 201814, 15 May 201815 and 19 October

     201816 under
Sections 4
and
5
of the MPID Act, attaching the properties of the

     respondent to recover the defaulted money. The Writ Petitions were heard

     together and disposed of by a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court by a

     judgment dated 22 August 2019.                   The petition was allowed on the following

     grounds:
11
Notification No. MPI/1118/C.R-394/Pol-11
12
Notification No. MPI-1118/C.R. 329/Pol-11
13
Notification No. MPI-1118/C.R. 434/Pol 11 read with corrigendum bearing MPI No. 1118/C.R.-434/Pol 11 dated
     19 April 2018.
14
Notification No. MPI 1118/C.R. 4999 Pol 11
15
Notification No. MPI-1118/C.R. 597/Pol 11
16
Notification No. MPI 1118/CR 1040/Pol 11
13
PART A
(i)     The pay-in amount received from the buyer was only for the purpose of

        passing it over to the seller on the same date. This amount would not

        fall within the purview of
Section 2(c)
of the MPID Act in terms of which

        a ‗deposit‘ must be the receipt or acceptance of a valuable commodity

        which would be ‗repaid‘ by the financial establishment after a specified

        period;
(ii)    NSEL only performed the role of a facilitator, in a manner similar to the

        Bombay Stock Exchange. NSEL did not receive money with the

        obligation to return it on maturity. The fact that VAT is collected by the

        selling members from the buying members and that TDS is not

        deducted by NSEL indicates that NSEL is a mere pass through

        platform;
(iii)   The contract notes do not disclose that NSEL received any money or

        commodity with an assured return. Rather, the difference between the

        buy contract and the sell contract is the profit that the member receives.

        The profit from the transaction is determined by totalling the two

        amounts by taking into consideration the number of days when the

        commodity was sold and the pay-out was scheduled. It varies with

        different products based on the period when the sell contract (that is the

        second contract) is scheduled;
(iv)    The entries in the ledger of the traders reflect the delivery obligation

        and record the credit/debit pursuant to the trade. The entries of NSEL‘s

        settlement bank account show the amount received from a particular
14
PART A

        trader. The entries of pay-in and pay-out match with the ledger

        accounts of individual traders;
(v)     Mr. Pankaj Saraf in his FIR has not stated that he has deposited money

        with NSEL. He has stated that trading on the platform was successful

        until the cessation of further trades ;
(vi)    The transactions had gone wrong since as depicted in the show cause

        notice to NSEL, the outstanding positions of trade did not result in

        delivery by the end of the day. After 31 July 2013, 24 sellers failed to

        honour their part of the agreement by purchasing back the commodities

        on T+25 days. This was noted as a violation of the exemption granted.

        However, this does not change the fact that NSEL did not receive any

        ‗deposits‘ within the meaning of
Section 2 (c)
of the MPID Act since

        NSEL did not receive the commodities or money to be retained. NSEL

        only received transaction and warehouse charges which cannot be

        considered as a ‗deposit‘;
(vii)   EOW filed a charge sheet on 4 August 2014 in which it was stated that

        the important feature of the exchange is that it guarantees that both the

        parties would comply with their contractual obligations and if the trading

        member is unable to pay, the Exchange would sell the goods and

        recover the money. The charge sheet also notes that NSEL

        encouraged the investors to enter into contracts without depositing

        commodities in the warehouses. However, the charge sheet makes it

        evident that even the EOW was of the opinion that the Exchange was
15
PART A

               only acting as a transaction agent. Further by a letter dated 16 August

               2013 from FMC, information on defaulters was sought by NSEL;
(viii)   Merely because one of the brochures refers to an assured yield of 14 to

               16% pa, it cannot be held that a ‗deposit‘ was made;
(ix)     In the event that accounts of NSEL and the suppliers do not tally and

               delivery of commodities has not been provided, this may constitute an

               offence under
Sections 465
and
467
of the IPC. NSEL is not absolved

               of any of these liabilities;
(x)      At the highest, since the members had to pay back the amounts due on

               T+25 , they could be construed as a ‗financial establishment‘;
(xi)     The warehouse receipts do not establish the nature of the transaction

               nor can it be held that the deposit of commodities would fall within the

               purview of the definition of ‗deposit‘ since the commodity that was to be

               deposited in a warehouse was to be sold by the seller;
(xii)    The judgment of the Supreme Court in 63 Moons Technologies v.
Union of India17 does not have any bearing on whether the attachment

               of properties initiated under
Section 4
of the MPID Act is valid;
(xiii)   The forensic report of the 17 defaulter companies reveals that the

               defaulters have utilized the funds and have transferred them to their

               sister companies;
(xiv)    In another case of one of the defaulting trading members that is

               pending before the Gujarat High Court, the Deputy Secretary, Home

               Department, Government of Maharashtra had referred to the trading
17
(2019) 18 SCC 401
16
PART B

                   member as a ‗defaulter‘ who had committed offences under
Sections

                   409
,
465
,
467
,
468
,
471
and
474
of the IPC;
(xv)     The contention that
Section 4
of the MPID Act must be read down in

                   view of the ‗wide ambit‘ of the provisions which could be misused is left

                   open since the Supreme Court in
KK Bhaskaran v. State
and
Sonal

                   Hemant Joshi v. State of Maharashtra
has upheld the constitutional

                   validity of the Depositors Acts in       Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry,

                   specifically noting that the decision would also apply to the
MPID Act
since the provisions are pari materia;
(xvi)    By an interim order on 24 October 2018, the impugned notifications

                   attaching the properties were stayed on the ground that the attachment

                   was in excess of the defaulted amount. It was noted in the interim order

                   that the defaulted amount is Rs. 4822.53 Crores whereas the

                   authorities have attached properties worth Rs. 8547 Crores, including

                   Rs. 2200 Crores from NSEL. This order was challenged before the

                   Supreme Court and it has refused to interfere; and

          (xvii) The audit report submitted US Gandhi and Co. has traced trade

                   obligations of the trading members who are defaulters. NSEL has also

                   instituted recovery suits against the defaulters.
B.         Submissions

12              Mr. Jayant Mehta, Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant submitted:

          (i)      The definition of ‗deposit‘ in Section 2(c) of the MPID Act is broad and
inclusive. The provision must be interpreted widely keeping in view the

                   statement of objects and reasons for the enactment of the law;
17
PART B
(ii)     NSEL received money from the seller and returned it in kind (through

         commodities). NSEL received commodities from the seller and returned

         an equivalent amount after a specified period in cash. Therefore, NSEL

         accepted deposits from both the seller and the buyer;
(iii)    Through a paired contract, the buying member would buy a purchasing

         contract and simultaneously sell a sale contract paired by NSEL. The

         sale price was pre-designated by NSEL to offer an annualised return of

         14-16% to the buying member;
(iv)     NSEL is both the bailee of cash (at the buyer‘s end) and of valuable

         commodities (at the seller‘s end);
(v)      The writ petition filed by the respondent before the High Court was not

         maintainable since there was an alternative remedy of raising an

         objection against the attachment of property before the Designated

         Court under
Section 7
of the MPID Act. Further, any person who is

         aggrieved by the order of the Designated Court under Section 10 can

         appeal to the High Court within 60 days from the date of the order in

         terms of Section 11 of the MPID Act; and
(vi)     The settlement cycle broke because:
(a)      NSEL, contrary to its bye-laws and rules, did not warehouse

                 the commodities. The buying member did not have knowledge

                 of whether the commodities were warehoused; and
(b)      The buying member was lured into a paired contract on the

                 assurance that the commodity in the warehouse would

                 constitute a security and NSEL would be the counter-guarantor.
18
PART B

                            However, NSEL colluded with the selling members and

                            facilitated trades without ensuring that the commodities were

                            deposited in the warehouses.
13           Mr. Vikramjit Banerjee, ASG appearing for the State of Maharashtra made

     the following submissions:
(i)     NSEL is a financial establishment under
Section 2(d)
of the MPID

                     Act since it has accepted deposits as defined under
Section 2(c)
.
NSEL has been trading in different types of commodities through

                     ‗farmer‘ contracts, paired contracts, e-series contracts, among

                     others. NSEL guaranteed assured returns to investors;
(ii)    The provision of warehouse receipts along with the assurance of

                     returns indicates that NSEL was accepting deposits;
(iii)   This Court in
New Horizon Sugar Mills Ltd. v. Government of

                     Pondicherry18
has held that the state legislature is competent to

                     legislate upon financial establishments with an object to protect

                     investors. The Court also held that the expression ‗financial

                     establishment‘ includes a natural and a juristic person such as a

                     company incorporated under the
Companies Act
.
This Court has

                     held in
KK Bhaskaran v. State19
, State v. KS Palanichamy,20 and
PGF v. Union of India21
that the object of a law regulating financial

                     establishments is to protect the investors. Therefore, the provisions
18
(2012) 10 SCC 575
19
(2011) 3 SCC 793
20
(2017) 16 SCC 384
21
(2015) 13 SCC 50
19
PART B

                   of the statute must be interpreted keeping this salient purpose in

                   mind;
(iv)    This Court in 63 Moons Technologies (supra) held that NSEL

                   carried out trade in paired contracts in commodities and this created

                   financial transactions distinct from sale and purchase transactions;

                   and
(v)     The respondent has an alternate statutory remedy available to it

                   under
Section 10
of the MPID Act.
14          Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent

     submitted that:
(i)     The commodity sellers received money from the buyers on T+2 with

                   an obligation to repay the money on T+25. NSEL obtained decrees

                   against the defaulters. Therefore, at the highest, the appellants can

                   only argue that the defaulting trade members (not NSEL) are

                   ‗financial establishments‘;
(ii)    The State has characterised the member defaulters of the exchange

                   as ‗defaulter companies‘ and as ‗financial establishment‘ in

                   notifications issued by the Home Department on 31 March 2017 and

                   24 March 2018 which indicates that NSEL is not a defaulter;
(iii)   According to the forensic report submitted by the EOW, the full

                   money trail has been traced to the defaulting members. NSEL did

                   not receive any money as ‗deposit‘;
(iv)    The State of Maharashtra in a case which is pending before the

                   Gujarat High Court relating to one of the members (buyers)
20
PART B

                    submitted on affidavit that the defaulting members have defrauded

                    the investors;
(v)      Even if the impugned judgment is upheld, NSEL will not be absolved

                    of its criminal liability under the
IPC
but no criminal liability arises

                    under the
MPID Act
. . NSEL and 63 Moons are being prosecuted in

                    various other criminal proceedings. They will face civil suits as well;
(vi)     As against the current outstanding claim of Rs. 4,676 Crores,

                    properties in excess of Rs. 6000 Crores are attached;
(vii)    NSEL is only obligated to recover the money from the defaulters. It

                    has secured decrees/arbitral awards to the tune of Rs. 3,397 Crores

                    from the members. The Bombay High Court has accepted the

                    determination of liability of Rs. 136.98 Crores against defaulters by

                    the Committee appointed by it. The Committee has crystallised a

                    further liability of Rs. 760 Crores from the defaulters which is

                    pending acceptance by the Bombay High Court;
(viii)   NSEL has filed proceedings for execution of the decrees and

                    awards against the defaulters across five States. Since the process

                    is taking time, NSEL instituted a petition22 before this Court under
Article 32
seeking a consolidation of all execution proceedings;
(ix)     NSEL did not receive any ‗deposit‘, as defined under
Section 2(c)
of

                    the MPID Act since:
(a) The impugned notifications by which the property of the

                       respondent was attached under
Section 4
of the MPID Act
22
WP (C) No. 995 of 2019
21
PART B

                        proceed only on the basis that NSEL accepted money which it

                        failed to return and there is no reference to a deposit founded on

                        the acceptance of commodities;
(b) The Government cannot improve on the reasons by a

                        subsequent affidavit (Relied on Mohinder Singh Gill v. CEC23);
and
(c) According to the definition of ‗deposit‘ under
Section 2(c)
of the

                        MPID Act, only the deposit of ‗valuable‘ commodity is covered. In

                        common parlance, valuable commodities would be restricted to

                        gold, silver, or other precious metals. NSEL only traded in

                        agricultural commodities and steel. Agricultural commodities are

                        not covered by the definition.
(x)     The traders who participated on NSEL‘s platform are corporate

                  traders. The statement of objects and reasons of the
MPID Act
states that the Act is for the protection of ‗small‘ depositors;
(xi)    The proceeding under the
MPID Act
would short-circuit the trials in

                  the pending civil suits against both NSEL and 63 Moons. 63 Moons

                  is a public listed company with more than 50,000 shareholders, 800

                  employees and 2 million users. If the property of 63 Moons is

                  attached, the interest of stakeholders will be prejudiced; and
(xii)   NSEL did not have control over any monies received from the

                  traders. NSEL is a pass through platform, where the money was

                  sent to the counter party brokers on the same day.
23
(1978) 1 SCC 405
22
PART B

15             Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, Senior Counsel, appearing for the respondent made

     the following submissions:
(i)     NSEL runs a commodity exchange, similar to a stock exchange.
NSEL is only a transacting medium and neither collects ‗deposits‘

                       nor does it assure returns;
(ii)    NSEL receives a commission of Rs. 100 per one lakh of the trade

                       value (0.1%) from the traders;
(iii)   In
Bhaskaran
, (supra) this Court held that the Tamil Nadu

                       Protection of Interests of Depositors (in Financial Establishments)

                       Act 199724 is constitutionally valid. In paragraph 15 of the judgment,

                       the court observed that though the Tamil Nadu Act and MPID have

                       minor differences, the view taken in the judgment would equally

                       apply to the validity of the
MPID Act
. This Court rejected the

                       challenge on the ground of
Articles 14
, 19
and
21
without examining

                       the provisions of the statute. Therefore, the Court in the present

                       case is not precluded from examining the constitutional validity of

                       the provisions of the
MPID Act
;
(iv)
Section 4
of the MPID Act is arbitrary and constitutionally invalid and

                       it suffers from over-breadth since:
(a) Sub-section (1) of
Section 4
mandates the attachment of

                             property of the ‗promoter, director, partner, manager or member

                             of the said Financial Establishment.‘;
24
―Tamil Nadu Act”
23
PART B
(b) Sub-section (2) of Section 4 divests the title of the attached

              properties without due process of law; and
(c)
Section 7
states that the Designated Court shall issue a notice to

              the financial establishment or any other person whose property is

              attached. An objection shall be raised by all persons who are

              likely to have a claim. The objection shall be decided by a

              summary procedure under
Order 37 of CPC
1908. The

              divestment of title of a property by a summary procedure is

              arbitrary.
(v)      Though the transaction by NSEL in its platform seems to be an

         exchange of commodities on paper, it was an agreement between a

         lender and borrower. A borrower who has defaulted in paying the loan

         can be held liable to repay it;
(vi)     The forensic audit traces back the money trail to the borrowing-
traders and not to NSEL;
(vii)    Five of the six attachment notifications were ―omnibus notifications‖

         issued by an incompetent authority; and
(viii)   NSEL did not make a blanket assurance of 16% returns. The

         representations only meant that investors making ‗wise investments‘

         would get an annualised return of 16%.
24
PART C

     C.    Analysis

     C. 1
Framework of the MPID Act
16
The MPID Act
was enacted by the legislature in Maharashtra and received
the assent of the President on 21 January 2000. The Statement of Objects and

     Reasons accompanying the introduction of the Bill states that the statute is

     enacted to protect the public from the increasing menace of financial

     establishments grabbing money from the public in the form of deposits:
―There is a mushroom growth of Financial Establishments
                  in the State of Maharashtra in the recent past. The sole
                  object of these Establishments is of grabbing money
                  received as deposits from public, mostly middle class and
                  poor on the promises of unprecedented high attractive
                  interest rates of interest or rewards and without any
                  obligation to refund the deposit to the investors on
                  maturity or without any provision for ensuring rendering of
                  the services in kind in return, as assured. Many of these
                  Financial Establishments have defaulted to return the
                  deposits to public. As such deposits run into crores of
                  rupees, it has resulted in great public resentment and
                  uproar, creating law and order problem in the State of
                  Maharashtra, especially in the city like Mumbai which is
                  treated as the financial capital of India. It is, therefore,
                  expedient to a make a suitable legislation in the public
                  interest to curb the unscrupulous activities of such
                  Financial Establishments in the State of Maharashtra.‖

17
Section 3
of the MPID Act envisages punishment upon conviction of every

     person including a promotor, partner, director, manager or employee responsible

     for the management of or the conduct of the business or affairs of the financial

     establishment which has fraudulently defaulted in the repayment of deposits on

     maturity.
Section 3
is in the following terms:
―Any Financial Establishment, which fraudulently defaults
                  any repayment of deposit on maturity along with any
                  benefit in the form of interest, bonus, profit or in any other
                  from as promised or fraudulently fails to render service as
                  assured against the deposit, every person including the
25
PART C

             promoter, partner, director, manager or any other person
             or an employee responsible for the management of or
             conducting of the business or affairs of such Financial
             Establishment shall, on conviction, be punished with
             imprisonment for a term which may extend to six years
             and with fine which may extend to one lac of rupees and
             such Financial Establishment also shall be liable for a fine
             which may extend to six years and with fine which may
             extend to one lac of rupees and such Financial
             Establishment also shall be liable for a fine which may
             extend to one lac of rupees.
Explanation- For the purpose of this section, a Financial
             Establishment, which commits default in repayment of
             such deposit with such benefits in the form of interest,
             bonus, profit or in any other form as promised or fails to
             render any specified service promised against such
             deposit with an intention of causing wrongful gain to one
             person or wrongful loss to another person or commits
             such default due to its inability arising out of impracticable
             or commercially not viable promises made while accepting
             such deposit or arising out of deployment of money or
             assets acquired out of the deposits in such a manner as it
             involves inherent risk in recovering the same when
             needed shall, be deemed to have committed a default or
             failed to render the specific service, fraudulently.‖
Section 4
contemplates the levy of attachment on properties of a financial

establishment on default of return of payment.
Section 4
provides that if on a

complaint received from the depositors or otherwise, the Government is satisfied

that any financial establishment has failed to return the deposit on maturity or

demand, or to pay interest or an assured benefit, or has failed to provide a

service that was assured against the deposit, or if the Government has reason to

believe that any financial establishment is acting in a manner detrimental to the

interest of the depositors with the intention to defraud them, it may attach the

money or property acquired by the financial establishment out of the deposit. The

provision states that if such money or property is not available to be attached, the
26
PART C

     property of the financial establishment or the promoter, director, partner, manager

     or member may be attached.
18
Section 5
provides for the appointment of a Competent Authority while
Section 6
contains a provision for a Designated Court.
Section 7
enunciates the

     powers of the Designated Court regarding attachment. Under
Section 7
, upon

     receipt of an application under
Section 5
, the Designated Court shall issue a

     show cause notice to the financial establishment or any person whose property is

     attached on why the order of attachment should not be made. A notice shall also

     be issued to all persons who are likely to have an interest in the property, calling

     them to submit objections to the attachment of the property on the ground that

     they have an interest in the property or a portion of it. If no cause is shown, then

     the attachment shall be made absolute and directions can be issued for the

     realisation and equitable distribution of assets. If cause is shown, the Designated

     Court shall investigate into it by following a summary procedure as contemplated

     under Order 37 of the Civil Procedure Code 1908. An appeal against an order of

     the Designated Court is envisaged by the provisions of
Section 11
.
19         Since NSEL did not have sufficient money or property for attachment

     under
Section 4
on default of payment of the outstanding amounts, the State of

     Maharashtra attached the properties of the respondent which owns 99.9% of the

     shares of NSEL.
C. 2 Framework of NSE

20         It is necessary to refer to the bye-laws of NSEL to ascertain the structure

     of NSEL‘s operation and functioning. Bye-law 2.17 defines ―certified warehouse

     receipt‖ in the following terms:
27
PART C

                   ―Certified Warehouse receipt means a receipt issued
                   under the authority of the Exchange or any agency
                   approved by the exchange as a certified warehouse,
                   evidencing proof of ownership of a standard quantity of
                   commodities of a stated grade and quality by the
                   beneficial owner or holder of the certified warehouse
                   receipt. Certified warehouse receipt may either be in
                   physical form or in dematerialised/electronic form as may
                   be permitted by law.‖

     The expression ‗certified warehouse‘ is defined in Bye-law 2.18 as a ―warehouse

     approved and designated by the Exchange for making deliveries to and taking

     deliveries for fulfilling contractual obligations resulting from transaction in

     commodities.‖ Bye-law 2.51 defines ‗Margin‘ as follows:
―Margin means a deposit or payment of cash/other
                   specified assets/documents to establish or maintain
                   a position in a commodity and include initial margin,
                   special margin, ordinary margin, delivery period margin,
                   additional margin and variation margin or any other type
                   of margin as may be determined by the Exchange from
                   time to time.‖
                                                     (emphasis supplied)
21          The expression ‗warehouse receipt‘ is defined in Bye-law 2.96 to mean a

     document evidencing that a commodity is being held in the approved warehouse.

     Bye-law 3.7 provides for limitation of liability:
―The Exchange shall not be liable for any activities of its
                   members or of any other person, authorised or
                   unauthorised, acting in the name of any member, and
                   any act of commission or omission by any one of them,
                   either singly or jointly, at any time shall not be in any way
                   construed to be an act of commission or omission by any
                   one of them, as an agent of the Exchange. Save as
                   otherwise specifically provided in these Bye-Laws and in
                   the Business Rules and Regulations of the Exchange, the
                   Exchange shall not incur or shall not be deemed to have
                   incurred any liability and accordingly, no claim or
                   recourse shall lie against the Exchange, any member of
                   the Board of Directors/or committee duly appointed by it
                   or any other authorised person acting for an on behalf of
                   the Exchange, in respect of or in relation to any
                   transaction entered into through the exchange made by
28
PART C

                  its members and any other matters connected therewith o
                  related thereto, which are undertaken for promoting,
                  facilitating, assisting, regulating, or otherwise managing
                  the affairs of the Exchange to achieve its objects as
                  defined in the Memorandum and Articles of Association
                  of the Exchange.‖
22         Bye-law 4.20(a) states that all outstanding transactions in commodities

     shall be compulsorily delivered at one or more delivery points or in warehouses

     accredited to the Exchange. Clause (b) of the bye-law states that if the

     outstanding transactions have not been settled by giving or receiving deliveries,

     then it shall be auctioned by buying-in or selling-out as per the Business Rules of

     the Exchange:
(a) All outstanding transactions in commodities shall in
                      general be for compulsory delivery at any one or
                      more delivery points and/or warehouses approved,
                      certified and designated by the Exchange.
(b) All outstanding positions not settled by giving or
                      receiving deliveries shall be auctioned by way of
                      buying-in or selling-out as per the Business Rules of
                      the Exchange, together with a penalty as prescribed
                      by a Managing Director or such committee for those
                      failing to give or receive delivery.
Bye-Law 7.10.2 states that the Exchange shall be responsible for its

     commitments to each clearing member unless the cause for default was under
improper trades not covered by the Settlement Guarantee Fund:
―The Exchange shall be responsible for its commitments
                  to each clearing member whether the remaining clearing
                  members with whom it has dealings have defaulted
                  except under circumstances where improper trades not
                  covered under the Settlement Guarantee Fund (SGF) are
                  the cause for default…‖
29
PART C

Bye-law 7.11 states that the Clearing House of the Exchange shall, among other

things, have the responsibility of receiving margin payments, certification of

warehouse receipts, and transmission of documents. Bye-law 7.11 reads as

follows:
―The Clearing House of the Exchange shall, in the
              manner specified by the Relevant Committee or the
              relevant authority, have the responsibility of receiving
              and maintaining margin payments, monitoring open
              positions and margins, and transmission of
              documents, payments and certified warehouse
              receipts amongst the trading-cum- clearing members
              and institutional clearing members of the Exchange.‖
                                                 (emphasis supplied)

Bye-law 9 provides for clearing and settlement. Bye-laws 9.5, 9.6 and 9.7 provide

as follows:
―9.5 An order to buy or sell will become a matched
              transaction only when it is matched in the Trading
              system and the Clearing House does not find the order to
              be invalid on any other consideration and further after
              verifying that the following are in agreement and/or in
              order:
( i) Commodity,
(ii) price indices,
(iii) Quantity,
(iv) Transaction quote,
                                                   (emphasis supplied)

              9.6 Once a trade is matched and marked to market by the
              Clearing House, the Exchange shall be substituted as
              counter party for all net financial liabilities of the
              clearing members in specified commodities in which
              the Exchange has decided to accept the responsibility
              of guaranteeing the financial obligations.
(emphasis supplied)

              9.7 All outstanding transactions shall be binding upon the
              original contracting parties, that is, the members of the
              Exchange until issue of delivery notice or delivery order or
              payment for delivery, as the case may be.‖
30
PART C

23   Bye-law 10 contains provisions with regard to delivery:
―10.1 For the fulfilment of outstanding position, commodity
           shall be tendered by Delivery Orders through the
           respective Clearing Members to the Clearing House in
           such manner as may be prescribed in the Business Rules
           or Regulations.
10.2 The Exchange shall prescribe tender days and
           delivery period for each commodity during which sellers
           having outstanding sale position must issue Delivery
           Orders through their respective Clearing Members to the
           Clearing House.
10.3 The Clearing House shall allocate the delivery orders
           received by it amongst one or more buyers having
           outstanding long open positions in a manner as
           considered appropriate by the Relevant Authority.
10.4 The Relevant Authority may specify in advance
           before commencement of trading in a commodity various
           grades of a commodity that may be tendered and the
           discounts and premiums for such grades.
10.5 All positions outstanding at the end ·of the day shall
           result into compulsory delivery obligation at the closing
           rate of the date of transaction as fixed by the Relevant
           Authority. The differences arising out of the actual
           transaction price and closing price shall be received from
           and disbursed to amongst the members on the next day
           of trading, pending actual delivery. The Relevant Authority
           may prescribe penalty on sellers with outstanding
           positions who fail to issue delivery orders and the
           Exchange may conduct auction to ensure delivery to the
           buyers who hold outstanding buy positions and intended
           to lift delivery and could not receive Delivery Orders
           against such positions due to failure on the part of the
           seller. In case of non availability of commodities during
           the auction process, close-out process as defined in the
           business rule shall be applicable. The Relevant Authority
           may prescribe penalty on buyers with outstanding
           positions who fail to pay against his purchase obligation
           and the Exchange may conduct sale out auction to ensure
           that the sellers gets the price for the commodities
           delivered against their sale obligation and could not
           receive payment due to failure on the part of the buyers.
In case of non availability of suitable buyers during the
           auction process, close-out process as defined in the
           business rule shall be applicable. Failure to pay the dues
           and penalties relating to such closing out within the
           stipulated period shall cause the member to be declared
           as defaulter and render him liable for disciplinary action.‖
31
PART C

24         Bye-law 10.7 envisages that a seller issuing the delivery order shall

     receive from the Clearing House the full price of the commodity delivered as per

     the delivery order rate, subject to additions or deductions on account of premium

     or discounts prescribed under the bye-laws. Under bye-law 10.8, a buyer has to

     pay to the Clearing House, the value of delivery allocated on his account by the

     Exchange within the time specified. However, the money will be passed by the

     Clearing House to the seller only on the completion of the delivery process to the

     satisfaction of the Exchange. The bye-law reads as follows:
―10.8 A buyer shall pay to the Clearing House the value
                  of delivery allocated on his account by the Exchange
                  within such time as may be specified, by the Exchange.
                  After getting full price of delivery from the buyer as per
                  delivery order allocated to him, the Exchange will
                  endorse the delivery order to him. Thereafter, till
                  completion of the delivery process, the money will be
                  retained by the Clearing House and will be passed on
                  to the seller only on completion of the delivery
                  process to the satisfaction of the Exchange. The
                  Clearing House will pass on the proceeds to the
                  seller after making adjustments relating to quality,
                  quantity and freight factors, as the case may be. The
                  balance amount, if any, remaining after such
                  adjustments, will be passed on to or recovered from the
                  buyer by the Clearing House.‖
                                                        (emphasis supplied)

     Bye-law 10.11 provides that at the time of issuing the delivery order, the seller of

     the commodity must satisfy the clearing member that he owns and holds in his

     possession or his agent‘s possession adequate stocks of the required quantity

     and quality of the commodity. Bye-law 10.12 prescribes that:
―A seller member is entitled to offer delivery only at
                  the delivery centers specified by the Exchange in
                  advance for the respective commodity. Delivery can be
                  tendered at such specified centers strictly as per the
                  delivery procedure specified by the Exchange. Before
                  tendering delivery, the seller is also required to obtain a
                  certificate from a surveyor empanelled by the Exchange
32
PART C

                  and such certificate shall be accompanied with the
                  delivery order being tendered by him to the Clearing
                  House. The surveyor's certificate shall clearly specify the
                  quality of the goods tendered and shall also confirm that
                  such quality is tenderable as per the contract specification
                  of the Exchange. In case of non-compliance of any of
                  these conditions, the delivery order is rejected ab
                  initio.”
                                                        (emphasis supplied)
25        Thus, under the above bye-law, the selling member is entitled to offer

     delivery only at the delivery centre which is specified in the Exchange strictly in

     accordance with the delivery procedure provided before tendering delivery. The

     seller has to obtain a surveyor‘s certificate which is to be accompanied with the

     delivery order being tendered by him to the Clearing House. Bye-laws 10.14,

     10.15 and 10.16 contain the following stipulations:
―10.14 Members of the Exchange and the clients/
                  constituents dealing through them shall strictly abide by
                  the delivery procedure, methods of sampling, survey,
                  transportation, storage, packing, weighing and final
                  settlement procedures, as may be specified by the
                  Relevant Authority from time to time. Any violation of such
                  method will be dealt with by the Relevant Authority in the
                  manner, as may be specified from time to time.
10.15 A seller of commodity shall deliver the quantity as
                  per his net sale position in the commodity during the
                  period specified ·in the Rules, Business Rules and
                  Regulations of the Exchange and notices and orders
                  issued thereunder from time to time for the specified
                  commodity, which should confirm to the quality specified
                  by the Exchange in the contract specification. In case of
                  any failure to do so, such net sale position shall be closed
                  out by buying in auction and the seller shall be required to
                  pay the difference, as determined by the Clearing House
                  and penalty in addition thereto.
10.16 A buyer shall be required to lift delivery from the
                  specified warehouse within the period prescribed by the
                  Relevant Authority, as per the delivery order assigned to
                  him. In case of his failure to do so, he shall be required to
                  pay the warehouse charges, insurance charges and other
                  expenses relating to storage for the incremental period
                  and also a penalty in addition thereto.‖
33
PART C

26         Bye-law 12 contains provisions for a Settlement Guarantee Fund. The

     Settlement Guarantee Fund is constituted by deposits made by the members of

     the Exchange and is utilised for paying in the event of a default in payments by

     the trading members, paying insurance covers and covering the losses of the

     Exchange, among other uses. Bye-law 12.1.1 is in the following terms:
―12.1 The Exchange to maintain Settlement Guarantee
                 Fund
                 12.1.1 The Exchange shall maintain Settlement
                 Guarantee Fund in respect of different commodity
                 segments of the Exchange for such purposes, as may be
                 prescribed by the Relevant Authority from time to time.‖


27         Bye-Law 12.1.2 states that the relevant authority may prescribe from time

     to time, the norms and conditions governing Settlement Guarantee which may

     among other things specify the amount of deposit or contribution to be made by

     each trading member to the Settlement Guarantee Fund. The bye-law also states

     that rules are to be made on contributions, conditions of repayment and

     withdrawal of contribution from the fund among other stipulations. Bye law 12.1.3

     states that the minimum amount in the fund before starting the trading must be

     Rs 1 Crore, which can be suitably increased.           Bye Law 12.2 stipulates the

     contribution and deposit with the Settlement Guarantee Fund:
―12.2 Contribution to and Deposits with Settlement
                 Guarantee Fund

                 12.2.1 Each member shall be required to contribute to
                 and provide a minimum security deposit, as may be
                 determined by the Relevant Authority from time to time,
                 to the relevant Settlement Guarantee Fund. The
                 Settlement Guarantee Fund shall be held by the
                 Exchange. The money in the Settlement Guarantee Fund
                 shall be applied in the manner, as may be provided in
                 these Bye-laws, Rules, Business Rules and Regulations
                 of the Exchange and notices and orders issued
                 thereunder from time to time.
34
PART C

                  12.2.2 The Relevant Authority may specify the amount of
                  additional contribution or deposit to be made by each
                  member and/or category of clearing members, which
                  may, inter alia, include the minimum amount to be
                  provided by each clearing member.
12.2.3 The Exchange shall, as a result of multi-lateral
                  netting followed by it in respect of settlement of
                  transactions, guarantee financial settlement of such
                  transactions to the extent it has acted as a legal counter
                  party, as may be provided in the relevant Bye-laws from
                  time to time.
12.2.4. The total amount of security deposit and
                  additional deposit, maintained by a clearing member with
                  the Clearing House of the exchange, in any form as
                  specified herein, shall form part of the Settlement
                  Guarantee Fund.
12.2.5 The amount deposited by a clearing member
                  towards the security deposit shall be refundable, subject
                  to such terms and conditions as may be specified by the
                  Relevant Authority from time to time. Any amount
                  deposited or paid by the clearing member may be
                  refunded provided further that such amount is in
                  surplus and there is no actual/crytallized or
                  contingent liability or a claim from any client or
                  clearing bank to be discharged by the clearing
                  member.
(emphasis supplied)



28         Bye-law 12.3 stipulates that a member may provide a deposit in the form of

     cash, fixed deposit receipts, bank guarantees or in such other form.
12.3 Form of Contribution or Deposit

                  The Relevant Authority may, in its discretion, permit a
                  member to contribute to or provide the deposit to be
                  maintained with the Settlement Guarantee Fund, in the
                  form of either cash, fixed deposit receipts, bank
                  Guarantees or in such other form or method and subject
                  to such terms and conditions, as may be specified by the
                  relevant Authority from time to time.
35
PART C

Bye-law 12.4 states that the deposit may be replaced by fresh deposits. Bye-law

12.5 states that the Settlement Guarantee Fund may be invested in securities or

other avenues of investment:
12.4 Replacement of Deposit

              By giving a suitable notice to the Exchange and subject
              to such conditions, as may be specified by the Relevant
              Authority from time to time, a member may withdraw fixed
              deposit receipts or bank Guarantees given to the
              Exchange, representing the member‘s contribution or
              deposit towards the Settlement Guarantee Fund,
              provided that the member has, simultaneously with such
              withdrawal, deposited cash, fixed deposit receipts, or
              bank Guarantees with the Clearing House or the
              Exchange or made contribution through such other mode,
              as may be approved by the Clearing House or the
              Exchange from time to time, to meet his required
              contribution or deposit, except as provided in these Bye-
Laws.
12.5 Investment of Settlement Guarantee Fund

              Funds in the Settlement Guarantee Fund may be
              invested in such approved securities and/or other
              avenues of investments, as may be provided for by
              the Board in the relevant Business Rules and
              Regulations in force from time to time.
(emphasis supplied)

Bye-law 12.6 states that the Settlement Guarantee Fund may be used for the

purpose of (i) maintenance of the fund; (ii) using the fund temporarily to fulfil the

shortfalls and deficiencies arising from clearing and settlement obligations; (iii)

payment of insurance cover; (iv) covering the loss arising from clearing and

settlement obligations; and (v) repaying to the members, the balance amount

available after utilization.
―12.6 Administration   and    Utilization   of   Settlement
              Guarantee Fund

              12.6.1 The Settlement Guarantee Fund may be utilised
              for such purposes as may be provided in these Bye-Laws
              and Regulations and subject to such conditions as the
36
PART C

                  relevant Authority may prescribe from time to time, which
                  may include

                  a. defraying the expenses of creation and maintenance of
                  Settlement Guarantee Fund;
b. temporary application of Settlement Guarantee Fund to
                  meet shortfalls and deficiencies arising out of the clearing
                  and settlement obligations of clearing members in
                  respect of such transactions, as may be provided in these
                  Bye-Laws, Rules, Business Rules and Regulations of the
                  Exchange in force from time to time;
c. payment of premium on insurance cover(s) which the
                  Relevant Authority may take from time to time, and/or for
                  creating a Default Reserve Fund by transferring a
                  specified amount every year, as may be decided by the
                  Relevant Authority from time to time;
d. Meeting any loss or liability of the Exchange arising out
                  of clearing and settlement operations of such transaction,
                  as may be provided in these Bye-Laws, Rules, Business
                  Rules and Regulations of the Exchange in force from
                  time to time;
e. repayment of the balance amount to the member
                  pursuant to the provisions regarding the repayment of
                  deposit after meeting all obligations under Bye-Laws,
                  Rules, Business Rules and Regulations of the Exchange,
                  when such member ceases to be member, and

                  f. any other purpose, as may be specified by the Relevant
                  Authority, from time to time.‖



29         Bye-laws 12.7 and 12.8 specifically provide for utilization of the fund for the

     failure of the trading member to meet his settlement obligations or when he is

     declared as a defaulter:
“12.7 Utilization for failure to Meet Obligations

                  Whenever a member fails to meet his settlement
                  obligations to the Exchange arising out of his clearing
                  and settlement operations in respect of his transaction,
                  as may be provided in these Bye-Laws, Rules and
                  Regulations of the Exchange, the Relevant Authority may
                  utilise the Settlement Guarantee fund and other moneys
                  lying to the credit of the said member to the extent
                  necessary to fulfil his obligations under such terms and
37
PART C

            conditions, as the Relevant Authority may specify from
            time to time;
12.8 Utilisation in Case of Failure to Meet Settlement
            Obligations or on Declaration of Defaulter

            Whenever a member fails to meet his settlement
            obligation to the Exchange arising out of the transactions,
            as may be provided in these Bye-laws, Rules, Business
            Rules and Regulations of the Exchange in force from
            time to time, or whenever a member is declared a
            defaulter, the Relevant Authority may utilise the
            Settlement Guarantee Fund and other moneys of the
            member to the extent necessary to fulfil his obligations in
            the following order:
[…]

            12.9.2 If the cumulative amount under all the above
            heads is not sufficient, the balance obligations shall be
            assessed against all the clearing members in the same
            proportion as their total contribution and deposit towards
            security deposit, and the clearing members shall be
            required to contribute or deposit the deficient amount in
            the Settlement Guarantee Fund within such time, as the
            Relevant Authority may specify in this behalf from time to
            time.‖

            […]

Bye-law 12.11 states that the deposit shall be allocated by the Exchange among

various segments of trading:
12.11 Allocation of the Contribution or Deposit

            Each clearing member‘s contribution and deposit towards
            the Settlement Guarantee Fund shall be allocated by the
            Exchange among the various segments of trading,
            which are designated as such by the exchange and in
            which the member may participate, in such
            proportion as the Exchange may decide from time to
            time. The Exchange shall retain the rights to utilise the
            fund allocated to a particular segment of trading to match
            the losses or liabilities of the Exchange, incidental to the
            operation for that segment or for any other segment, as
            may be decided by the Exchange at his discretion.
38
PART C

Bye-law 12.12 states that the clearing member shall be repaid his deposit after

making deductions:
12.12 Repayment to the Clearing Member on His
            Cessation

            12.12.1 A members hall be entitled to repayment of the
            actual amount of deposit, if any, made by him to the
            Settlement Guarantee Fund provided it is not part of the
            admission fee after

            a. the member ceases to be an exchange member on
            account of any reason whatsoever,

            b. all pending transactions at the time the member
            ceases to be an exchange member, which may result in a
            charge to the settlement Guarantee Fund, have been
            closed and settled,

            c. all obligations to the Exchange for which the member
            was responsible while he was an exchange member
            have been satisfied, or at the discretion of the Relevant
            Authority, have been deducted by the Exchange from the
            member‘s actual deposit; provided, the member has
            presented to the Exchange such indemnified or
            guarantees       as the Relevant Authority may deem
            necessary or another clearing member has been
            substituted owning liability for all the transaction and
            obligations of the clearing member, who had ceased to
            be a member.
d. a suitable amount, as may be determined by the
            Relevant Authority at his discretion, has been set aside
            for taking care of any loss/liability/obligation arising out of
            his past transactions and

            e. a suitable amount, as may be determined by the
            Relevant Authority at its discretion, has been set aside by
            the Exchange towards such other obligations, as may be
            perceived by the Exchange to exist or be perceived by
            the Exchange to arise in future.
12.12.2 The Relevant Authority may specify norms for
            repayment of deposit including the manner, amount and
            period within which it may be paid. The repayment
            amount, at no point of time, will exceed the actual deposit
            available to the credit of the clearing member after
            deducting the necessary dues or charges payable by
            such clearing member from time to time, including the
            initial deposit.
39
PART C

     C. 3 Definitions of „Deposit‟ and „Financial Establishment‟: Interpretation of
Sections 2(c)
and
2(d)
of the MPID Act

30         The notifications attaching the properties of the respondent were issued

     under
Section 4
of the MPID Act.
Section 4
covers only those situations where a

     ‗financial establishment‘ is a defaulting entity.
Section 4
is reproduced below:
“4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other
                  law for the time being in force,-
(i) where upon complaints received from the depositors
                  or otherwise, the Government is satisfied that any
                  Financial Establishment has failed,-
(a) to return the deposit after maturity or on
                  demand by the depositor; or
(b) to pay interest or other assured benefit; or
(c) to provide the service promised against such
                  deposit; or
(ii) where the Government has reason to believe that
                  any Financial Establishment is acting in a calculated
                  manner detrimental to the interest of the depositors with
                  an intention to defraud them;
[…]

                                                      (emphasis supplied)



31         The primary issue is whether NSEL is a ‗financial establishment‘ within the

     meaning of
Section 2(d)
.
Section 2(d)
reads as follows:
―(d) ―Financial Establishment‖ means any person
                  accepting deposit under any scheme or arrangement or
                  in any other manner but does not include a corporation or
                  a co-operative society owned or controlled by any State
                  Government or the Central Government or a banking
                  company as defined under clause (c) of
section 5
of the
                  Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
Financial Establishment is defined as any person accepting a ‗deposit‘. The

     definition excludes from its purview (a) a corporation or cooperative society

     controlled or owned either by the State or the Central Government; and (b) a

     Banking Company as defined under
Section 5(c)
of the Banking Regulation Act
40
PART C

1949. Since NSEL does not fall within any of the exceptions, it would be a

‗financial establishment‘ for the purposes of the Act if it is a ‗person accepting

deposit‘. Section 3(42) of the General Clauses Act 1897 provides an inclusive

definition of ―person‖ to include both incorporated and unincorporated

companies25 as:
― ‗person‘ shall include any company or association or
                     body of individuals, whether incorporated or not.‖

The expression deposit is defined in
Section 2(c)
of the MPID Act in the following

terms:
―(c) ―deposit‖ includes and shall be deemed always to
                     have included any receipt of money or acceptance of any
                     valuable commodity by any Financial Establishment to be
                     returned after a specified period or otherwise, either in
                     cash or in kind or in the form of a specified service with or
                     without any benefit in the form of interest, bonus, profit or
                     in any other form, but does not include–
(i)     amount raised by way of share capital or by way
                     of debenture, bond or any other instrument covered
                     under the guidelines given, and regulations made, by the
                     SEBI, established under the
Securities and Exchange
                     Board of India Act, 1992
;
(ii)    amounts contributed as capital by partners of a
                     firm;
(iii)   amounts received from a scheduled bank r a co-
operative bank or any other banking company as defined
                     in clause (c) of
section 5
of the Banking Regulation Act,
                     1949;
(iv)    any amount received from, -
(a)   the Industrial Development Bank of India,
(b)   a State Financial Corporation,
(c)   any financial institution specified in or under section 6A of
                     the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964, or
(d)   any other institution that may be specified by the
                     Government in this behalf;
(v)     amounts received in the ordinary course of
                     business by way of, -
(a)   security deposit,
(b)   dealership deposit,
(c)   earnest money,
(d)   advance against order for goods or services;
25
New Horizon Sugar Mills Limited v. Government of Pondicherry
, (2912) 10 SCC 575 (para 58)
41
PART C
(vi)    any amount received from an individual or a firm or an
                association of individuals not being a body corporate,
                registered under any enactment relating to money
                lending which is for the time being force in the State; and
(vii)   any amount received by way of subscriptions in respect
                of a Chit.
Explanation I. – ―Chit‖ has the meaning as assigned to it
                in clause (b) of
section 2
of the Chit Funds Act, 1982;
                Explanation II. – Any credit given by a seller to a buyer on
                the sale of any property (whether movable or immovable)
                shall not be deemed to be deposit for the purposes of this
                clause;
The statutory definition of the expression ‗deposit‘ comprises of the following

ingredients:
(i)     Any receipt of money or the acceptance of a valuable commodity by a

        financial establishment;
(ii)    Such acceptance ought to be subject to the money or commodity being

        required to be returned after a specified period or otherwise; and
(iii)   The return of the money or commodity may be in cash, kind or in the form

        of a specified service, with or without any benefit in the form of interest,

        bonus, profit or in any other form.
These elements of the definition are followed by specific exclusions contemplated

in clauses (i) to (vii). Clause (i) of the exceptions covers an amount which is

raised by way of share capital or by debenture, bond or other instrument

governed by the guidelines and regulations of SEBI. Clause (v) states that money

received in the ordinary course of business by way of security deposit, dealership

deposit, earnest money or advance against an order of goods or services shall be

excluded. The exclusions in clause (i) to (vii) indicate that transactions which

would otherwise fall within the broad sweep of the definition are excluded.
42
PART C

32           The legislature may define a word artificially by restricting or expanding its

     natural meaning. When the legislature employs the phrase ‗means‘, the definition

     is intended to be exhaustive.
In
Indra Sarma v. VKV Sarma,26
this Court

     observed that the definition of the expression ‗domestic relationship‘ in
Section

     2(f)
of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005 is restrictive

     since it is defined by the use of the term ‗means‘. On the other hand, the Court

     has taken a consistent view that where the definition of a word is inclusive, as

     presaged by the adoption of the expression ―includes,‖ it is prima facie

     extensive27. The definition of ‗deposit‘ uses the phrase ‗includes and shall be

     deemed to have always included‘. The import of this is to create a legal fiction by

     which actions which though not included within the natural meaning of the

     expression are intended to be included. The combined use of ‗includes‘ and

     ‗deemed to have always included‘ while defining the term ‗deposit‘ makes the

     term inclusive and not restrictive.
33           The expression ‗deposit‘ is conspicuously broad in its width and ambit for it

     includes, not only any receipt of money but also the acceptance of any valuable

     commodity by a financial establishment under any scheme or arrangement. As a

     matter of interest, we may note at this stage that the expression ―any‖ is used in

     the substantive part of the definition of the expression ‗deposit‘ on five occasions

     namely;
(i)     Any receipt of money;

     (ii)    Any valuable commodities;

     (iii)   By any financial establishment;
26
(2013) 15 SCC 755
27
Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation v. Ashok Iron Work Pvt. Ltd.
, (2009) 3 SCC 240;
Ramanlal Bhailal
     Patel v. State of Gujarat
, (2008) 5 SCC 449
43
PART C
(iv)     With or without any benefit; and
(v)      In any other form.
34            Likewise, the definition of financial establishment refers to the acceptance

     of deposits:
(i) Under any scheme or arrangement; or
(ii)In any other manner.
35            The repeated use of the expression ‗any‘ by the statute while defining both

     the above expressions is a clear reflection of the legislative intent to cast the net

     of the regulatory provisions of the law in a broad and comprehensive manner.

     Unlike many other state enactments which govern the field, clause (c) of
Section

     2
of the MPID Act comprehends within the meaning of a deposit not only the

     receipt of money but of any valuable commodity as well. For example, in contrast,

     Section 2(2) of the Tamil Nadu Act defines ‗deposit‘ only in terms of money and

     not commodity.
Section 2(2)
reads as follows:
―(2) ―deposit‖ means the deposit of money either in one lump
                       sum or by instalments made with the Financial Establishments
                       for a fixed period, for interest or for return in any kind or for any
                       service;
Similarly, statutes protecting the interest of depositors in Orissa 28, Kerala29,

     Himachal Pradesh30, Goa31, Telangana32, Andhra Pradesh33 and Sikkim34 define

     the phrase ‗deposit‘ only in terms of money and not the acceptance of a

     commodity.
28
The Odisha Protection of Interests of Depositors (in Financial Establishments) Act 2011
29
The Kerala Protection of Interests of Depositors in Financial Establishment Act 2013
30
The Himachal Pradesh [Protection of interests of depositors (in Financial Establishments)] Act 1999
31
The Goa Protection of Interests of Depositors (in financial Establishments) Act 1999
32
The Telangana Protection of Depositors of Financial Establishments Act
1999
33
The Andhra Pradesh Protection of Depositors of Financial Establishments Act
1999
34
The Sikkim Protection of interests of Depositors (in Financial Establishments) Act 2000
44
PART C

36          According to the second ingredient of
Section 2(c)
, the money or

     commodity must be liable to be returned. However, such return need not

     necessarily be in the form of cash or kind but also in the form of a service, with or

     without any benefit such as interest. It needs to be recalled that clause (v) of
Section 2(c)
states that a deposit of money or commodity made as a security

     deposit, dealership deposit or an advance amount is excluded from the definition

     of the phrase ‗deposit‘. To illustrate, if a member of a financial establishment

     deposits Rs. 25,000, and that money is returned on cessation of membership by

     making deductions, the issue of whether the deposit is a security deposit or of the

     nature covered under
Section 2(c)
should be determined with reference to the

     structure of operation and functioning of the financial establishment. It is to be

     noted that the definition also states that the return may be with or without interest

     or any benefit. Therefore, the submissions made by both the sides on whether

     NSEL had through its representations assured a 16% return on trading in the

     platform is immaterial for the purpose of determining if NSEL accepted deposits.
37          Having referred to the relevant bye-laws, we shall determine if NSEL

     receives ‗deposits‘ as defined by
Section 2(c)
of the MPID Act. The bye-laws

     elucidate that NSEL receives both money and commodities from trading

     members. In order to decide if these receipts by NSEL could be regarded as

     ‗deposits‘, the test of ‗return‘ will have to be satisfied. The test is that the return be

     in cash, kind or service. It is not necessary that the return should be with the

     benefit of interest, bonus or profit. Therefore, if the financial establishment is

     obligated to return the deposit without any increments, it shall still fall within the

     purview of
Section 2(c)
of the MPID Act, provided that the deposit does not fall
45
PART C

     within any of the exceptions. The exception of relevance to our case is clause (v)

     which states that ‗amounts received in the ordinary course of business by way of
(a) security deposit; (b) dealership deposit; (c) earnest money; and (d) advance

     against order for goods or services shall be excluded from the purview of the

     term ‗deposit‘.
C. 3.1 Settlement Guarantee Fund: Deposit under
Section 2(c)
of the MPID

            Act

38         The trading members pay NSEL a margin deposit and NSEL maintains a

     Settlement Guarantee Fund.
Regulation 4
.12 states that only transactions of

     those members who have paid the margin deposit and security deposit shall be

     considered as valid. Therefore, the payment of margin deposit and security

     deposit is ‗mandatory‘ for a person to trade on NSEL‘s platform.
Regulation 4
.12

     refers to the SGF as a ‗security deposit‘. Similarly, bye-law 12.2.1 stipulates that

     each member shall contribute a ‗minimum security deposit‘. However, merely

     because the SGF is referred to as a ‗security deposit‘, the exception would not

     automatically be applicable. The meaning of the phrase ‗security deposit‘ takes

     colour from the surrounding phrases. Clause (v) to sub-
Section 2(c)
excludes

     security deposit, dealership deposit, earnest money, and an advance against an

     order for goods and services from the ambit of the phrase ‗deposit‘. The concepts

     used in sub-
Section 2(c) (v)
fall in two categories: (i) token amounts paid to

     indicate the earnest to purchase (earnest money and advance money), and (ii)

     payments required to meet exigent situations of default by a party (dealership

     deposit and security deposit).
46
PART C

39                Black‘s Law dictionary35 defines security deposit as ―money deposited by a

     tenant with a landlord as security for full and faithful performance by the tenant of

     terms of leases, including damages to premises. It is refundable unless the

     tenant has caused damage or injury to the property or has breached the terms of

     tenancy or the laws governing the tenancy. Certain states also require the

     landlord to make a security deposit to cover essential repairs required on rental

     property.‖ A similar phrase, ―Client Security Fund‖ is defined as a fund set up by

     many State Bar Associations to cover losses incurred by persons as a result of

     dishonest conduct of member-attorneys. The meanings of both these phrases

     suggest the necessary ingredients of a security deposit, which are:
(i) An advance to ensure faithful performance of the contract;
(ii) A payment to cover essential ‗functions‘ for performance; and
(iii) The entitlement to refund being dependent upon whether damage, injury

                  and default are occasioned.
40                Chapter 12 of the bye-laws provides the features of the SGF:
(i)      SGF is utilized for:
(a) defraying the expenses for its creation and maintenance ;
(b) temporary use of the fund to meet efficiencies arising out of the

                         performance of obligations;
(c) payment of premia on insurance covers;
(d) payments for the loss or liability of the Exchange arising out of

                         ‗clearing and settlement operations‘;
(e) repayment of the balance deposit to a member;
35
Bryan A Garner, Black’s Law Dictionary (11 ed. Thomson Reuters).
47
PART C
(f) payment towards the member‘s obligations where the member fails

                     to meet his settlement obligations; and
(g) payment of the member‘s obligation on being            declared as a

                     defaulter;
(ii)      The members‘ contribution is allocated among various segments of

                  trading, in which they can participate. The Exchange also retains the

                  right to utilise the fund allotted to a particular segment of trading to

                  match the losses or the liabilities of the Exchange; and
(iii)     The settlement fund may be invested in approved securities or other

                  avenues of investments.
41              The features of the SGF indicate that the fund is used to cover those

     expenses, which are beyond the utilization which is made out of a regular

     security fund. Unlike a security deposit between a landlord and a tenant where

     the fund is used to meet the ‗essential obligations‘ of the landlord such as repair

     work and deductions are made when the tenant has outstanding payments,

     NSEL uses the deposit to cover the payment obligations of the trading member

     (buyer) to another trading member (seller) since NSEL is a counter party to the

     transactions. However, NSEL uses the fund to cover functions beyond its role as

     a counter-party. For example, the fund is used to cover loses faced by the NSEL

     in the settlement operations, investments are made in securities, and the fund is

     allotted in various segments of trading, where the funds are also utilised to cover

     loses, if any, in the segment. Therefore, these three features of the SGF indicate

     that though the SGF is termed as a ‗security deposit‘ in nomenclature, its features

     do not represent a security deposit. Since NSEL receives ‗money‘ in the form of
48
PART C

     SGF that is returned in money and services, and is not covered by the

     exceptions, it would fall within the expression ‗deposit‘ as defined in
Section 2(c)
of the Act.
C. 3. 2 Receipt of commodities: Deposit under
Section 2(c)
of the Act

42          A person who wishes to trade in the platform of NSEL is required to place

     the commodities in the accredited warehouse of NSEL. NSEL would then provide

     the trader with a warehouse receipt. When the buyer‘s offer and the seller‘s offer

     is matched, NSEL would debit the amount from the buyer member‘s pay in

     obligations and it would be credited to NSEL‘s exchange settlement account. The

     Operations Department would confirm with the Delivery Department if the

     requisite quantity of a particular commodity of the seller is available. After such

     confirmation, the Operations Department would release the purchase price to the

     selling broker‘s designated bank account. Simultaneously, a Delivery Allocation

     Report would be issued to the buyer‘s broker or the buyer. Once the VAT invoice

     is paid, NSEL would issue a Delivery Note authorizing the Buyer to take delivery

     from the designated warehouse or if the buyer chooses, he can take constructive

     possession of the commodity. There is nothing in the definition of the term

     ‗deposit‘ to mean that the acceptance of the commodity should be accompanied

     by a transfer of title to the commodity. Even if the financial establishment is only

     in ‗custody‘ of the commodity, it would still fall within the purview of the phrase

     ‗acceptance of commodity‘. On the acceptance of custody of the commodity,

     NSEL has to provide various services such as an obligation to keep the

     commodity safe and without any damages. Additionally, the Operations

     Department and the Delivery Department will have to coordinate while matching
49
PART C

     the contracts. Similarly, after the delivery note is sent to the buyer, the commodity

     is either delivered to the buyer or the buyer is put in constructive possession of

     the commodity. The phrase ‗warehouse receipt‘ is defined in Bye-law 2.96 as a

     document evidencing that the commodity is being held by NSEL in the approved

     warehouse. Clause (b) to Bye law 4.20 states that if the outstanding transactions

     have not been settled by giving or receiving deliveries, then it (the commodity)

     shall be auctioned by buying-in or selling-out as per the Business Rules of the

     Exchange. Bye-law 10.11 states that the commodities shall be delivered to and

     delivery taken from only the designated warehouses. Therefore, NSEL offers a

     multitude of ‗services‘ in return for receiving the commodity. The receipt of the

     commodities and holding the commodities (when the members are put in

     constructive possession) in the accredited warehouses is a ‗deposit‘ under
Section 2(c)
of the Act.
43         The counsel for the respondent argued that the expression ‗valuable

     commodity‘ used in
Section 2(c)
would only include precious metals such as gold

     and silver. The expression ―valuable commodity‖ is not defined by the statute.

     There is no valid basis to accept the submission of the respondent that the

     expression should only comprehend within it precious metals such as gold and

     silver. If the legislature intended to so restrict the definition of the expression

     valuable commodity, it could have used an explanation importing an artificial

     meaning to the expression. However, the legislature has desisted from doing so.

     A valuable commodity is a commodity which has significant value. This does not

     refer only to the intrinsic value of the commodity. Whether or not a commodity is

     valuable has to be determined bearing in mind the salutary object and purpose of
50
PART C

     the Act
which is to protect the interest of depositors. It is in this context that it

     becomes necessary to adopt a purposive construction which would give effect to

     the meaning and content of the law. Any attempt to read the definition in a

     restrictive sense would be contrary to legislative intent. The intent of the

     legislature is to define the expression ‗deposit‘ as well as the expression ‗financial

     establishment‘ in a comprehensive and all-encompassing manner. Therefore, the

     phrase ‗valuable commodity‘ cannot be restricted to only mean precious metals.

     Agricultural commodities which NSEL trades in will fall within the purview of the

     term.
44           Though it has been observed earlier that it is not necessary that there must

     be interest or an assured benefit from the deposit for the purposes of
Section 2(c)
of the MPID Act, it is still necessary that we refer to the representations made by

     NSEL. NSEL in the course of its brochures has held out representations about

     the trading and investment opportunities available for:
(a) corporate clients;
(b) high net worth individuals; and
(c) retail investors.
45           Under the head of ‗contract specifications‘, the following representation

     has been held out:
Commodity             Duration            Investment (lacs.)    Yield

     Castor Seed           T+3 & T+36          7.5 -9 Lacs           16%

     Castor Oil            T+5 & T+30          7-9                   16%

     Cotton Wash Oil       T+2 & T+25          10                    16%

     Paddy                 T+2 & T+25          3.5-4.5               16%
51
PART C

Steel                    T+2 & T+25   4.5-5      16%

Raw Wool                 T+2 & T+25   3.5-4      16%

Wool Top                 T+2 & T+25   1.8-2      16%

Crude         Soybean T+2 & T+25      3.3.-3.5   16%

Oil

Soya DOC                 T+2 & T+25   1.7-2.0    16%

Refined        Mustard T+2 & T+25     6.5        16%

Oil

Refined Soybean T+2 & T+25            6.5        16%

Oil

Refined                  T+2 & T+25   6.5        16%

Sunflower Oil

RBD           Palmolein T+2 & T+25    6.5        16%

Oil

Sugar                    T+2 & T+25   3.0        16%

Maize                    T+2 & T+25   3.0        16%




The above representation specifies:
(i)      Commodities;

      (ii)     Duration of trades;

      (iii)    Investment; and

      (iv)     Yield.
52
PART C
For example, in the case of castor seeds, NSEL held out a buy contract (T+3)

and sale contract (T+36), in which the yield is stated to be 16%. Moreover, NSEL

represented that:
―Opportunities

            Traders can trade and lock their return
            Trader has to buy in near settlement contract and sell in
             far settlement contract simultaneously
            Price for both settlement available
            Exchange provides counterparty guarantee risk
            No basis risk, No link with future contracts‖



While describing the features of ―trading opportunity‖, NSEL represented that:
“Features of Trading Opportunity:
   T+2 and T+25contract offers unique trading
                 opportunity to traders
                Trader purchases T+2 contract and simultaneously
                 sells T+25 contract
                Pay-in obligation is on T+2 while Pay-out of the funds
                 will be on T+25. Entire settlement cycle is of 35-37
                 days
                Price differential between the two settlement dates i.e
                 premium if annualized offers interest rate of about
                 16%
                Income arising out of such trades are treated as
                 Business Income‖



While comparing the investment opportunities of bank fixed deposits with trading

opportunities at NSEL, NSEL represented that:
―Comparison
            Bank FD 9.25% for 390 days; NSEL Trading Opportunity
             16%;
   Bank FD minimum duration 390 days; NSEL Trade
             duration 35-55 days, depending on the contract
            Traders have an option of rolling over their position as
             per their convenience‖
53
PART C

Under the caption of ‗risk management‘, the following representation has been

held out by NSEL:
“Risk Management
             Trades are backed by collaterals in the form of stock
             Cash margin of 10-15% is levied on the open position of
              seller in T+2/T+3 contracts
             In case of adverse price movement, Exchange collects
              additional margin from the seller in T+2/T+3 contracts
             The exchange has defined guidelines for auction/closeout
              (circular: 029/2008)
             Warehouse        Management         includes     Selection,
              Accreditation,    Quality   Resting,     Fumigation    and
              Insurance‖

The above representation indicates that paired contracts were designed as a

unique trading opportunity by NSEL under which a trader would, for instance,

purchase a T+2 contract (with a pay-in obligation on T+2) and would

simultaneously sell a T+25 contract (with a pay-out of funds on T+25). The

price differential between the two settlement dates was represented to offer an

annualized return of about 16%. NSEL categorically represented that all trades

were backed by collaterals in the form of stocks and its management activities

included selection, accreditation, quality testing, fumigation and insurance.
Therefore, NSEL represented that on receiving money and commodities, the

members would receive ‗assured returns‘ and a ‗service‘. Though NSEL has

been receiving ‗deposits‘, it has failed to provide services as promised against the

deposits and has failed return the deposits on demand. Therefore, the State of

Maharashtra was justified in issuing the attachment notifications under
Section 4
of the MPID Act.
54
PART C

     C.4 Uncovering the Conspiracy

     C. 4.1 The Grant Thornton Report
46         FMC engaged Grant Thornton LLP to conduct a forensic audit of the

     practices and records of NSEL. The report found several instances where NSEL

     had repeatedly contravened the rules:
(a) NSEL allowed members who had repeatedly defaulted to continue trading

           though under NSEL‘s exchange rules, a member who does not have

           sufficient collateral to discharge his obligations would not be allowed to

           trade further;
(b) Members who were in default or those who had exhausted their margin

           limits, were granted an exemption from margin requirements;
(c) There was an insufficient collateral of commodities in the warehouses and

           NSEL did not diligently conduct the exercise;
(d) The Bye-laws and rules of the Exchange mandate the formation of various

           committees for the effective management of operations. However, the

           Board failed to constitute nine out of ten such committees. There is also no

           documentary evidence to demonstrate whether any          committee formed

           was ever convened;
(e) Client margin deposits and the settlement fund were used for fulfilling the

           obligations of the defaulting members. NSEL also used the deposits made

           by the members for its own business purposes on a regular basis. For

           example, on 28 March 2013, Rs. 236.5 Crore was withdrawn from the

           settlement fund to fund NSEL‘s business overdraft account. There is a
55
PART C

           running deficit in the client settlement fund balance from 2012 to June

           2013. The financial team had raised the issue on multiple occasions;
(f) Mr. Jignesh Shah, in his presentation dated 10 July 2013 to FMA had

           stated that 120 NSEL accredited warehouses held commodities valued at

           Rs. 6,000 crores. However, there was no documentation relating to

           warehouse activities for long term trades indicating that the contracts were

           not secured by stocks. The collateral of the members was not in custody

           and NSEL did not have any control over it;
(g) Though the Warehouse Development and Regulatory Authority had

           rejected NSEL‘s application for registration of its warehouse in May 2011,

           the website of the establishment still represented that the warehouses

           were registered with the authority;
(h) Though the warehouse receipts are to evidence that a commodity is held

           in an approved warehouse, receipts were issued without deposit of the

           commodities. NSEL did not insist on commodities being deposited in the

           warehouses prior to executing the sale transactions. NSEL issued Delivery

           Allocation Reports misrepresenting that every transaction was delivery

           based and backed with commodities;
C. 4. 2 63 Moons Judgment

47         NSEL filed third party representations in a suit filed by the allegedly duped

     traders for the recovery of Rs 5,600 Crores from the 24 defaulters. Arbitration

     proceedings were also initiated for the recovery of dues. An amount of Rs. 3,365

     Crores out of Rs 5,000 crores has been covered through Court decrees and

     arbitral awards. On 6 January 2014, the EOW, Mumbai filed a charge sheet
56
PART C

     against the Managing Director and CEO of NSEL, the head of warehousing, and

     two other defaulters. It was mentioned in the charge sheet that these employees

     of NSEL had colluded with the defaulters to enable them to trade on the platform

     without depositing the goods in the accredited warehouses. FMC wrote to the

     Union of India on 18 August 2014 that NSEL and 63 Moons be merged. In the

     representative suit which was instituted, the Bombay High Court appointed a

     three-member committee consisting of Mr Justice VC Daga, Mr J Solomon, and

     Mr Yogesh Thar for determining the liability of the defaulters and assisting in the

     process of recovery. In addition to Rs. 3,365 Crores covered through court

     decrees and arbitral awards, the high level committee had crystallised a further

     sum of Rs. 835.88 to be recovered from the defaulters.

48         On 15 October 2014, the Additional Secretary, Department of Economic

     Affairs wrote a letter to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs stating that 63 Moons

     and NSEL are maintaining separate identities to deprive the investors of money.

     It was stated that the corporate veil ought to be lifted and both the companies

     must be amalgamated to recover the pending dues. On 12 February 2016, an

     amalgamation order under Section 396(3) was passed, merging the assets and

     liabilities of 63 Moons and NSEL. A writ petition filed under
Article 226
for

     challenging the amalgamation was dismissed by the Bombay High Court. A

     Special Leave Petition before this court challenged the judgment of the Bombay

     High Court. The two-Judge Bench in the course of determining the validity of the

     amalgamation order, referred to the Grant Thornton report, where the features

     and representations made regarding the twin contracts ( short term and long

     term), and the role of NSEL in the default of payments were discussed:
57
PART C

                 ―1.3. These long-term contracts (e.g. T+25) were first
             traded on the NSEL exchange in September 2009. The
             Board of NSEL ratified the circulars introducing such
             long-term contracts over a period beginning November
             2009.
1.4. Further evidence was obtained with regard to the
             existence of a financing business, such as presentations
             which stated that a fixed rate of return was
             guaranteed on investing in certain products on the
             NSEL exchange.
Several internal (NSEL) presentations were found,
             upon a review of email databases, setting out a yield
             (e.g. 16%) as an opportunity for investors for trading
             in certain products on the NSEL exchange.
An external presentation was also obtained which
             had been made by a brokerage house (Geojit Comtrade
             Ltd.) for their clients claiming a fixed return on
             investments made on the NSEL exchange. Further, this
             presentation, declared that actual delivery of stocks in
             such transactions would not be required.
1.5. Grant Thornton also obtained evidence of
             repeated contraventions of NSEL exchange rules and
             bye-laws       which     facilitated   such       financing
             transactions to continue and grow in size as below:
Repeated defaults : As per the NSEL exchange rules
             a member who does not have sufficient collateral/monies,
             etc. to discharge his obligations would not be allowed to
             trade further. This rule was overridden on a recurring
             basis. Further despite repeated defaults members were
             allowed to trade and increase their expenses. For
             example, Lotus Refineries had defaulted, as per the
             Rules of the Exchange, on 198 days between the fifteen-
             month period of 1-4-2012 and 30-7-2013.
Exemptions from margin requirements : Members
             who were in a default position or who had exhausted their
             margin limits on trading were granted an exemption from
             margin requirements and thus allowed them to increase
             their exposure by engaging in new trades. More than
             1800 margin limit exemptions were granted between
             2009 through to 2013.
Inadequate monitoring of member collateral : NSEL
             did not carry out any diligence to establish the existence
             of stock at member managed warehouses, upon which
             trades were being executed. Grant Thornton carried out a
             stock verification exercise and found significant shortages
             vis-à-vis expected collateral.‖

The judgment referred to the findings of misutilization of client monies/ settlement

fund in the Grant Thornton report:
―1.12. Misutilisation of client monies/settlement fund :
             As per the rules and bye-laws of the NSEL exchange
             ―Margin deposits received by clearing members from their
             constituent members and clients in any forms shall be
58
PART C

            accounted for and maintained separately in segregated
            accounts and shall be used solely for the benefit of the
            respective constituent members' and client position.‖
                Grant Thornton found evidence (including emails)
            that client monies/settlement fund, was used
            regularly for fulfilling the obligations of defaulting
            members.
Further, NSEL utilised client monies/settlement
            fund for its own business purposes on a regular
            basis. For example, on 28-3-2013, Rs 236.5 crores was
            withdrawn from the Settlement Fund in order to fund
            NSEL's own business overdraft account.
There was a running deficit in the client
            monies/settlement fund balance from April 2012 to June
            2013. The finance team of FTIL had raised this as an
            area of concern on several occasions.‖



The report‘s finding on the lack of documentation of the warehousing activities

were discussed in the judgment:
―The report then goes on to say that there was no
            documentation in relation to warehouse activities for long-
            term trades indicating that such contracts were not
            secured by warehouse stocks. The warehouses were
            customer managed warehouses and the underlying
            collateral were not in custody of NSEL. NSEL did not
            have control over these warehouses and Grant Thornton
            was denied access to a number of warehouses. The
            Warehouse Development and Regulatory Authority had
            in fact rejected NSEL's application for registration of its
            warehouses way back on 16-5-2011. Notwithstanding
            such rejection, NSEL's website represented that its
            warehouses were registered with the Authority. No
            verification or due diligence was ever undertaken by
            NSEL to ensure compliance by its members of the
            conditions outlined in its rules and bye-laws even though
            in terms of NSEL bye-laws, warehouse receipt issued by
            NSEL were meant to evidence a commodity being held in
            an approved warehouse. NSEL did not insist upon
            deposit of commodities in the warehouses prior to
            executing sale transactions. Instead NSEL resorted to
            issuing Delivery Allocation Reports (DAR) representing to
            genuine investors that each transaction was delivery
            based and backed at the time of sale by the required
            quantity of commodities in its warehouses.‖
59
PART C

The conclusion in the FMC order dated 17.12.2013 which revealed the

conspiracy unfolded by 63 Moons and NSEL was also referred to in the following

extract:
―15.1. Noticee 1: Financial Technologies (India) Ltd.
            (FTIL) : We have discussed the equity structure of NSEL,
            which is wholly owned by FTIL. We have also pointed out
            that Shri Jignesh Shah, Chairman-cum-Managing
            Director of FTIL has been a Director on the Board and
            also functioning as Vice-Chairman and a key
            management person of NSEL since its inception.
Similarly, Shri Joseph Massey and Shri Shreekant
            Javalgekar have been Directors of the said company
            from its very beginning till the settlement crisis at NSEL
            first came to light in July 2013. The facts establishing the
            fraud involving a settlement default over Rs 5500 crores
            at NSEL have been discussed at length in the SCNs
            issued to the noticees as well as reiterated, albeit
            illustratively by us at para 14.7 of this Order. The
            responsibility of FTIL as the holding company possessing
            absolute control over the governance of NSEL has also
            been highlighted. The control of FTIL over NSEL
            becomes further crystallised from the responses given by
            M/s Grant Thornton before the Commission on 3-12-2013
            stating that Shri Jignesh Shah, Mr Joseph Massey and a
            host of other officials of FTIL reviewed the forensic audit
            report and it was only after obtaining their clearance, the
            forensic auditor finalised its report.
15.1.1. The violation of conditions prescribed in the
            exemption notification, trading in paired contracts to
            generate assured financial returns under the garb of
            commodity trading, admission of members who were
            thinly capitalised having poor net worth and giving margin
            exemptions to those who were repeatedly defaulting in
            settling their dues, poor warehousing facilities with no or
            inadequate stocks, no risk management practices
            followed, non-provision of funds in SGF, consciously
            appointing Shri Mukesh P. Shah as statutory auditors for
            FY 2012-13 who was related to Shri Jignesh Shah, and
            apparent complicity with the defaulters to defraud the
            investors, etc., lead to an inescapable conclusion that a
            huge fraud was perpetrated by NSEL while having the
            presence of two Board members of FTIL on the Board of
            NSEL, one of whom was the Vice-Chairman of the
            company.
15.1.2. The facts of the case and the manner in which
            the business affairs of NSEL were conducted leaves no
            doubt in our minds that FTIL, notwithstanding its
            contentions that it was ignorant of the affairs and conduct
            of NSEL, exerted a dominant influence on the
            management, and directed, controlled and supervised the
            governance of NSEL. In the face of a fraud of such a
            magnitude involving settlement crises of Rs 5500 crores
60
PART C

owed to over 13,000 sellers/investors on the trading
platform of NSEL, FTIL, cannot seek to take refuge
behind the corporate veil so as to unjustifiably isolate
itself from the fraudulent actions that took place at NSEL
resulting in such a huge payment crisis.
15.1.3. FTIL has its principal business of
development of software which has become the
technology platform for almost the entire industry
engaged in broking in shares and securities,
commodities, foreign exchange, etc. As has been
demonstrated by FTIL in their written submission, FTIL
has floated a number of regulated exchanges—both for
securities and commodities derivatives—in India as well
as abroad. NSEL was incorporated to provide a trading
platform of commodity spot exchange on a pan-India
basis for the purpose of which apparently it sought and
was granted exemption from the operation of the FCRA,
1952. Since the objective of the NSEL was promoting
spot trading in commodities on an electronic
platform, its business model did not contemplate
venturing into trading in forward contracts. FTIL had
already promoted MCX, a regulated exchange under
FCRA, 1952, for the purpose of trading in forward
contracts. Therefore, having secured an exemption from
the purview of FCRA, 1952 on the ground that it was
intended to promote spot trading, NSEL was not
authorised to allow trading in forward contracts through
the scheme of paired contracts, thereby defying
conditions stipulated in the exemption notification granted
to it. The motive behind allowing trading in forward
contracts on the NSEL platform in a circuitous manner on
NSEL which was neither recognised nor registered under
FCRA, 1952 indicates mala fide intention on the part of
the promoter of FTIL to use the trading platform of its
subsidiary company for illicit gains away from the eyes of
Regulator. The fact that FTIL promoted NSEL sought
exemption from FCRA, 1952 provisions even before they
had started any trading or operation, points to their
intention from the outset. In this manner, it misinterpreted
the conditions stipulated in the exemption notification in
collusion with a handful of members, which ultimately
culminated in a massive fraud involving Rs 5500 crores,
which has the potential effect of eroding trust and
confidence in exchanges and financial markets.
15.1.4. Keeping in view the foregoing observations
and the facts which reveal misconduct, lack of integrity
and unfair practices on the part of FTIL in planning,
directing and controlling the activities of its subsidiary
company, NSEL, we conclude that FTIL, as the anchor
investor in the Multi-Commodity Exchange Ltd. (MCX)
does not carry a good reputation and character, record of
fairness, integrity or honesty to continue to be a
shareholder        of     the      aforesaid       regulated
exchange. Therefore, in the public interest and in the
interest of the Commodities Derivatives Market which is
regulated under FCRA, 1952, the Commission holds that
Financial Technologies (India) Ltd. (FTIL) is not a “fit and
61
PART C

                   proper person” to continue to be a shareholder of 2% or
                   more of the paid-up equity capital of MCX as prescribed
                   under the guidelines issued by the Government of India
                   for capital structure of commodity exchanges post 5
                   years of operation. It is further ordered that neither FTIL,
                   nor any company/entity controlled by it, either directly or
                   indirectly,   shall    hold     any     shares     in   any
                   association/Exchange recognised by the Government or
                   registered by the FMC in excess of the threshold limit of
                   the     total   paid-up      equity    capital   of    such
                   Association/Exchange as prescribed under the
                   commodity exchange guidelines and post 5-year
                   guidelines.‖
                                                        (emphasis supplied)


49          The two-Judge Bench of this Court took note of the modus operandi

     through which the trading members were duped by a conspiracy hatched by a

     few trading members along with NSEL. However, this Court held that the order

     amalgamating NSEL and 63 Moons did not fulfil the requirements of
Section 396
of the Companies Act 1956 as the ‗essentiality‘ aspect in Section 396 was not

     satisfied since the ‗emergency situation‘ requiring amalgamation was short lived.

     Further, it was observed that the rationale for the amalgamation was the financial

     incapability of NSEL to effect recoveries from the defaulting members. The Court

     noted that the final order of amalgamation dated 12 February 2016 referred to the

     actions taken for recovery by the EOW and the Enforcement Directorate which

     indicated methods other than amalgamation through which the monies could be

     recovered. The action taken by the EOW and the Enforcement Directorate is

     referred to in the following extract:
―92.1. What is important to note is that by the time the
                   final order of amalgamation was passed i.e. on 12-2-
                   2016, the final order itself records:
―8.1. Economic Offences Wing, Mumbai:
(i) Total amount due and recoverable from 24
                   defaulters is Rs 5689.95 crores.
(ii) Injunctions against assets of defaulters worth Rs
                   4400.10 crores have been obtained.
62
PART C
(iii) Decrees worth Rs 1233.02 crores have been
             obtained against 5 defaulters.
(iv) Assets worth Rs 5444.31 crores belonging to the
             defaulters have been attached of which assets worth Rs
             4654.62 crores have been published in Gazette under the
MPID Act
for liquidation under the supervision of MPID
             Court and balance assets worth Rs 789.69 crores have
             been attached/secured for attachment by the EOW.
(v) Assets worth Rs 885.32 crores belonging to the
             Directors and employees of NSEL have been attached
             out of which assets worth Rs 882.32 crores have already
             been published in Gazette under the
MPID Act
for
             liquidation under the supervision of the MPID Court and
             balance assets worth Rs 3 crores have been
             attached/secured for attachment by the EOW.
(vi) MPID Court has already issued notices under
Sections 4
&
5
of the MPID Act to the persons whose
             assets have been attached as above. Thus, the process
             of liquidation of the attached assets has started.
(vii) The Bombay High Court has appointed a 3-
             member committee headed by Mr Justice (Retd.) V.C.
             Daga and 2 experts in finance and law to recover and
             monetise the assets of the defaulters.
(viii) Rs 558.83 crores have been recovered so far,
             out of which Rs 379.83 crores have been
             received/recovered from the defaulters and Rs 179
             crores       were   disbursed    by    NSEL      to small
             traders/investors.
8.2. Enforcement Directorate:
(i) ED has traced proceeds of crime amounting to Rs
             3973.83 crores to the 25 defaulters;
(ii) ED has attached assets worth Rs 837.01 crores
             belonging to 12 defaulters;
(iii) As per the recent amendment in the PMLA, the
             assets attached by ED can be used for restitution to the
             victims.
8.3. The above status indicates that the said
             enforcement agencies are working as per their
             mandate….‖
                                                (emphasis supplied)


This Court noted that the ‗essentiality‘ requirement in
Section 396
of the

Companies Act was not fulfilled:
―92.2. What concerned the FMC in August 2014 has, by
             the date of the final amalgamation order, been largely
             redressed without amalgamation. The ―emergency
             situation‖ of 2013 which, even according to the Central
             Government, required the emergent step of compulsory
             amalgamation has, by the time of the passing of the
63
PART C

             Central Government order, disappeared. Thus, the raison
             d'être for applying
Section 396
of the Companies Act has,
             by the passage of time, itself disappeared. In fact, as on
             today, decrees/awards worth INR 3365 crores have been
             obtained against the defaulters, with INR 835.88 crores
             crystallised by the committee set up by the High Court,
             pending acceptance by the High Court, even without
             using the financial resources of FTIL as an amalgamated
             company. What is, therefore, important to note is that
             what was emergent, and therefore, essential, even
             according to the FMC and the Government in 2013-2014,
             has been largely redressed in 2016, by the time the
             amalgamation order was made. Also, the Central
             Government order does not apply its mind to the
             essentiality aspect of Section 396 at all. In fact, in several
             places, it refers to ―essential public interest‖ as if
             ―essential‖ goes with ―public interest‖ instead of being a
             separate and distinct condition precedent to the exercise
             of power under Section 396. On facts, therefore, it is
             clear that the essentiality test, which is the condition
             precedent to the applicability of Section 396, cannot be
             said to have been satisfied.‖



The judgment held that NSEL had falsely represented that it had full stock as

collateral and that the stock was valued at Rs. 6,000 crores:
―91.3. We have seen that neither FTIL nor NSEL has
             denied the fact that paired contracts in commodities were
             going on, and by April to July 2013, 99% (and excluding
             E-series contracts), at least 46% of the turnover of NSEL
             was made up of such paired contracts. There is no doubt
             that such paired contracts were, in fact, financing
             transactions which were distinct from sale and purchase
             transactions in commodities and were, thus, in breach of
             both the exemptions granted to NSEL, and the FCRA.
             We have also seen that NSEL throughout kept
             representing that it was, in fact, a commodity exchange
             dealing with spot deliveries. Apart from the Grant
             Thornton Report and the FMC order, we have also seen
             that Shri Jignesh Shah, on 10-7-2013, made
             representations to the DCA and the FMC, in which he
             stated that NSEL had full stock as collateral; 10-20% of
             open position as margin money; and that the stock
             currently held in NSEL's 120 warehouses was valued at
             INR 6000 crores, all of which turned out to be incorrect.
             Further, there is no doubt whatsoever that in July 2013,
             as a result of NSEL stopping trading on its exchange, a
64
PART C

                  payment crisis of approximately INR 5600 crores arose.
                  The further question that remains is whether, given these
                  facts, the conditions precedent for the applicability of
                  Section 396 were followed.
50         This Court in its decision in 63 Moons (supra) took note of the modus

     operandi by which the defaults came about, specifically highlighting the role of

     NSEL in not complying with the rules. It set aside the amalgamation order on the

     narrow ground that the pre-conditions for the exercise of power under Section

     396 had not been fulfilled. One of the reasons which persuaded this Court to set

     aside the order of amalgamation was that the EOW and the Enforcement

     Directorate had already taken steps to realise the amounts in default. The

     judgment in 63 Moons (supra) has after a detailed analysis of the Grant Thornton

     report and the FMC‘s order held that the defaulters and NSEL conspired to dupe

     the members of their money.
C. 5 Constitutional Validity of the MPID Act

51         The respondents challenged the constitutional validity of the provisions of

     the
MPID Act
before the High Court on the ground that it is arbitrary. The High

     Court in the impugned judgment did not deal with the constitutional validity of the

     provisions and left the question open. The respondents contended before this

     Court that the judgment in
Bhaskaran
(supra) while holding the Tamil Nadu Act

     to be constitutionally valid only made a passing reference to the
MPID Act
.
Thus,

     it was argued that this Bench is not bound by the judgment in
Bhaskaran
(supra)

     while deciding on the validity of the provisions of the
MPID Act
.
65
PART C

52               A Full Bench of the Bombay High Court had held that the state legislature

     did not possess the legislative competence to enact the
MPID Act
.36 On the other

     hand, a Full Bench of the Madras High Court had upheld the constitutional

     validity of the Tamil Nadu Act.
The correctness of the judgment of the Madras

     High Court was assailed before this Court in
Bhaskaran
(supra). The judgment

     of the Full Bench of the Bombay High Court was cited and considered by the two

     judge Bench which heard the appeal against the judgment of the Madras High

     Court. This Court held that the state legislature does possess legislative

     competence to enact the law in question and that the legislation was not for the

     transaction of banking or the acceptance of deposits but for the protection of the

     depositors who are deceived by fraudulent financial establishments. The Court

     held:
―26. The Tamil Nadu Act was enacted to ameliorate the
                         conditions of thousands of depositors who had fallen into
                         the clutches of fraudulent financial establishments who
                         had raised hopes of high rate of interest and thus duped
                         the depositors. Thus the Tamil Nadu Act is not focused on
                         the transaction of banking or the acceptance of deposit,
                         but is focused on remedying the situation of the
                         depositors who were deceived by the fraudulent financial
                         establishments. The impugned Tamil Nadu Act was
                         intended to deal with neither the banks which do the
                         business or banking and are governed by the Reserve
                         Bank of India Act and the Banking Regulation Act, nor the
                         non-banking financial companies enacted under the
Companies Act, 1956
.
27. The Reserve Bank of India Act, the Banking
                         Regulation Act and the Companies Act do not occupy the
                         field which the impugned Tamil Nadu Act occupies,
                         though the latter may incidentally trench upon the former.
The main object of the Tamil Nadu Act is to provide a
                         solution to wipe out the tears of several lakhs of
                         depositors to realise their dues effectively and speedily
                         from the fraudulent financial establishments which duped
                         them or their vendees, without dragging them in a legal
                         battle from pillar to post. Hence, the decision of this Court
36
Vijay C. Puljal v. State of Maharashtra
, (2005) 4 CTC 705 (Bom)
66
PART C

                       in Delhi Cloth Mills [(1983) 4 SCC 166] has no bearing on
                       the constitutional validity of the Tamil Nadu Act.‖



     The judgment of the Full Bench of the Bombay High Court in
Vijay C. Puljal v.

     State of Maharashtra37
was specifically disapproved in the decision of this Court

     in
Bhaskaran
(supra), where the Court held:
―14. The learned counsel for the appellant relied on the
                       Full Bench decision of the Bombay High Court in
Vijay C.
                       Puljal
case [(2005) 4 CTC 705 (Bom)] in support of his
                       contention that the Tamil Nadu Act, like the
Maharashtra
                       Act
, was unconstitutional being beyond the legislative
                       competence of the State Legislature. We do not agree.
15. We have carefully perused the judgment of the Full
                       Bench of the Bombay High Court in
Vijay
case [(2005) 4
                       CTC 705 (Bom)] and we respectfully disagree with the
                       view taken by the Bombay High Court. It may be noted
                       that though there are some differences between the
                       Tamil Nadu Act and the Maharashtra Act, they are
                       minor differences, and hence the view we are taking
                       herein will also apply in relation to the
Maharashtra
                       Act
.”
                                                         (emphasis supplied)
53             Besides holding that the State legislature did not lack legislative

     competence to enact the law, the judgment in
Bhaskaran
(supra) also concluded

     that the Tamil Nadu enactment did not violate the provisions of
Articles 14
,

     19(1)(g)
or 21 of the Constitution.                  In that context, while dismissing the

     constitutional challenge against the legislation enacted in Tamil Nadu, the Court

     held:
―31. We fail to see how there is any violation of
Articles
                       14
, 19(1)(g)
or 21 of the Constitution.
The Act
is a salutary
                       measure to remedy a great social evil. A systematic
                       conspiracy was effected by certain fraudulent financial
                       establishments which not only committed fraud on the
                       depositors, but also siphoned off or diverted the
                       depositor's funds mala fide. We are of the opinion that the
37
(2005) 4 CTC 705 (Bom)
67
PART C

                  act of the financers in exploiting the depositors is a
                  notorious abuse of faith of the depositors who innocently
                  deposited their money with the former for higher rate of
                  interest. These depositors were often given a small pass
                  book as a token of acknowledgment of their deposit,
                  which they considered as a passport of their children for
                  higher education or wedding of their daughters or as a
                  policy of medical insurance in the case of most of the
                  aged depositors, but in reality in all cases it was an
                  unsecured promise executed on a waste paper. The
                  senior citizens above 80 years, senior citizens between 60
                  and 80 years, widows, handicapped, driven out by wards,
                  retired government servants and pensioners and persons
                  living below the poverty line constituted the bulk of the
                  depositors. Without the aid of the impugned Act, it would
                  have been impossible to recover their deposits and
                  interest thereon.
32. The conventional legal proceedings incurring huge
                  expenses of court fees, advocates' fees, apart from other
                  inconveniences involved and the long delay in disposal of
                  cases due to docket explosion in courts, would not have
                  made it possible for the depositors to recover their money,
                  leave alone the interest thereon. Hence, in our opinion the
                  impugned Act has rightly been enacted to enable the
                  depositors to recover their money speedily by taking
                  strong steps in this connection.
33. The State being the custodian of the welfare of the
                  citizens as parens patriae cannot be a silent spectator
                  without finding a solution for this malady. The financial
                  swindlers, who are nothing but cheats and charlatans
                  having no social responsibility, but only a lust for easy
                  money by making false promise of attractive returns for
                  the gullible investors, had to be dealt with strongly. The
                  small amounts collected from a substantial number of
                  individual depositors culminated into huge amounts of
                  money. These collections were diverted in the name of
                  third parties and finally one day the fraudulent financers
                  closed their financial establishments leaving the innocent
                  depositors in the lurch.‖



54         The judgment held that the Tamil Nadu Act is constitutionally valid and

     constitutes a salutary measure which was long over-due to deal with these

     matters. Significantly, the above extracts from the decision in
Bhaskaran
(supra)

     indicate that the differences between the enactment in Tamil Nadu and

     Maharashtra ―are minor‖ and the view of the court on the validity of the former will

     govern the validity of the latter enactment as well.
68
PART C

55             The judgment in
Bhaskaran
(supra) was followed by another two-Judge

     Bench of this Court in
New Horizons Sugar Mills Limited v. Government of

     Pondicherry38
. The case arose from the action of the Government of

     Pondicherry of attaching the properties acquired by a company. The validity of

     the Pondicherry Protection of Interests of Depositors in Financial Establishments

     Act 2004 was also in question. A two-Judge Bench of this Court considered

     whether the pith and substance of the enactment istraceable to the entries in the

     Union List or the State List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
After

     adverting to the earlier decision in
Bhaskaran
(supra) which upheld the Tamil

     Nadu enactment while disapproving the Full Bench decision of the Bombay High

     Court on the legislative competence of the State legislature to enact the
MPID

     Act
, this Court held:
―50. In addition to the above, it has also to be noticed that
                       the objects for which the Tamil Nadu Act, the Maharashtra
                       Act and the Pondicherry Act were enacted, are identical,
                       namely, to protect the interests of small depositors from
                       fraud perpetrated on unsuspecting investors, who
                       entrusted their life savings to unscrupulous and fraudulent
                       persons and who ultimately betrayed their trust.
51. However, coming back to the constitutional
                       conundrum that has been presented on account of the
                       two views expressed, by the Madras High Court and the
                       Bombay High Court, it has to be considered as to which of
                       the two views would be more consistent with the
                       constitutional provisions. The task has been simplified to
                       some extent by the fact that subsequently the decision of
                       the Bombay High Court [(2005) 4 CTC 705 (Bom)]
                       declaring the
Maharashtra Act
to be ultra vires, has been
                       set aside by this Court [Sonal Hemant Joshi v. State of
                       Maharashtra, (2012) 10 SCC 601] , [State of
                       Maharashtra v. Vijay C. Puljal, (2012) 10 SCC 599] , so
                       that there is now a parity between the judgments relating
                       to the Maharashtra Act and the Tamil Nadu Act.
[…]
38
(2012) 10 SCC 575
69
PART C
59. […] The objects of the Tamil Nadu Act, the
                     Maharashtra Act and the Pondicherry Act being the same
                     and/or similar in nature, and since the validity of the Tamil
                     Nadu and Maharashtra Act have been upheld, the
                     decision of the Madras High Court in upholding the validity
                     of the
Pondicherry Act
must be affirmed. We have to keep
                     in mind, the beneficial nature o the three legislations
                     which is to protect the interests of all depositors, who
                     invest their life‘s earnings and savings in schemes for
                     making profit floated by unscrupulous individuals and
                     companies, both incorporated and unincorporated.‖



     Following the decision in
Bhaskaran
(supra), the challenge to the Pondicherry

     enactment on the ground of legislative competence was repelled.
56           The validity of the
MPID Act
was specifically dealt with in two decisions of
39
this Court in
State of Maharashtra v. Vijay C. Puljal
and
Sonal Hemant

     Joshi v. State of Maharashtra40
.
In both the decisions, this Court upheld the

     constitutional validity of the
MPID Act
in view of the earlier decision in
Bhaskaran
(supra).
In
Soma Suresh Kumar v. Government of Andhra Pradesh41
, a two

     judge Bench of this Court upheld the provisions of the
Andhra Pradesh Protection

     of Depositors of Financial Establishments Act
1999 following the earlier decisions

     in
Bhaskaran
(supra) and
New Horizons Sugar Mills Limited
(supra).

57           Having discussed the judgments of this Court on the constitutional validity

     of the state legislations governing financial establishments offering deposit

     schemes, including the
MPID Act
, there is no reason for us to reopen the

     question. This Court has held that the
MPID Act
is constitutionally valid on the

     grounds of legislative competence and when tested against the provisions of Part

     III of the Constitution.
39
(2012) 10 SCC 599
40
(2012) 10 SCC 601
41
(2013) 10 SCC 677
70
PART C

     C. 6 The High Court‟s Judgment

58         Referring to the Bye-laws and rules of NSEL, the High Court held that

     NSEL is an electronic trading platform which only facilitated transactions between

     buyers and sellers. In this context, it observed that NSEL did not receive the pay-

     in in its own right but only for the purpose of passing it on to the selling trading

     member on the same day. The High Court observed:
―The nature of transaction to be carried out on the NSEL
                  platform was also therefore, in public domain since the
                  trading on this electronic platform commenced. The
                  business/transaction which operated through NSEL, do
                  not disclose any payin amount received by NSEL in its
                  own right but it was only received in the process of
                  settlement of the commodity trade and only for the
                  purpose of passing it on the selling trading member on
                  the same day. This amount cannot be said to be
                  received as a deposit within the meaning of
Section 2(c)
of the MPID Act which contemplates ‗deposit‘ to be a
                  receipt of money or acceptance of a valuable commodity
                  on the promise that such money or valuable commodity
                  would be returned/repaid by the financial establishment
                  after a specified period or otherwise.‖


     The High Court has lost sight of the fact that
Section 2(c)
of the MPID Act defines

     ‗deposit‘ in broad terms. Further, according to the definition, the return may be

     either in money, commodity or service, and it is not necessary that the commodity

     or the money must be returned in the same form. The definition includes the

     receipt of money and the return of a commodity, or even the receipt of a

     commodity and a return in the form of a service. Further, Bye-law 10.8 indicates

     that NSEL was not merely an intermediary. The Bye-law states that the buyer

     shall pay the Clearing House the value of the delivery allocation. However, till the

     completion of the delivery process, the money will be retained by the Clearing

     House of NSEL.
71
PART C
59         Referring to the contract notes and the confirmation receipts generated on

     the electronic platform, the High Court observed that NSEL was only a ‗medium‘.

     However, the High Court subsequently noted that ‗something has gone wrong

     somewhere in these transactions‘. Further, the High Court referred to the First

     Information Report filed by Mr. Pankaj Saraf observing that even the complainant

     had not stated that he had deposited any amount with NSEL. The Court goes on

     to note:
―in no way, the complainant in the FIR allege a promised
                  return in the form of any interest, bonus, profit, but yield-
                  the difference in the price of a commodity between the
                  two trading dates i.e T+2 and T+30/33/25 was calculated
                  as a yield but this, in our view, would not fall within the
                  purview of deposit since neither the NSEL received the
                  commodities to be retained by itself nor did it receive any
                  amount to be deposited in its account.‖
60         The High Court also observed in paragraph 33 of the judgment that at the

     most, only the sellers in T+2 (and buyers in T+25) could be referred to as a

     ‗financial establishment‘. This finding was made without analysing the functioning

     of the exchange vis-à-vis
Sections 2(c)
and
2(d)
of the Act. The Court also held

     that the ‗warehouse receipts‘ do not establish the nature of the transaction that

     took place in the platform. In this regard it observed:
―… this receipt do not provide an answer to the nature of
                  transaction that took place on the platform of NSEL and
                  though it is no doubt that the commodity came to be
                  accepted as a deposit, but it should be accepted with an
                  assured return and in the present case, the commodity
                  which was accepted was because it was to be sold to a
                  purchaser and it is not the case of the State that it was a
                  pure transaction where commodities are accepted as
                  deposit.‖
72
PART C

     The High Court observed that since transaction charges were charged by NSEL

     and the amount paid by the buyer used to be paid by NSEL by the settlement

     date, it is not a financial establishment.
61          The High Court has formed an erroneous opinion that firstly, only if the

     return includes interest, bonus or any other added benefit, it would be a deposit

     for the purpose of the
MPID Act
. However,
Section 2(c)
states that the return may

     be ―with or without any benefit in the form of interest, bonus, profit or in any other

     form‖. The definition does not stipulate that there must be an added benefit,

     rather that the ‗added benefit‘ is irrelevant for the purpose of the definition;

     secondly, that for the purpose of
Section 2(c)
, the receipt of the commodity or

     money ‗must be retained by itself‘. The definition does not provide any such

     embargo. Rather, the definition is broadly worded to include even the possession

     of the commodities for a limited purpose. The High Court has read the definition

     of ‗deposit‘ narrowly without any reference to the salutary purpose of the
MPID

     Act
.
62          The High Court also made observations on the merits of the criminal

     proceedings. Referring to the role of NSEL in the default in payments, it observed

     that at the highest, the actions of NSEL would constitute offences under
Sections

     465
and
467
of the IPC. The EOW filed a charge sheet under
Section 173
CrPC

     before the Sessions Judge, Special Court under the
MPID Act
for offences

     punishable under Sections 409,465,467,468,471,474 and 477(4) read with

     Section 120(B). The High Court ought not to have made observations on the

     merits of the criminal proceedings when the writ petition was restricted to the
73
PART C

     issue of whether NSEL is a financial establishment for the purpose of the
MPID

     Act
.
63          The High Court observed that the decision of this Court in 63 Moons

     (supra) does not have ‗any serious effect on the present proceeding‘, though this

     Court has discussed at length the modus operandi of NSEL in duping the trading

     members by throwing light on the structure of the exchange.
Though it was

     observed that the question of constitutional validity was settled in
Bhaskaran
(supra),
New Horizons
(supra),
Sonal Hemant Joshi
(supra) and
Vijay Kulijal
(supra), the challenge of the respondent to the constitutional validity of the
MPID

     Act
was still kept open by the High Court.
Such an observation was made in spite

     of noticing in paragraph 39 of the judgment that this Court in
Bhaskaran
(supra)

     had observed that the
MPID Act and the Tamil Nadu Act
have minor differences

     and that the statute did not violate
Articles 14
, 19(1)(g)
or 21 of the Constitution.

64          Further, while referring to the earlier order of the Division Bench dated 1

     October 2015, where it was prima facie recorded that NSEL is a ‗financial

     establishment‘ for the purpose of the
MPID Act
, the High Court observed that it

     was not bound by the prima facie view. The primary ground for the Division

     Bench for arriving at a prima facie view was the representations made assuring a

     14% to 16% yield. However, the High Court in its impugned judgment dispelled

     the argument on the ground that only a ‗faint reference‘ was made to assured

     returns. Such an observation misrepresents the factual instances which are

     backed by documentary material.
65          The appellant also contended that the writ petition filed by the respondent

     is not maintainable since there was an alternative remedy of raising an objection
74
PART C

     before the Designated Court under
Section 7
of the MPID Act. Though there is

     merit in the argument of the appellant, since the High Court decided on the

     validity of the impugned attachment notifications on merits, and arguments have

     been addressed in the present proceedings, we have proceeded to decide the

     matter on merits.
66         For the reasons recorded in this judgment, we allow the appeals and set

     aside the impugned judgment of the Bombay High Court dated 22 August 2019.

     The impugned notifications issued under
Section 4
of the MPID Act attaching the

     properties of the respondent are valid.
67         Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                               [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]



                                               …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                               [Surya Kant]



                                               …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                               [Bela M Trivedi]


     New Delhi;
April 22, 2022
75