[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Dillip Kumar Mallick on 5 April, 2022
Author:
Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench:
M.M.Sundresh
,
Dinesh Maheshwari
1

                                                                                       REPORTABLE
2022 INSC 1301

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2754 OF 2022
                           (Arising Out of SLP (C) NO. 26402 OF 2019)


         UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                                  ………APPELLANT(S)

                                                           VERSUS

         DILIP KUMAR MALLICK                                                    ………RESPONDENT(S)

                                                  ORDER
DINESH MAHESHWARI,J.
Leave granted.
2.         The challenge herein is to the judgment and order dated

            25.03.2019 in Writ Appeal No. 223 of 2018, whereby the Division

            Bench     of   the   High   Court   of     Orissa       at   Cuttack,      in   partial

            disapproval of the order dated 10.04.2018 passed by the learned

            Single     Judge      of    the     High       Court        in     Writ    Petition(C)

            No. 24085 of 2018, interfered with the punishment of removal

            from service, as awarded to the respondent; and directed the

            present appellants to impose ‘any lesser punishment as deemed

            just and proper’.
3.         The only question for consideration in this appeal is,

            as   to    whether    the   Division       Bench       of    the    High   Court    was

            justified in interfering with the quantum of punishment awarded

            to the respondent? The background aspects may be noticed to the

            extent relevant for the present purpose.
2
4.   In the year 2003, the respondent was appointed under the

Central      Reserve         Police        Force           (‘CRPF’)         Group      Centre,

Bhubaneswar.      While       continuing             in    service,       a      departmental

inquiry   was    initiated          against       him       on    the   allegations         that

though he was involved in Kendrapara Police Station Case No.

349 dated 26.09.2001 for the offences punishable under Sections

341, 323, 294, 337, 506 read with
Section 34
of the Indian

Penal Code and was charge-sheeted for the said offences on

01.12.2001;      and       though    the    said          criminal      case     was   pending

before    the     competent         Court        but,        while      filling        up    the

verification roll, he suppressed/concealed the said fact and

such an act was prejudicial to the discipline of CRPF. The

respondent participated in the inquiry and ultimately, he was

awarded    the     punishment          of        removal          by    the      Disciplinary

Authority.      The    appeal        taken       by       the     respondent        was     also

dismissed by the Appellate Authority on 31.07.2009.
5.   However,         on    02.02.2012,       a      writ        petition      filed   by    the

respondent bearing No. 14945 of 2009 was allowed by the High

Court to the extent that the Appellate Authority was directed

to reconsider the appeal within two months in light of the

judgment of this Court in the case of
Commissioner of Police

and Ors. v. Sandeep Kumar
: (2011) 4 SCC 644. The Appellate

Authority,      thereafter,         passed       a    fresh       order     on    22.08.2012,

again dismissing the appeal and declining to interfere with the

decision of the Disciplinary Authority. The respondent again

approached the High Court by way of the writ petition leading

to the present appeal, being W.P.(C) No. 24085 of 2012.
3
6.     The    plea        taken      by   the        present       respondent       before      the

learned Single Judge in this writ petition was that, he had not

suppressed         any     information          so     as     to     be     held     guilty     in

disciplinary proceedings. In respect of the particular column

in the verification roll, it was submitted, he had neither

mentioned     ‘Yes’        nor    mentioned          ‘No’     as    regards     the      criminal

case. It was also asserted that he was neither arrested nor

remanded      to    judicial           custody;       and     the     matter       having      been

settled between the parties in the village, he did not know

about the pendency of the case and hence, did not state any

information        in     that    regard        in     the    relevant       column       of   the

verification        roll.        The    present        appellants         opposed       the    writ

petition     with        the   submissions           that     the    respondent         left    the

relevant column blank, though the criminal case was pending

against him and such an act was that of concealment/suppression

of material facts.
6.1.   The     learned           Single     Judge        did        not    agree        with    the

contentions of the present respondent (writ petitioner) and on

10.04.2018, dismissed the writ petition while concluding that

he    had    concealed         the     facts     about        his     involvement         in   the

criminal case.
7.     The intra-court appeal against the order so passed by the

learned Single Judge was considered and decided by the Division

Bench of the High Court by the impugned order dated 25.03.2019.

The    Division          Bench    of      the     High       Court        examined       all   the

contentions         raised        before        it     with        reference       to     several

decisions of this Court and found no reason to interfere with
4
the    basic   findings    of   the   learned         Single    Judge      as   regards

guilt/delinquency of the appellant and affirmed the conclusion

in that regard in the following terms: -
“In view of the aforesaid settled positions of Law
        and the facts and circumstances of the present case as
        to non-supply of required information of which the
        petitioner-appellant has been found guilty, we do not
        find any cogent reason to interfere with the findings
        reached by the learned Single Judge in that regard.”

7.1.    However, thereafter, the Division Bench of the High Court

referred to a few passages in the 3-Judge Bench decision of

this Court in
Avtar Singh v. Union of India and Others
: (2016)

8 SCC 471, and observed that the respondent had been acquitted

in the said criminal case prior to awarding of punishment in

the disciplinary proceedings.
The Division Bench also observed

that the matter was earlier remanded to the Appellate Authority

for re-consideration in light of the decision of this Court in

the case of
Sandeep Kumar
(supra) but, the Appellate Authority

again stuck to the punishment of removal and thereby, set at

naught the directions of the Court. On these considerations,

the    Division    Bench   formed     the      view    that    the    punishment    of

removal   from     service   was    too       harsh   and     thus,   directed     the

present appellants to impose ‘any lesser punishment as deemed

just and proper’. The Division Bench also issued consequential

orders and directions as regards continuity of service of the

respondent.       The   relevant    and       concluding      part    of   the    order

impugned reads as under: -
“10. In the instant case, the petitioner-appellant
        was charge-sheeted along with others for the offences
5
punishable under
Sections 341
/
323
/
294
/
337
/
506
read
with
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code. offences
are petty offences said the petitioner-appellant
along the others stood acquitted with the specific
observation of the learned trial court that the
matter has been compromised between the parties,
which was the specific pica of the petitioner-
appellant that he had no knowledge about the pendency
of case since the matter was compromised at the
village. It may also be mentioned here that when the
petitioner was first awarded with the punishment of
removal from service, he had approached this Court in
W.P.(C) No. 14945 of 2009 and this Court had set
aside   the     punishment    directing   the   appellate
authority to reconsider the matter in the light of
the judgment rendered by the Hon’ble Apex Court in
the case of
Sandeep Kumar
(supra). But the appellate
authority again stuck to the punishment of removal
thereby setting the direction of this Court at
naught. Keeping in view the discussed facts and
circumstances we are of the considered opinion that
the punishment of removal from service as has been
imposed against the petitioner-appellant was too
harsh calling for interference by this Court in
exercise    of   power   under
Article   226
of   the
Constitution of India.
11.   Accordingly, the appeal is allowed in part.
Only the punishment of removal from service as has
been awarded against the petitioner-appellant is set
aside   and    the   opposite   parties-respondents   are
directed to impose any lesser punishment as deemed
just and proper. The petitioner-appellant shall be
deemed to be continuing in service notionally from
the date he was removed from service and shall be
considered for the purpose of all consequential
service benefits subject to any lesser punishment, if
any, to be awarded by the competent authority-
opposite parties-respondents.
However, the petitioner-appellant shall not be
entitled to any pecuniary benefit for the period he
was out of service.
The writ appeal is disposal of accordingly. No
order as to cost.”
6
8.     Assailing the order aforesaid, it has been strenuously

argued by Ms. Nidhi Khanna, learned counsel for the appellant

that, furnishing of false information and suppression of any

relevant fact in the verification roll could only be viewed

disfavourably    and   a     person    like     the   respondent,        with    the

admitted   position     of    suppression        of    material        fact   about

pendency of the criminal case against him, could not have been

ordered to be taken back in service; and the punishment of

removal from service in this matter called for no interference.

Learned counsel has particularly referred to and relied upon

the 3-Judge Bench decision of this Court in the case of
Avtar

Singh
(supra).
9.     Per contra, it is submitted by Mr. Piyush Kumar Roy,

learned counsel for the respondent that the respondent had been

serving the appellants without any cause of complaint since

after his appointment in the year 2009. It is submitted with

reference to the judgment and order dated 01.05.2008, as passed

by the Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate, Kendrapara in Trial

No. 33 of 2002 pertaining to GR Case No. 613 of 2001, that the

respondent was honourably acquitted in the said case pertaining

to the offences of petty nature where more than 50 persons of

the   village   were   parties   and       it   had   not   been   a    matter   of

criminality of conduct of the respondent. Learned                  counsel       for

the respondent has strenuously argued that the respondent had

not been guilty of supplying any false information; and in such

a case of trivial nature, where the respondent was ultimately

acquitted honourably, the punishment of removal from service
7
would be too harsh and in the totality of the circumstances,

the Division Bench has rightly interfered to the limited extent

of requiring the authorities to re-consider the matter on the

quantum of punishment.
9.1.    With reference to the decision in
Avtar Singh
(supra) and

particularly to the summation in paragraph 38.4 and its sub-

paragraphs, the learned counsel would submit that this being a

matter    of     trivial     nature,      where     the   respondent     had   been

honourably     acquitted,         the    employer    in   its    discretion    could

ignore such alleged suppression of facts, which did not carry

the element of any ill-intent on the part of the respondent.

Learned counsel has also made a fervent plea for leniency,

particularly with reference to the facts that the respondent

comes from a humble background and has a family to support.
10.     Having     given     thoughtful        consideration       to   the    rival

submissions and having examined the material placed on record,

we find it difficult to endorse the approach and views of the

Division Bench of the High Court in this matter.
11.     The fact that the respondent was guilty of suppressing

material fact is not of any doubt or dispute. He had indeed

left the relevant columns in the verification roll blank; and

thereby, had been wanting in forthrightness while filling up

the    verification        roll    for    employment      with    the   appellant.

Admittedly, at the time of filling up the verification roll,

the    criminal    case    was     pending.    The    respondent     cannot    feign

ignorance about the said case because he indeed surrendered

before the Trial Court and was granted bail. That being the
8
position, the findings whereby he is held guilty of misconduct

 of suppression/concealment of material information, cannot be

 faulted        at.     In     fact,          such    findings      of     the    Disciplinary

 Authority and the Appellate Authority have been affirmed by the

 learned Single Judge as also by the Division Bench in the order

 impugned. The question, then, is as to whether the Division

 Bench        was     justified          in     interfering        with    the    quantum     of

 punishment?          In     our   view,        the       answer   could   only    be   in   the

 negative.
12.          As    regards        the    effect          of   suppression   of    facts,    the

 3-Judge Bench of this Court in the case of
Avtar Singh
(supra),

 has stated the principles in no uncertain terms thus: -
“32. No doubt about it that once verification form
              requires certain information to be furnished,
              declarant is duty-bound to furnish it correctly and
              any suppression of material facts or submitting
              false information, may by itself lead to termination
              of his services or cancellation of candidature in an
              appropriate case. However, in a criminal case
              incumbent has not been acquitted and case is pending
              trial, employer may well be justified in not
              appointing such an incumbent or in terminating the
              services as conviction ultimately may render him
              unsuitable for job and employer is not supposed to
              wait till outcome of criminal case. In such a case
              non-disclosure or submitting false information would
              assume significance and that by itself may be ground
              for employer to cancel candidature or to terminate
              services.”

12.1.         Of course, in Avtar Singh, various eventualities

and     the    applicable          principles             have   been    summarised     in

paragraph 38 and sub-paragraph thereof. We may reproduce the

relevant parts, as occurring in paragraphs 38.1 to 38.4.3, as
9
under: -
“ 38.1. Information given to the employer by a
           candidate as to conviction, acquittal or arrest, or
           pendency of a criminal case, whether before or
           after entering into service must be true and there
           should be no suppression or false mention of
           required information.
38.2 While passing order of termination of
           services or cancellation or candidature for giving
           false information, the employer may take notice of
           special circumstances of the case, if any, while
           giving such information.
38.3 The employer shall take into consideration
           the       government       orders/instructions/rules,
           applicable to the employee, at the time of taking
           the decision.
38.4 In case there is suppression or false
           information of involvement in a criminal case where
           conviction or acquittal had already been recorded
           before filing of the application/verification form
           and such fact later comes to knowledge of employer,
           any of the following recourses appropriate to the
           case may be adopted:
38.4.1.   In a case trivial in nature in which
           conviction had been recorded, such as shouting
           slogans at young age or for a petty offence which
           if disclosed would not have rendered an incumbent
           unfit for post in question, the employer may, in
           its discretion, ignore such suppression of fact or
           false information by condoning the lapse.
               38.4.2.   Where conviction has been recorded in
           case which is not trivial in nature, employer may
           cancel candidature or terminate services of the
           employees.
38.4.3.   If    acquittal    had   already   been
           recorded in a case involving moral turpitude or
           offence of heinous/serious nature, on technical
           ground and it is not a case of clean acquittal, or
           benefit of reasonable doubt has been given, the
           employer may consider all relevant facts available
           as to antecedents, and may take appropriate
           decision as to the continuance of the employee.”
10
13.       Thus, it remains beyond the pale of doubt that the cases of

non-disclosure      of    material   information        and    of    submitting    false

information have been treated as being of equal gravity by this

Court and it is
laid down in
no uncertain terms that non-disclosure

by itself may be a ground for an employer to cancel the candidature

or to terminate services. Even in the summation above-quoted, this

Court has emphasized that information given to the employer by a

candidate as to criminal case including the factors of arrest or

pendency    of     the    case,   whether    before     or     after    entering    into

service, must be true and there should be no suppression or false

mention of the required information.
14.       In case of suppression, when the facts later come to the

knowledge of employer, different courses of action may be adopted

by the employer depending on the nature of fault as also the nature

of default; and this Court has indicated that if the case is of

trivial nature, like that of shouting slogans at a young age etc.,

the     employer    may    ignore    such        suppression    of     fact   or   false

information depending on the factors as to whether the information,

if disclosed, would have rendered incumbent unfit for the post in

question.
14.1.     However, the aforesaid observations do not lead to the

corollary that in a case of the present nature where a criminal

case was indeed pending against the respondent and the facts were

altogether omitted from being mentioned, the employer would be

obliged to ignore such defaults and shortcomings. On the contrary,

as indicated above, a non-disclosure of material information itself

could be a ground for cancellation of employment or termination of
11
services.
15.       We have also taken note of the fact that the decision of

the so-called honourable acquittal was rendered by the Trial Court

as late as on 01.05.2008. This leads to the position that the

respondent, who entered the employment in CRPF in the year 2003

without disclosing the fact of pendency of criminal case against

him, had continued to remain as a pending-trial accused person

without   the     knowledge     of    the   department,     until   the    facts    were

noticed and he was subjected to departmental proceedings.
16.       In     the    given   set    of    facts   and    circumstances,         where

suppression of relevant information is not a matter of dispute,

there cannot be any legal basis for the Court to interfere in the

manner    that    the    employer      be   directed   to    impose       ‘any   lesser

punishment’, as directed by the Division Bench of the High Court.

The submissions seeking to evoke sympathy and calling for leniency

cannot lead to any relief in favour of the respondent.
17.       Accordingly, and in view of the above, this appeal succeeds

and is allowed; the questioned part of the impugned order dated

25.03.2019, i.e., paragraph 11 where the Division Bench interfered

with the quantum of punishment, is set aside. The writ petition

filed by the respondent shall stand dismissed without any order as

to costs.
…………………………………………………….J
                                                               (DINESH MAHESHWARI)



                                                                    ………………………………….J
                                                                     (M.M.SUNDRESH)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 5, 2022.
12
ITEM NO.11                 COURT NO.14                     SECTION XI-A

                 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F      I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (C) No. 26402/2019

(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 25-03-2019
in WA No. 223/2018 passed by the High Court of Orissa at Cuttack)

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                     Petitioner(s)
                                  VERSUS

DILLIP KUMAR MALLICK                                      Respondent(s)

(IA No. 11524/2022 - APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION)

Date : 05-04-2022 These matters were called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE DINESH MAHESHWARI
           HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.M. SUNDRESH

For Petitioner(s)    Mr. B. V. Balaram Das, AOR

                     Ms. Sakshi Kakkar, Adv.
Mr. G. S. Makkar, Adv.
Ms. Nidhi Khanna, Adv.
Mr. A. K. Sharma, AOR

For Respondent(s)    Mr. Pijush K. Roy, Adv.
Mrs. Kakali Roy, Adv.
Ms. Ankita Sharma, Adv.
Mr. Rajan K. Chourasia, AOR

            UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R
          Leave granted.
The appeal succeeds and is allowed in terms of the Signed

Reportable Order.
All pending applications stand disposed of.
(SHRADDHA MISHRA)                               (RANJANA SHAILEY)
SENIOR PERSONAL ASSISTANT                       COURT MASTER (NSH)
(Signed Reportable Order is placed on the file)