[Cites
6
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
National Medical Commission vs Pooja Thandu Naresh on 29 April, 2022
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Hemant Gupta
REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2950-2951 OF 2022
                          (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NOS. 2536-2537 OF 2022)


         THE NATIONAL MEDICAL COMMISSION                                 .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                          VERSUS

         POOJA THANDU NARESH & ORS.                                    .....RESPONDENT(S)




                                                   JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.              The present appeals are directed against orders dated 29.7.2021 and

                         20.9.2021 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras in the writ

                         petitions filed for quashing the circulars issued by the Tamil Nadu

                         Medical Council on 12.11.2020 and 24.12.2020 and consequential

                         orders of directing respondent No. 1/writ petitioner 1 to undergo two

                         months of Compulsory Rotatory Residential Internship, 2 followed by

                         one year of internship before granting permanent registration under
Signature Not Verified
the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 3 (now repealed by the National
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
Date: 2022.04.29
16:15:46 IST
Medical Commission Act, 2019).
Reason:
1         For short, the ‘student’
         2         For short, the ‘CRRI’
         3         For short, the ‘Act’
1
2.      The brief facts leading to the present appeals are that the student and

        other similarly situated students after qualifying the eligibility test i.e.

        as per “The Eligibility Requirement for Taking Admission in an

        Undergraduate Medical Course in a Foreign Medical Institution

        Regulations, 20024 joined medical colleges in the People’s Republic of

        China, such as Qingdao University Faculty of Medicine 5. It is the stand

        of the students that they have undergone nine semesters of their

        academic course including clinical training on the campus. However,

        due to the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic, the clinical training for the

        subjects of Ophthalmology, Otorhinolaryngology and Nuclear Medicine

        in the 10th Semester was done online and that they have been granted

        degree of Bachelor of Medicine & Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) after

        qualifying in all the subjects as per the teaching plan till May, 2020 by

        the Foreign Institute.            According to the student, some of her fellow

        students have been granted provisional registration by the Tamil Nadu

        Medical Council but she has been declined such provisional registration

        which led to filing of number of writ petitions before the High Court.

        The argument is that since she has been declared qualified by the

        Foreign Institute, the only requirement before provisional registration is

        qualifying in the Screening Test in terms of the Screening Test

        Regulations, 20026.               As she has qualified such Screening Test,


4    For short, the ‘Eligibility Regulations’
5    For short, the ‘Foreign Institute’
6    For short, the ‘Screening Regulations’
2
therefore, the condition in the statute read with the Screening

     Regulations stands satisfied. Hence, the decision of the Medical Council

     not to grant provisional registration is not justified in law.
3.   The High Court in its order dated 29.7.2021 passed the following

     directions:
“i) The impugned circulars dated 12.11.2020 and 24.12.2020
           passed by the third respondent, rejecting the claim of the
           petitioners are quashed, as far as the petitioners are concerned.
ii) The petitioners shall make their individual application to the
           third respondent for provisional registration for doing their CRRl
           along with the documents, as required by the second
           respondent, within a period of one week from the date of receipt
           of a copy of this order.
iii) On such application being made by the petitioners, the third
           respondent shall verify the original documents and consider their
           application for issuing certificate of provisional registration.
iv) The above said exercise shall be completed within two weeks
           from the date of receipt of the application from the petitioners.”
4.   Subsequently, writ petitions were listed under the caption “for

     clarification” and thereafter an order was passed by the High Court

     with the following directions:
“(a) the petitioners who submit their applications to the Tamil
           Nadu Medical Council shall be provisionally registered and they
           shall be permitted to undergo the internship (CRRI);
(b) Taking into consideration the fact that the petitioners had not
           undergone the practical and clinical training during the MBBS
           Course in physical form in the medical university where they had
           undergone the course, there shall be a direction to the effect
           that the petitioners will undergo the internship for a period of 14
           months and the additional 2 months shall be utilized for
           providing practical and clinical training in the initial phase of
3
their internship and thereafter, the regular internship shall follow
          for a period of 12 months (1 year). This Court is aware of the fact
          that this requirement goes beyond what is provided under clause
          11 of the screening test regulations 2002. However, instead of
          making the students go back to the respective universities and
          complete the practical and clinical training which may be
          impossible in the prevailing situation, it will be a better via-
media to make them undergo the same in the initial phase of the
          internship for a period of 2 months. This will sufficiently satisfy
          the requirements for maintaining better quality in medical
          education and at the same time safeguarding the interest of the
          students;
(c) It is made clear that all these directions issued by this Court
          are peculiar to the given situation and this can never be taken as
          a precedent in future. The Tamil Nadu Medical Council shall
          ensure that the students who apply for provisional registration
          are possessing screening test passing certificate issued by the
          concerned authority and only thereafter register them
          provisionally, and:
(d) This Court expects that this order will be made applicable to
          all the students who are similarly placed and they are not made
          to knock the doors of this Court.”
5.   Some of the statutory provisions of the Act relevant for the purpose of

     the present appeals read thus:
“13. (4-A) A person who is a citizen of India and obtains medical
          qualification granted by any medical institution in any country
          outside India recognised for enrolment as medical practitioner in
          that country after such date as may be specified by the Central
          Government under sub-section (3), shall not be entitled to be
          enrolled on any Medical Register maintained by a State Medical
          Council or to have his name entered in the Indian Medical
          Register unless he qualifies the screening test in India prescribed
          for such purpose and such foreign medical qualification after
          such person qualifies the said screening test shall be deemed to
          be the recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this
          Act for that person.
(4-B) A person who is a citizen of India shall not, after such date
4
as may be specified by the Central Government under sub-
section (3), be eligible to get admission to obtain medical
           qualification granted by any medical institution in any foreign
           country without obtaining an eligibility certificate issued to him
           by the Council and in case any such person obtains such
           qualification without obtaining such eligibility certificate, he shall
           not be eligible to appear in the screening test referred to in sub-
           section (4-A):
Provided that an Indian citizen who has acquired the
           medical qualification from foreign medical institution or has
           obtained admission in foreign medical institution before the
           commencement of the
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act,
           2001
shall not be required to obtain eligibility certificate under
           this sub-section but, if he is qualified for admission to any
           medical course for recognised medical qualification in any
           medical institution in India, he shall be required to qualify only
           the screening test prescribed for enrolment on any State Medical
           Register or for entering his name in the Indian Medical Register.”
6.   The Eligibility Regulations and the Screening Regulations were

     published in the Government of India Gazette on the same date i.e.,

     18.2.2002. It is not disputed that the student has qualified the

     eligibility test which made her eligible to undergo the medical course in

     the Foreign Institute.        The relevant provisions of the Eligibility

     Regulations read as under:
“9. After verification, as required, if the candidate is found to
           fulfil the eligibility criteria, the Council shall issue an Eligibility
           Certificate in the prescribed format to the candidate certifying
           that he/she is eligible to join a medical institution outside India to
           obtain a primary medical qualification. The certificate shall
           indicate that on return after obtaining the foreign primary
           medical qualification, the candidate shall have to undergo a
           screening test, subject to fulfilment of the conditions prescribed
           in the Screening Test Regulations, 2002, and that passing this
           test shall only entitle him to provisional/permanent registration
           by the Medical Council of India or the State Medical Councils.
5
Provided that he/she has studied for the medical course at
             the same institute located abroad for the entire duration of the
             course from where he/she has obtained the degree.
10. In case the candidate does not fulfil any of the qualifying
             criteria the Council may reject his application for issue of
             Eligibility Certificate giving the reasons therefore.
11. The issue of a eligibility certificate to a candidate shall not
             entitle him to any right, whatsoever, other than to take
             admission in an undergraduate medical course in a foreign
             medical institute.”
7.   Some of the relevant conditions of the Screening Regulations read as

     thus:
“2. (c) “Permanent Registration” means registration for the
             purpose of enrolment on any State Medical Register or Indian
             Medical Register after obtaining the Primary Medical qualification
             followed by completion of such practical training as prescribed
             either in India or abroad as per the provisions of the Act;
xx                  xx                  xx
(f) “Primary Medical qualification” means a medical qualification
             awarded by any medical institution outside India which is a
             recognized qualification for enrolment as medical practitioner in
             the country in which the institution awarding the said
             qualification is situated and which is equivalent to MBBS in India;
xx                  xx                  xx
(g) “Provisional Registration” means provisional registration in a
             State Medical Register or Indian Medical Register for the purpose
             of undergoing practical training in India as prescribed and for no
             other purpose by an Indian citizen possessing any primary
             medical qualification but has not undergone such practical
             training after obtaining that qualification as may be required by
             the rules or regulations in force in the country granting the
             qualification;
6
xx                   xx                  xx
4. Eligibility criteria. – No person shall be allowed to appear in
the screening test unless –

            xx                   xx                  xx

(3) he/she has studied for the medical course at the same
institute located abroad for the entire duration of the course
from where he/she has obtained the degree:
Provided in cases where Central Government is informed
of condition of war, civil unrest, rebellion, internal war or any
such situation wherein life of Indian citizen is in distress and such
information has been received through the Indian Embassy in
that country then the Council shall relax the requirement of
obtaining medical education from the same institute located
abroad in respect of which communication has been received
from the Indian Embassy in that country.
xx                   xx                  xx
5. The purpose.—The purpose of conducting the screening test
shall be only to determine the eligibility or otherwise of a
candidate for his or her registration with the Medical Council of
India or any State Medical Council and qualifying the same shall
not confer any other right, whatsoever, on a candidate.
xx                   xx                  xx
11. The Prescribed Authority shall intimate the result of the
Screening Test to the candidates as well as to the Secretary,
Medical Council of India and the State Medical Councils. The
unsuccessful candidates shall also be appropriately informed.
The candidates who qualify the Screening Test may apply to the
Secretary, Medical Council of India, New Delhi or to any State
Medical     Council    for   provisional   registration/permanent
registration along with the requisite registration fee in favour of
Secretary, Medical Council of India or the State Medical Council.
The Medical Council of India or the State Medical Councils shall
issue provisional registration to such successful candidates, who
are yet to undergo one year internship in an approved institution
and issue permanent registration to such eligible candidates who
7
have already undergone one year internship, as the case may
                be.”
8.      A notification notifying the National Medical Commission (Foreign

        Medical Graduate Licentiate) Regulations, 20217 dated 18.11.2021 has

        been published. Relevant provisions of the said Regulations read thus:
“5. Applicability of these regulations. – (1) Notwithstanding
                anything contained in regulation 4, these regulations shall not be
                applicable –
(a) To foreign medical graduates who have acquired a foreign
                medical degree or primary qualification, as the case may be,
                prior to the coming into force of these regulations;
(b) to candidates who are pursuing their education in foreign
                institutions prior to the coming into force of these regulations;
and
(c) to such foreign medical graduates who are specifically
                exempted by the Commission or the Central Government, as the
                case may be, by notification.
(2) The foreign medical graduates who have acquired a foreign
                medical degree or primary qualification, as the case may be, and
                the candidates who are pursuing their education in foreign
                institutions, prior to the coming into force of these regulations,
                shall be governed by the erstwhile applicable regulations.
xx               xx                 xx

                                            SCHEDULE-I
                                         (See regulation 4)
CRITERIA TO RECOGNISE FOREIGN MEDICAL GRADUATES
                    APPLYING FOR LICENCE OR PERMANENT REGISTRATION TO
                                      PRACTICE IN INDIA
1. The guiding principle for licensing a foreign medical graduate
                to practice in India is to ensure that the Foreign Medical

7    For short, the ‘2021 Regulations’
8
Graduate fulfils the requirements of education and training
          equivalent or commensurate with that of an Indian medical
          graduate.
2. Eligibility for primary medical qualification in a country
          outside India:
(i) Duration of course and training in subjects leading to primary
          medical qualification:
(a) Any person who pursue the foreign medical degree should
          have undergone a course of theory, practical and clinical training
          equivalent to Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery
          (MBBS) of India; and
(b) Should have been completed internship of twelve months in
          addition to such course referred to in clause (a), in the same
          foreign institution where the primary medical qualification has
          been obtained, along with hands-on training in clinical subjects
          including but not limited to Community Medicine, General
          Medicine, Psychiatry, Paediatrics, General Surgery, Anaesthesia,
          Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Orthopaedics, Otorhinolaryngology,
          Ophthalmology, Dermatology, Emergency or Casualty services,
          lab services and their sub-specialties.”
9.   The appellant had issued a clarification on 4.3.2022 that the 2021

     Regulations are not applicable to foreign medical graduates who have

     acquired a foreign medical degree or primary qualification, as the case

     may be, prior to 18.11.2021. However, it further prescribes as under:
“6. Taking into the consideration all the relevant provisions of
          NMC’s Regulations and circumstances, the Commission decided
          to issue the detailed guidelines/process which is required to be
          followed by State Medical Councils for grant of registration of
          FMGs till further instructions from the Commission or
          implementation of NExT Exam, whichever occurs earlier. State
          Medical Councils should ensure the following conditions/criteria
          while processing the case for grant of registration of FMGs:
(i) The medical qualification/degree must be registerable to
          practice medicine in their respective jurisdiction of the country in
9
which the medical degree is awarded and at par with the license
            to practice medicine given to citizen of that country.
(ii) Documentary evidence certifying successful completion of
            physical training or internship during the medical qualification
            equivalent to MBBS, if conducted in foreign institute.
(iii) Copy of passport with VISA and immigration details.
(iv) Foreign medical Graduate Examination (FMGE) conducted by
            National Board of Examination (NBE) should be cleared by the
            candidates seeking registration in India.
xx                  xx                  xx”
10.   It is admitted by the student that she has not undergone the practical

      and clinical training in the physical form, though she has undergone

      the course through online mode for the entire duration, therefore, she

      satisfies the requirement under Regulation 4(3) of the Screening

      Regulations.
11.   The argument of Mr. Vikas Singh, learned senior counsel for the

      appellant, is that in terms of the statutory Regulations, the student has

      to study the medical course in the same institute located abroad for

      the “entire duration”. It has been argued that as per the dates of the

      semester and the date of departure of student from China, it shows

      that the student has not completed the ninth semester in part and

      tenth semester completely, therefore, the student is not eligible for

      provisional registration to undergo one year internship so as to be

      eligible for registration as a professional under the Act. The argument
10
is that clinical training cannot be imparted through online mode as it is

         the actual training involving diagnosis and interactions with the

         patients. There cannot be any online clinical training which will satisfy

         the requisite condition of the Screening Regulations.
12.      Mr. S. Nagamuthu, learned senior counsel for the respondent-student

         relied upon a judgment of this Court reported as
Medical Council of

         India v. J. Saai Prasanna & Ors.
8 to contend that the student is

         eligible for provisional registration. It was contended that the action of

         the   Tamil      Nadu   Medical   Council   is   completely   arbitrary   and

         discriminatory as some students have been granted provisional

         registration not only by the Tamil Nadu Medical Council but also by the

         Medical Council of different States. Therefore, declining of provisional

         registration to the student leads to heartburn amongst the student who

         has not been granted provisional registration. Mr. Nagamuthu referred

         to a note filed on behalf of the appellant before the High Court to

         contend that the stand of the appellant was that acquiring primary

         medical qualification from the Foreign Medical Institute was acceptable

         for grant of registration. It was also contended that as per Note V(2),

         the Screening Regulations grant an opportunity to the candidate to

         either complete his practical training/internship in the country from

         where he has acquired the Foreign Medical Qualification or in India.
Relevant part of the Note reads thus:
“V. (1)      xxx                                   xxx
8     (2011) 11 SCC 748
11
(2) Further
Regulation 2
{c) read with 2(e) of the Eligibility
            Requirement For Taking Admission in an Undergraduate Medical
            Course in a Foreign Medical Institution Regulations, 2002 and
            similarly,
Regulation 2(c)
read with 2(g) of the Screening Test
            Regulation, 2002, further grants an opportunity to the candidate
            to either complete his practical training I internship in the
            Country 'from where he has acquired the Foreign Medical
            Qualification or in India. This is further clarified by Regulation 11
            of the Screening Test Regulation, 2002.
xx                       xx                         xx

            VIII.   xx                        xx                         xx
The National Medical Commission vide its notice dated
            30.09.2020. allowed Indian Medical Graduates to undergo only
            online classes of theory subjects which shall be supplemented by
            practical and Clinical training in physical form as per the MBBS
            Curriculum as and when the Medical Colleges gets re-opened. In
            order to bring Foreign medical Graduates at par with Indian
            Medical Graduates, the Candidates are required to reproduce
            Certificate of successful completion of theory as well as practical
            and Clinical training during the course of MBBS having being
            done in physical form in the Medica~ University and its affiliated
            Hospital.”
13.   We have heard learned counsel for the parties and find that the

      reliance on the judgment of this Court in Medical Council of India is

      not applicable to the facts of the present case as after the judgment of

      the Andhra Pradesh High Court delivered on 2.5.2008, Regulation 4(3)

      of the Screening Regulations was inserted to make it mandatory that a

      candidate should have studied for the medical course at the same

      institute located abroad for the entire duration of the course. Though,

      this Court has delivered judgment after the amendment but the
12
student had obtained the degree prior to the amendment of the

      Regulations. Therefore, such judgment would not be relevant in the

      present matter.
14.   The fact is that the student has admittedly not completed clinical

      training which was part of the curriculum in the tenth semester, may

      be she has not completed part of clinical training in the ninth semester

      as well as per the curriculum.
15.   The Eligibility Regulations are to ensure that a student meets the

      minimum eligibility condition as per the Graduate Medical Education

      Regulations, 1997, but after completing the curriculum, a candidate

      has to qualify the Screening Test, provided the entire duration of the

      course has been completed at the same institute located abroad. The

      question to be examined is as to whether the degree granted by the

      Foreign Institute even in respect of clinical training is binding on the

      appellant and the student has to be provisionally registered. We find

      that the appellant is not bound to grant provisional registration to the

      student who has not completed the entire duration of the course from

      the Foreign Institute including the clinical training.
16.   No doubt, the pandemic has thrown new challenges to the entire world

      including the students but granting provisional registration to complete

      internship to a student who has not undergone clinical training would

      be compromising with the health of the citizens of any country and the

      health infrastructure at large.
13
17.   The students had taken admission in medical colleges outside India for

      the reason that they could not get admission in the medical colleges in

      India. China alone has a number of Institutes offering medical courses

      conducted in English language.
The Act
and the Screening Regulations

      are framed in such a way that the course completed by the students is

      treated to be valid in India provided that the medical qualification is

      recognised for enrolment of the medical practitioner in that country.

      Obviously, none of the Indian students are going to practice medicine

      in the foreign country, therefore, the grant of degree to the Indian

      students has no corresponding obligation that such students actually

      practice medicine in that country. In other words, the medical course is

      permitted to be completed abroad to practice in India only on the basis

      of an endorsement that the completion of such medical course entitles

      them to practice in the said foreign country. The courses are designed

      in such a way to attract students to undertake admission in the Foreign

      Institutes so that such students, become eligible to practice medicine

      in India. The very framework of the Regulations was compromising the

      interests of the Indian nationals and the health infrastructure in India.

      However, the malice has been corrected by the 2021 Regulations but

      such Regulations are not applicable to the students who have taken

      admission in the Foreign Institutes prior to 18.11.2021.
18.   The students claim to have completed clinical training through online

      mode.    The online mode for practical training has come up for
14
consideration before this Court in a judgment reported as
Orissa Lift

         Irrigation Corporation Limited v. Rabi Sankar Patro & Ors.9
wherein the degree in the discipline of engineering was being

         conferred by online method as part of distance education course.

         Earlier, it was Engineering Degree by online mode and now Degree in

         Medicine and Surgery by online mode. This Court held that the

         practicals form the backbone of such education which is hands-on

         approach involving actual application of principles taught in theory. It

         was held as under:
“48. Technical education leading to the award of degrees in
                Engineering consists of imparting of lessons in theory as well as
                practicals. The practicals form the backbone of such education
                which is hands-on approach involving actual application of
                principles taught in theory under the watchful eyes of
                Demonstrators or Lecturers. Face to face imparting of knowledge
                in theory classes is to be reinforced in practical classes. The
                practicals, thus, constitute an integral part of the technical
                education system. If this established concept of imparting
                technical education as a qualitative norm is to be modified or
                altered and in a given case to be substituted by distance
                education learning, then as a concept the AICTE ought to have
                accepted it in clear terms. What parameters ought to be satisfied
                if the regular course of imparting technical education is in any
                way to be modified or altered, is for AICTE alone to decide. The
                decision must be specific and unequivocal and cannot be
                inferred merely because of absence of any Guidelines in the
                matter. No such decision was ever expressed by AICTE. ......”
19.      Therefore, without practical training, there cannot be any Doctor who is

         expected to take care of the citizens of the country.            Hence, the

         decision of the appellant not to grant provisional registration cannot be

9     (2018) 1 SCC 468
15
said to be arbitrary.
20.   The argument that certain students have been granted provisional

      registration will not confer any right with the student to claim

      provisional registration so as to undergo the internship. There cannot

      be any equality in illegality. Reference may be made to a judgment of

      this Court reported as
Chandigarh Administration v. Jagjit Singh10
.
21.   The argument that if a student has a right, then such right can be

      enforced independent of the order passed by the courts is not tenable.

      Qualifying in the Screening Regulations is no proof of the clinical

      experience, if any, gained by the students. The Screening examination

      is based upon Optical Mark Reader (OMR) answers and has no

      correlation with any practical training. We do not find that in terms of

      the Screening Regulations, the students are entitled to the provisional

      registration.
22.   However, the fact remains that the students were permitted to

      undergo medical course abroad and that they have completed their

      curriculum according to the certificate granted by such Foreign

      Institute. Therefore, such national resource cannot be permitted to be

      wasted which will affect the life of young students, who had taken

      admission in the foreign Institutes as part of their career prospects.

      Therefore, the services of the students should be used to augment

      health infrastructure in the country. Thus, it would be necessary that

      the students undergo actual clinical training of such duration and at
10 (1995) 1 SCC 745
16
such institutes which are identified by the appellant and on such terms

      and conditions, including the charges for imparting such training, as

      may be notified by the appellant.
23.   We are unable to agree with the High Court that instead of three

      months of clinical training in China, two months training would be

      sufficient for provisional registration apart from the 12 months of

      internship. The Courts are not expert in deciding an academic

      curriculum or the requirement of the clinical training which may be

      required to be satisfied by the students.
24.   Mr. Vikas Singh submitted that the pandemic and the crisis in the

      Ukraine has thrown new challenges for the appellant and that the

      appellant shall take a holistic view as to how to safeguard the interests

      of the Indian students who were studying abroad and at the same time,

      not compromising with the quality of medical education expected from

      them in India.
25.   Therefore, we direct the appellant
i)    to frame a scheme as a one time measure within two months to

            allow the student and such similarly situated students who have

            not actually completed clinical training to undergo clinical

            training in India in the medical colleges which may be identified

            by the appellant for a limited duration as may be specified by the

            appellant, on such charges which the appellant determines.
17
ii)   It shall be open to the appellant to test the candidates in the

            scheme so framed in the manner within next one month, which it

            considers appropriate as to satisfy that such students are

            sufficiently trained to be provisionally registered to complete

            internship for 12 months.
26.   With the aforesaid directions, the appeals stand disposed of.
.............................................J.
                                                               (HEMANT GUPTA)



                                          .............................................J.
                                                    (V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 29, 2022.
18