[Cites
6
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
V G Jagdishan vs M/S. Indfos Industries Private Limited on 19 April, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.      OF 2022
                         (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 12511 OF 2016)


          V G Jagdishan                                              ..Appellant (S)


                                                Versus



          M/s. Indofos Industries Limited                          ..Respondent (S)


                                           JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.              Leave granted.
2.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with impugned judgment

                          and order dated 06.07.2015 passed by the High Court of

                          Delhi at New Delhi in Letters Patent Appeal No. 412/2015,

                          by which the High Court has dismissed the said appeal

                          preferred by the appellant herein – workman and it is held
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
that the Labour Court at Delhi would have no jurisdiction
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2022.04.19
17:37:17 IST
Reason:
to try the case and that the Labour Court at Ghaziabad
1
would have jurisdiction to try the complaint/case, the

     workman has preferred the present appeal.
3.   The dispute in the present appeal is in a very narrow

     compass. The appellant herein – workman was working as

     a driver at Ghaziabad. He was employed at Ghaziabad and

     was   also   working   at    Ghaziabad.     His   services    were

     terminated at Ghaziabad. Subsequent to his termination,

     the workman shifted to Delhi. He sent a demand notice

     challenging his termination to the head office at Delhi.

     Thereafter, he filed a claim before the Conciliation Officer

     at Delhi. Before the Labour Court, Delhi, the Management

     –   respondent    herein     raised   the     objection      about

     maintainability of proceedings at Delhi. It was also pointed

     out that the workman had already raised the same dispute

     before the Deputy Labour Commissioner, Ghaziabad. The

     Labour Commissioner, Delhi proceeded further with the

     complaint/conciliation      proceedings.    The   dispute     was

     referred to the Labour Court, Delhi. Before the Labour

     Court, respondent – management raised a preliminary

     objection that the Labour Court, Delhi had no territorial
2
jurisdiction   since   the       workman   was   appointed    at

      Ghaziabad; he was working in the factory of management –

      respondent herein at Ghaziabad and his services were also

      retrenched at Ghaziabad. It was the case on behalf of the

      workman that as the demand notice was served at Head

      Office at Delhi, it can be said that the dispute has arisen

      giving rise to substantial cause of action at Delhi.

      Therefore, it was the case on behalf of the workman that

      the Labour Court at Delhi has territorial jurisdiction to try

      the case.
3.1   The Labour Court vide award dated 18.04.2006 held the

      preliminary issue in favour of the management and held

      that   the Labour      Court at      Delhi has   no   territorial

      jurisdiction to decide the case/complaint/reference. The

      Labour Court held that merely because the Corporate

      Office of the management was at Delhi the same will not

      vest the Labour Court, Delhi with territorial jurisdiction.

      The Labour Court held that as the cause of action has

      arisen at Ghaziabad, the Court at Ghaziabad alone had the

      jurisdiction to try the case.
3
3.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the award/order

      passed by the Labour Court holding that the Labour

      Court, Delhi has no territorial jurisdiction to try the case,

      the workman preferred the writ petition before the learned

      Single Judge of the High Court. The learned Single Judge

      dismissed   the   said   writ   petition   vide   order   dated

      09.04.2015. The Letters Patent Appeal (LPA) against the

      order passed by the learned Single Judge has been

      dismissed by the Division Bench of the High Court by the

      impugned judgment and order. Hence, the workman has

      preferred the present appeal.
4.
Ms. V. Mohana
, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

      behalf of the appellant herein – workman has vehemently

      submitted that in the present case it cannot be said that

      there is a total lack of jurisdiction in the Labour Court,

      Delhi. It is submitted that as the Head Office, where the

      demand notice was sent was at Delhi and the demand

      notice was served from Delhi where the workman was

      staying after the termination, it can be said that a part

      cause of action has arisen in Delhi. It is submitted that
4
when a part of the cause of action has arisen in Delhi, the

      Court at Delhi would have territorial jurisdiction.
Reliance

      is placed on the decisions of this Court in the cases of
Nandram Vs. Garware Polyster Limited
; (
2016) 6 SCC

      290, Bikash Bhushan Ghosh and Ors. Vs. Novartis India

      Ltd. and Anr
; (2007) 5 SCC 591 and Singareni

      Collieries Co. Ltd. Vs. Ande Lingaiah and Anr; (2000)

      10 SCC 294.
4.1   It is further submitted by
Ms. V. Mohana
, learned Senior

      Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant that in the

      present   case,   the   Labour   Court   had   decided    the

      preliminary issue and held that the Labour Court, Delhi

      has no territorial jurisdiction to decide the case.      It is

      submitted that Labour Court ought to have given its

      decision on all issues.
Reliance is placed upon the

      decision of this Court in the case of
D.P. Maheshwari Vs.

      Delhi Administration and Ors.
; (1983) 4 SCC 293. It is

      submitted that as held by this honourable Court, tribunals

      should dispose of all the issues, whether preliminary or

      otherwise, at the same time.
5
4.2   Making the above submissions and relying upon above

      decisions of this Court, it is prayed to quash and set aside

      the order(s) passed by the Labour Court, learned Single

      Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court and direct

      the Labour Court, Delhi to decide and dispose of the case

      at the earliest.
5.    As per the office report, service is not complete on sole

      respondent No. 1 and as per the post tracking report,

      notice has not been delivered to respondent No. 1 with

      postal remarks as “Addressee left without instructions”.

      However, the present Special Leave Petition (SLP) is of the

      year 2016 and for the reasons hereinbelow, we see no

      reasons to interfere with the order passed by the High

      Court. We proceed further with the SLP ex­parte so far as

      sole respondent No. 1 is concerned.
6.    The question which is posed for the consideration of this

      Court is, whether, the Labour Court, Delhi would have

      territorial jurisdiction to decide the case or the Labour
6
Court, Ghaziabad would have territorial jurisdiction to

      decide the case.
6.1   From the findings recorded by the Labour Court, Delhi and

      the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench of the

      High Court, it is not much in dispute that the workman

      was employed as a driver at Ghaziabad office. He was

      working at the Ghaziabad. His services were retrenched at

      Ghaziabad. All throughout during the employment, the

      workman stayed and worked at Ghaziabad. Only after the

      retrenchment/termination the workman shifted to Delhi

      from where he served a demand notice at Head Office of

      the Management situated at Delhi. Merely because the

      workman after termination/retrenchment shifted to Delhi

      and sent a demand notice from Delhi and the Head Office

      of the Management was at Delhi, it cannot be said that a

      part cause of action has arisen at Delhi. Considering the

      facts that the workman was employed at Ghaziabad; was

      working at Ghaziabad and his services were terminated at

      Ghaziabad,   the   facts   being   undisputed,   only   the

      Ghaziabad Court would have territorial jurisdiction to
7
decide the case. As such the issue involved in the present

case is no longer res integra in view of the decision of this

Court in the case of
Eastern Coalfields Ltd. and Ors. Vs.

Kalyan Banerjee
; (2008) 3 SCC 456.
In the case of
Eastern   Coalfields   Ltd.
(supra)   the   workman    was

employed in Mugma area in the district of Dhanbad,

Jharkhand. His services were terminated at Mugma.

However, the workman filed a writ petition before the

Calcutta High Court. On a preliminary objection taken the

Calcutta High Court held that since the workman was

serving at Mugma area under the General Manager of the

area which is the State of Jharkhand, the Calcutta High

Court had no jurisdiction. Affirming the aforesaid decision,

this Court held that the entire cause of action arose in

Mugma area within the State of Jharkhand and only

because the head office of the company was situated in the

State of West Bengal, the same by itself will not confer any

jurisdiction upon the Calcutta High Court particularly

when the head office had nothing to do with the order of

punishment passed against the workman. In the present
8
case also, the workman was employed at Ghaziabad; he

      was working at Ghaziabad and his services were also

      terminated at Ghaziabad by the office at Ghaziabad where

      he was employed.
6.2   Now, so far as the reliance placed upon the decision of this

      Court in the case of Singareni Collieries Co. Ltd. (supra)

      is concerned, apart from the fact that the same is not

      applicable to the facts of the case on hand, it is required to

      be noted that the order passed by this Court in the said

      case was a consent order and the order was passed in

      exercise of power under
Article 142
of the Constitution of

      India and the question of law was left open. Therefore, no

      reliance can have been placed on the said decision.
6.3   Now, as far as the decision of this Court in the case of
Bikash Bhushan Ghosh
(supra) is concerned, on facts
,
the

      said decision
also is not applicable to the facts of the case

      on hand. That was a case where it was specifically found

      that the part cause of action had arisen at both places. In
9
the present case as observed, it cannot be said that any

      part cause of action has arisen at Delhi.
6.4   Reliance placed upon the decision of this Court in the case

      of
Nandram
(supra) is also of no assistance to the

      appellant. Again, on facts
,
the said decision
is not

      applicable to the facts of the case on hand. That was also a

      case where it was found that part cause of action had

      arisen in both the places, namely, Pondicherry and

      Aurangabad. Therefore, it was found on facts that both,

      the Labour Courts at Pondicherry and Aurangabad had the

      jurisdiction to deal with the matter and therefore, the

      Labour   Court   at   Aurangabad    was     well   within   its

      jurisdiction to consider the complaint.
6.5   In the case of
D.P. Maheshwari
(supra) is pressed into

      service by learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of

      the appellant in support of the submission that the Labour

      Court ought not to have given the decision only on

      preliminary issue and ought to have disposed of all the

      issues, whether preliminary or otherwise at the same time.
10
On facts
the said decision
is not applicable to the facts of

     the case on hand. In the aforesaid decision no absolute

     proposition of law was
laid down by
this Court that even

     the issue touching the jurisdiction of the court cannot be

     decided by the court as a preliminary issue and the court

     has to dispose of all the issues, whether preliminary or

     otherwise, at the same time. When the issue touches the

     question of territorial jurisdiction, as far as possible the

     same shall have to be decided first as preliminary issue.

     Therefore, in the present case, the Labour Court did not

     commit any error in deciding the issue with respect to the

     territorial jurisdiction as a preliminary issue in the first

     instance.
7.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

     present Appeal fails and the same deserves to be dismissed

     and      is   accordingly   dismissed.   In   the   facts   and

     circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to

     costs.
…………………………………J.
                                      (M. R. SHAH)
11
…………………………………J.
                       (B.V. NAGARATHNA)
New Delhi,
April 19, 2022.
12