[Cites
7
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Shri N.K. Janu, Deputy Director, Social ... vs Lakshmi Chandra on 10 April, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 287, (2019) 162 FACLR 410, (2019) 163 FACLR 3, (2019) 2 CURLR 501, (2019) 2 ESC 348, (2019) 4 ALL WC 3681, (2019) 6 SCALE 236, 2019 (9) ADJ 8 NOC
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3740      of 2019
                                     (ARISING OUT OF S.L.P (C) NO. 15358 OF 2018)




                         SHRI N.K. JANU,                                ........APPELLANTS
                         DEPUTY DIRECTOR
                         SOCIAL FORESTARY DIVISION,
                         AGRA AND OTHERS



                                                        Versus



                         LAKSHMI CHANDRA                                ........RESPONDENT




                                                   JUDGMENT
Hemant Gupta, J.
Leave granted.
2.   The challenge in the present appeal is to an order dated
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
16.02.2018 whereby an application for recall of the order dated
Date: 2019.04.10
15:29:54 IST
Reason:
06.12.2017 dismissing the Review Application in default was dismissed.
1
3.    The case has a chequered history. The respondent initially filed a

Civil Misc. Writ Petition No. 36896 of 1992. The said Writ Petition was

disposed of in terms of the judgment of the Division Bench of

Allahabad High Court reported as
State of U.P. and Others vs. Putti

Lal1
. The said judgment has been affirmed by this Court in State of

U.P and Others. vs. Putti Lal 2 decided on 21.02.2002. This Court

held that the daily wagers are entitled to minimum pay scale as is

being received by their counter-parts in the Government and would not

be entitled to any other allowances or increment so long as they

continue as daily wagers. It was further ordered that since statutory

Rules, namely, the Uttar Pradesh Regularisation of Daily Wages

Appointments on Group 'D' Posts Rules, 20013 have been framed,

therefore, question of framing any further scheme by the State does

not arise.
4.    The respondent again filed Civil Misc. Writ Petition No. 43443 of

2004 after the said order was passed by this Court. The said Writ

Petition was disposed of on 23.10.2008 with the following directions:
“Rule 4 of the Uttar Pradesh Regularisation of
                Daily Wages Appointments on Group ‘D’ Posts
                Rules, 2001 has been interpreted by this Hon’ble
                Court in the case of Visheshwar Vs. Principal
                Secretary, Forest Anubbhag-3 and this Court in the
                said case has held that in case the employee is
                working on the cut off date and is continuing as
                such on daily wage post on the date of

1 (1998)1UPLBEC 313
2 (2006) 9 SCC 337
3 Rules 2001
2
proclamation of the notification of the aforesaid
              Rules, he is entitled for regularisation, inspite of
              the fact that the employee worked intermittently.
In the instant case, the petitioner, as stated by the
              counsel for the petitioner, has been engaged in
              the year 1983, though has worked intermittently,
              but regularly till 2001 and as such he is entitled
              consideration for regularisation of his Service, in
              view of the provision of Rule 4 of the aforesaid
              Rules as interpreted by this Court in the Case of
              Visheshwar Vs. Principal Secretary, Forest (Supra).
              In view of above, without going into the merits of
              the case the Opp. Parties are directed to consider
              the case of the petitioner in accordance with the
              provision of the Uttar Pradesh Regularisation of
              Daily Wages Appointments on Group ‘D’ Posts
              Rules, 2001 for regularisation of his Services and
              with regard to the payment of minimum of the
              regular pay scale in accordance with law as well as
              the law laid down by the Apex Court and by this
              Court expeditiously, preferably within three
              months from the date of presentation of a certified
              copy of this order.”
5.    In terms of such order, the Divisional Director, Social Forestry

Division Agra, passed an order on 19.11.2008 that the respondent is

not eligible for regularisation/equal pay.    The relevant extract of the

order reads as under:
“Because, the aforesaid daily wager was not
              found working continuously. Therefore, Sri Lakshmi
              Chandra does not come under the category of
              eligibility for regularisation/equal pay. There is a
              clear cut direction in S.L.P No. 3393/1999, SLP No.
              91/03, 01/95(
Secretary of State of Karnataka &
              Others Vs. Uma Devi
) of Hon’ble Supreme Court,
              order dated 10.04.2005 that those persons whose
              appointment has been made without any selection
              procedure, cannot be eligible for regularisation
              against permanent post.
Therefore, after due consideration the
              undersigned has decided that Sri Lakshmi Chandra
3
S/o Sri Pati Ram is not found eligible for
             regularisation/equal pay and the benefits of U.P.
             Daily Wager Appointment Rules 2001 Group-D
             cannot be accrued to him.
Therefore,    his    representation       dated
             06.11.2008 is hereby disposed off.”
6.   The respondent instead of challenging the above order declining

the claim for regularisation and/or minimum of pay scale filed a

Contempt Application (C) No. 1632 of 2009. In such Contempt Petition,

a notice was issued to the present appellants when the following order

was passed on 08.05.2009:
“It is alleged that the order dated 23.10.2008
             passed by this Court has been violated. From
             perusal of the petition, a prima facie case is made
             out.
Issue notices to the opposite parties within a
             week returnable within six weeks. The opposite
             parties need not appear in person at this stage.

                 The counter affidavit may be filed within the
             aforesaid periods of else charges may be framed
             after summoning the notice.
However, one more opportunity is granted to
             the opposite parties to comply with the order
             within a month, with the notices fixing a date after
             six weeks.”
7.   It is thereafter, on 29.06.2009 an order was passed by the

appellants that Rs. 2550/- as minimum of pay scale of Rs.2550 – 3200/-
has been sanctioned to the respondent.          Thereafter, an order on

31.08.2009 was passed by the Court as to why the respondent is being

paid minimum monthly wages at the rate of Rs. 2550/- though,

minimum pay scale of Group ‘D’ employees has been fixed to          Rs.
4
6050/-.   Thereafter numerous orders were passed from time to time

seeking personal presence of the officers of the State. An order was

passed on 03.12.2009, directing the Principal Chief Conservator of

Forests, U.P. to ensure that accurate eligibility and seniority list be

drawn up in all the divisions and be finalised after hearing the

incumbents. The said order reads as under:
“   Heard learned counsel for the parties.
The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, U.P.
             and Principal Secretary (Forest) are present in
             person.
The Forest Department of the State use to
             employee daily wagers for execution of its work in
             various schemes and projects and they continue
             for decades together. The issue of their
             regularisation was decided by this Court and
             affirmed by the Supreme Court which directed the
             State to frame a scheme for regularisation of such
             daily   wagers.   In   pursuance      thereof,    the
             Government enacted U.P. Regularisation of Daily
             Wages Appointments on Group ‘D’ Posts Rules,
             2001. Under the Rules the Authorities were
             directed to draw an eligibility and seniority list for
             the purposes of regularisation and the selection
             committee was to take decision on its basis.
Issue of break in service was also considered
             by this Court in various writ petitions and it was
             held that if the incumbent has been working from
             the cut of date till the invoking of the Rules of
             2001, though with breaks, he should be considered
             in accordance with the directions given. Large
             number of writ petitions had been filed and
             allowed on the basis of the aforesaid Rules and the
             judgments. However, the Court has been flooded
             with    contempt     applications   alleging    non-
             compliance in letter and spirit. In various cases
             this Court has come across where either
             compliance has been refused on imaginary ground
             or on the basis of fake seniority and eligibility list
             and even if compliance was made, citing paucity
5
of posts, the employee was given only the
               minimum scale.
This petition has been heard at length and on
               pointed queries the officers present admit that
               seniority and eligibility list has not been prepared
               in various divisions. It has also been brought on
               record that persons who had never worked in the
               department have also been appointed and
               regularized:
The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, U.P.
               shall ensure that accurate eligibility and seniority
               list is drawn up in all the divisions and be finalized
               after hearing the incumbents and Court be duly
               informed on the next date. Reply of rejoinder
               affidavit be also filed.
List for further orders on 25.2.2010.”
8.   The said order was challenged by the appellants in Special Appeal

No. 215 of 2010 in the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad. The

Special Appeal No. 215/2010 was dismissed. The orders passed by the

High Court became subject matter of challenge before this Court. This

Court in a judgment reported as
Deputy Director, Social Forestry

Division and Another vs. Lakshmi Chandra
4 directed the Principal

Secretary to the Department of Forests, U.P. and Principal Chief

Conservator of Forests to file separate affidavits before the High Court

on the implementation of the orders to ensure that the wages are paid

to the workmen in terms of orders passed within three months. This

Court also requested the High Court to take into consideration all the

subsequent developments to reach a logical conclusion in terms of the

orders passed by this Court. The parties were directed to appear before

the High Court on 17.02.2016.
4 (2016) 4 SCC 721
6
9.    The Contempt Application (C) No. 1632 of 2009 was again taken

up for hearing by the High Court on 30.3.2016. It was ordered that it is

no longer open to the Department to take plea that all the daily wage

employees, whether they have been considered for regularization or

not, are not entitled to the minimum of the pay scale. The plea of the

Department on the strength of Division Bench judgment in
State of

U.P. and Others vs. Chhiddi and Others5
may not be available in

view of the order of this Court.
10.   The said order was challenged by the appellants before the

Division Bench in Special Appeal No. 261 of 2016 –
N.K. Janu and

Others vs. Lakshmi Chandra
.
The Court observed that the order in

Chhiddi’s case (supra) is contrary to another Division Bench

judgment in
Chanchal Kumar Tiwari and Others vs. Shri Hari

Shankar6
and that there is no occasion for the Court to intervene in

the matter now on the strength of order in Chhiddi’s case (supra) in

view of the order of the Supreme Court in Lakshmi Chandra’s case

(supra). It was observed that it is open to the State to approach this

Court to seek clarification. The Court observed as under:
“The Order passed by Apex Court dated
                02.02.2016, in effect clearly reflects for ensuring
                enforcement of orders passed on earlier occasion,
                in view of this in our considered opinion it is true
                that there is a Division Bench judgement in the
                case of
State of U.P. Vs. Chhiddi and others
,
                Special Appeal No. 1530 of 2007 that takes
                altogether contrary view to the judgment in the
                case of Special Appeal No. 1205 of 2010, Chanchal

5 2016 (1) ALJ 226 (Special Appeal No. 1530 of 2007 decided on 24.09.2015)
6 (2011) ILLJ 581 All
7
Kumar Tiwari Vs. State of U.P. In normal course of
              business, in case there are two judgments on the
              same subject matter holding altogether contrary
              directions, the matter would have been referred to
              Full Bench for reconciliation of the situation but
              here fact of the matter is that matter is emanating
              out of an order passed by Apex Court dated
              02.02.2016.
In view of this in the facts of the case once
              reliance has been placed by the State on the
              orders passed by Division Bench of this Court in
              Special Appeal No. 1530 of 2007 to which it has
              been informed by Sri Pankaj Srivastava, Advocate
              that review application has already been filed.
              Once the order passed by learned Single Judge is
              in tune with the order passed by Apex Court, in
              Civil Appeal No. 879-883, then there is no occasion
              for us to intervene with the said order, and it is
              always open to the State and its agencies to
              approach Apex Court alongwith clarificatory
              application in the light of the judgment passed by
              Division Bench on subsequent occasion in Special
              Appeal No. 1530 of 2007 so that situation may be
              reconciled.”
11.   In terms of the liberty granted, the State filed IA 29-33 of 2016 in

Lakshmi Chandra’s case (supra). The said applications were

withdrawn on 25.07.2016. It is thereafter, the appellants filed Special

Leave to Appeal (C) No……. /2016 CC No. 25207 of 2016. The Special

Leave to Appeal was dismissed as withdrawn with liberty to approach

the High Court by filing Review Petition. The order reads as under:
“After some arguments, Mr. Harin P. Raval,
              learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
              petitioners, seeks permission to withdraw this
              petition with liberty to approach the High Court by
              way of filing review petition to establish that the
              respondent was not continuously employed from
              1992 to 2001.
Permission, as sought for, is granted.
8
Accordingly, the special leave petition is
              dismissed as withdrawn with the aforesaid liberty .”
12.   It is thereafter, appellants filed a Review Petition No. 313796 of

2017 in the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad against the order dated

07.04.2016 passed in Special Appeal No. 261 of 2016.                 The Review

Petition along with an application for condonation of delay in filing of the

Review Petition was dismissed by the Allahabad High Court for want of

prosecution on 06.12.2017. It is the said application for recall of order

dated 06.12.2017 which remained unsuccessful which is the subject

matter of the challenge in the present appeal.
13.      Learned Senior Counsel for the appellants argued that the

respondent has been paid minimum of pay scale and that he attained

the age of superannuation on 31.7.2018 and stands retired. It is

contended that the direction of this Court is in two parts- (i) to pay

minimum of pay scale to all daily wagers as per the direction of this

Court in Putti Lal’s case (supra) and (ii) to consider regularization of

the workers in terms of statutory Rules framed. Since the minimum of

pay scale stands paid to the respondent, the dispute in such respect

does not survive.
14.   However, in respect of regularization of the services, it is argued

that there is no evidence that the respondent has worked on daily wages

from the year 1994 to 2000 i.e. for approximately seven years.

Thereafter, he has worked intermittently from 2001 to 2003 as a daily

wager and that there is no record available that the respondent worked
9
from December 2003. Therefore, his claim for regularization was not

accepted when an order was passed on 19.11.2008.
15.      Once an order has been passed by the Department, it was open to

the respondent to challenge the said order by way of a Writ Petition, but

the Contempt Jurisdiction could not be invoked. The Contempt Court is

to ensure that the order of the Court is complied with. The order of the

Court on 23.10.2008 was to consider the case of the respondent for

regularization of his services and for payment of minimum regular pay

scale.
16.       Since the appellants have considered the claim of regularization

and/or payment of minimum of pay scale, the only remedy of the

respondent was by way of the Writ Petition.          The High Court has

exceeded the Contempt Jurisdiction to compel the officers of the State to

appear in court and in fact, the High Court travelled much beyond the

orders passed by the Single Bench on 23.10.2008.
17.      It is contended by the learned Senior Counsel for the appellants

that the question of regularization has been considered by the Division

Bench of the High Court in a judgment in Chhiddi’s case (supra)

wherein, issue of minimum of pay scale as well as artificial break in

service was examined in the matter of regularization of the services in

terms of the Rules framed. In respect of break in service the Court held

as under:
“Thus, for all the reasons stated above, the
                directions issued by the learned Judge on 17
10
October 2005 to the State Government, while
                partly allowing the writ petitions, to reconsider the
                cases of the writ petitioners for regularisation of
                their   services   by    ignoring     the   minimum
                educational    qualifications    or    the   physical
                endurance requirement prescribed in the service
                rules with a further direction that until then all the
                petitioners who were still working should be
                allowed to continue on a daily wage basis and be
                paid the minimum of the pay-scale, cannot be
                sustained and are, accordingly, set aside. The
                State Government shall consider the cases of the
                daily wagers in the light of the observations made
                above and by ignoring the artificial breaks in their
                engagement as daily wagers.”
18.     Still further, Allahabad High Court in a judgment reported as
Surendra Singh and Another vs. State of U.P. and Others
7 held

that period of two years cannot be treated as an artificial break which

can be overlooked for the purpose of claim of regularization. The Court

held as under:
“The learned Judge found that in the chart giving
                details of the engagement of the writ petitioners
                as daily wagers, the column relating to working in
                the year 2001-02 was left blank and against the
                year 2013, it was mentioned that both the writ
                petitioners were working from February 2003 and
                July 2003 respectively. The learned Judge also
                recorded a finding that the writ petitioners had
                failed to discharge the burden of establishing that
                they were working on daily wages in the Forest
                Department during the relevant period and the
                contention of the writ petitioners that they had
                been working without payment of any wages was
                also not accepted for the reason that it was
                difficult to believe that the writ petitioners would
                be actually working for two years without payment
                of wages.
7 Special Appeal No. 1016 of 2005 decided on 24.9.2015
11
Learned counsel for the appellants has
                submitted that even if the writ petitioners had not
                worked for some period, then too the break should
                be treated as artificial break and should have been
                overlooked for the purpose of considering their
                claim for regularisation.
In the present case, the writ petitioners had
                not worked on daily wage basis for a long period of
                two years. This break cannot be treated to be an
                artificial break in the service. The writ petitioners
                did not satisfy the essential requirements
                contained in the 2001 Rules. They were, therefore,
                not entitled for regularisation under the 2001
                Rules.”
19.    The learned Single Bench of Allahabad High Court passed an order

reported as Visheshwar vs. Principal Secretary Forest Anubhag-3

and Others8, wherein, it was held that artificial break in the case of

regularization has to be ignored. The Court held as under:
“In all these cases, I find that the consideration for
                regularisation was denied by the Selection
                Committee on the ground of short breaks in
                service.    According to the stand taken in the
                counter affidavit, a policy was adopted at the
                Divisional Level to exclude all those persons, who
                had not contemplated 240 days of work in one
                calendar year. This consideration in my opinion
                was wholly arbitrary as we are not dealing with the
                question of retrenchment under the
Industrial
                Disputes Act, 1947
. On the contrary I find that in
                Allahabad      Division     the     Conservator     of
                Forest/Regional Director, Social Forestry, U.P.
                Allahabad in the matter of similarly situate persons
                for regularisation ignored this policy and directed
                that in interpreting the word ‘continuing in
                service’, any short beak may be ignored with the
                condition that the person has been employed
                subsequent on daily wages. Sri M.C. Chaturvedi,
                Additional chief Standing Counsel submits that this
                order was immediately recalled. Sri Pankaj

8 Civil Misc. Writ Petition No. 47568 of 2002 decided on 29.11.2004
12
Srivastava submits that even alien recalling of the
               order,    the      regularisation    obtained     with
               interpretation given in the order were not
               cancelled. Be that as it may, since I am the holding
               that an artificial break in case of regularisation has
               to be ignored I need not to decide this question.”
20.      The said order was also a subject-matter of challenge in Special

Appeal No. 305 of 2015. The Court allowed the appeal in respect of

payment of minimum pay scale but upheld the finding in respect of

break in service. The relevant extract from the order reads as under:
“The writ petitioner had contended that there was
               no justification for excluding his case for
               regularisation under the Rules only for the reason
               that there were some breaks in service while
               working as daily wagers. The learned Judge held
               that artificial breaks have to be ignored and,
               therefore, directed the respondents to consider the
               case of the writ petitioner for regularisation afresh.
               It was further directed that in case the petitioner
               was still in employment, he should be continued
               and should be paid the minimum of the pay scale
               till his case was considered as had been directed
               by the Supreme Court in
State of U.P & Ors. Vs.
               Putti Lal
.
Learned Additional Advocate General for the
               appellants has stated that the appellants are not
               aggrieved by the direction issued for ignoring the
               artificial breaks in the service but the direction by
               the learned Judge to pay the minimum of the pay
               scale to the writ petitioner should be set aside.”
21.      Thus, we find that the grievance regarding regularization of the

service on account of a break in service could not have been taken up in

Contempt proceedings, when such issue has attained finality in the High

Court.
13
22.     Having said so, we find that the High Court was not justified in

passing orders from time to time to secure presence of the officers. The

officers of the State discharge public functions and duties. The orders

are generally presumed to be passed in good faith unless proved

otherwise.    The officers pass orders as a custodian of public money.

Therefore, merely because an order has been passed, it does not warrant

their personal presence. The summoning of officers to the court to

attend proceedings, impinges upon the functioning of the officers and

eventually it is the public at large who suffer on account of their absence

from the duties assigned to them. The practice of summoning officers to

court is not proper and does not serve the purpose of administration of

justice in view of the separation of powers of the Executive and the

Judiciary. If an order is not legal, the Courts have ample jurisdiction to set

aside such order and to issue such directions as may be warranted in the

facts of the case.
23.          In view of the above discussion, we find that the entire

proceedings in Contempt Application No. 1632 of 2009 are wholly

unjustified and in excess of jurisdiction vested with the Contempt Court.

Consequently, the appeal is allowed and the Contempt Application is

dismissed.
……..….…………………………………J.
                                           (SANJAY KISHAN KAUL)


                                        ….………….…………………………..J.
                                           (HEMANT GUPTA)
New Delhi
April 10, 2019.
14