[Cites
18
, Cited by
33
]
Supreme Court of India
Sevoke Properties Pvt. Ltd. vs West Bengal State Eletrictiy ... on 11 April, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 2664, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 337, (2019) 1 RENCR 586, (2019) 2 CAL HN 183, (2019) 2 RENTLR 92, (2019) 3 CIVILCOURTC 818, (2019) 3 ICC 802, (2019) 4 ANDHLD 175, 2019 (4) KCCR SN 273 (SC), (2019) 4 MAD LJ 278, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 1931
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
1

                                                                                          REPORTABLE




                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2019
                                          (Arising out of SLP(C) No.32456 of 2018)




     Sevoke Properties Ltd.                                                               Appellant


                                                          Versus


     West Bengal State Electricity Distribution Company Ltd.                            Respondent




                                                     JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J



     1                   Leave granted.
2                   This appeal arises from a judgment and order of a Division Bench of the High

     Court at Calcutta dated 14 November 2018. Allowing the first appeal filed by the

     respondent against a decree for possession, the Division Bench directed, in

     consequence, that the suit filed by the appellant shall stand dismissed.


     3                   The subject matter of the dispute is a plot of land situated at Second Mile,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.04.24
16:55:00 IST
Sevoke Road, Siliguri, West Bengal admeasuring 4 bighas, 18 Cottahs, 9 Chittacks and
Reason:
18 sq.ft.
2
4         On 22 March 1975, a deed of settlement was executed by Mohan Lal Khemka,

by which a private trust was created for the benefit of his grandson. By the said deed,

Mahabir Prasad Bhartia and Sunita Bhartia were appointed as trustees. On 5

November 1979, a deed of settlement resulted in the creation of a private trust. At this

stage, it would be material to note that the property in dispute has by subsequent

devolutions vested in the appellant.
5         On 25 May 1981, an indenture of lease was entered into between the appellant

and the respondent. The term of the lease was fifteen years. Under the terms of the

lease, the respondent took possession of the land. The rent was paid until 19 April

1984.
6         The State of West Bengal initiated proceedings for requisitioning of the land

under the West Bengal Lands (Requisition and Acquisition) Act 1948. The appellant

challenged the validity of the requisitioning in a Writ Petition before the High Court. The

petition was allowed by a judgment dated 25 September 1998 and the order of

requisitioning was set aside. The judgment of the Single Judge was questioned in

appeal by the respondent. The appeal was dismissed on 16 November 2000.


7         Eventually, a suit for eviction was instituted before the Court of the Civil Judge

(Senior Division), Jalpaiguri1. The respondent filed its written statement. The learned

trial judge decreed the suit by a judgment and order dated 30 November 2005. The trial

court passed a decree for vacant and peaceful possession. A preliminary decree for

mesne profits was passed. The respondent filed an appeal before the High Court. By an

interim order dated 18 May 2006, the Division Bench of the High Court directed that

proceedings before the trial Court for ascertainment of mesne profits in terms of Order

1   Title Suit 63 of 2001
3
XX
Rule 12 of the Code of Civil Procedure
1908 2 shall continue, but no final decree

shall be drawn up without the leave of the Court. The execution proceedings were

stayed, subject to deposit of the arrears of rent.
8           Following the order of the High Court, the valuer submitted a report in regard to

the valuation of the property. The trial Court accepted the valuation on 7 September

2016. The order of the trial court was challenged by the respondent before the High

Court3. The petition was dismissed on 1 May 2018 by a learned Single Judge.


9           By a judgment and order dated 14 November 2018, the High Court has set aside

the decree for possession and, in consequence, directed that the suit instituted by the

respondent shall stand dismissed. The High Court has held that:
(i)        A lease of immovable property for a term exceeding one year can only be

               made by a registered instrument;
(ii)       Since the indenture of lease was unregistered, it was governed by the first

               paragraph of
Section 107
of the Transfer of Property Act 1882 4;
(iii)      The relationship between the parties would, in consequence, be governed by

               the second paragraph of Section 107;
(iv)       The tenancy shall, therefore, be deemed to be from month to month

               terminable by fifteen days’ notice under Section 106; and
(v)        In the absence of a notice under
Section 106
determining the relationship of

               lessor and lessee between the parties, the suit was not maintainable.
10          Mr C A Sundaram, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant

urged three submissions:
2 “
CPC
”
3 CO 456 of 2017
4 “
TP Act
”
4
(i) The purpose of a notice under
Section 106
is relatable to the necessity of

   effecting termination of the lease. No specific form is provided by the
TP Act
.
The purpose of the notice is to furnish an intimation to the tenant of the

   termination of the lease and to provide a period of fifteen days to quit and

   vacate the premises. The substantive purpose of such a notice is in effect

   fulfilled in the form of the suit for possession, so long as an eviction follows

   beyond a period of fifteen days. In that event, the requirement of
Section 106
stands satisfied;
(ii) Since the indenture of lease is an unregistered document, as a consequence

   of the provisions of
Sections 35
and
36
of the Indian Stamp Act 1899 and
Sections 17
and
49
of the Registration Act 1908, the contents of the

   document are inadmissible in evidence to prove the terms of the contract. As

   a consequence, the presumption under
Section 106
would come into

   operation and the relationship between the parties would be in the nature of a

   monthly tenancy. The respondent in its written statement categorically

   admitted that it was in occupation for a period of fifteen years which ended on

   24 May 1996. Once this is the position, the position of the respondent would

   be as a tenant at sufferance, in which event, no notice under Section 106 was

   necessary; and
(iii) After the respondent entered upon the property on 25 May 1981, it was

   requisitioned by the State Government in pursuance of a request made by

   the respondent. The respondent stopped paying the rent after 1984. After

   the Writ Petition was allowed by the learned Single Judge and the order of

   requisitioning was quashed, the respondent filed an appeal before the

   Division Bench. In this view of the matter, the respondent must be treated to
5
have elected or opted out of the lease.
11      On the other hand, Mr Yasobant Das, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf

of the respondent, urged that:
(i)    Since the document of lease has not been registered, the contents of the

             lease cannot be looked into for any purpose whatsoever.
(ii)   The status of the respondent would be of a monthly tenant;
(iii) Consequently, a notice of termination under Section 106 was mandatory; and
(iv) The failure of the appellant to issue a notice of termination under
Section 106
was fatal to the maintainability of the suit.
In this regard, reliance was placed

             on a decision of a two judge Bench of this Court in
Satish Chand Makhan v

             Govardhan Das Byas5
.
12
Section 107
of the TP Act reads thus:
“107. Leases how made.—A lease of immovable
                    property from year to year, or for any term exceeding
                    one year, or reserving a yearly rent, can be made only
                    by a registered instrument.
All other leases of immovable property may be made
                    either by a registered instrument or by oral agreement
                    accompanied by delivery of possession.
Where a lease of immovable property is made by a
                    registered instrument, such instrument or, where there
                    are more instruments than one, each such instrument
                    shall be executed by both the lessor and the lessee:
Provided that the State Government may, from time to
                    time, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that
                    leases of immovable property, other than leases from
                    year to year, or for any term exceeding one year, or
                    reserving a yearly rent, or any class of such leases,
                    may be made by unregistered instrument or by oral
                    agreement without delivery of possession.”




5(1984) 1 SCC 369
6
13       In terms of the provisions of Section 107, a lease of immovable property for a

term exceeding one year can only be made by a registered instrument. Admittedly, in

the present case, the indenture of lease has not been registered. In consequence, the

contents of the indenture would be inadmissible in evidence for the purpose of

determining the terms of the contract between the parties. This is the plain

consequence of the provisions of
Sections 17
and
49
of the Registration Act 1908 6.

The only purpose for which the lease can be looked at is for assessing the nature and

character of the possession of the respondent.
14       The essence of the dispute in the present case is as to whether a notice of

termination under
Section 106
was necessary. In the judgment of this Court in Satish
6
17. Documents of which registration is compulsory.—(1) The following documents shall be registered, if the
property to which they relate is situate in a district in which, and if they have been examined on or after the date on which,
Act XVI of 1864, or the
Indian Registration Act, 1866
(20 of 1866), or the
Indian Registration Act, 1871
(8 of 1871), or the
Indian Registration Act, 1877
(3 of 1877), or this Act came or comes into force, namely—
(a) instruments of gift of immovable property;
(b) other non-testamentary instruments which purport or operate to create, declare, assign, limit or
              extinguish, whether in present or in future, any right, title or interest, whether vested or contingent, of the
              value of one hundred rupees and upwards, to or in immovable property;
(c) non-testamentary instruments which acknowledge the receipt or payment of any consideration on
              account of the creation, declaration, assignment, limitation or extinction of any such right, title or interest;
              and
(d) lease of immovable property from year to year, or for any term exceeding one year, or reserving a yearly
              rent;
(e) non-testamentary instruments transferring or assigning any decree or order of a Court or any award
              when such decree or order or award purports or operates to create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish,
              whether in present or in future, any right, title or interest, whether vested or contingent, of the value of one
              hundred rupees and upwards, to or in immovable property:
49. Effect of non-registration of documents required to be registered.—No document required by
Section 17
or by
any provision of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
(4 of 1882), to be registered shall—
(a) affect any immovable property comprised therein, or
(b) confer any power to adopt, or
(c) be received as evidence of any transaction affecting such property or conferring such power,
         unless it has been registered:
Provided that an unregistered document affecting immovable property and required by this Act or the
Transfer of
Property Act, 1882
(4 of 1882), to be registered may be received as evidence of a contract in a suit for specific
performance under Chapter II of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (1 of 1877) or as evidence of any collateral transaction not
required to be effected by registered instrument.
7
Chand Makhan
(supra), the father of the plaintiff had leased open land to the

defendant for a period of five years under a registered deed of lease. After the expiry of

the initial term, there was a draft agreement for renewal for a further period of nine

years, which, however, was not registered under
Section 17(1)(d)
of the Registration

Act 1908. The plaintiff served a notice for the determination of the tenancy on the

ground of forfeiture under
Section 111(g)
and brought a suit for ejectment. The High

Court held that the lease had been determined by efflux of time under
Section 111(a)
upon the expiry of the term of nine years and hence, no notice under
Section 106
was

required for the determination of the lease. While determining the correctness of the

judgment of the High Court, this Court observed that “the defendants have nowhere

admitted that the lease was for a specific term of nine years”. On the contrary, the

defendants had pleaded that they were tenants holding over under
Section 116
of the

TP Act. This Court held that the unregistered draft lease agreement was inadmissible in

evidence under
Section 49
of the Registration Act except for a collateral purpose of

proving the nature and character of the possession of the defendants. The terms of the

lease did not constitute a collateral purpose. Consequently, the unregistered draft lease

was held to be inadmissible to create a valid lease for a renewed term of nine years. In

this background, this Court held that the defendants were tenants holding over under
Section 116
in which event it was necessary for the plaintiff to serve a notice under
Section 106
. In the absence of such a notice, the suit, it was held, would not be

maintainable.
15    Mr Sundaram has sought to distinguish this decision, since
in that case
this Court

found that the defendant was a tenant holding over within the meaning of
Section 116
.
We find merit in the submission which has been urged by Mr Sundaram. In the case

before this Court noted above, the defendants had not admitted that the term of the
8
lease was for a period of nine years. This was noted by the Court, as we have extracted

earlier. On the contrary, we find that in the present case, there is an express admission

on the part of the defendants that they were in occupation under the lease agreement

for a period of fifteen years with effect from 1981 and that the period of lease expired on

24 May 1996. Such a specific admission on the part of the defendants is contained in

paragraph 22 of the written statement. Under
Section 111(a)
, a lease of immovable

property determines by efflux of time limited thereby. Once this be the position, there

can be no manner of doubt that the position of the respondent on the expiration of the

lease was of a tenant at sufferance. In the circumstances, there was no necessity of a

notice for the termination of the lease under the provisions of
Section 106
.           The

respondent having squarely admitted in its written statement that it was in occupation

for a term of fifteen years, that term having expired, the lease stood determined by

efflux of time. Once the lease stood determined by efflux of time, there was no

necessity for a notice of termination under
Section 106
.


16     In coming to this conclusion, we are fortified by the decision of this Court in R V

Bhupal Prasad v State of A P7, where this Court held:
“8.Tenant at sufferance is one who comes into
                     possession of land by lawful title, but who holds it by
                     wrong after the termination of the term or expiry of the
                     lease by efflux of time. The tenant at sufferance is,
                     therefore, one who wrongfully continues in possession
                     after the extinction of a lawful title. There is little
                     difference between him and a trespasser. In Mulla's
                     Transfer of Property Act (7th Edn.) at page 633, the
                     position of tenancy at sufferance has been stated thus:
A tenancy at sufferance is merely a fiction to avoid
                     continuance in possession operating as a trespass. It
                     has been described as the least and lowest interest
                     which can subsist in reality. It, therefore, cannot be
                     created by contract and arises only by implication of
                     law when a person who has been in possession under
                     a lawful title continues in possession after that title has

7 (1995) 5 SCC 698
9
been determined, without the consent of the person
                     entitled. A tenancy at sufferance does not create the
                     relationship of landlord and tenant. At page 769, it is
                     stated regarding the right of a tenant holding over thus:
The act of holding over after the expiration of the term
                     does not necessarily create a tenancy of any kind. If
                     the lessee remains in possession after the
                     determination of the term, the common law rule is that
                     he is a tenant on sufferance. The expression “holding
                     over” is used in the sense of retaining possession...””




In
Park Street Properties Private Limited v Dipak Kumar Singh8
, the appellant to

whom premises had been let out with a right to sub-let them entered into a sub-tenancy

in favour of the respondent. The agreement by which the sub-tenancy was created was

unregistered. The appellant issued a notice under
Section 106
of the TP Act terminating

the monthly sub-tenancy and then instituted a suit for recovery of possession. The trial

court held that since the sub-lease was unregistered, it was inadmissible in evidence

and none of its terms, including clause 6 which empowered the landlord to serve a

notice upon default in the payment of rent could be looked into. Hence the notice under
Section 106
was held to be valid. The High Court allowed the appeal and remanded the

proceedings to the trial court. In appeal, this Court held that clause 6 of the agreement

was contrary to
Section 106
. While
Section 106
contains the phrase “in the absence of

a contract to the contrary”, this must refer to a valid contract. This Court held that in the

absence of a registered agreement, the court is not precluded from determining the

factum of tenancy from other evidence on the record including the conduct of parties.

However, in the absence of registration,
Section 106
created a fiction of tenancy from

month to month, the termination of which was governed by
Section 106
. Consequently,

the judgment of the High Court was set aside and the judgment of the trial court was

restored. The above judgment is clearly distinguishable.
Since the agreement of sub-


8 (2016) 9 SCC 268
10
lease in
Park Street Properties
(supra) was unregistered, clause 6 which governed

the sub-lease could not be looked into. In the present case, the indenture of lease being

unregistered, the contents of the instrument are inadmissible in evidence. However, it is

evident from the clear admission in the written statement that the appellant accepted

and proceeded on the basis that the period of lease expired on 24 May 1996.
Thereafter, the position of the appellant is of a tenant at sufferance.
In
Nopany Investments (P) Ltd v Santokh Singh (HUF
)9, a two judge Bench of this

Court has held :
“22…In any view of the matter, it is well settled that filing
                     of an eviction suit under the general law itself is a notice
                     to quit on the tenant. Therefore, we have no hesitation
                     to hold that no notice to quit was necessary under
Section 106
of the Transfer of Property Act in order to
                     enable the respondent to get a decree of eviction
                     against the appellant.”
17     For the above reasons, we have come to the conclusion that the judgment of the

High Court was in error.
18     We accordingly allow the appeal and set aside the impugned judgment and order

of the High Court and restore the judgment of the trial court dated 30 November 2005.

In view of the pendency of the proceedings before this Court and having due regard to

the interim order that was passed by the High Court during the pendency of the appeal,

the respondent should be given the liberty of assailing the judgment dated 1 May 2018

of the learned Single Judge of the High Court accepting the report of the Commissioner

in regard to the determination of mesne profits. We grant a period of three months to

the respondent to initiate appropriate proceedings in accordance with law for assailing

the judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 1 May 2018.



9 (2008) 2 SCC 728
11
19      Mr Yasobant Das requested for the grant of a year to vacate since the

respondent has a store in the land and arrangements for shifting have to be made. We

direct that the respondent shall have one year's time to vacate the suit premises from

the date of the judgment, subject to the filing of the usual undertaking within four weeks

from today. We have granted one year's time since the Court was apprised of the fact

that a store which provides services to the entire North Bengal area is situated on the

land.
20      The bank guarantee furnished by the appellant as a condition for withdrawal of

the occupation charges deposited by the respondent shall stand discharged. However,

the amount which has been withdrawn by the appellant shall abide by the final

determination of mesne profits.
21      There shall be no order as to costs.
…….……….....................................................J.
                                          [DR DHANANJAYA Y CHANDRACHUD]



                                           …………........................................................J.
                                           [HEMANT GUPTA]


NEW DELHI
APRIL 11, 2019