[Cites
7
, Cited by
17
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Rajasthan vs Nemi Chand Mahela . on 30 April, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2655
Author:
Sanjiv Khanna
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
L. Nageswara Rao
REPORTABLE

                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3873 OF 2010


                         THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN                            …..        APPELLANT(S)

                                                     VERSUS

                         NEMI CHAND MAHELA AND OTHERS                     …..      RESPONDENT(S)

                                                              WITH

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4491 OF 2019
                         (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 4562 OF 2012)




                                                      JUDGMENT
Sanjiv Khanna, J.
Leave granted in Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 4562 of

                                  2012.
2.       Predicament of candidates consequent to conflicting opinions in

                                  different decisions of the High Court on true and correct

                                  interpretation of principle of prospective overruling as directed in
Kailash Chand Sharma vs. State of Rajasthan and Ors.
1 is the
Signature Not Verified
cause of this agonising and festering litigation since 1999. This
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.04.30
16:29:05 IST
Reason:
“scarecrow” of a litigation, to use the words of Charles Dickens, “in
1
(2002) 6 SCC 562
Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2010 & Anr.                             Page 1 of 15
course of time, [has] become so complicated that no man alive

          knows what it means.”
3.        Award of bonus marks to candidates seeking appointment to the

          post of Primary School Teachers in Zila Parishad of various

          districts in the State of Rajasthan during the year 1998-99 was

          struck down and declared unconstitutional by a Full Bench of the

          Rajasthan High Court vide judgment dated November 18, 1999 in
Kailash Chand Sharma v. State of Rajasthan
in W.P.(C) No.

          3928 of 1998, for the reason that any kind of weightage and

          advantage in public employment in a State service is not

          permissible on the ground of place of birth, residence or on the

          ground of being a resident of urban or rural area.
The Full Bench

          in Kailash Chand Sharma’s case (supra) had followed an earlier

          Full Bench judgment in Deepak Kumar Suthar and Another v.

          State of Rajasthan and Others2 wherein similar stipulations for

          grant of bonus marks in selection of Grade II and Grade III

          teachers in the state cadre were struck down as unconstitutional.

          However,       in   Deepak      Kumar   Suthar’s   case   (supra),   no

          consequential and substantive relief was granted to the writ

          petitioners therein as first, they did not have a chance of selection

          on merits even if award of bonus marks to successful candidates
2
(1999) 2 Rajasthan Law Reporter 692
Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2010 & Anr.                                Page 2 of 15
was disregarded and secondly, the candidates so selected had

     not been impleaded as parties. Accordingly, the Full Bench in

     Deepak Kumar Suthar’s case (supra), in the concluding

     paragraph, had given the following directions:
“44. Instead of sending the matter to the appropriate
             bench, we think it proper to dispose of this petition with
             a direction that no relief can be granted to the
             petitioners as they could not succeed to get the place
             in the merit list even by getting 10 bonus marks being
             residents of urban area, for which they are certainly not
             entitled. More so, the petitioners have not impleaded
             any person from the select list, not even the last
             selected candidate. Thus, no relief can be granted to
             them in spite of the fact that the appointments made in
             conformity of the impugned Circular have not been in
             consonance with law. However, we clarify that any
             appointment made earlier shall not be affected by this
             judgment and it would have prospective application.”
4.   These directions in Deepak Kumar Suthar’s case (supra) were

     followed by the Full Bench in Kailash Chand Sharma’s case

     (supra) and the batch of writ petitions were disposed of.
5.   After the decision of the Full Bench in Kailash Chand Sharma’s

     case (supra), a large number of writ petitions including one by

     Naval Kishore were filed before the Rajasthan High Court. Some

     of them, notwithstanding the operative directions given by the Full

     Bench in Kailash Chand Sharma’s case (supra), were disposed

     of with a direction to the authorities to prepare and draw up a fresh

     merit list of candidates appointed on or after October 21, 1999
Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2010 & Anr.                            Page 3 of 15
without the bonus marks.     For convenience we would refer to

     these cases as Naval Kishore’s case. Naval Kishore’s case

     (supra) was decided on 30th July, 2002.
6.   The decision of the Full Bench in Kailash Chand Sharma’s case

     (supra) and some of the judgments directing preparation of fresh

     merit list without bonus marks (but not in all cases where such

     directions were issued) became subject matter of challenge in

     Special Leave Petitions which were granted and decided vide the

     judgment reported as Kailash Chand Sharma’s case (supra)

     referred to by us in paragraph 2 above. Affirming the findings of

     the Full Bench of the Rajasthan High Court, this Court concluded

     that award of bonus marks to residents of districts and residents of

     rural area amounts to impermissible discrimination as there was

     no rational basis for such preferential treatment. Thereafter this

     Court, in paragraph 36 onwards, in Kailash Chand Sharma’s

     case (supra) had elaborately and expressly considered the

     question of relief after noticing operative directions in Deepak

     Kumar Suthar’s case (supra). In view of the factual matrix and for

     several reasons recorded, this Court felt that there was a need to

     balance competing claims and accordingly doctrine of prospective
Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2010 & Anr.                        Page 4 of 15
overruling was partially applied vide paragraphs 45 and 46 of this

     decision, which read as under:
“45. One more point which needs mention. Some of the
             learned counsel argued that the unsuccessful applicant
             should not be allowed to challenge the selection process to
             the extent it goes against their interest, after having
             participated in the selection and waited for the result. It is
             contended that the discretionary relief under
Article 226
should not be granted to such persons. Reliance has been
             placed on the decision of this Court in Madan Lal v. State
             of J&K (1995) 3 SCC 486 and other cases in support of this
             argument. On the other hand, it is contended that in a case
             of challenge to unconstitutional discrimination, the doctrine
             of acquiescence, estoppel and the like does not apply and
             the writ petitioners cannot be expected to know the
             constitutional implications of the impugned circular well
             before the selections. We are not inclined to go into this
             question for the reason that such a plea was not raised nor
             was any argument advanced before the High Court.
46. Having due regard to the rival contentions adverted to
             above and keeping in view the factual scenario and the
             need to balance the competing claims in the light of
             acceptance of prospective overruling in principle, we
             consider it just and proper to confine the relief only to the
             petitioners who moved the High Court and to make
             appointments made on or after 18-11-1999 in any of the
             districts subject to the claims of the petitioners. Accordingly,
             we direct:
“1. The claims of the writ petitioners should be
               considered afresh in the light of this judgment
               vis-à-vis the candidates appointed on or after 18-
               11-1999 or those in the select list who are yet to
               be appointed. On such consideration, if those
               writ petitioners are found to have superior merit
               in case the bonus marks of 10% and/or 5% are
               excluded, they should be offered appointments, if
               necessary, by displacing the candidates
               appointed on or after 18-11-1999.
2. The appointments made upto 17-11-1999
               need not be reopened and re-considered in the
               light of the law laid down in this judgment.
3. Writ Petition No. 542/2000 filed in this Court
               under
Article 32
is hereby dismissed as it was
Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2010 & Anr.                                  Page 5 of 15
filed nearly one year after the judgment of the
               High Court and no explanation has been
               tendered for not approaching the High Court
               under
Article 226
at an earlier point of time.”
7.   Thus, notwithstanding the ratio, appointments made before

     November 18, 1999 were left untouched and saved. The writ

     petitioners who had moved the High Court before November 18,

     1999 were entitled to be considered afresh vis-à-vis candidates

     appointed on or after November 18, 1999 or with those in the

     select list without giving such appointed/selected candidates

     benefit of the bonus marks which had been declared to be

     unconstitutional. Only such writ petitioners, if found to be higher in

     the order of merit than those appointed after November 18, 1999

     or on select list, were to be offered appointments, if necessary, by

     removing such appointed candidates. The date November 18,

     1999 selected by the Supreme Court was the date on which the

     Full Bench of the Rajasthan High Court had pronounced its

     judgment in Kailash Chand Sharma’s case (supra). As noticed

     above, after the Full Bench decision in Kailash Chand Sharma’s

     case (supra), a number of writ petitions had been filed before the

     High Court in which directions for preparation of a fresh merit list

     without bonus marks, appointment in terms of the new selection

     list, etc., had been issued. These directions, being contrary to the
Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2010 & Anr.                          Page 6 of 15
ratio and directions given by this Court in Kailash Chand

     Sharma’s (supra), were therefore rendered inconsequential. To

     this extent, decision in Naval Kishore case (supra) and other

     similar cases were overruled/impliedly overruled.
8.   In spite of the aforesaid enunciation and directions in Kailash

     Chand Sharma’s case (supra), it is apparent that in several

     cases, directions similar to Naval Kishore’s case (supra) for re-

     computation of marks after excluding bonus marks were issued in

     favour of candidates who had approached and invoked jurisdiction

     of the High Court after November 17, 1999. Even contempt

     petitions were filed and directions were issued notwithstanding the

     fact that the said writ petitioners/petitioners had not filed writ

     petitions on or before November 17, 1999 i.e. the date on which

     Kailash Chand Sharma’s case (supra) was decided by the Full

     Bench. In some decisions, it was held that this Court in Kailash

     Chand Sharma’s case (supra) had not barred relief to all such

     candidates who may have filed writ petitions at any time after

     November 18, 1999.
9.   The controversy was set at rest beyond doubt by this Court in its

     decision in
Manmohan Sharma v. State of Rajasthan and
Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2010 & Anr.                       Page 7 of 15
Others3
and other connected matters. After extensively dealing

          with the factual matrix and arguments in Manmohan Sharma’s

          case (supra), it was held as under:
“16. A careful reading of the above leaves no manner of
                     doubt that (a) this Court invoked the doctrine of prospective
                     overruling which implies that the law declared by this Court
                     would apply only to future selections and appointments, (b)
                     that although prospective overruling left the appointments
                     made before 18th November, 1999 untouched, the writ-
                     petitioners who had moved the High Court had to be
                     considered afresh vis-à-vis candidates appointed on or after
                     18th November, 1999 or those in the select list without
                     giving to such appointed/selected candidates the benefit of
                     bonus marks under the circular, and (c) that upon such
                     consideration of the writ-petitioners if they are found to be
                     superior in merit than those appointed after 18th November,
                     1999 they shall be offered appointments, if necessary, by
                     removing the latter.
17. It was strenuously contended by learned counsel for
                     the appellants that the expression “the appellants who
                     moved the High Court” appearing in para 46 (supra) was
                     wide enough and actually covered not only such of the writ-
petitioners as had approached the High Court in the two
                     batch of cases decided by this Court in Kailash Chand
                     Sharma’s case (supra) but also all such candidates as may
                     have filed writ petitions at any time after 18th November,
                     1999 including those who filed such petition after 30th July,
                     2002 when this Court decided the appeals in Kailash Chand
                     Sharma’s case (supra) and connected matters.
18. We find it difficult to accept that contention. There is
                     nothing in the judgment of this Court in Kailash Chand
                     Sharma’s case (supra) or the directions that were issued in
                     para 46 thereof to suggest that this Court was either
                     conscious of or informed of pendency of any writ petition
                     filed before the High Court after 18th November, 1999.
                     There is also nothing to suggest that this Court intended the
                     benefit granted in terms of direction (1) under para 46 to
                     extend not only to the writ-petitioners who had moved the
                     High Court in Kailash Chand Sharma’s case (supra) and in
                     the writ petition filed by Naval Kishore and others but the
                     same has intended to benefit all those who had or may
                     have moved the High Court at any point of time. On the
                     contrary there is positive indication of the fact that the Court
                     did not intend to extend the benefit to any appellant who
3
Civil Appeal No. 4294 of 2014, decided on April 01, 2014
Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2010 & Anr.                                          Page 8 of 15
had challenged the award of bonus marks and the selection
             process on the basis thereof at any stage after 18th
             November, 1999. This is evident from the fact that Writ
             Petition No.542 of 2000 filed in this Court under
Article 32
of
             the Constitution of India was dismissed by this Court in
             terms of direction (3) under para 46 on the ground that the
             same had been filed nearly one year after the judgment of
             the High Court. The expression “as it has been filed after
             the judgment of the High Court” appearing in direction (3)
             under Para 46 clearly suggest that for the grant of relief this
             Court had only petitions filed before the judgment in Kailash
             Chand Sharma’s case (supra) in mind and not those filed
             after 18th November, 1999 when
the said judgment
was
             pronounced. The observation of this Court that the writ-
             petitioners had offered no explanation for not approaching
             the High Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution at an
             earlier point of time too has two distinct facets, namely, (1)
             that the writ-petitioners in Writ Petition No.542 of 2000
             should have ordinarily approached the High Court and (2)
             They should have done so at an earlier point of time. The
             latter of these reasons again emphasized the importance
             this Court attached to the delay in the filing of the petitions
             in the matter of grant of relief for those who did not
             challenge the selection process in good time were not
             granted any relief.”
10.   The Bench in Manmohan Sharma’s case (supra) observed that

      there were two categories of cases; Category 1 comprising of writ

      petitions which were filed after November 18, 1999 and before

      July 30, 2002 and Category II comprising of writ petitions which

      were filed after July 30, 2002. The date July 30, 2002 being the

      date of decision of the Rajasthan High Court in the case of Naval

      Kishore’s case (supra). Rejecting the arguments raised on behalf

      of the two Categories, the Bench observed that in Kailash Chand

      Sharma’s case (supra) this Court had recognized the need to

      balance competing claims by invoking doctrine of prospective
Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2010 & Anr.                                 Page 9 of 15
overruling, thereby, protecting appointments made on or before

     November 17, 1999 and confining relief only to the writ petitioners

     who had moved the High Court before November 18, 1999.

     Further, the directions given in Kailash Chand Sharma’s case

     (supra) were a binding precedent under
Article 141
of the

     Constitution. With regard to the argument for grant of benefit on

     the principle of parity, i.e. similar benefits, as notwithstanding the

     judgment in Kailash Chand Sharma’s case (supra) some of the

     candidates were appointed on redrawing the merit list after

     exclusion of bonus marks, the Bench comprehensively and

     squarely rejected the submission as being contrary to the dictum

     and binding directions of this Court in Kailash Chand Sharma’s

     case (supra). In Manmohan Sharma’s case (supra), the Bench

     observed that there was no need to enlarge the scope of the

     directions issued in Kailash Chand Sharma’s case (supra) to

     others and that the Court was not hearing a review petition nor

     could the Court modify the order passed by this Court in Kailash

     Chand Sharma’s case (supra). The contention of some

     petitioners in Category II who had been appointed on re-

     computation of the result on merits after November 18, 1999 was

     rejected as illegal and impermissible in the light of the judgment of

     this Court in Kailash Chand Sharma’s case (supra). The plea
Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2010 & Anr.                        Page 10 of 15
and contention of parity and similar treatment was also rejected

      observing that wrong appointments should have been challenged

      expeditiously and not belatedly, and that such appointments would

      not confer any right. That apart, it was recorded in Manmohan

      Sharma’s case (supra) that the State had filed an affidavit

      satisfactorily refuting the factual submissions made at the Bar.
11.   The learned counsel for the petitioners had drawn our attention to

      paragraph 24 of the decision in Manmohan Sharma’s case

      (supra) which refers to the case of one Danveer Singh whose writ

      petition had been allowed and the order had attained finality as it

      was not challenged before the Division Bench or before the

      Supreme Court. Termination of services in the case of Danveer

      Singh, it was accordingly held, was not justified and in accordance

      with law. The reasoning given in paragraphs 24 and 25 in

      Manmohan Sharma’s case (supra) relating to the case of

      Danveer Singh would reflect the difference between the doctrine

      of res judicata and law of precedent. Res judicata operates in

      personam i.e. the matter in issue between the same parties in the

      former litigation, while law of precedent operates in rem i.e. the

      law once settled is binding on all under the jurisdiction of the High

      Court and the Supreme Court. Res judicata binds the parties to

      the proceedings for the reason that there should be an end to the
Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2010 & Anr.                        Page 11 of 15
litigation and therefore, subsequent proceeding inter-se parties to

         the litigation is barred. Therefore, law of res judicata concerns the

         same matter, while law of precedent concerns application of law in

         a similar issue. In res judicata, the correctness of the decision is

         normally immaterial and it does not matter whether the previous

         decision was right or wrong, unless the erroneous determination

         relates to the jurisdictional matter of that body. (See
Makhija

         Construction        and     Engineering     Private   Ltd     v.    Indore

         Development Authority and Others4
). Learned counsel for the

         appellants had drawn our attention to several decisions of the

         Rajasthan High Court in which reliefs have been granted to the

         writ petitioners who had not filed a writ petition before the cut-off

         date of November 18, 1999 fixed by this Court in Kailash Chand

         Sharma’s case (supra). Some of these decisions were made after

         the decision of Manmohan Sharma’s case (supra) on April 01,

         2014.
This    should    have     been   avoided   as     authoritative

         pronouncements of the Supreme Court and High Court must be

         respected and followed as any departure therefrom would cause

         uncertainty, unnecessary and speculative litigation as has been

         held in strong words in
Dwarikesh Sugar Industries Ltd. v. Prem

         Heavy         Engineering    Works    (P)   Ltd.5   and     Bihar    State
4
(2005) 6 SCC 304
5
(1997) 6 SCC 450
Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2010 & Anr.                                 Page 12 of 15
Government Secondary School Teachers Association and

         Others v. Bihar Education Service Association and Others 6

         Consequently, we find that a number of impleadment applications

         have been filed by aspirants anxiously waiting and hoping of

         favourable outcome in the foreclosed and covered litigation. They

         cannot succeed and these applications are dismissed. We were

         informed that there are a large number of vacant posts and,

         therefore, it has been contended that the benefit should be

         extended. We do not agree and should not accept the said

         contentions as it would fall foul and would be clearly contrary to

         the ratio of Kailash Chand Sharma’s and Manmohan Sharma’s

         cases (supra).
12.      Our attention was also drawn to the case of Neeraj Saxena in

         whose case the writ appeal filed by the State Government against

         the order of the Single Judge was dismissed on the ground of

         delay and inaction. The Special Leave Petition against the

         decision of the Division Bench was also dismissed on the ground

         of delay. This decision of the Division Bench in Neeraj Saxena and

         the dismissal of the Special Leave Petition on the ground of delay

         does not lay down any ratio in the form of precedent. At best, the

         decision of the Single Judge in the case of Neeraj Saxena as in
6
(2012) 13 SCC 33
Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2010 & Anr.                         Page 13 of 15
the case of Danveer Singh would apply to the specific candidates

      in whose case the decision would operate as res judicata. This,

      however, would not be a ground to negate and nullify the ratio and

      direction invoking doctrine of prospective overruling, applied in

      Kailash Chand Sharma’s case (supra), which was thereafter

      affirmed and elucidated by this Court in Manmohan Singh’s case

      (supra).
13.   In view of the aforesaid discussion, we hold that the candidates

      who had not filed writ petitions on or before November 17, 1999

      would not be entitled to appointment upon recalculation of marks

      by exclusion of bonus marks from the marks of the selected

      candidates. The aforesaid direction would not apply to individual

      cases where the principle of res judicata would apply, i.e. wherein

      the decision of the Single Judge or the Division Bench has

      become final since it was not challenged before the Division

      Bench or before this Court. All other pending writ petitions and

      appeals, before the High Court, would be disposed of and decided

      on the basis of decisions in Kailash Chandra Sharma’s,

      Manmohan Sharma’s cases (supra) and the present matter,

      subject to condonation of delay, when justified and satisfactorily

      explained.
Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2010 & Anr.                       Page 14 of 15
14.   The appeals and all pending applications are disposed of in the

      aforesaid terms.
......................................J.
                                              (L. NAGESWARA RAO)



                                            ......................................J.
                                                     (SANJIV KHANNA)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 30, 2019.
Civil Appeal No. 3873 of 2010 & Anr.                          Page 15 of 15