[Cites
21
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Hindustan Sanitaryware And Industries ... vs The State Of Haryana on 29 April, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 2194, 2019 LAB IC 2479, (2019) 4 ALLMR 967 (SC), (2019) 162 FACLR 124, (2019) 2 CURLR 603, (2019) 2 ESC 313, (2019) 2 LAB LN 313, (2019) 2 PAT LJR 437, (2019) 2 SCT 772, (2019) 3 KANT LJ 309, (2019) 4 ALLMR 967, (2019) 4 ALL WC 3151, 2019 (5) ADJ 48 NOC, (2019) 7 SCALE 39, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 1751, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 226
Author:
L. Nageswara Rao
Bench:
M.R.Shah
,
L. Nageswara Rao
Reportable


                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL No. 2539 of 2010

                         Hindustan Sanitaryware and Industries Ltd. &
                         Others.
                                                               .... Appellants


                                                   Versus

                         The State of Haryana                    …. Respondent

                                                   WITH

                                     CIVIL APPEAL No. 4454_ of 2019
                          (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 5832 of
                                                    2018)

                         Faridabad Industries Association           .... Appellant


                                                   Versus

                         The State of Haryana & Another            …. Respondents


                                              JUDGMENT
L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.
CIVIL APPEAL No. 2539 of 2010
Signature Not Verified
1.   The Appellant filed a Writ Petition challenging the
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2019.04.30
11:47:50 IST
Reason:
Notification dated 27.06.2007 issued under Section 5 (2) of
1
the
Minimum Wages Act, 1948
(hereinafter, “the Act”).

The said Writ Petition was dismissed by the High Court.

Aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court, the Appellant

has approached this Court.
2.   In exercise of the powers conferred       by
Section 5(2)
of

the Act, the Finance Commissioner and Principal Secretary to

the Government of Haryana, Labour Department issued a

Notification on 27.06.2007 fixing/revising the minimum rates

of wages in respect of different scheduled employments as

mentioned     in    the   schedule   therein   with   effect   from

01.07.2007.        The relevant provisions of the Notification

dated 27.06.2007 are as under:
 Unskilled employees having 10 years’ experience
       would be deemed categorized as semi-skilled “A”.
      After 3 years of experience in semi-skilled “A”, the
       employees would be deemed categorized as semi-
       skilled “B”.
 After 3 years of experience in skilled “A”, the
       employees would be deemed categorized as
       skilled “B”.
xxx
     Note:
1. The minimum rates of wages being fixed/ revised
     are linked with Haryana State Working Consumer
2
Price Index Number (base year 1972-73=100) with
July 2007 as the base month.             The rate of
neutralization will be Rs.2.31 per point on the rise or
fall of the Consumer Price Index Number, adjustment
in wages shall be made six monthly i.e. 1 st January
and 1st July, every year after taking into account the
average rise or fall in the Haryana State Working
Class Consumer Price Index Number half-yearly
ending December and June respectively.
2. The minimum rates of wages being now fixed/
revised shall not be affected as a result of the
linkage as much as the wages shall not fall below
those being fixed/ revised now.
3 The wages of apprentices appointed under the
Apprentices Act, 1961
(52 of 1961), shall be
regulated under the said Act.
4. There shall be no difference between the wages
for men and women workers.
5. Where any of the above categories of workmen
are engaged/ employed through a Contractor, the
Occupier/ the Principal Employer shall be personally
responsible   for   ensuring    the   payment   of   the
minimum rates of wages by the Contractor.
6. If any category of workers employed in the
employment is not mentioned specifically by name,
3
he/she shall not be paid less than the minimum
     wages fixed for similar category having same skill.
7. While calculating the per day wages, the monthly
     wages shall be divided by 26 days but for deduction,
     if any, shall be calculated monthly wages divided by
     30 days.
8. The categorization of employment in Brick Kiln is
     placed at Annexure-A.
9. Above rates are without food. Wherever food is
     given customarily, it shall be extra.
10. Trainees will be paid 75% of the wages
     applicable to the category but it will not be less than
     the Minimum Wages for an unskilled category of
     worker. The period of training will not be more than
     one year.”
3.   The above Appeal was taken up along with the other

Writ Petitions which were filed for the same relief. Without a

detailed discussion on the issues which arose in the Writ

Petition, the High Court dismissed the Writ Petition by

observing that the contention raised by the Petitioners

relating to classification was misconceived and that the

trainees would fall within the purview of the Act.
4
Civil Appeal No. 4454 of 2019
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 5832 of
2018)


       Leave granted.
4.     This Appeal by Special Leave is filed against the

judgment of the High Court dated 18.08.2017 by which the

Writ    Petition   filed   by   the   Appellant   questioning   the

Notification dated 21.10.2015 issued under
Section 5(2)
of

the Act was dismissed.
5.     By    a Notification dated 21.10.2015, the Labour

Department of the Government of Haryana revised the

minimum rates of wages in respect of different scheduled

employments as mentioned in the schedules therein with

effect from 01.11.2015. It is necessary to reproduce the

relevant portion of the Notification dated 21.10.2015 which

is as follows:
“Unskilled employees having five years experience

       would be deemed categorized as semi skilled “A”.
After 3 years of experience in semi skilled “A” the

       employees would be deemed categorized as skilled

       “B”
5
xxx
xxx

Notes:
1. The minimum rates of wages notified herein

above are basic rates of minimum wages which are

not permitted to be segregated into components in

the form of allowances by the employer.             The

minimum rates of wages being fixed/ revised are

linked with Haryana State Working Class Consumer

Price Index number (base year 1972-73=100) with

July 2015, as the base month. There shall be 100%

neutralization of the rise or fall of the consumer price

index number on pro rata basis; the adjustment in

wages shall be made six monthly i.e. on 1st January

and 1st July every year, after taking into account the

average rise or fall in the Haryana State Working

Class Consumer Price Index half yearly ending

December and June respectively.
2. The minimum rates of wages now being fixed/

revised shall not be affected as a result of the

linkage as much as the wages shall not fall below

those being fixed/ revised now.
6
3. The wages of apprentices appointed under the
Apprentices Act, 1961
(52 of 1961), shall be

regulated under the said Act.
4. There shall be no difference between the wages

for men and women.
5. Where any of the above categories of workmen

are engaged/ employed through a contractor, the

occupier/ the principal employer shall be personally

responsible   for   ensuring    the   payment   of   the

minimum rates of wages by the contractor.
6. If any category of workers employed in the

employment is not mentioned specifically by name,

he/she shall not be paid less than the minimum

wages fixed for similar category having same skills.
7. While calculating the per day wages, the monthly

wages shall be divided by 26 days but for deduction,

if any, shall be calculated as monthly wages divided

by 30 days.
8. The categorization of employment in Brik Kiln is

placed above at Annexure-A.
7
9. Above rates do not include food charges.
Wherever food is given customarily, it shall be extra.
10. Trainees shall be paid 75% of the wages

       applicable to the category, but it shall not be less

       than the Minimum Wages for an unskilled category

       of worker because an unskilled worker does not

       require any training. The period of training shall not

       be more than one year.
6.     It was submitted on behalf of the Appellant before the

High Court that segregation of wages into components in the

form of allowances was permissible. The further contention

of the Appellant before the High Court was that Note 10 of

the Notification which fixed the minimum wages for trainees

at 75% of the wages applicable to that category and also

limited period of such training to one year was ultra vires the

Act.              The provision for categorization of unskilled

employees as semi-skilled and of semi-skilled employees as

skilled on their acquiring experience of a certain number of

years was stated to be beyond the jurisdiction of the

Government.       Inclusion of Domestic Workers and Safai

Karamcharis in the list of scheduled employment at Serial
8
Numbers 49 and 50 was also in challenge in the Writ

Petition.     The High Court rejected the submission of the

Appellants that there is prohibition of segregation of wages

into components in the form of allowances. The challenge to

100% neutralization was also not accepted by the High

Court.
The Act
was held to be applicable to the trainees by

the impugned judgment.                Insofar as the categorization of

workers was concerned, the High Court was of the opinion

that the categorization was justified and indeed necessary

as the workmen were continued with their grades for a long

number of years which resulted in stagnation.                            The

contention of the Appellants that Domestic Workers and

Safai Karamcharis could not have been included in the list of

scheduled employment at Serial Numbers 49 and 50 was

accepted by the High Court.                    In view of the aforesaid

findings, the High Court concluded that Notes 1, 9 and 10 of

the Notification dated 21.10.2015 were legal and valid. It is

relevant to mention that the High Court relied upon the

judgment of a Division Bench in Writ Petition (Civil)

No.11326 of 20071 in support of its findings.


1 Apparel Exporters & Manufacturers Association vs. State of Haryana –
      CWP No.9942 of 2007 dated 06.09.2007
9
7.    Mr. Kailash Vasdev, learned Senior Counsel appearing

for the Appellants in Civil Appeal No. 2539 of 2010

submitted      that       the   classification   of   workmen   by   the

Notification dated 27.06.2007 amounts to an interference

with the promotion policy of the Appellant which is beyond

the jurisdiction of the Government under the Act. He stated

that the Government does not have the power to alter the

conditions of service, contract or settlement between the

employer and the employee.                 He referred to a settlement

between employees and the employer which specifies the

regulation of wages. Mr. Vasdev argued that the High Court

erred in not realizing the difference between a fair wage, a

living wage, and a minimum wage.                      He relied upon a

judgment of this Court in
Bidi, Bidi Leaves and Tobacco

Merchants’ Association v. State of Bombay2
in support

of his submission that the power that is conferred on the

Government was only to deal with fixation and revision of

wages and not to interfere with the contractual rights and

obligations. Mr. Harvinder Singh, learned counsel appearing

for the Petitioner in Civil Appeal @ SLP (Civil) No.5832 of

2018 submitted that the Petitioner has a grievance only

2 1962 Supp (1) SCR 381
10
regarding      some      portions    of   the   Notification   dated

21.10.2015.          His first objection to the Notification was

relating to the revision of minimum rates of wages for

Security inspector/ Security officer/ Supervisor by relying

upon the definition of “employee” in
Section 2(i)
of the Act.

He submitted that Security inspector/ Security officer/

Supervisors will not fall within the purview of the definition

and hence, the State Government did not have the power to

fix/ revise the minimum wages for the said categories.

Similarly, the learned counsel submitted that trainees

cannot be brought within the purview of the Act as they also

do not fall within the definition of “employee” under
Section

2(i)
of the Act as all the trainees are not employed for hire or

reward.
The learned counsel relied upon a judgment of this

Court in
Haryana Unrecognised Schools’ Association v.

State of Haryana3
in which it was held that teachers

working in an educational institution cannot be held to be

discharging either skilled or unskilled or manual or clerical

work and as such they did not fall within the scope of

“employee” under
Section 2(i)
of the Act.                 Mr. Singh

submitted that the Government did not have the power to

3 (1996) 4 SCC 225
11
place a restriction on the period of training which according

to the Notification cannot be more than one year. He further

argued that the classification of employees was totally

impermissible.   He also submitted that different minimum

rates of wages cannot be fixed for the same class of work in

the   same   scheduled   employment.      By   the   deemed

categorization of an unskilled employee as a semi-skilled

employee after five years experience, the Government fixed

higher minimum       rate of wages for worker who has

completed five years though he continued to work as an

unskilled employee. This would amount to higher minimum

wages being paid for a worker in the lower category on the

basis of deemed classification.   He further submitted that

the prohibition of segregation into components in the form of

allowances was beyond the competence of the Government.

By referring to
Section 2(h)
of the Act which defines wages,

the learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that the

very definition of wages means all other remuneration in

accordance with the terms of contract or employment.

According to Mr. Singh, there is no concept of basic rate of

minimum wages.      He further argued that the concept of
12
principal employer and contractor is foreign to the Act and

the   occupier/the   principal   employer   cannot   be   made

responsible for the payment of minimum rate of wages to a

contract labour. Allegations of exploitation of workmen by

the employers cannot be a ground for issuance of a

notification under
Section 5
of the Act if the Government

lacks the jurisdiction.
8.    Dr. Monika Gusain, learned counsel appearing for the

State of Haryana referred to
Article 43
of the Constitution of

India to submit that it is the duty of the State to secure a

living wage to all workers.           She submitted that the

Notifications were issued on the basis of recommendations

made by an Advisory Committee after consultations with the

employers and the workmen.            Splitting of the minimum

wages into components is permissible as there is no

prohibition in the Act.     She contended that the deemed

promotion of an unskilled worker to a semi-skilled worker

and a semi-skilled worker to a skilled worker, based on

experience, is only for the purpose of entitling them with the

next grade of minimum wages which cannot be construed as

a deemed promotion or classification. Dr. Gusain stated that
13
it has come to the notice of the Government that trainees

were not being paid even the minimum wages applicable to

an unskilled workmen for which reason it was decided that

trainees should be protected. The learned counsel for the

State    of   Haryana   defended   the   Notifications   dated

27.06.2007 and 21.10.2015 on the ground that they were

issued to protect the fundamental rights of the workers. She

also argued that the Appellants have not produced any

material to show the loss caused to them by the Notification,

and hence, the judgment of the High Court does not warrant

interference.
9.   At this stage, it is necessary to refer to the relevant

provisions of the Act. “Wages” and “Employee” have been

defined in
Section 2(h)
and
2(i)
of the Act which reads as

under:
“2(h) “wages” means all remuneration, capable of
     being expressed in terms of money, which would, if
     the terms of the contract of employment, express or
     implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a person
     employed in respect of his employment or of work
     done in such employment, [and includes house rent
     allowance], but does not include—
14
(i) the value of—
(a) any house-accommodation, supply of light,
water, medical attendance, or
(b) any other amenity or any service excluded by
general   or   special    order   of    the    appropriate
Government;
(ii) any contribution paid by the employer to any
Pension Fund or Provident Fund or under any scheme
of social insurance;
(iii) any travelling allowance or the value of any
travelling concession;
(iv) any sum paid to the person employed to defray
special expenses entailed on him by the nature of
his employment; or
(v) any gratuity payable on discharge;
2(i) “employee” means any person who is employed
for hire or reward to do any work, skilled or unskilled,
manual or clerical, in a scheduled employment in
respect of which minimum rates of wages have been
fixed; and includes an out-worker to whom any
articles or materials are given out by another person
to   be   made      up,   cleaned,     washed,    altered,
ornamented,      finished,     repaired,      adapted   or
otherwise processed for sale for the purposes of the
trade or business of that other person where the
process is to be carried out either in the home of the
out-worker or in some other premises not being
15
premises under the control and management of that
     other person; and also includes an employee
     declared to be an employee by the appropriate
     Government; but does not include any member of
     the Armed Forces of the [Union].”
10. The appropriate government is empowered by
Section

3
of the Act to fix the minimum rates of wages payable to

the employees employed in an employment specified in Part

I and Part I (b) of the Schedule.
Section 4
of the Act provides

that the minimum rate of wages fixed or revised under
Section 3
may contain:
“(i) a basic rate of wages and a special allowance at
     a rate to be adjusted, at such intervals and in such
     manner as the appropriate Government may direct,
     to accord as nearly as practicable with the variation
     in the cost of living index number applicable to such
     workers (hereinafter referred to as the “cost of living
     allowance”); or
(ii) a basic rate of wages with or without the cost of
     living   allowance,    and    the   cash   value   of   the
     concessions in respect of supplies of essential
     commodities       at   concession    rates,   where     so
     authorised; or
16
(iii) an all-inclusive rate allowing for the basic rate,
        the cost of living allowance and the cash value of the
        concessions, if any.”
11. The procedure for fixing or revising the minimum rate

of wages is dealt with in
Section 5
of the Act. After following

the procedure prescribed under
Section 5
, the appropriate

government can fix/revise the minimum rates of wages and

issue notification to that effect. An obligation is imposed on

the employer by
Section 12
of the Act to pay to every

employee engaged in a scheduled employment wages at a

rate not less than the minimum rates of wages fixed by the

notification issued under
Section 5
of the Act. The authority

conferred on the Government in fixing or revising the

minimum rate of wages under the relevant provisions of the

Act was dealt with by this Court in
Bidi, Bidi Leaves and

Tobacco Merchants’ Association
(supra).                   This Court

held:
“What is the extent of the authority conferred
        on the respondent in fixing or revising minimum
        rates of wages under the relevant provisions of the
        Act?    In   dealing   with    this   question   we   must
        necessarily bear in mind the definition of the term
        “wages” prescribed by
Section 2(h)
. As we have
17
already   seen    the    term    “wages”    includes
remuneration which would, if the terms of the
contract of employment, express or implied, were
fulfilled, be payable to a person employed in respect
of his employment. In other words, the term “wages”
refers to remuneration payable to the employee as a
result of the terms of employment. What would be
the amount to which the employee is entitled if the
other terms of the contract are performed? That is
the question which has to be asked in determining
what the term “wages” means under
Section 2(h)
.
No doubt
Sections 3
,
4
and
5
authorise the
appropriate Government to fix the minimum rates of
wages. In other words, if the wages fixed by a
contract which is either express or implied are found
to be low, authority is conferred on the appropriate
Government to increase them so as to bring them to
the level of what the said Government regards as
the minimum wages in the particular scheduled
employment in the particular area concerned. This
means that power is conferred on the appropriate
Government to modify one term of the contract
express or implied between the employer and the
employee and that is a term which has reference to
the payment of wages. If for a certain piece of work
done by the employee the employer has agreed to
pay him either expressly or by implication a certain
amount of wages the appropriate Government can
18
issue a notification and prescribe that for the said
work done under the contract the employer must
pay his employee a much higher rate of wages and
the higher rate of wages thus prescribed would be
deemed to be the minimum rate of wages between
the parties.
It would, however, be noticed that in defining
“wages” clause 2(h) postulates that they would be
payable if the other terms of the contract of
employment     are   fulfilled.   That   is    to   say,   in
authorising the fixation of minimum rates of wages
the other terms of the contract of employment have
always to be fulfilled. The fulfilment of the others
terms of the contract is a condition precedent for the
payment of wages as defined under
Section 2(h)
and
it continues to be such a condition precedent even
for the payment of the minimum rates of wages
fixed and prescribed by the appropriate Government.
The significance of the definition contained in
Section 2(h)
lies in the fact that the rate of wages
may be increased but no change can be made in the
other terms of the contract. In other words, the Act
operated on the wages and does not operate on the
other terms of the contract between the employer
and the employee. That is the basic approach which
must be adopted in determining the scope and effect
of   the   powers    conferred    on     the   appropriate
Government by the relevant provisions of the statute
19
authorising it to prescribe minimum rates of wages
     or to revise them. What the appropriate Government
     is authorised to do is to prescribe, fix or revise wages
     and wages are defined to be remuneration payable
     to the employees if the terms of the contract of
     employment, express or implied, were fulfilled. This
     definition runs, as it inevitably must, through the
     material provisions of the Act and its importance
     cannot therefore be ignored.”
12. The learned counsel for the Government of Haryana

argued that the workmen are exploited by the employers

and the notification was issued after taking into account the

recommendations of the expert body to protect the interests

of the workmen. The point raised by the Appellants pertains

to the jurisdiction of the Government in the issuance of the

notification.     The grievances of the workmen can be

redressed by fora constituted under the
Industrial Disputes

Act, 1948
if the Government does not have the competence

to deal with certain issues in the notification under the Act.
In
Bidi,      Bidi   Leaves   and   Tobacco     Merchants’

Association
(supra), Justice Gajendragadkar, observed :-
“It is well settled that industrial adjudication under
     the provisions of the
Industrial Disputes Act
14 of
     1947 is given wide powers and jurisdiction to make
20
appropriate       awards   in   determining      industrial
disputes brought before it. An award made in an
industrial adjudication may impose new obligations
on the employer in the interest of social justice and
with a view to secure peace and harmony between
the employer and his workmen and full co-operation
between them. Such an award may even alter the
terms of employment if it is thought fit and
necessary to do so. In deciding industrial disputes
the jurisdiction of the tribunal is not confined to the
administration of justice in accordance with the law
of contract. As Mukherjea, J., as he then was, has
observed in
Bharat Bank Ltd., Delhi v. Employees of
the Bharat Bank Ltd., Delhi
the tribunal “can confer
rights and privileges on either party which it
considers reasonable and proper, though they may
not be within the terms of any existing agreement. It
has not merely to interpret or give effect to the
contractual rights and obligations between them
which it considers essential for keeping industrial
peace”.
Since the decision of the Federal Court
in
Western India Automobile Association v. Industrial
Tribunal, Bombay
, it has been repeatedly held that
the jurisdiction of Industrial Tribunals is much wider
and   can    be    reasonably   exercised   in   deciding
industrial disputes with the object of keeping
industrial    peace    and      progress    (Vide:
Rohtas
Industries, Ltd. v. Brijnandan Pandey
,
Patna Electric
21
Supply    Co.    Ltd.,     Patna v. Patna    Electric    Supply
     Workers' Union
). Indeed, during the last ten years
     and more industrial adjudication in this country has
     made so much progress in determining industrial
     disputes arising between industries of different kinds
     and their employees that the jurisdiction and
     authority of Industrial Tribunals to deal with such
     disputes with the object of ensuring social justice is
     no longer seriously disputed.”
13. There is no power vested in the Government by the Act

to make alterations to the terms of a contract.
The Act
only

confers jurisdiction in Government to fix/revise the minimum

rate of wages notwithstanding the contract. The Notification

dated 21.10.2015 postulates that unskilled employees

having five years experience would be deemed categorized

as semi-skilled “A”; that after three years of experience in

semi-skilled   “A”,      the     employees       would   be    deemed

categorized as semi-skilled “B”; that after three years of

experience in skilled “A”, the employees would be deemed

categorized    as     skilled    “B”.    Such     categorization       or

classification by deeming workmen in one category to

belong to another category is in direct contravention of the

contract between the employer and the employee and is
22
beyond the jurisdiction of the Government.                  Inclusion of

Security inspector/ Security officer/ Supervisor at Serial No.9

in the table “Minimum rates of wages in respect of all

scheduled employment” in the Notification is ultra vires the

provisions of the Act. They do not fall within the definition of

“employee’ in
Section 2(i)
as they do not discharge any

skilled or unskilled, manual or clerical work. 4 Similarly, not

all trainees can be included in the Notification. Trainees who

receive wages during the period of training would fall under

the definition of “employee” as has been fairly admitted by

the learned counsel for the Appellants. It is the Appellant’s

case that such of those trainees who are not paid any wages

cannot be included in the notification. We are in agreement

with the said submission as only a person who is employed

for     “hire or reward” will fall under the definition of

“employee”.          Consequent upon the above finding, the

trainees who are not paid wages cannot be included in the

notification and the fixation of minimum wages for such

trainees at 75% is also not valid.                 To make it clear, the

minimum wages fixed for trainees who are appointed for

reward is not interfered with. The period of training to be
4 See:
Haryana Unrecognized Schools’ Association
(supra)
23
undergone by a trainee would depend upon the contract

between the employer and the employee. There is no power

vested in the Government under the Act to decide the period

of training and any stipulation with regard to the training

period is ultra vires.
14. The word “employee” as defined in the Act means any

person who is employed for hire or reward in a scheduled

employment.          There is no distinction made between a

person employed by the principal employer and a person

employed through a contractor. Any person who employs,

whether directly or through any other person, one or more

employees in a scheduled employment falls within the

definition of an “employer”.5              A close scrutiny of the

definitions of the employer and the employee would bring

the workmen employed through the contractors within the

purview of the Act.           We reject the submission made on

behalf of the Appellants that the contract workmen are not

covered under the Act.
15. The only point that remains to be considered is

regarding the segregation of wages into components in the


5
Section 2(e)
, Minimum Wages Act, 1948
24
form of allowances. It is useful to refer to the judgment of

this Court in
Airfreight Ltd. v. State of Karnataka6
in

which this Court observed:
“20. … … … Once rates of minimum wages are
      prescribed under the Act, whether as all-inclusive
      under
Section 4(1)(iii)
or by combining basic plus
      dearness allowance under
Section 4(1)(i)
, are not
      amenable to split up. It is one pay package. Neither
      the scheme nor any provision of the Act provides
      that the rates of minimum wages are to be split up
      on the basis of the cost of each of the necessities
      taken into consideration for fixing the same.”
16. “Wages” is defined in
Section 2(h)
to mean all

remuneration, capable of being expressed in terms of

money, which would, if the terms of the contract of the

employment, express or implied were fulfilled, be payable to

a person in respect of his employment or of work done in

such employment and includes house rent allowance. There

are four exclusions in the definition relating to travelling

allowance, value of housing accommodation, supply of light,

water, medical attendance, etc.     If certain components of

the remuneration are taken care of by the employer, he

cannot be asked to pay twice over such allowance/
6 (1999) 6 SCC 567
25
payments which are part of the remuneration. Therefore, we

are of the opinion that the prohibition on segregation of the

wages into components under the notification is not a valid

exercise of power.
17. Our conclusion in respect of some parts of the

Notification will not affect the Notifications as such. The part

of the Notifications other than that which are dealt with by

this judgment shall continue to be in force. We make it clear

that the employers shall not be entitled to recover any

amounts paid under the Notifications to the workmen on the

ground that they have succeeded in this case.           As the

findings recorded in this judgment pertain to the jurisdiction

of the Government under the Act, the workmen are not

precluded from resorting to redressal of other remedies

regarding their grievances.
18. The upshot of the above discussion is :
“(a)    The prohibition of segregation of wages into

  components in the form of allowances in the Notification

  is impermissible;
(b)     The security inspector/ security officer/ security

  supervisor cannot be included in the Notification;
26
(c)         Trainees who are employed without payment

  of any reward cannot be covered by the Notification;
(d)     Categorization of unskilled employees as semi-
skilled and semi-skilled as skilled on the basis of their

  experience is ultra vires.
(e)    Fixing the training period for one year is beyond

  the jurisdiction of the Government.”
19. For the aforementioned reasons, the appeals are

allowed.
.................................J.
                                     [L. NAGESWARA RAO]



                                  ..................................J.
                                                     [M.R.SHAH]

New Delhi,
April 29th, 2019.
27