[Cites
16
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Atul Chandra Das(D) Tr.Lrs. vs Rabindra Nath ... on 4 April, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2490
Author:
K.M. Joseph
Bench:
K.M. Joseph
,
Ashok Bhushan
REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                           CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).       8793-8794 OF 2013


     ATUL CHANDRA DAS (D) THROUGH LRS.                            APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS

     RABINDRA NATH BHATTACHARYA (D)
     THR. LRS. & ORS.ETC.                                         RESPONDENT(S)


                                         J U D G M E N T
K.M. JOSEPH, J.
1.                   The appellants are the legal representatives of

     one Atul Chandra Das.                 These appeals are directed against

     the common judgment of the Calcutta High court dismissing

     the First Appeal No.7 of 1989 and First Appeal No.8 of

     1989.               The appeals were filed by Atul Chandra Das against

     the dismissal of E.S. No.782 of 1979 filed by him for

     ejectment              of   the   respondents   from   the   plaint   schedule

     property and decreeing of Suit no.1271 of 1980 filed by
Signature Not Verified
the respondents which would be referred to as the title
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.04.04
13:29:58 IST
Reason:
suit.               Thus, the appeals before us are lodged against the
1
concurrent finding of the courts below and maintained by

special leave granted by this Court.
2.    The case set up by Atul Chandra Das is as follows:
By a registered deed of conveyance dated 28.11.1959

(the parties shall be referred to as in the position in

the trial Court), the defendants sold for consideration

the   plaint   schedule    property         to   one   Bholanath     Auddy

(hereinafter       referred            to        as      “Bholanath”).
Simultaneously, Bholanath created tenancy in favour of

the defendants at the monthly rent of Rs.50/-.                     It was

agreed that the share of corporation tax shall be paid by

the defendants.    It was also agreed between Bholanath and

defendants that the defendants were to vacate and deliver

possession on the expiry of two years from 28.11.1959.
Thereafter, an agreement for sale was entered into on

15.8.1960 between Bholanath and Atul Chandra Das.                      He

agreed to sell plaint schedule property for Rs.9000/-.
Since Bholanath failed to perform the obligation, O.S.

No.171 of 1962 was filed by Atul Chandra Das for specific

performance.    On 30.11.1977 a decree was passed in favour

of Atul Chandra Das.       In terms of decree he deposited the

balance    consideration     and       finally     a   sale   deed    was
2
executed in his favour.              He claimed to be the landlord of

the building and alleging that defendants have no right

to occupy the premises, he sought recovery of possession

by evicting the defendants.                 The defendants filed written

statement.    That      apart    they       also    filed    the    other     suit

namely    Suit    No.1271       of     1980.       Therein    the     following

averments were made inter alia:
Smt. Annapurna Devi (since deceased) was the owner for

 life of the property and on her death, her three sons

 namely Late Ashutosh Bhattacharya, Late Dulal Krishna

 Bhattacharya and Rabindra Nath Bhattacharya (hereinafter

 referred to as ‘Bhattacharyas and who are the defendants

 in the suit filed by Atul Chandra Das and plaintiffs in

 O.S. No. 1271/1980) were given absolute rights, in terms

 of the will executed by Bijoy Kr. Ghosal, the owner of

 the     property.      They    set    up     the   case     that    a   sum   of

 Rs.8000/-       came    to     be     borrowed       from     Bholanath        on

 28.9.1959.       To secure Rs.8000/- Bhattacharyas mortgaged

 by conditional sale, on 28.11.1959 the plaint schedule

 property    in    favour       of    Bholanath.        In    order      to   give

 effect to mortgage an agreement for sale was entered

 into on 07.12.1959 with Aboya Devi (since deceased wife
3
of Late Ashutosh Bhattacharya and deceased Late Karuna

Bhattacharya, the wife of first plaintiff in a title

suit and Late Smt. Rama Devi, daughter of Annapurna

Devi) who were the nominees of the mortgagors for the

agreement to sell of the house on payment of a sum of

Rs. 10,000/- which was settled to be the mortgage money,

no rate of interest having been stipulated. Two years

was agreed to be the period of redemption of mortgage.
The title deeds were to be kept with Bholanath by way of

further security. The agreement which is referred to by

Atul Chandra Das as an agreement for sale in his favour

dated     15.8.1960     is    described      as   a     collusive     and

fraudulent agreement and it was entered into before the

expiry    of   period   of    redemption.     The     plaint   schedule

property comprised of a three storied building standing

upon an area of 1 cottah and 8 chittackas of land and

the value at the relevant time would not have been less

than     Rs.30,000/-,    the    annual      municipal     value     being

Rs.1469/- declared at that point of time.                Bholanath was

a mere mortgagee in a mortgage by conditional sale. The

specific performance suit was described as a collusive

suit.    Bhattacharyas       claimed   to    be   the    owners     being
4
legatees    under   the   will.       The   relief   sought   by   the

plaintiffs in O.S. No.1271 of 1980 is relevant. The

relevant portion reads as below:-
“20. For the purpose of jurisdiction the suit
      is valued for declaration with consequential
      relief of perpetual injunction at Rs.51/-
      there   being   no  objective   standard   of
      valuation and objectively for Rs.8500/- and
      Court fee stamp of Rs.4.15 is paid on the sum
      of Rs.51/- being the value for declaration
      with injunction and court fee stamp Rs.525.00
      is paid on the sum of Rs.6500/- being balance
      of the principal due the total court fee paid
      being Rs.529.15p.
The plaintiffs therefore pray-
(a)    That the suit be decreed for:-
(i) Declaration that the sale dated 28.11.59
      for the consideration of Rs.8000/- of the
      property described in the schedule “A” below
      by                   Sm. Annapurna Devi since
      deceased,   Ashutosh    Bhattacharyya,  since
      deceased and the plaintiff nos.1 and 2 to
      Bhola Nath Duddya, since deceased followed by
      the condition of re-transfer as per agreement
      for sale dt. 7.12.59 by Bholanath Auddya
      since deceased in favour of Sm. Abhoya Devi,
      since deceased Sm. Karuna and Sm. Rama Devi
      since deceased, on payment of Rs.10,000/-
within 2 years was on ostensible sale
      amounting to a mortgage by conditional sale
      and the sallers in the said deed of sale were
      mortgagors and the buyer therein was the
      mortgagee and the period of redemption was 2
      years as provided in the said agreement for
      sale dt. 7.12.59.
(ii) declaration that either the defendant
      Nos. 2 to 7 are the present mortgagee being
      the heirs and legal representatives of the
      said   Bholanath  Auddya, deceased   or  in
      alternative the defendant no. 1 is the
5
present mortgages, by subrogation having
stepped in the shoes of the said Bholanath
Auddya by purchase.
(iii)     declaration  that   the   right   of
redemption   of    the   said   mortgage    by
conditional sale is still subsisting and the
plaintiffs are entitled to redeem the said
mortgage on deposit of the mortgage money
amounting to Rs.8500/- in court or such
amount as may be determined by the Court or
payment of the same to who ever may be
declared to be the mortgages or mortgagees.
(iv) Declaration that the agreement dated
15.08.60 between the said Bholanath Auddya
since deceased and the defendant No. 1 for
sale of the property described in the
schedule “A” below is a collusive and
fraudulent agreement and not enforceable in
law.
(v) Declaration    that   the  decree   dated
30.11.77 of the Hon’ble High Court at
Calcutta in Suit No. 171 of 62 for specific
performance of contract for the sale of the
property described on the schedule “A” below
was obtained by practising fraud upon the
court by the defendant No. 1 and the said
Bhola Nath Auddya since deceased collusively.
(vi) declaration that the said decree of the
Hon’ble High Court at Calcutta and the
conveyance executed thereunder on 26.3.79 by
the Registrar Original Side of the said
Hon’ble High Court for sale of the property
described in the schedule “A” below in favour
of the defendant No. 1 are not enforceable in
law and the defendant No. 1 cannot take any
advantage under the said decree and/ or the
said conveyance in enforcement of the same.
(vii)     declaration that the defendant No.
1 has no right title and interest in the
property described in the schedule “A” below
either as owner or as landlord nor has any
right to file the Ej. Suit no. 782 of 1979 in
the city civil court, Calcutta now pending
before the Ld. Registrars’ Bench and/ or
proceeding with the same.
6
That the suit be decreed for perpetual
        injunction restraining the defendant No. 1.

        i.   From enforcing the said decree dt.
        20.11.77 in suit no. 171 of 62 of the Hon’ble
        High Court at Calcutta and/ or enforcing the
        conveyance dt. 26.3.79 executed by the
        Registrar Original side, High Court at
Calcutta in favour of the defendant No. 1
under the said decree and/ or taking any
        advantage under the said decree and/ or
        taking any and/ or the said conveyance and
        interfering with the possession of the
        plaintiffs in the property described in the
        schedule “A” below in any way including
        recording his name in Calcutta Corporation
        and/ or in the Calcutta Collectorate.
ii. From preceding with the Ej. Suit No. 782
of 79 now pending before the ld. Registrar’s
        Bench City Civil Court, Calcutta.
iii. For temporary Injunction to the effect
        as prayed for in prayer Nos. b(i) and (ii)
        above till the disposal of this suit.

        iv. That the suit be decreed for Rs.8500/-
        or such other sum as may be determined by the
        court as the present balance of the mortgage
        money   payable   by   the   plaintiffs   for
        redemption of the mortgage.
c.   That the property described in schedule
        “A” below be freed from the mortgage on
        deposit in court or payment to whoever will
        be declared to be the mortgagee or mortgagees
        by the plaintiffs of the mortgage money to be
        decreed by the court.
d.    That the suit be decreed for Costs.

        e.   That the suit be decreed for any other
        relief or reliefs to which the plaintiffs may
        be entitled under law and equity. “
3.      The    trial   Court    proceeded    to     consider   the

evidence and on the basis of same came to the conclusion
7
that there is no merit in the case set up by Atul Chandra

Das. It was found to be a case of mortgage by conditional

sale and suit filed by Atul Chandra Das was dismissed and

the suit filed by the Bhattacharyas came to be decreed.

As already noticed, the High Court has confirmed the said

decree.
4.         We heard the learned counsel for the appellant

and learned counsel for the Bhattacharyas.
5.         The    learned     counsel     for   the   appellant    would

submit before us that the courts below have proceeded to

find   that      the   sale   dated   28.11.1959      executed    by   the

previous      owners,    namely   the     defendants    in   favour    of

Bholanath was a mortgage without noticing that such a

finding will be in the teeth of the proviso to
Section

58(c)
of the Transfer of Property Act.                 In other words,

in order to constitute a mortgage by way of conditional

sale, the proviso to
Section 58(c)
of the Transfer of

Property Act mandates that the condition of agreement to

sell which is what is relied upon by the Bhattacharyas to

make Bholanath a mortgagee must have been incorporated in
8
one document.      In this case on the other hand, there is

no dispute that the Bhattacharyas relied upon a separate

and   distinct    document    namely   an        agreement   to    sell

executed    by   Bholanath   in   favour    of    the   Bhattacharyas

dated 7.12.1959.      There is no condition for reconveying

the property contained in the sale deed dated 28.11.1959.
6.         The second submission is that the courts have

gone wrong in relying on
Section 37A
of the Bengal Money-

Lenders Act, 1940 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the State

Act’).     It is her contention that the suit filed by the

Bhattacharhyas was not filed under the State Act.                 There

was no account demanded within the meaning of the Act.

Support was sought to be drawn from the judgment of the

Single Bench reported in
Swarnalata Tat v. Chandni Charan

Dey and Ors.
AIR 1984 Calcutta page 130.
7.         The last submission is as follows:-
Section 37(A)
contained under the State Act is repugnant

to Central Law namely
Section 58(c)
of the Transfer of

Property Act.
9
8.        Per     contra,    the    learned     counsel    for    the

respondent      supported   the    judgment.   He   submitted    that

Bholanath had not obtained any title under the purported

sale deed dated 27.11.1959. He could not have conveyed

any title to the Atul Chandra Das. The suit for specific

performance was a collusive suit.
9.
Section 58(c)
of the Transfer of Property Act

reads as follows:-
“58(c). Mortgage by conditional sale – Where,
      the mortgagor ostensibly sells the mortgaged
      property-
on condition that on default of payment of the
      mortgage-money on a certain date the sale shall
      become absolute, or

        on condition that on such payment being made
      the sale shall become void, or

        on condition that on such payment being made
      the buyer shall transfer the property to the
      seller,

        the   transaction   is  called  mortgage  by
      conditional sale and the mortgagee a mortgagee
      by conditional sale,
        [Provided that no such transaction shall be
      deemed to be a mortgage, unless the condition
      is embodied in the document which effects or
      purports to effect the sale]”


It is undoubtedly true that under
Section 58(c)
, the

proviso    makes      it    indispensable      to    constitute    a

transaction      a   mortgage     that   one   of   the   conditions
10
mentioned      in
Section        58(c)
be    incorporated     in    the

document    by      which    the     conditional        sale   is     effected.
However, it is now time to refer to Section 37(a) of the

State Act. It reads as under:-
“37(a) Saving as to mortgage by conditional
        sale. – In the case where any loan is secured
        by a mortgage and the mortgagor ostensible
        sells the mortgaged property on any of the
        conditions specified in sub-section (c) of
section 58
of the Transfer of Property Act,
        1882 (4 of 1882) then, notwithstanding anything
        to the contrary contained in the proviso to the
        said sub-section, the transaction shall always
        be deemed to be a mortgage by a conditional
        sale   and  the   mortgagee   a  mortgagee   by
        conditional sale for the purpose of the said
        sub-section.”
10.        Keeping
Section 58(c)
side by side with Section

37(a) of the State Act, the conclusion is inevitable that

the State legislature has intended to override the effect

of proviso to
Section 58(c)
of the Transfer of Property

Act by enacting
Section 37(a)
in the State Act.
Section

37(a)
was incorporated by way of an amendment in the

State   Act.     Reading      of
Section         37(a)
brings    out   the

Legislative intent with unambiguous clarity and therefore

the High court was right in relying upon Section 37(a) of

the State Act to find that though it was by agreement

dated   07.12.1959          which    is     a    separate      document      that
11
condition to make it a mortgage was incorporated it would

not make any difference. We may also notice that despite

the   sale    deed    dated   27.11.1959,    the     Bhattacharyas

continued to be in possession of the plaint scheduled

property and it has been found that they paid the taxes.

It is further found that the market value of the property

would not have been less than Rs.30 thousand as on the

date of the alleged sale namely 27.11.1959.
11.     The    next    contention    is   that     suit   filed   by

Bhattacharya was not under the State Act. Support was

sought to be drawn from the judgment of the Single Judge

reported in
Swarnalata Tat
case (Supra). Para 12 of the

judgment relied upon by the appellants reads as follows:-
“12. The first question which calls for
        determination is whether the present suit is
        a suit under the
Bengal Money Lenders Act,
        1940
(hereinafter referred to as the said
        Act).
Section 36(1)
of the said Act empowers
        the Court to re-open a decree in any suit to
        which the Act applies or in any suit brought
        by a borrower for relief under the Section,
        to re-open the transaction whether the suit
        has been heard ex parte or otherwise. Nowhere
        in
Section 36
, it is provided that a fixed
        court fee of Re. 1 is to be paid for
        initiating proceeding under
Section 36
of the
        said Act.
Section 38
provides that any
        borrower may make any application at any time
        to a Court which would have jurisdiction to
        entertain suit by the lender for the recovery
        of the principal and interest of a loan
12
before or after the commencement of the said
Act for taking accounts and for declaring
amount due to the lender. Such application
shall be in the prescribed form and shall be
accompanied by a fee of one rupee and on
receipt of such application the Court shall
cause a notice thereon to be served on the
lender. The Court shall thereafter take an
account of the transaction between the
parties and declare the amount, if any due
and payable but not due by the borrower to
the lender, whether as principal or interest
or both. A proceeding under
Section 38
shall
be deemed to be a suit for the purpose of
Section   11
of   the  Civil   P.C.   1908.
Admittedly, the plaintiff has not filed any
application under
Section 38
of the Act far
less in the prescribed form. As such the
question of payment of a fixed court fee of
one rupee would not arise.
Section 38
does
not contemplate any suit. It enables a
borrower to make an application in the
prescribed form asking the Court to take an
account and to declare the amount due to the
lender. Merely because a fixed court fee of
one rupee has been paid, the suit cannot be
corrected into an application under
Section
38
of the said Act. Assuming that the Court
should   have   treated   the  suit   as   an
application under
Section 38
of the said Act,
even then the plaintiff cannot succeed in her
contention. The requirements of
Section 38
have not been complied with. There is no
prayer for taking account and for declaring
the amount due to the lender. No borrower can
call in and the procedure prescribed under
Section 38
unless he asks for account and
determination of the amount due to the
lender. Even if the loan is secured, the
borrower need not ask for redemption. He will
be at liberty to file an application for
determination only of the amount due from
him. This was not done by the plaintiff, who
claims to be the successor-in-interest of the
borrower. On the contrary, the plaintiff has
asked, inter alia, for the following reliefs
in the plaint:—
(a) For a decree declaring the aforesaid
transaction is  a loan   transaction and
13
declaring that the aforesaid deed of sale is
             an ostensible deed of sale as a security to
             repayment of the said loan is repaid.
(b) For a decree of permanent injunction
             restraining the defendant No. 1 from claiming
             any right of ownership in the property in
             suit by virtue of the aforesaid deed of sale.
             Having regard to the provisions of Ss. 36 and
             38 of the said Act and the averments made in
             the plaint and the reliefs claimed in the
             suit, I am unable to accept the contention of
             Mr. Mullick that the present suit is suit
             under the
Bengal Money Lenders Act, 1940
.”
12.          It is at once necessary to notice Section 2(12)

of the State Act which defines the word “loan”.
“2(12). “loan” means an advance, whether or
             money or in kind, made on condition or
             repayment with interest and includes any
             transaction which is in substance a loan but
             does not include-
(a)    *    *    *    *
      (b)    *    *    *    *
      (c)    A loan taken or advanced by, by the Central
Government or any State Government or by any
             local authority in West Bengal;
(d)    A   loan   advanced   before   or   after   the
             commencement of this Act –
  (i)        by a bank; or
  (ii)       by a co-operative life insurance society, co-
operative society, insurance company, life
             assurance company, Life Insurance Corporation
             of India, mutual insurance company, provident
             insurance society or from a provident fund;
(e)    an advance made on the basis of a negotiable
             instrument as defined in the
Negotiable
             Instruments Act, 1881
, (26 of 1881) other
             than a promissory note;
(f)   Omitted by W.B. Money Lender Amendment Act,
             (Act IV of 1931)
(g)     *        *    *    *
(h)   a loan made to or by the Administrator General
             and Official Trustee of West Bengal or the
             Commissioner   of   Wakfs   or   the   Official
             Assignee or the Official Receiver of the High
14
Court in Calcutta;
(i)    a loan or debenture in respect of which
             dealings are listed on any Stock Exchange;”
13.          Commercial loan is defined in Section 2(4) of

the State Act.
Section 2(22)
defines suit to which this

Act applies. It reads as follows:-
“2(22) “suit to which this Act applies” means any
            suit or proceeding instituted or filed on or after
            the 1st day of January, 1939 or pending on that
            date and includes a proceeding in execution-
(a)    for the recovery of a loan advanced before or
                   after the commencement of this Act;
(b)    for the enforcement of any agreement entered
                   into before or after the commencement of this
                   Act, whether by way of settlement of account
                   or otherwise, or of any security so taken, in
                   respect of any loan advanced whether before or
                   after the commencement of this Act; or
(c)    for the redemption of any security given
                   before or after the commencement of this Act
                   in respect of any loan advanced whether before
                   or after the commencement of this Act.”
14.
Section 36
comes under the heading ‘Reopening of

transactions’. It deals with the power of the Court to

exercise          all   or   any   of   the   various   powers   which   are

mentioned therein. Sub
Section 4
of
Section 36
reads as

follows:-
“36(4). This Section shall apply to any Suit,
            whatever it forms may be, if such suit is
            substantially one for the recovery of a loan or
            for the enforcement of any agreement of
            security in respect of a loan or for the
            redemption of money such security.”
15
15.      It will be noticed that a Suit for redemption is

mentioned as suit to which
Section 36
applies.
Section 38
undoubtedly enables the borrowers to seek a direction for

taking accounts.
16.      We have noticed the relief which was sought in

the suit which was considered by the learned Single Judge

in Swarnalata Tat AIR 1984 Calcutta 130. In fact, Court

in the said case could not find a mortgage proved also.

The   reliefs   on   the   other    hand   in   the    suit   filed   by

Bhattacharya include reliefs relating to redemption in

the form it is asked for. In fact, no issue in this

regard was taken before the Trial Court.               We      see    no

reason   to   non-suit,    the     Bhattacharyas      on    this   ground

which is taken for the reasons which we have given.
17.      The last contention taken is that Section 37(a)

of the State Act is repugnant to Section 58(c) of the

Central Act namely, the
Transfer of Property Act
. The

contention runs as follows:-
Money lending falls as entry (30) in the State List.
16
Transfer of Property other than agricultural land falls

in Entry 6 in the concurrent list. The State legislature

in    enacting   Section   37(a)        of    the   State   Act,   a    law

relating    to   money   lending        has   made    a   law   which    is

inconsistent and therefore, repugnant to the law made by

the   Parliament    in
Section        58(c)
of   the    Transfer     of

Property Act.
This contention is taken for the first time in this

Court. We also see no merit in the same at any rate.
Section 37(A)
is traceable to the Entry ‘Transfer of

Property’ which is found in the concurrent list.
Article

254
of the Constitution of India reads as follows:-
“254. Inconsistency between laws made by
           Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures
           of States
           (1) If any provision of a law made by the
           Legislature of a State is repugnant to any
           provision of a law made by Parliament which
           Parliament is competent to enact, or to any
           provision of an existing law with respect to
           one   of   the   matters   enumerated in  the
           Concurrent    List,   then,   subject to  the
           provisions of clause ( 2 ), the law made by
           Parliament, whether passed before or after
           the law made by the Legislature of such
           State, or, as the case may be, the existing
           law, shall prevail and the law made by the
           Legislature of the State shall, to the extent
           of the repugnancy, be void.
(2) Where a law made by the Legislature of a
           State with respect to one of the matters
           enumerated in the concurrent List contains
           any provision repugnant to the provisions of
           an earlier law made by Parliament or an
17
existing law with respect to that matter,
           then, the law so made by the Legislature of
           such State shall, if it has been reserved for
           the consideration of the President and has
           received his assent, prevail in that State:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall
           prevent Parliament from enacting at any time
           any law with respect to the same matter
           including a law adding to, amending, varying
           or repealing the law so made by the
           Legislature of the State.”
18.        In this case proceeding on the basis that there

is an inconsistency between
Section 58(c)
of the Transfer

of Property Act and Section 37(A) of the State Act, in

view of the assent given by the President, the matter

falls     under
Article      254(2).
Therefore,     despite     the

inconsistency,       Section    37(A)    of   the    State   Act   will

prevail in the State.
19.        The argument that being part of State Act which

is the Money Lending Act and Money lending is in the

state list and therefore, it is a case of legislative,

incompetence, does not appeal to us. We have found that

the     provisions    of   37(A)   is    traceable     to    the   Entry

‘Transfer of Property’ in the Concurrent List and that
Article 254(2)
saves the provision.
18
20.     We see no merit in the appeals and the appeals

stand dismissed.
…....................J.
                                       [ASHOK BHUSHAN]




                               …....................J.
                                         [K.M. JOSEPH]
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 04, 2019.
19