[Cites
12
, Cited by
350
]
Supreme Court of India
Pioneer Urban Land And Infrastructure ... vs Govindan Raghavan on 2 April, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 1779, 2019 (5) SCC 725, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 153, 2019 (3) ABR 675, (2019) 197 ALLINDCAS 122 (SC), (2019) 134 ALL LR 236, (2019) 197 ALLINDCAS 122, (2019) 2 CURCC 11, (2019) 2 GUJ LH 461, (2019) 2 KER LJ 572, (2019) 2 RECCIVR 738, (2019) 3 ALL WC 2087, (2019) 3 CIVLJ 426, 2019 (3) KCCR SN 193 (SC), (2019) 5 SCALE 680, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 1493
Author:
Indu Malhotra
Bench:
Indu Malhotra
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 12238 OF 2018

         Pioneer Urban Land & Infrastructure Ltd.                         …Appellant


                                                  Versus


         Govindan Raghavan                                              …Respondent
                                                  WITH

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1677 OF 2019

         Pioneer Urban Land & Infrastructure Ltd.                         …Appellant


                                                  Versus


         Geetu Gidwani Verma & Anr.                                     …Respondent


                                             JUDGMENT
INDU MALHOTRA, J.
1.              The present statutory Appeals have been filed under Section
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MUKESH KUMAR
23 of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
to challenge the Final
Date: 2019.04.02
17:10:33 IST
Reason:
Judgment and Order dated 23.10.2018 passed in Consumer
1
Case No. 238 of 2017 and Consumer Case No. 239 of 2017 by

     the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission

     (hereinafter referred to as “the National Commission”).
2.   Since a common issue arises in both the Civil Appeals, they

     are being disposed of by the present common Judgment and

     Order.
3.   For the sake of brevity, the facts in C.A. No. 12238 of 2018 are

     being referred to, being the lead matter.

     The factual matrix of the said Civil Appeal is as under :
3.1.     The Appellant – Builder launched a residential project

            by the name “Araya Complex” in Sector 62, Golf Course

            Extension Road, Gurugram.
The Respondent – Flat Purchaser entered into an

            Apartment Buyer’s Agreement dated 08.05.2012 with the

            Appellant – Builder to purchase an apartment in the said

            project for a total sale consideration of Rs. 4,83,25,280/-.

              As per Clause 11.2 of the Agreement, the Appellant –

            Builder was to make all efforts to apply for the Occupancy

            Certificate within 39 months from the date of excavation,

            with a grace period of 180 days.
2
3.2.     The   excavation      of       the   project   commenced     on

       04.06.2012. As per Clause 11.2 of the Agreement, the

       Builder was required to apply for the Occupancy

       Certificate by 04.09.2015, or within a further grace period

       of 6 months i.e. by 04.03.2016, and offer possession of the

       flat to the Respondent – Flat Purchaser.

         The Appellant – Builder however failed to apply for the

       Occupancy Certificate as per the stipulations in the

       Agreement.
3.3.     The Respondent – Flat Purchaser filed a Consumer

       Complaint before the National Commission on 27.01.2017

       alleging deficiency of service on the part of the Appellant –

       Builder for failure to obtain the Occupancy Certificate,

       and hand over possession of the flat.
The Respondent prayed inter-alia for :-
• Refund     of   the    entire        amount    deposited   being

          Rs. 4,48,43,026/-, along with Interest @18% p.a.; and

       • Compensation of Rs. 10,00,000/- for mental agony,

          harassment, discomfort and undue hardship; and
3
• Refund of the wrongfully charged taxes including

          Service Tax, and other charges along with Interest

          @18% p.a.; and

       • Litigation Costs of Rs. 1,00,000/-.

3.4.    On 06.02.2017, the National Commission passed an ex-
parte Interim Order restraining the Appellant – Builder

       from cancelling the allotment made in favour of the

       Respondent – Flat Purchaser during the pendency of the

       Consumer Case.
3.5.    During the pendency of the proceedings before the

       National Commission, the Appellant – Builder obtained

       the Occupancy Certificate on 23.07.2018, and issued a

       Possession Letter to the Respondent – Flat Purchaser on

       28.08.2018.
3.6.    The Appellant – Builder submitted before the National

       Commission that since the construction of the apartment

       was complete, and the Occupancy Certificate had since

       been obtained, the Respondent – Flat Purchaser must be

       directed to take possession of the apartment, instead of

       directing refund of the amount deposited.
4
3.7.     The Respondent – Flat Purchaser however submitted

       that he was not interested in taking possession of the

       apartment on account of the inordinate delay of almost 3

       years. The Respondent – Flat Purchaser stated that he

       had, in the meanwhile, taken an alternate property in

       Gurugram, and sought refund of the entire amount of Rs.

       4,48,43,026/- deposited by him along with Interest @18%

       p.a.

3.8.     The National Commission vide Final Judgment and

       Order dated 23.10.2018 allowed the Consumer Complaint

       filed by the Respondent – Flat Purchaser, and held that

       since the last date stipulated for construction had expired

       about 3 years before the Occupancy Certificate was

       obtained, the Respondent – Flat Purchaser could not be

       compelled to take possession at such a belated stage.

         The grounds urged by the Appellant – Builder for delay

       in handing over possession were not justified, so as to

       deny awarding compensation to the Respondent – Flat

       Purchaser. The clauses in the Agreement were held to be

       wholly one – sided, unfair, and not binding on the

       Respondent – Flat Purchaser.
5
The Appellant – Builder was directed to refund Rs.

4,48,43,026/-       i.e.   the     amount       deposited     by   the

Respondent – Flat Purchaser, along with Interest @10.7%

S.I. p.a. towards compensation. The rate of Interest

@10.7% S.I. p.a. was fixed in accordance with Rule 15 of

the Haryana Real Estate (Regulation and Development)

Rules, 2017 which reads as follows :
“15. An allottee shall be compensated by the
    promoter for loss or damage sustained due to
    incorrect or false statement in the notice,
    advertisement, prospectus or brochure in the
    terms of
Section 12
. In case, allottee wishes to
    withdraw from the project due to discontinuance
    of promoter’s business as developers on account
    of suspension or revocation of the registration or
    any other reason(s) in terms of clause (b) sub-
    section (I) of
Section 18
or the promoter fails to give
    possession of the apartment/ plot in accordance
    with terms and conditions of agreement for sale in
    terms of sub-section (4) of
section 19
. The
    promoter shall return the entire amount with
    interest as well as the compensation payable. The
    rate of interest payable by the promoter to the
    allottee or by the allottee to the promoter, as the
    case may be, shall be the State Bank of India
    highest marginal cost of lending rate plus two
    percent. …”
                                     (emphasis supplied)

 However, for the period when the Interim Order dated

06.02.2017 was in operation, which restrained the

Appellant – Builder from cancelling the Respondent’s

allotment, no Interest was awarded. The                       National

Commission ordered payment of Interest from the date of
6
each installment till 05.02.2017; and from the date of the

            Order passed by the Commission till the date on which the

            amount would be refunded.
3.9.    Aggrieved by the Order dated 23.10.2018 passed by the

            National Commission, the Appellant – Builder preferred

            the present statutory Appeal under
Section 23
of the

            Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
4.   Mr. C.A. Sundaram, Senior Counsel appeared for the

     Appellant – Builder, and drew our attention to the following

     Clauses      in   the    Apartment       Buyer’s     Agreement   dated

     08.05.2012 viz. Clause 11.5 (ii), (iv) and (v) along with Clause

     20 which read as under :
“11.5. (ii) In the event of further delay by the
                Developer in handing over of the possession of the
                Unit even after 12 months from the end of grace
                period, then in such case, the intending Allottee
                shall have an additional option to terminate this
                Agreement by giving termination notice of 90 days
                to the Developer and refund of the actual
                installment paid by him against the Unit after
                adjusting the taxes paid / interest / penalty on
                delayed payments.
…
(iv) Developer shall, within ninety (90) days from
                the date of receipt of termination notice of said
                Unit, refund to the intending Allottee, all the
                monies received excluding the service tax
                collected on various remittances, till the date of
                the refund, from the Intending Allottee under this
                Agreement. In case the Developer fails to refund
7
the Sale Price, the Developer shall pay interest to
           the Intending Allottee @ 9% per annum for any
           period beyond the said period of ninety (90) days.
The Intending Allottee shall have no other claim
           against the Developer in respect of the said Unit
           along with the parking space. The Intending
           Allottee in this event shall have no right to seek
           any compensation apart from the interest as
           stipulated herein.
…
(v) If the Intending Allottee fails to exercise his
           right of termination within the time limit as
           aforesaid, by delivery to the Developer of a
           written notice acknowledged by the Developer in
           this regard, then he shall not be entitled to
           terminate this Agreement thereafter and he shall
           continue to be bound by the provisions of this
           Agreement, provided that in such case, the
           Developer shall continue to pay the compensation
           provided herein.
20. RIGHT OF CANCELLATION BY THE
           ALLOTTEE
           Except to the extent specifically and expressly
           stated elsewhere in this Agreement, the Intending
           Allottee shall have the right to cancel this
           Agreement solely in the event of the clear and
           unambiguous failure of the warranties of the
           Developer that leads to frustration of the contract
           on that account. In such case, the Allottee shall
           be entitled to a refund of the installments actually
           paid by it along with interest thereon @ 6% per
           annum, within a period of 90 days from the date
           of communication to the Developer in this regard
           less any payments made towards taxes paid by
           the Developer or interest paid due or payable, any
           other amount of a non-refundable nature. No
           other claim, whatsoever, monetary or otherwise
           shall lie against the Developer nor shall be raised
           otherwise or in any manner whatsoever by the
           Allottee. Save and except to this limited extent,
           the Allottee shall not have any right to cancel this
           Agreement on any ground whatsoever.”
                                           (emphasis supplied)

4.1.    It was submitted that the Respondent – Flat Purchaser

       was not entitled to refund of the amount deposited, since
8
the Apartment Buyer’s Agreement was not terminated by

       the Respondent – Flat Purchaser in accordance with

       Clause 11.5 (ii) of the Agreement, which stipulates that the

       allottee has to terminate the Agreement by giving a

       Termination Notice of 90 days to the Developer.

         Since the Respondent – Flat Purchaser had not

       terminated the Agreement by a written notice as per

       Clause 11.5, the Builder could not sell the apartment, and

       refund the money to the Respondent – Flat Purchaser. On

       the contrary, the Respondent filed a Consumer Complaint

       and obtained an ex-parte Interim Order dated 06.02.2017

       restraining the Builder from cancelling the allotment made

       in favour of the Respondent.
4.2.     It was further submitted that if the filing of the

       Consumer    Complaint    is    considered   as   an   act   of

       termination of the Agreement, then the same was pre-

       mature. As per Clause 11.5 (ii), the Respondent – Flat

       Purchaser could have claimed refund only after the expiry

       of 12 months after the grace period came to an end i.e.

       after 04.03.2017. However, the Consumer Complaint was

       filed on 27.01.2017. In these circumstances, even if it is
9
found that the Appellant – Builder is liable to refund the

               amount deposited with Interest, then the date of the

               Impugned Order i.e. 23.10.2018, must be treated as the

               date of serving the Termination Notice as per Clause 11.5
(ii) of the Agreement, and the Appellant – Builder should

               be held liable to pay Interest only after 90 days from the

               date of termination i.e. from 23.01.2019.

        4.3.     With respect to rate of Interest awarded by the National

               Commission, it was submitted that the Commission erred

               in granting Interest @10.7% S.I. p.a. even though Clause

               20 of the Agreement provided Interest @6% p.a. in case of

               delay in handing over possession. Even under Clause 11.5

               of the Agreement, the Builder was liable to pay Interest

               @9% p.a., but not @10.7% S.I. p.a. The learned Senior

               Counsel relied upon this Court’s Judgment in
Bharathi

               Knitting Company v. DHL Worldwide Express Courier

               Division of Airfreight Ltd.,1
and submitted that the National

               Commission could not have granted compensation in

               excess of the rate prescribed by the Agreement.




1   (1996) 4 SCC 704.
10
5.   Mr.     Sushil   Kaushik,    learned   Counsel   represented    the

     Respondent – Flat Purchaser.
5.1.     It was submitted that the filing of the Consumer

            Complaint may be treated as his Termination Notice under

            Clause 11.5 (ii) of the Agreement. Under the Agreement,

            the Builder was obligated to apply for the Occupancy

            Certificate within 39 months from the date of excavation,

            with a grace period of further 6 months. The period got

            over by 04.03.3016 after taking into account the grace

            period.
Admittedly, the Appellant – Builder offered possession

            after an inordinate delay of almost 3 years on 28.08.2018.

            On account of the inordinate delay, the Respondent – Flat

            Purchaser had no option but to arrange for alternate

            accommodation in Gurugram. Hence, he could not be

            compelled to take possession of the apartment after such

            a long delay.
It was in these circumstances that the Respondent – Flat

            Purchaser sought stay of the cancellation of the allotment

            as a collateral, till his claim for refund was adjudicated by

            the National Commission.
11
5.2.     It was further submitted that the Clauses of the

       Agreement were one-sided. As per Clause 6.4 (ii) of the

       Apartment Buyer’s Agreement, the Appellant Builder

       could charge Interest @18% p.a. for delayed payments.

         However, the Appellant – Builder was not required to pay

       equivalent Interest to the Respondent – Flat Purchaser for

       delay in handing over possession of the flat.

         On the contrary, as per Clause 11.5 (iv) of the

       Agreement, in case of delay on the part of the Appellant –

       Builder in handing over possession of the flat, the

       Respondent – Flat Purchaser was entitled to Interest @9%

       p.a. only.
5.3.     The Respondent further submitted that the National

       Commission had ordered payment of Interest as per the

       statutory Rules i.e. Rule 15 of the Haryana Real Estate

       (Regulation and Development) Rules, 2017 @10.7% S.I.

       p.a.

         The Respondent – Flat Purchaser submitted that he had

       obtained a loan for Rs. 3,30,00,000/- from Standard

       Chartered Bank to purchase the flat in question, and had

       entered into a Tripartite Loan Agreement with the Bank
12
and the Builder. The Respondent – Flat Purchaser had to

            pay Interest @10% p.a. for servicing the loan for the entire

            period. Hence, Interest @10.7% S.I. p.a. awarded by the

            National Commission was just and fair.
It was pointed out that even though the National

            Commission had not granted Interest for the period during

            which the Order of stay of cancellation of the allotment

            was in operation, the Respondent – Flat Purchaser had to

            pay Interest to the Bank even for this period.

     5.4.     The Respondent – Flat Purchaser submitted that the

            present Appeal be dismissed, and the Builder be directed

            to pay the amount awarded by the National Commission

            with Interest, within 1 week, so that the Respondent can

            discharge his loan liability.
6.   We have heard the learned Counsel for both the parties, and

     perused the pleadings, and written submissions filed.

     6.1.     In the present case, admittedly the Appellant – Builder

            obtained the Occupancy Certificate almost 2 years after

            the date stipulated in the Apartment Buyer’s Agreement.

            As a consequence, there was a failure to hand over
13
possession of the flat to the Respondent – Flat Purchaser

               within a reasonable period. The Occupancy Certificate was

               obtained after a delay of more than 2 years on 28.08.2018

               during the pendency of the proceedings before the

               National Commission.
In
Lucknow Development Authority v. M.K. Gupta,2
this

               Court held that when a person hires the services of a

               builder, or a contractor, for the construction of a house or

               a flat, and the same is for a consideration, it is a “service”

               as defined by
Section 2 (o)
of the Consumer Protection Act,

               1986. The inordinate delay in handing over possession of

               the flat clearly amounts to deficiency of service.
In
Fortune Infrastructure & Anr. v. Trevor D’Lima & Ors.,3
this Court held that a person cannot be made to wait

               indefinitely for possession of the flat allotted to him, and

               is entitled to seek refund of the amount paid by him, along

               with compensation.
6.2.     The Respondent – Flat Purchaser has made out a clear

               case of deficiency of service on the part of the Appellant –

               Builder. The Respondent – Flat Purchaser was justified in


2   (1994) 1 SCC 243.
3   (2018) 5 SCC 442.
14
terminating the Apartment Buyer’s Agreement by filing the

       Consumer Complaint, and cannot be compelled to accept

       the possession whenever it is offered by the Builder. The

       Respondent – Purchaser was legally entitled to seek refund

       of the money deposited by him along with appropriate

       compensation.
6.3.     The National Commission in the Impugned Order dated

       23.10.2018 held that the Clauses relied upon by the

       Builder were wholly one-sided, unfair and unreasonable,

       and could not be relied upon.
The Law Commission of India in its 199th Report,

       addressed the issue of ‘Unfair (Procedural & Substantive)

       Terms in Contract’. The Law Commission inter-alia

       recommended that a legislation be enacted to counter

       such unfair terms in contracts. In the draft legislation

       provided in the Report, it was stated that :
“A contract or a term thereof is substantively
           unfair if such contract or the term thereof is in
           itself harsh, oppressive or unconscionable to one
           of the parties.”

6.4.     A perusal of the Apartment Buyer’s Agreement dated

       08.05.2012 reveals stark incongruities between the

       remedies available to both the parties.
15
For instance, Clause 6.4 (ii) of the Agreement entitles the

Appellant – Builder to charge Interest @18% p.a. on

account of any delay in payment of installments from the

Respondent – Flat Purchaser.
Clause 6.4 (iii) of the Agreement entitles the Appellant –

Builder to cancel the allotment and terminate the

Agreement, if any installment remains in arrears for more

than 30 days.
On the other hand, as per Clause 11.5 of the Agreement,

if the Appellant – Builder fails to deliver possession of the

apartment within the stipulated period, the Respondent –

Flat Purchaser has to wait for a period of 12 months after

the end of the grace period, before serving a Termination

Notice of 90 days on the Appellant – Builder, and even

thereafter, the Appellant – Builder gets 90 days to refund

only the actual installment paid by the Respondent – Flat

Purchaser, after adjusting the taxes paid, interest and

penalty on delayed payments. In case of any delay

thereafter, the Appellant – Builder is liable to pay Interest

@9% p.a. only.
16
6.5.     Another instance is Clause 23.4 of the Agreement which

       entitles the Appellant – Builder to serve a Termination

       Notice upon the Respondent – Flat Purchaser for breach

       of any contractual obligation. If the Respondent – Flat

       Purchaser fails to rectify the default within 30 days of the

       Termination Notice, then the Agreement automatically

       stands cancelled, and the Appellant – Builder has the right

       to forfeit the entire amount of Earnest Money towards

       liquidated damages.
On the other hand, as Clause 11.5 (v) of the Agreement,

       if the Respondent – Flat Purchaser fails to exercise his

       right of termination within the time limit provided in

       Clause 11.5, then he shall not be entitled to terminate the

       Agreement thereafter, and shall be bound by the

       provisions of the Agreement.
6.6.
Section 2 (r)
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986

       defines ‘unfair trade practices’ in the following words :
“‘unfair trade practice’ means a trade practice which, for

       the purpose of promoting the sale, use or supply of any

       goods or for the provision of any service, adopts any unfair

       method or unfair or deceptive practice …”, and includes any
17
of the practices enumerated therein. The provision is

             illustrative, and not exhaustive.
In
Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited

             and Ors. v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and Ors.,4
this Court held

             that :
“89. … Our judges are bound by their oath to
                  ‘uphold the Constitution and the laws’. The
                  Constitution was enacted to secure to all the
                  citizens of this country social and economic
                  justice.
Article 14
of the Constitution guarantees
                  to all persons equality before the law and equal
                  protection of the laws. This principle is that the
                  courts will not enforce and will, when called upon
                  to do so, strike down an unfair and unreasonable
                  contract, or an unfair and unreasonable clause in
                  a contract, entered into between parties who are
                  not equal in bargaining power. It is difficult to give
                  an exhaustive list of all bargains of this type. No
                  court can visualize the different situations which
                  can arise in the affairs of men. One can only
                  attempt to give some illustrations. For instance,
                  the above principle will apply where the
                  inequality of bargaining power is the result of the
                  great disparity in the economic strength of the
                  contracting parties. It will apply where the
                  inequality is the result of circumstances, whether
                  of the creation of the parties or not. It will apply to
                  situations in which the weaker party is in a
                  position in which he can obtain goods or services
                  or means of livelihood only upon the terms
                  imposed by the stronger party or go without them.
                  It will also apply where a man has no choice, or
                  rather no meaningful choice, but to give his assent
                  to a contract or to sign on the dotted line in a
                  prescribed or standard form or to accept a set of
                  rules as part     of the contract, however unfair,
                  unreasonable and unconscionable a clause in
                  that contract or form or rules may be. This
                  principle, however, will not apply where the
                  bargaining power of the contracting parties is
                  equal or almost equal. This principle may not

4   (1986) 3 SCC 156.
18
apply where both parties are businessmen and
                the contract is a commercial transaction. …
                … These cases can neither be enumerated nor
                fully illustrated. The court must judge each case
                on its own facts and circumstances.”
                                              (emphasis supplied)


     6.7.     A term of a contract will not be final and binding if it is

            shown that the flat purchasers had no option but to sign

            on the dotted line, on a contract framed by the builder.

              The   contractual     terms     of   the   Agreement       dated

            08.05.2012      are    ex-facie    one-sided,      unfair,    and

            unreasonable. The incorporation of such one-sided

            clauses in an agreement constitutes an unfair trade

            practice as per
Section 2 (r)
of the Consumer Protection

            Act, 1986 since it adopts unfair methods or practices for

            the purpose of selling the flats by the Builder.
7.   In view of the above discussion, we have no hesitation in

     holding that the terms of the Apartment Buyer’s Agreement

     dated 08.05.2012 were wholly one-sided and unfair to the

     Respondent – Flat Purchaser. The Appellant – Builder could

     not seek to bind the Respondent with such one-sided

     contractual terms.
19
8.      We also reject the submission made by the Appellant – Builder

        that the National Commission was not justified in awarding

        Interest @10.7% S.I. p.a. for the period commencing from the

        date of payment of each installment, till the date on which the

        amount was paid, excluding only the period during which the

        stay of cancellation of the allotment was in operation.
In
Bangalore Development Authority v. Syndicate Bank,5
a

        Coordinate Bench of this Court held that when possession of

        the allotted plot/flat/house is not delivered within the

        specified time, the allottee is entitled to a refund of the amount

        paid, with reasonable Interest thereon from the date of

        payment till the date of refund.
8.1.    In the present case, the National Commission has

               passed an equitable Order. The Commission has not

               awarded any Interest for the period during which the

               Order of stay of cancellation of the allotment was in

               operation on the request of the Respondent – Flat

               Purchaser.
The National Commission has rightly awarded Interest

               @10.7% S.I. p.a. by applying Rule 15 of the Haryana Real



5   (2007) 6 SCC 711.
20
Estate (Regulation And Development) Rules, 2017 from

         the date of each installment till 05.02.2017 i.e. till the date

         after which the Order of stay of cancellation of the

         allotment was passed; and thereafter, from the date of the

         Commission’s final Order till the date on which the

         amount is refunded with Interest.
9.   We see no illegality in the Impugned Order dated 23.10.2018

     passed by the National Commission. The Appellant – Builder

     failed to fulfill his contractual obligation of obtaining the

     Occupancy Certificate and offering possession of the flat to the

     Respondent – Purchaser within the time stipulated in the

     Agreement, or within a reasonable time thereafter. The

     Respondent – Flat Purchaser could not be compelled to take

     possession of the flat, even though it was offered almost 2

     years after the grace period under the Agreement expired.

     During this period, the Respondent – Flat Purchaser had to

     service a loan that he had obtained for purchasing the flat, by

     paying Interest @10% to the Bank. In the meanwhile, the

     Respondent – Flat Purchaser also located an alternate

     property   in   Gurugram.     In   these    circumstances,     the
21
Respondent – Flat Purchaser was entitled to be granted the

   relief prayed for i.e. refund of the entire amount deposited by

   him with Interest.
10. The Civil Appeals are accordingly dismissed, and the Final

   Judgment and Order dated 23.10.2018 passed by the National

   Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission is affirmed. The

   appellant is granted a period of three months from today to

   refund   the   amount    to    the   respondent.         All    pending

   Applications, if any, are accordingly disposed of.
.....................................J.
                                               (UDAY UMESH LALIT)




                                        .…...............………………J.
                                                 (INDU MALHOTRA)




New Delhi,
April 2, 2019.
22