[Cites
29
, Cited by
30
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Tamil Nadu vs Elephant G. Rajendran on 12 April, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2303, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 236
Author:
Ashok Bhushan
Bench:
K.M. Joseph
,
Ashok Bhushan
REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            CIVIL APPEAL NOS.   3918-3919 OF 2019
                      (arising out of S.L.P. (C) Nos. 32344-32345/2018)


          THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU & ORS.                                 ...APPELLANTS

                                                         Vs.

          ELEPHANT G. RAJENDRAN & ORS. ETC.                              ...RESPONDENTS



                                             J U D G M E N T
ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
Leave granted.
2.             The    State      of      Tamil       Nadu      alongwith     its

          functionaries have filed these appeals against the

          common judgment dated 30.11.2018 passed by the High

          Court of Madras in Writ Petition Nos. 20392 and 20963

          of             2018   filed   by   the    respondents          as   PIL   (Public

          Interest Litigation).
Signature Not Verified
3.
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.04.12
Tamil Nadu is a State, which is known for its
15:20:10 IST
Reason:
majestic              temples,     its    rich       culture    and    heritage.
Idols consecrated in its various temples have their
1
own significance, rich heritage and some of the idols

dates back to 1500 to 2000 years back. There have

been several instances for theft of precious idols

and    artefacts     in     the   State       of    Tamil    Nadu,     which

alarmed the State Government.                  The State Government

vide its G.O.Ms. No. 2098, Home(Pol-IV) Department

dated     07.10.1983        formed       an   Idol        Wing   of    Crime

Investigation Department (CID).                    The temples in Tamil

Nadu    are    administered       under       the       enactment     namely,
Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments

Act, 1959
(hereinafter referred to as “Act, 1959”).
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department

(hereinafter referred to as “HR & CE Department”) of

the State controls and administers various temples in

the State. The HR & CE Department of the State keeps

a direct control and management of the temples, its

properties, idols and artefacts etc.
4.      One Mr.A.G. Ponn Manickavel, the respondent No.2

herein,       who   shall    hereinafter           be    referred      to   as

“respondent No.2” was appointed as Deputy Inspector

General of Police, Idol Wing, Chennai on 11.02.2012,

which was part of Economic Offences Wing of the Tamil
2
Nadu Police. The role of the wing is basically for

efficient investigation, detection and follow up of

the   Idol      theft   cases    and   follow   the   Court      cases

concerning them.          Respondent No.2 was continued in

the Idol Services Wing since then.
5.    The two individuals namely, Mr. R. Venkataraman

and Mr. Elephant G. Rajendran, the respondent No.1

herein,    filed     petitions     before     the   High   Court    of

Madras under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. being Crl.O.P. No.

8960 of 2017 and Crl.O.P. No. 12060 of 2017.                       In

Crl.O.P.        No.8960   of     2017,   it     was    prayed      for

transferring the investigation regarding theft of 06

idols from the HR & CE Department to the Idol Wing of

the Tamil Nadu Police and in Crl.O.P. No.12060 of

2017,     the    prayer    was    made   to     transfer    an     FIR

pertaining to an Idol theft from the Idol Theft Wing,

CID, Chennai to the Crime Branch, CID, Chennai.
6.    The case filed by the petitioner in Crl.O.P. No.

8960 of 2017 was with regard to Sri Pasupatheeswarar

Temple in Thanjavur District, which was built during

the Chola Reign about 1500 to 2000 years ago, which
3
according to petitioner houses several ancient idols

of temples.        Allegation was made that 06 of such

idols were missing belonging to a temple with regard

to which complaints were made to police officers and

officials of HR & CE Department.                  Despite several

complaints to police officers and officials of HR &

CE Department, no FIR has been lodged and no action

has been taken to punish the erring officials of the

HR & CE Department.           It was further pleaded that

officials of HR & CE Department are not appropriate

authority to investigate the offence of theft, hence

appropriate direction was sought for.
7.   Mr. Elephant G. Rajendran, who is respondent No.1

in this appeal, had filed Crl.O.P. No. 12060 of 2017

making allegation that a police official came into

possession of six Idols during the course of their

investigation      had sold    the Idols         for Rs.6    Crores.

Despite the fact that FIR had been lodged against the

accused,    they    have   been       promoted    and   no   further

action     was   taken.       Further     allegation     was    that

investigation by a subordinate officer of the same

wing cannot be handled effectively.               Allegations were
4
also made that Idols worth several crores of rupees

were sold by the trustees in collusion with the HR &

CE authorities.
8.    Madras High Court disposed of both the Crl.O.P.

petitions by its judgment dated 21.07.2017.              the High

Court during the hearing had summoned the Inspector

General of Idol Wing, who at that time was second

respondent.      Inspector General of Idol Wing appeared

before the Court and brought to the notice of the

Court, various difficulties and shortcomings faced by

the Idol Wing due to which steps for detection of

Idol thefts and bringing the culprits before law is

being    hampered.       During   the   course   of   hearing   on

30.06.2017, it was brought before the knowledge of

Madras    High   Court    that    respondent     No.2,   who    was

working as Inspector General of Police, Idol Wing has

been transferred.         Court observed that officer, the

respondent No.2 has been supervising the cases and

has efficiently traced and recovered several Idols

worth several crores.        Court further observed that it

is not that the succeeding officer is less efficient,

but   considering that      Respondent No.2       and his      team

have extensively travelled throughout the country and
5
are aware of the modus operandi of the culprits, for

the   sake      of    continuity,   speedy    completion   of    the

investigation and completion of the pending cases,

respondent        No.2    must    continue    despite    the     work

assigned        presently.        The    Madras   High   Court    on

21.07.2017 issued 20 directions to the State of Tamil

Nadu,     out    of    which     first   04   directions   are    as

follows:-
“(i)     The Chief Secretary of the State of
                 Tamil Nadu must issue appropriate
                 orders within a week for the creation
                 of a special camp at Tiruchirappalli
                 headed by Mr. A.G. Ponn Manickavel,
                 IPS, Inspector General of Police with
                 other members of Idol wing, who
                 associated   him   earlier   for   the
                 completion of trial in the pending
                 cases in the State and needless to
                 say that necessary infrastructure,
                 staff and transportation, vehicle,
                 fuel etc. from time to time are to be
                 provided. The said officer can place
                 his     representation     immediately
                 intimating required assistance and
                 the team members required by him to
                 the Chief Secretary and on such
                 representation, the same shall be
                 provided forthwith.
(ii)     The cases pending on the file of
                 various courts in the State of Tamil
                 Nadu prosecuted by the Idol wing are
                 hereby transferred to the file of the
                 learned Additional Chief Judicial
                 Magistrate, Kumbakonam for effective
                 and speedy disposal of the cases, on
                 day to day basis.
6
(iii)    The Inspector General of Police Mr.
                 A.G. Ponn Manickavel, IPS and all the
                 officers of the cases connected with
                 Idol wing, CID are directed to
                 continue to investigate and follow up
                 all the cases under investigation,
                 pending trial, till the disposal by
                 the learned Additional Chief Judicial
                 Magistrate, Kumbakonam.
(iv)     The team as now ordered by this Court
                 headed by the Inspector General of
                 Police Mr. A.G. Ponn Manickavel, IPS,
                 shall continue to follow up those
                 cases in addition to their present
                 and future assignments, wherever they
                 are posted.
............”
9.   The Director General of Police aggrieved by the

order    dated    21.07.2017    passed      by   the   Madras    High

Court    filed    a   SLP   (Crl.)   Nos.    6139-6140    of    2017,

which was disposed of by this Court by its order

dated 01.09.2017 in following manner:-
“Having heard Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned
        Senior Counsel for the petitioners and Mr.
        J. Sai Deepak Iyer, learned counsel for the
        respondents and upon perusal of the record,
        we consider it appropriate to delete the
        findings pertaining to the mala fide nature
        of the transfer of Inspector General of
        Police Mr. A.G. Ponn Manickavel. We order
        accordingly.
7
Nonetheless, the order regarding the
       transfer of Inspector General of Police Mr.
       A.G. Ponn Manickavel, shall remain intact.
With the aforesaid observations, the
       special leave petitions stand disposed of.
As a sequel to the above, pending
       interlocutory applications, if any, stand
       disposed of.”
10. This Court did not interfere with the directions

of Madras High Court dated 21.07.2017 directing the

respondent No.2 to continue to head the Idol Wing of

the    CID.        The    High      Court    vide    its    order    dated

21.07.2017       had not      disposed of       the matter         finally

rather      it    postponed         the     matter        for     reporting

compliance.       It appears that before the High Court,

it    was   brought      to   the    notice    that       State    has   not

complied with various directions issued on 21.07.2017

and    there     are   obstacles          created    in    carrying      out

various functions of the Idol Wing.                   It is further to

be noticed that several FIRs were registered leading

to arrest of several culprits including some officers

of HR & CE Department.              In order dated 21.07.2017, in

Crl.O.P. No. 8690 of 2017 and Crl.O.P. No. 12060 of

2017, High Court made certain observations about not
8
providing        proper        infrastructure              to    the        Court

appointed idol Wing.
11. On 31.07.2018, Commissioner, HR & CE Department

wrote     a     letter    to     Director        General         of       Police,

Chennai.        In     the D.O.        letter, Commissioner                stated

that     Idol    Wing     of     the        Police    is    harassing           the

officials of HR & CE Department and they are being

threatened with filing of the FIRs.                             Reference to

certain       complaints       made     by     officers         of    HR    &    CE

Department brought to the notice of the Commissioner

were also narrated.              The Commissioner requested the

State to take necessary action to ensure a fair and

confidential investigation and bring the culprits to

book,     without       damaging       the      reputation           of    honest

officials       and    the     Department.            Commissioner           also

requested       that     early    charge        sheets      be       filed      and

prosecution be undertaken to enable disposal of the

cases,        early      apprehension            of        criminals            and

restoration of the Idols to the respective temples.
12. On the said letter, Additional Director General

of Police on same date, i.e., on 31.07.2018 wrote to
9
the Director General of Police mentioning that during

investigation of cases, several senior officers and

other staff belonging to HR & CE Department were also

arrested.       The      Additional         Director       of    Police

recommended that all cases under investigation by the

special team constituted for Idol theft cases and all

such future cases may be transferred to the Central

Bureau of investigation.             Director General of Police

on 01.08.2018 wrote to Additional Chief Secretary to

the     Government        concurring        with     the    views     of

Additional Director General of Police to transfer the

cases    to     Central     Bureau     of    Investigation.           On

01.08.2018,      the    Additional     Chief       Secretary    to   the

Government wrote to Additional Advocate General of

the High Court of Madras bringing into notice the

development.         In the end of the letter, it was stated

by Additional Chief Secretary to the Government that

High    Court   be     apprised   about      the    decision    of   the

Government and when the above cases are taken up for

hearing and whether any orders from the Court are

required.       On     01.08.2018      itself,       the    Additional

Advocate General of Tamil Nadu brought to the notice

of    Additional Chief       Secretary that          he has     brought
10
into the notice of the Madras High Court about the

communication dated 01.08.2018 on which the Bench has

observed that the communication, decisions or orders,

as the case may be placed before the Court on its

next hearing on 08.08.2018.            On 01.08.2018 itself,

the State Government issued an order according its

consent to transfer all cases being investigated by

the Special Team constituted for the Idol cases and

all   such   future   cases    to     the    Central    Bureau    of

Investigation.
13. Two Writ Petitions being Writ Petition No.20392

of 2018 – Elephant G.Rajendran Vs. The State of Tamil

Nadu and Writ Petition No. 20963 of 2018 –
Traffic

Dr.   K.R.Ramaswamy    Vs.    State    and    Others
,    has    been

filed in the Madras High Court praying for quashing

the Government Order dated 01.08.2018, transferring

the    investigation     to     the     Central        Bureau     of

Investigation.    The above writ petitions were heard

by the Division Bench and the Division Bench of the

High Court vide its judgment dated 30.11.2018 allowed

both the above writ petitions quashing the Government

Order dated 01.08.2018 and issued several directions.
11
The conclusion of the Court is recorded in paragraph

No.45. In paragraph Nos.45 to 48 of the judgment, the

High Court has held:-
“45. This Court is empowered under
Article
     226
of the Constitution to pass any orders
     to secure the ends of justice. We have
     already expressed our anguish over the
     conduct of the State in handling the matter
     insensitively. The directions issued by
     this Court and confirmed by the Hon’ble
     Supreme Court have not been complied in
     full. We have also expressed that we are
     satisfied with the credentials of the
     Mr.A.G.Pon    Manickavel,    I.P.S,    Inspector
     General of Police and the steps taken by
     him in the process of investigation. Hence,
     the following directions are given, which
     shall   be     implemented    by    the    State
     forthwith:
(1)Mr.A.G.Pon      Manickavel,      I.P.S,
        Inspector General of Police is hereby
        appointed as a Special Officer to
        head Idol Wing&#126;CID, Chennai to
        deal with the cases of theft of idols
        and antiques in all stages, for a
        period of one year, who shall assume
        charge    on   his   superannuation     on
        30.11.2018 forthwith and function
        from the same camp with the same
        facilities. The Government shall pass
        orders to that effect. It is made
        clear    that    any    delay    by    the
        Government in passing appropriate
        orders, shall not curtail the powers
        of Mr.A.G.Pon Manickavel, I.P.S. to
        head the team and investigate the
        cases and take appropriate action as
        per law.
(2)The members of the Special team
        constituted on the basis of the
        orders of this Court on 21.07.2017
12
shall continue to be part      of the
team and any such member as requested
by                         Mr.A.G.Pon
Manickavel, I.P.S., shall be spared
by the Government from the Tamil Nadu
Police Force.
(3)Mr.A.G.Pon   Manickavel,   I.P.S.,
Inspector General of Police, shall
draw the same pay and benefits that
were available to him at the time of
his retirement for the entire tenure
of his term as Special officer.
(4)The    Special   Officer,    hereby
appointed shall investigate the cases
thoroughly and periodically submit
all    the    reports    before    the
appropriate Court as per law and also
before this Court in a sealed cover
to enable this Court to monitor the
investigation.
(5)The Special Officer and his team
shall    continue   to   not   only
investigate and file charge Sheets
and prosecute in the pending cases
but shall also continue to do so in
the cases arising in future during
his tenure or until further orders
from this Court.
(6)The CBI and other agencies of
Central Government shall continue to
give   appropriate  support   to the
Special officer and his team.
(7)No action or enquiry against the
Special officer or any member of his
team shall be initiated except with
the concurrence of this Court. If any
materials are there to rely upon for
necessary action, the same be placed
before   this   court   for   further
directions.
13
(8)The State shall forthwith issue
   appropriate      communications      to
   concerned Departments of the State
   including the HR & CE Department to
   extend          their           fullest
   co&#126;operation to the Special Team
   and furnish necessary particulars and
   documents sought by them.
(9)   The   State   shall    create   a
   separate   Division   to   handle   the
   financial aspects of the functioning
   of the team so as to ensure that no
   action is delayed for paucity of
   funds and separate account is to be
   created   for    this    purpose    and
   reasonable amount must be available
   to meet out the daily overheads.
(10)All the directions issued by
   this   Court  shall be   implemented
   without any delay or demur and a
   report shall be submitted regarding
   the action taken.
46.With the above directions, the writ
petitions are allowed. Consequently, other
connected  petitions  in   W.M.P.Nos.23975,
23976, 24609 and 26868 of 2018 are closed.
No costs.
47.When we are about to pronounce this
order, the petitioner in WP.No.20392 of
2018 produced a copy of the proceedings
issued by the Government of Tamil Nadu in
Police Note No.SC/19/2018 dated 29.11.2018
indicating   that  one   Thiru.Abhay   Kumar
Singh, IPS, Additional Director General of
Police/Chief       Vigilance        Officer,
Tamil Nadu Newsprint and Papers Limited,
Karur has been transferred and posted as
Additional Director General of Police, Idol
Wing, CID, Chennai by upgrading the post of
Inspector General of Police, Idol Wing CID.
14
48.We are of the view that the State all
        along, is not inclined to continue with the
        investigation of idol theft cases as the
        same   were  transferred   to  CBI  despite
        pendency of the stay order of this Court.
        It is also pertinent to note that after the
        orders were reserved, they have upgraded
        the post of the Additional Director General
        of Police and appointed an officer, by
        order dated 29.11.2018, which action is
        inappropriate and it would amply prove the
        transfer of cases in a most hurried manner
        within a single day i.e., on 01.08.2018.
        Similarly, the manner in which the present
        order dated 29.11.2018 has been passed,
        will     speak    for     itself.    Hence,
        notwithstanding the order dated 29.11.2018
        passed by the Government, which has become
        redundant, Tr.A.G.Pon Manickavel shall take
        charge as Special Officer to head the Idol
        Wing as ordered by us, in order to preserve
        the idols as well as recovery of the stolen
        idols to uphold the cultural heritage of
        this land.”
14. State     of    Tamil    Nadu      aggrieved       by
the   said

judgment
has filed these appeals.
15. Shri K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General has

appeared for the State of Tamil Nadu.                       Shri Mukul

Rohatgi,    learned     senior    counsel        has   appeared     for

Director    General     of   Police,     Tamil    Nadu.       We   have

heard     Shri     R.   Basant,        learned     senior      counsel

appearing for the respondent No.1 and we have also

heard learned counsel, who has appeared for the PIL
15
petitioner– Traffic Dr. K.R. Ramaswamy.             We have also

heard, learned counsel, who appeared for intervenor.

Shri Mohan Parasaran, Senior Advocate has appeared

for respondent No.9.
16. Learned Attorney General submits that High Court

exceeded     its    jurisdiction     under
Article    226
in

appointing respondent NO.2 as a Special Officer to

head Idol Wing, whereas respondent No.2 was going to

be superannuated on 30.11.2018 itself.              In the writ

petition, challenge was to the Government order dated

01.08.2018 for transferring the investigation, which

was being carried on by Idol Wing of the CID to the

CBI.      Without their being any prayer, the respondent

No.2 has been directed to continue to head the Idol

Wing even after his superannuation.             The respondent

No.2 after superannuation could not have exercised

any power of police officer as entrusted on a police

officer     under     the
Code    of   Criminal     Procedure
.

Retired police officer is not a police officer for

purposes of registering a FIR or carrying out the

investigation       or submitting    a charge    sheet, nor    a

retired police officer can present a case in Court.
16
The     State     Government      was     fully        justified    in

transferring the investigation of Idol theft cases to

CBI for fair investigation.             Even the learned Single

Judge while hearing Crl.O.P. No. 8960 of 2017 and

Crl.O.P. No. 12060 of 2017 had made observation that

in    event    appropriate    infrastructure       and    facilities

are not provided to Idol Wing, the Court may direct

for investigation to be carried out by CBI.
17. High Court, exercising jurisdiction under
Article

226
cannot take over the power of Superintendent of

Police    conferred     on     the     State     Government      under
Sections 3
and
4
of the Police Act, 1861.                 It was not

within the scope of
Article 226
so as to direct by

the High Court to take over a full-fledged wing of

the Executive (Idol Wing-CID) from the control of the

Executive.       The direction to appoint respondent NO.2

as Special Officer to head the Idol Wing-CID has been

passed without affording an opportunity to the State.

The    State    has   already    appointed       one     Abhay   Kumar

Singh,    by    Government      Order    dated     29.11.2018,      as

Additional      Director     General    of     Police,    Idol   Wing,

CID, Chennai, which order has been erroneously held
17
by the High Court to be redundant.                 When respondent

No.2   was going     to be       superannuated on         30.11.2018,

State was fully justified in making an arrangement to

head the Idol Wing of the CID.             The directions issued

by the High Court, as noticed in paragraph No.45 of

the    judgment    are     all    beyond     the       scope    of   the

jurisdiction      of the    High Court       under
Article           226.
Although, this Court as well as the High Courts in

several    judgments       has    directed       for     carrying      on

investigations by retired personnel but in none of

the cases, the question was decided as to whether it

is competent on behalf of the High Court to direct

for carrying out investigation by retired personnel.

The power given to this Court to pass orders under
Article 142
are not available to the High Court under
Article   226.
The    High       Court,     while    exercising

jurisdiction       under
Article       226
has        virtually

exercised the jurisdiction given to this Court under
Article 142
of the Constitution.                The respondent No.2

has provided the details of cases so as to transfer

it to the CBI as per its request.
18
18. Shri       Mukul       Rohatgi,           learned    senior     counsel

appearing for the Director General of Police submits

that impugned judgment of the High Court is beyond

the scope of
Article 226.
It is submitted that High

Court     erred       in     directing           for    continuation      of

respondent      No.2       even    after        superannuation.       There

have been several complaints against respondent No.2

relating to his functioning and respondent NO.2 was

not a person who could have been allowed to head the

Idol    Wing    even       after    his        superannuation.       It   is

submitted that in the writ petitions, respondent No.2

has     filed       certain         self-serving          documents       on

27.11.2018 to which no opportunity was there to the

appellants to rebut the claim of respondent No.2 that

he has done much good work pertaining to theft and

recovery       of   Idols.        Shri        Rohtagi   has   referred    to

extradition of one person, namely, Subhash Chandra

Kapoor,       who   was     extradited           from   Germany.    It    is

submitted that several cases of further extradition

are    not being       processed on             account of    unwarranted

delay with regard to case of Subhash Chandra Kapoor.

It is submitted that due to inaction on the part of

the    Idol    Wing    with       regard        prosecution    of   Subhash
19
Chandra    Kapoor,           other        cases    of     other   accused        for

extradition          are     not     being      even     processed.         It   is

submitted that impugned judgment of the High Court

has created a shield to respondent No.2 so that he is

not answerable to anyone.                      It is submitted that there

was no challenge to the order dated 29.11.2018 by

which the Additional Director General of Police was

posted in the Idol Wing to head it.                         The order having

not been challenged or set aside, the respondent No.2

cannot     be        allowed         to   head     the     Idol     Wing,    when

Additional Director General is a superior Officer.

It is submitted by Shri Rohtagi that PIL petitioner –

Elephant    G.        Rajendran           even    before     30.11.2018          has

written    to the           Government that             respondent No.2           be

allowed to continue to head the Idol Wing.                            There is

no    bonafide              in       filing       the      Public      Interest

Litigations. PIL petitioner and respondent No.2 are

hands in gloves.
19. Learned counsel appearing for the applicant in

I.A. No. 24724 of 2019 submits that respondent No.2

has   constantly             tried        to     malign     and   defame         the

officers        of     HR        &   CE    Department.       Several        senior
20
officers of HR & CE Department were arrested without

any cogent grounds.            The Commissioner in its letter

dated 31.07.2018 written to the Director General of

Police has highlighted several misdeeds of the Idol

Wing.    The learned counsel for the applicant submits

that    officers    of    HR    &    CE     Department     have    been

unnecessarily castigated by the Idol Wing.                        it is

submitted that applicant be permitted to intervene in

the matter so that this Court may be apprised of the

correct facts.
20. Shri    Mohan    Parasaran,           learned      senior   counsel

appearing    for    the    respondent           No.9    submits    that

respondent No.9 is neither appropriate nor necessary

party, who has been unnecessarily impleaded in the

writ petition before the High Court. It is submitted

that respondent No.9 is a respected person and an

incorrect    allegation        has       been   made    against    him.

Respondent No.9 is respectable person of the Society,

who has unnecessarily been dragged.
21. Shri R.Basant, learned senior counsel appearing

for Elephant G. Rajendran, PIL petitioner, refuting

the submission of learned Attorney General submits
21
that judgment of the High Court is well within the

scope and ambit of
Article 226.
Shri Basant submits

that submission raised questioning the bonafide of

PIL   petitioner       is    an    afterthought     and     has    no

substance.        The PIL petitioner has done commendable

public work. Elephant G. Rajendran had filed a PIL

petition in the year 2001 with regard to an injured

Elephant     in    which    High    Court   permitted      the    PIL

petitioner to bring doctors from foreign countries.

The   PIL    petitioner      brought     doctors    from    foreign

countries and got the Elephant cured.              Several Public

Interest Litigations have been filed by Elephant G.

Rajendran    in public       interest.      It is    specifically

noted by the High Court in the impugned judgment that

Additional     Advocate      General    himself    has     submitted

that there are no question on the bonafide of the

petitioner.        It is submitted that various complaints

in respect of respondent No.2, which are brought on

the   record        are     complaints,     which     have        been

deliberately obtained after the judgment of the High

Court.      Most    of the    complaints against         respondent

No.2 have been obtained by obliging Police Officials

on one day, i.e., on 18.12.2018, which is clear from
22
the complaints brought on the record alongwith I.A.

No. 10291 of 2018.
22. It is submitted by Shri Basant that High Court

has    jurisdiction    under
Article    226
to    direct        for

constituting a Special Investigation Team headed by

respondent No.2.        He submits that conferring of the

police power on non-police officer is not an anathema

to     law.      Extraordinary       situation         calls         for

extraordinary remedy.          The jurisdiction of the High

Court under
Article 226
is wide and plenary. There

have been several orders of different High Courts as

well as this Court where Special Investigation Team

were    constituted     consisting   of    retired         personnel.

The transfer of the investigation of the Idol cases

before the Idol Wing to the CBI was nothing but a

ruse to remove respondent No.2 from not carrying out

the    investigation.      Several    officers        of    HR   &   CE

Department     were     involved     and    were      accused         in

different First Information Reports. The Government

has acted on to save officers of HR & CE Department.

Shri Basant submits that the present is not a case

where   High   Court    exercised    any   jurisdiction          under
23
Article 142
of the Constitution of India as contended

by    the    appellant.        He    further       submits         that    the

present is a case where this Court need not exercise

its jurisdiction under
Article 136.
The High Court

having exercised jurisdiction well within its powers,

there is no extraordinary situation, where this Court

may grant special leave in the present case.                              High

Court has exercised its jurisdiction to ensure fair

and    proper   investigation            and    prosecution         in    Idol

theft cases.       Replying to lapses as alleged on the

part    of    respondent    No.2         with     regard      to    Subhash

Chandra      Kapoor,   it   is      submitted         that    prosecution

agency to prosecute cases is State.                          It is State,

which is prosecuting extradited accused Shri Subhash

Chandra Kapoor and no blame can be put on respondent

No.2 in the above regard.
23. Learned      counsel    appearing           for    the    second       PIL

petitioner, i.e., Traffic Dr. K.R. Ramaswamy submits

that free and fair trial is fundamental right.                              He

submits that when the Director General of Police can

be given 02 years extension in the year 2017, why

such    extension      could     not       have       been    granted       to
24
respondent No.2.           Respondent No.2 was appointed as

Special Officer in Idol Wing in 2012 and since then

he has been efficiently carrying on his duties.                           It

is    submitted     that     order    of     the    High   Court      dated

21.07.2017 passed in Crl.O.P. No. 8960 of 2017 and

Crl.O.P.      No.    12060    of     2017,      respondent      No.2     was

directed to continue as head of the Idol Wing.                          The

Director      General    of   Police        aggrieved      by   the     said

order has filed a special leave petition before this

Court, which was dismissed on 01.09.2017.
24. It is submitted that it is on account of the

letter dated 31.07.2018 written by the Commissioner,

HR & CE Department to the Director General of Police

that    hurriedly decision           was taken       to transfer        the

cases    to   CBI.      The    letter        of    Commissioner       dated

31.07.2018 and within 24 hours, a decision was taken

by the State Government to transfer the cases to the

CBI    in   hurried     manner.           The   Commissioner       in   his

letter dated 31.07.2018 made allegations against Idol

Wing, on which allegations, without there being any

investigation or inquiry, the decision was taken to

transfer the cases to CBI, which was done with intent
25
to take away the investigation from respondent No.2,

who   was    unearthing       several          unholy     cases      and       was

taking      action    against          the     officers    of       HR    &     CE

Department and some police officers.                      The decision of

the State to transfer it to CBI was not bonafide.                              It

is further submitted that CBI itself in its letter

dated    20.09.2018, which              was filed       before the            High

Court,      submitted      that        CBI     will    extend       its       full

cooperation and support in the matters of extradition

of    accused,       issue        of     Red     Corner        Notices        and

coordinating with Interpol and it shall extend all

its      cooperation         to         SIT,     which         is        already

investigating        the     Idol        theft        cases.        CBI       has

expressed its unwillingness to take up large number

of Idol theft cases under its fold.                       As regards not

challenging G.O. dated 29.11.2018, it is pointed out

that it was produced on the eve of the judgment and

there was time to challenge it.
25. Learned      Attorney              General    in      his       rejoinder

submission contends that High Court cannot pass any

order in violation of law.                   It is submitted that the

officers of Indian Police Services are governed by
26
the
All India Services Act, 1951
and the Rules made

thereunder.         The    State        has    no     power       to        grant

extension     of    service     of      IPS     Officers.              It      is

submitted that under the All India Services (Death-

cum-Retirement Benefits) Rules, 1958, only few of the

incumbents of the posts can be given extension in

services by the Central Government, which rule does

not    include     extension       for        Inspector       General          of

Police, the post held by respondent No.2.                              Learned

Attorney General submits that even though there was

O.M.    dated      18.05.1977       issued          for    extension/re-

employment of Central Government servants beyond the

age of superannuation, it is now no longer available

in view of issuance of O.M. dated 09.12.2002.                               After

the O.M. dated 09.12.2002, no re-employment can be

granted beyond the age of superannuation of 60 years.

Learned     Attorney      General       again       referring          to     the

various   directions       in   the      impugned         order    contends

that the directions are contrary to the provisions of
Code of Criminal Procedure
and fall outside the law.

He submits that each and every direction given in the

impugned judgment is contrary to some or other law.
27
26. We have considered the submissions of the learned

counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
27. Following are the main issues, which arise for

consideration in the present appeals:-
(i)    Whether     the       State      of    Tamil        Nadu    was

           justified     in      transferring        all    the       under

           investigation cases being investigated by

           the Special Team constituted for Idol theft

           cases   and     all    such      future      cases     to   the

           Central Bureau of Investigation vide its

           G.O. dated 01.08.2018?
(ii)   Whether the impugned judgment of the High

           Court     dated        30.11.2018            quashing        the

           Government        Order       dated       01.08.2018            is

           sustainable?
(iii) Whether    the      High    Court,       in     exercise         of

           jurisdiction       under
Article         226
of     the

           Constitution of India can appoint a police

           officer after his superannuation to head a

           Special     Investigation             Team    (S.I.T.)          to

           carry     out         investigations            and        other

           functions,      which      can    be    exercised          by    a
28
police officer under the
Code of Criminal

           Procedure
?
(iv)   Whether the impugned judgment of the High

           Court dated 30.11.2018 directing respondent

           No.2 to continue to head the Idol Wing of

           C.I.D.      after        his     superannuation       on

           30.11.2018 is sustainable?
(v)    Whether the 10 directions issued by the

           High     Court   in      Paragraph    No.45    of    the

           impugned judgment are contrary to law and

           are unsustainable being beyond the scope of
Article 226
of the Constitution of India?
(vi)   Whether the High Court could have declared

           the     Government       Order    dated     29.11.2018

           appointing Thiru. Abhay Kumar Singh, IPS,

           Additional Director General of Police, Idol

           Wing – C.I.D., Chennai as redundant without

           there    being   any      challenge    to     the   said

           Government Order before the High Court in

           the Writ Petitions, in question?
Issue Nos. 1 and 2
28. Both the above issues being inter-connected are
29
being    taken     together.     Few     background          facts    before

issuance of Government order dated 01.08.2018 need to

be noted. The Idol Wing of the Criminal Investigation

Department(CID) is a special feature pertaining to

State    of     Tamil   Nadu.    The     State    of       Tamil     Nadu   is

blessed with most ancient temples in the country. As

noted above under the
Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and

Charitable       Endowments     Act,     1959
there       are    various

authorities       to    ensure      proper       administration             and

governance        of    Hindu       religious          and        charitable

endowments Tamil Nadu. The HR & CE Department has

obligation       and    responsibilities              of     managing       and

maintaining temples' properties including the Idols.

There    being     large    number       of   cases         pertaining       to

theft, missing and misappropriation of Idols valuing

in    several     crores,     the    State       of    Tamil       Nadu     had

constituted       the Idol      Wing by       the Government            Order

issued in the year 1983. The Madras High Court while

deciding Criminal O.P. Nos.8690 and 12060 of 2017 in

its     order     dated     21.07.2017        has          made    following

observation in paragraph 12:
“12. The HR & CE department is the
        custodian of most of the temples and the
30
properties including the idols belonging to
       them. It is their primary duty to protect
       the temples and safeguard the valuable
       idols/antiques, which, this Court with
       great    anguish,   expresses     that    the
       department   has  failed   to   do.    It  is
       startling to find that the HR & CE
       department with all its income from major
       temples, has not been able to maintain
       historical temples and safeguard the Idols,
       which in market, have antique value based
       on their age. Some temples in the State
       have also been recognised by the UNESCO as
       heritage sites. Many temples constructed at
       least 1500 years ago or much before the
       temples recognised by UNESCO, are in ruins.
       Even the daily rituals are not performed.
       Some temples remain closed throughout the
       day with no one to even lighten the lamps.
       Neither the Archaeology Department nor the
       HR & CE Department has shown interest to
       identify and protect them. This has also
       come to the advantage of the miscreants,
       who have laid their hands on the Idols.”
29. The      above      Criminal      O.P.    were     filed       for

transferring all investigations regarding theft of 6

Idols from the Commissioner, HR & CE, Nungambakkam

District, Chennai to Additional Director General of

Police,   Economic       Offences     Wing,   CID,   Chennai.      The

High    Court    while    deciding      Criminal     O.Ps     in   its

judgment dated 21.07.2017 has observed that various

complaints      given    to   Joint     Commissioner        were   not

addressed. In paragraph 16 the High Court made the

following observation:
31
“16. In the cases on hand, the erring
      officials have had a free hand in handling
      the idols as if it was their private
      property. It is clear from the documents
      produced by the petitioner that the various
      complaints    of     the    petitioner   in
      Crl.O.P.No.8690/2017     have    not   been
      addressed. Curiously, there is no denial
      about the existence of the tunnel and
      stocking the PWD guest house. Despite the
      fact that the 6th respondent found that the
      idols were missing, no complaint has been
      lodged till date. It appears that the ball
      is passed on from one office to another, to
      protect the officials. The learned counsel
      for the petitioner has sought for a
      transfer of the investigation from the 6th
      respondent to the Idol Wing, CID, Chennai.
      However, considering the nature of the
      offence that 6 Idols under the custody of
      the department has gone missing, not only
      does the matter require investigation by
      the idol wing, CID, but also departmental
      action must be initiated against the
      relevant officials. This Court is also not
      in consonance with the reply given by the
      Deputy Superintendent of Police of Idol
      wing that a complaint should only be lodged
      with the local police station as per
Section 154
Cr.P.C.”
30. The    High   Court   observed    that    considering    the

nature of the offences, 6 Idols under the custody of

the Department had gone missing, not only the matter

required    investigation     by     the     Idol    Wing,   CID

departmental action was also required to be taken by

the   relevant      officials.       While     the     Criminal
32
O.P.Nos.8690 and 12060 of 2017 were heard, it was

brought    to    the   notice     of    the    High   Court    that

respondent No.2 who was heading Idol Wing has been

transferred. The High Court noticed that respondent

No.2     has    been   supervising       the    cases    and    has

efficiently traced and recovered several Idols worth

several crores, hence, for the sake of continuity and

speedy    completion   of   the      investigation,     respondent

No.2     must    continue   despite       the    work    assigned

presently. In paragraph 19 following observation has

been made:
“19. After much dejection from this Court as
       to why no action has been taken, an order of
       suspension dated 29.06.2017 was passed and a
       copy of the same was produced to the Court on
       30.06.2017, while at the same time, it was
       brought to the knowledge of this Court that
       Mr.A.G.Ponn Manickavel, Inspector General of
       Police, Idol Wing was transferred. Though it
       could be claimed as a routine transfer, this
       Court feels, it is otherwise. Also, the
       officer has been supervising the cases and has
       efficiently traced and recovered several Idols
       worth several crores. It is not that the
       succeeding officer is less efficient, but
       considering that Mr.A.G.Ponn Manickavel and
       his team have extensively travelled throughout
       the country and are aware of the modus
       operandii of the culpritis. For the sake of
       continuity,    speedy   completion    of   the
       investigation and completion of the pending
       cases, this Court is of the view that
       Mr.A.G.Ponn Manickavel, Inspector General of
       Police and his team must continue despite the
33
work assigned presently.”
31. As    noted    above    against    the   order   of     the     High

Court    dated    21.07.2017,     the    Director         General     of

Police filed an SLP in this Court which was disposed

of on 01.09.2017 but the order directing respondent

No.2 to be continued as head of the Idol Wing was not

interfered       with      by   this     Court.      Consequently,

respondent No.2 was continuing to head the Idol Wing.
It is further to be noted that the High Court vide

its order dated 21.07.2017 has specifically directed

that     departmental      proceedings       must    be     initiated

against the officials of the HR and CE Department.

FIRs were registered in which Officers of HR & CE

Department       were   also    made     accused     and      several

officers    were arrested.       It was      on 31.07.2018          that

D.O. letter was written by Commissioner, HR & CE to

Director General of Police. The letter begins with

the words:
“This is to inform you of the increasing
        ways in which the Idol Wing of the Police
        is harassing officials of this Department
        threatening them with filing of FIRs in
        case they do not agree to carry out its
        wishes   filing FIRs   on  the  basis  of
34
complaints   by   Public   without   even   a
       preliminary enquiry, refusing to file FIR
       on   the   basis   of   complaints   by   the
       Department/Temple authorities, undermining
       the authority of the temple/ Department
       authorities   including   the   Commissioner,
       humiliating and hurting the reputation of
       officials through public investigation of
       cases and their depiction in the social and
       conventional media and interfering in the
       legitimate functioning of this Department.”
32. In the letter dated 31.07.2018 the Commissioner

pointed out various complaints of his officers which

were   received          by       him   in      writing    and    orally.       The

Commissioner        stated          that     HR    and    CE    Department       is

facing      a     crisis.         The    Commissioner           wrote     to    the

Director General to ensure a fair and confidential

investigation and bring the culprits to book, without

damaging the reputation of honest officials and the

Department.         By        a     letter        of     31.07.2018        itself

Additional          Director            General          of      Police        made

recommendation to the Director General of Police to

transfer         all      cases         under          investigation           being

investigated by the Special Team constituted for the

Idol Theft cases to the CBI. The Director General on

the    next        day        i.e.      01.08.2018            recommended       for

transferring the cases to the CBI, on the same day

the    GO       dated    01.08.2018             was    issued.     The     entire
35
process       for    transferring       cases     to    the     CBI    was

completed within one day on complaints submitted by

the Commissioner. We have already noted that the High

Court order dated 21.07.2018 has directed for holding

departmental inquiry against certain officers of HR &

CE. It is already noticed that FIRs were registered

against the officers of the HR & CE Department and

other accused. Thus, it was known fact that there

were allegations and FIRs against the few officers

and complaints submitted by the Commissioner against

the Idol Wing of the Police ought not to have been

accepted outrightly without conducting any enquiry.
Even if there was some truth in the complaints made

by    the   Commissioner,     the       same   ought    to     have   been

enquired and informed decision ought to be taken by

the Government. The Idol Wing had been carrying out

its    work    for    the   last    more       than    three    decades,

several Idols were recovered and cases launched and

prosecutions were accomplished. On a single letter of

the Commissioner suddenly no opinion could have been

formed that Idol Wing of the Department is not doing

its job. The Higher Police authorities and State was

fully competent to take action against any officer of
36
the   Idol     Wing,   if   any    excess     or    misdeeds    were

reported against any officer of the Idol Wing. The

letter of the Commissioner dated 31.07.2018 does not

refer to any written complaint by HR & CE Department

to Police, higher authorities or the Government in

the above regard. We, thus, are of the view that the

decision to transfer the cases to CBI was hurriedly

taken within one day on a complaint received by the

Commissioner     without    making      any   inquiry     and     the

decision of the Government cannot be said to be an

informed decision.
33. Another aspect of the matter in the above context

needs to be noted. That the transfer was made of all

the under investigation cases being investigated by

the Special Team constituted for Idol Theft cases and

all such future cases to the CBI. There were more

than 100 cases under investigation with the Idol Wing

at the relevant time. In the above context, it is

relevant to notice the letter dated 19/20.09.2018 of

the Central Bureau of Investigation which was brought

before   the    High   Court      by   memo   and    is   filed    as

Annexure P/18 to the appeal which is to the following
37
effect:
“Sub: Writ Petition NO.20392/2018 filed by
       Shri Elephant G.Rajendran – reg.
Please refer to the subject cited above.
In this connection, it is requested that
     when the matter comes up for hearing, it
     may be stated that Considering the large
     number of Idol Theft Cases pending in
     various stages and also the future idol
     theft   cases   likely   to   come   up,  and
     considering   the     severe    shortage   of
     manpower,   CBI    will   extend   its   full
     cooperation and support in the matters of
     Extradition of accused, issue of Red Corner
     Notices and coordinating with Interpol,
     etc., to the Special Investigation Team,
     which is already investigating the Idol
     Theft Cases.
HoB, CBI, SCB, Chennai.”
34. The CBI by its communication dated 20.09.2018 in

reference to subject matter in the writ petition has

expressed   its   opinion   that   considering   the   large

number of Idol Theft Cases pending in various stages

and also the future Idol Theft Cases likely to come

up, and considering the severe shortage of manpower,

CBI will extend its full cooperation and support in

the matters of Extradition of accused, issue of Red

Corner Notices and coordinating with Interpol, etc.,

to the Special Investigation Team, which is already
38
investigating the Idol Theft Cases. The said letter

is    politely        expressing     inability        of   the   CBI     to

undertake such large number of cases.
35. The High Court in paragraph 32 of the impugned

judgment has given detail of reasons for quashing the

order dated 01.08.2018. It is relevant to notice that

the   High      Court    in    its   order    dated    21.07.2017      has

already directed to constitute a SIT of the Officers

of the Idol Wing to carry on the investigation and

follow     up    pending       trial.     The    compliance      of     the

aforesaid order was under consideration before the

Court.     The        Additional      Chief      Secretary       to     the

Government,       after       receiving   letter      from   Additional

Director     General      of    Police,      wrote    a    letter     dated

01.08.2018       to     the    Additional       Advocate     General     in

which following request was made:
“9. I am therefore, to request you to
      appraise the Hon’ble High Court of Madras
      about the decision of the Government when
      the above cases are taken up for hearing
      and whether any orders from the Court are
      required.”
36. The Advocate General also brought to the notice

of the Bench of the letter dated 01.08.2018 and wrote
39
back     to   the   Additional         Chief   Secretary      to    the

Government that Division Bench of the High Court has

observed that communication, decisions or orders be

placed before the Court in the next hearing to be

held on 08.08.2018. When the matters pertaining to

Idol Thefts were already under investigation by SIT

constituted under the order of the High Court, it was

appropriate that the State Government ought to have

apprised      the   Court     before    issuing      any    Government

order for transferring the cases. In any view of the

matter looking to the large number of cases of Idol

Thefts cases and cases to come in future regarding

Idol      Thefts,      the     CBI       was    not        appropriate

investigating agency to be requested by the State.
The    CBI    itself    has     expressed      its    inability      to

undertake such huge exercise, the High Court did not

commit    any error     in quashing        the Government          order

dated 01.08.2018.
Issue No.3 and 4
37. The submission which has been much pressed by the

learned Attorney General before us is the lack of the

jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 226
to
40
direct for appointment of retired Police Officer to

head    a    SIT    after       his    superannuation.          Three-fold

submissions have been made by the learned Attorney

General in the above regard. Firstly, he High Court

exercising jurisdiction under
Article 226
cannot take

over   the     power      of    the     Superintendent          of   Police

conferred on the State Government under
Sections 3
and
4
of the Police Act, 1861. Secondly, Under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, it is the Police Officer

who    is    entitled      to       carry     investigation,         arrest,

submit charge sheet and do all other acts as a Police

Officer.       Thirdly,         the         Respondent        No.2     after

superannuation no longer continued as Police Officer

and    could        not     have       exercised        any     power     or

jurisdiction as conferred on Police officer under the

Cr.P.C.
38. What is the ambit and scope of powers of the

constitutional        courts        exercising         the    jurisdiction

under
Article 226
needs to be looked into. The High

Courts in India were created by Indian High Courts

Act,   1861.       Sections     9     and    10   of   the    Indian    High

Courts Act, 1861 provided for jurisdiction and power
41
of the High Court.
Section 106
of the Government of

India Act, 1915 and
Section 223
of the Government of

India    Act,   1935   provided          for    jurisdiction          of   the

existing High Courts.
Article 226
of the Constitution

of India confers to the High Courts vide powers in

the matter of issuing writs which they never possess

before.
Article 226
of the Constitution is couched in

very wide words, power given to the High Court are

both plenary and inherent. The power under
Article

226
is not confined only to issue specified writs but

power     conferred    to    the     High        Court     is    to    issue

directions, orders or writs including writs in the

nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo

warranto     and    certiorari           or     any   of     the      rights

conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.
39. The     scope   and     ambit    of
Article     226
came      for

consideration before this Court in
Dwaraka Nath vs.

Income-tax Officer
, AIR 1966 SC 81.                   Justice K. Subba

Rao speaking for the Court held:
“(4)………This   article     is    couched   in
        comprehensive phraseology and it ex facie
        confers a wide power on the High Courts to
        reach injustice wherever it is found. The
        Constitution   designedly    used   a   wide
42
language in describing the nature of the
     power, the purpose for which and the person
     or authority against whom it can be
     exercised. It can issue writs in the nature
     of prerogative writs as understood in
     England; but the scope of those writs also
     is widened by the use of the expression
     “nature”, for the said expression does not
     equate the writs that can be issued in
     India with those in England, but only draws
     an analogy from them. That apart, High
     Courts can also issue directions, orders or
     writs other than the prerogative writs. It
     enables the High Courts to mould the
     reliefs   to   meet     the   peculiar   and
     complicated requirements of this country.
     Any attempt to equate the scope of the
     power of the High Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution with that of the
     English Courts to issue prerogative writs
     is to introduce the unnecessary procedural
     restrictions grown over the years in a
     comparatively small country like England
     with a unitary form of government to a vast
     country like India functioning under a
     federal structure. Such a construction
     defeats   the   purpose    of  the   article
     itself……”
40. Justice Krishna Iyer speaking for this Court in
Rohtas    Industries      Ltd.    And    another    vs.   Rohtas

Industries Staff Union and others
, (1976) 2 SCC 82,

held that the extended power of the High Court under
Article   226
is   as   wide    as    the   amplitude   of   the

language used. In paragraph 9 following was held:
43
“9. The expansive and extraordinary power
      of the High Courts under
Article 226
is as
      wide as the amplitude of the language used
      indicates and so can affect any person —
      even   a    private    individual    —   and   be
      available for any (other) purpose — even
      one for which another remedy may exist. The
      amendment to
Article 226
in 1963 inserting
Article 226 (1-A)
reiterates the targets of
      the writ power as inclusive of any person
      by   the    expressive     reference    to   ‘the
      residence of such person’. But it is one
      thing to affirm the jurisdiction, another
      to authorise its free exercise like a bull
      in a china shop. This Court has spelt out
      wise and clear restraints on the use of
      this extraordinary remedy and High Courts
      will    not    go   beyond     those    wholesome
      inhibitions except where the monstrosity of
      the    situation      or    other    exceptional
      circumstances     cry    for   timely    judicial
      interdict or mandate. The mentor of law is
      justice and a potent drug should be
      judiciously     administered.      Speaking    in
      critical      retrospect      and      portentous
      prospect, the writ power has, by and large,
      been the people’s sentinel on the qui vive
      and to cut back on or liquidate that power
      may cast a peril to human rights……”
41. Again,      this     Court    in
Air    India       Statutory

Corporation and others vs. United Labour Union and

others
,     (1997)   9   SCC   377,    held    that   the   Founding

fathers placed no limitation or fetters under
Article

226
of     the      Constitution      except       self-imposed

limitations. This Court held that ‘The arm of the
44
Court is long enough to reach injustice wherever it

is    found’.     In    paragraph      59     following       has    been

observed:
“59.   The   Founding  Fathers  placed   no
      limitation or fetters on the power of the
      High Court under
Article 226
of the
      Constitution       except      self-imposed
      limitations. The arm of the Court is long
      enough to reach injustice wherever it is
      found. The Court as sentinel on the qui
      vive is to mete out justice in given
      facts……”
42. The above authorities of this Court clearly lay

down that power given to the High Court under
Article

226
is   power   of    very   vide    nature        which   does   not

contain any fetter except self-imposed restrictions.
It    is   well    settled      that    the     High     Court      while

exercising jurisdiction under
Article 226
shall not

issue any direction which is contrary to law.
43. The challenge raised before us by the learned

Attorney    General      is   that     after    superannuation         of

Police Officer he cannot be entrusted the power of

investigation      or   other    powers       under
Cr.P.C
.      which

entrustment runs contrary to the statutory scheme and

cannot be held to be available under
Article 226.
We
45
may notice few decisions of the High Courts and this

Court    which       may   be   relevant      for   the     issue   under

consideration.
44. A three-Judge Bench of this Court on monitoring

of    criminal       investigation      has    laid   down     that    in

appropriate cases this Court can monitor the Criminal

Investigation especially when persons occupying high

position in society are accused. This Court in
Vineet

Narain and others vs. Union of India and another
,

(1998) 1 SCC 226, held that Govt. Agencies including

CBI     had    not    carried     out    their      public     duty    to

investigate the offences disclosed; this Court would

monitor       the    investigations.       This     Court    laid     down

following in paragraphs 8 and 9:
“8. The sum and substance of these orders
        is that the CBI and other governmental
        agencies had not carried out their public
        duty to investigate the offences disclosed;
        that none stands above the law so that an
        alleged offence by him is not required to
        be investigated; that we would monitor the
        investigations, in the sense that we would
        do what we permissibly could to see that
        the investigations progressed while yet
        ensuring that we did not direct or channel
        those investigations or in any other manner
        prejudice the right of those who might be
        accused to a full and fair trial. We made
46
it clear that the task of the monitoring
court would end the moment a charge-sheet
was filed in respect of a particular
investigation    and   that    the   ordinary
processes of the law would then take over.
Having regard to the direction in which the
investigations were leading, we found it
necessary to direct the CBI not to report
the progress of the investigations to the
person occupying the highest office in the
political executive; this was done to
eliminate any impression of bias or lack of
fairness or objectivity and to maintain the
credibility   of   the   investigations.   In
short,   the   procedure   adopted   was   of
“continuing mandamus”.
9. Even after this matter was brought to
the Court complaining of the inertia of CBI
and the other agencies to investigate into
the   offences    because   of   the   alleged
involvement of several persons holding high
offices in the executive, for quite some
time the disinclination of the agencies to
proceed    with    the    investigation    was
apparent. The accusation, if true, revealed
a nexus between high-ranking politicians
and bureaucrats who were alleged to have
been funded by a source linked with the
source funding the terrorists. In view of
the funding also through foreign currency,
some undesirable foreign elements appeared
to be connected. This revealed a grave
situation posing a serious threat even to
the unity and integrity of the nation. The
serious threat posed to the Indian polity
could not be underscored. The obvious need
for an expeditious and thorough probe which
had already been delayed for several years
could   not    but   be    countenanced.   The
continuing inertia of the agencies to even
commence a proper investigation could not
47
be tolerated any longer. In view of the
      persistence of that situation, it became
      necessary as the proceedings progressed to
      make some orders which would activate the
      CBI and the other agencies to at least
      commence a fruitful investigation. Merely
      issuance   of  a   mandamus  directing  the
      agencies to perform their task would be
      futile and, therefore, it was decided to
      issue directions from time to time and keep
      the matter pending requiring the agencies
      to report the progress of investigation so
      that monitoring by the court could ensure
      continuance of the investigation. It was,
      therefore, decided to direct the CBI and
      other    agencies     to    complete    the
      investigation expeditiously, keeping the
      court informed from time to time of the
      progress of the investigation so that the
      court retained seisin of the matter till
      the investigation was completed and the
      charge-sheets were filed in the competent
      court for being dealt with, thereafter, in
      accordance with law.”
45. When the Government Agencies failed in unearthing

offences     of   magnitude   the    doors   of   constitutional

courts have been knocked by citizens to come to their

rescue. One of the tools of this Court to advance

justice and fulfil the constitutional objectives is

recognizing a special category of litigation, namely,

PIL. Durga Das Basu in Commentary on the Constitution

of   India   Vol.6   8th   Edition   2010    while   delineating

scope and object of such litigation states:
48
“1. The grievance in a public interest
     action is about the content and conduct of
     Government   action  in   relation  to   the
     constitutional   or  statutory   rights   of
     segments   of   society   and   in   certain
     circumstances the conduct of Government
     policy. The relief to be granted looks to
     the future and is, generally, corrective
     rather than compensatory which, sometimes,
     it also is. The Court has a more dynamic
     and positive role. It often does seek the
     assistance of expert panels, commissioners,
     advisory committees etc. The relief implies
     affirmative action. The remedy is both
     imposed, negotiated or quasi-negotiated.”
46. A     Constitution    Bench     of    this   Court    speaking

through Bhagwati, CJ in
M.C. Mehta and another vs.

Union of India and others
, 1987 (1) SCC 395, while

considering the nature of PIL and power under
Article

32
held that under
Article 32
this Court is free to

devise    any    procedure   appropriate         for     particular

purpose    of   the   proceeding.    In   paragraphs      6   and   7

following was stated:
“6. So far as the power of the court under
Article 32
to gather relevant material
     bearing on the issues arising in this kind
     of litigation, which we may for the sake of
     convenience call social action litigation,
     and to appoint Commissions for this purpose
     is concerned, we endorse what one of us,
     namely, Bhagwati, J. as he then was, has
     said in his judgment in Bandhua Mukti
     Morcha case. We need not repeat what has
49
been stated in that judgment. It has our
full approval.
7. We are also of the view that this Court
under
Article 32(1)
is free to devise any
procedure appropriate for the particular
purpose    of    the    proceeding,     namely,
enforcement of a fundamental right and
under
Article 32(2)
the court has the
implicit power to issue whatever direction,
order or writ is necessary in a given case,
including all incidental or ancillary power
necessary to secure enforcement of the
fundamental right. The power of the court
is not only injunctive in ambit, that is,
preventing     the    infringement      of    a
fundamental right, but it is also remedial
in scope and provides relief against a
breach of the fundamental right already
committed vide Bandhua Mukti Morcha case.
If the court were powerless to issue any
direction, order or writ in cases where a
fundamental     right    has    already    been
violated,
Article 32
would be robbed of all
its efficacy, because then the situation
would be that if a fundamental right is
threatened to be violated, the court can
inject such violation but if the violator
is quick enough to take action infringing
the fundamental right, he would escape from
the net of
Article 32.
That would, to a
large extent, emasculate the fundamental
right guaranteed under
Article 32
and
render it impotent and futile. We must,
therefore, hold that
Article 32
is not
powerless to assist a person when he finds
that   his    fundamental    right   has   been
violated. He can in that event seek
remedial assistance under
Article 32.
The
power of the court to grant such remedial
relief may include the power to award
50
compensation in appropriate cases. We are
deliberately    using     the    words   “in
appropriate cases” because we must make it
clear that it is not in every case where
there is a breach of a fundamental right
committed by the violator that compensation
would be awarded by the court in a petition
under
Article 32.
The infringement of the
fundamental right must be gross and patent,
that is, incontrovertible and ex facie
glaring and either such infringement should
be   on   a  large    scale   affecting  the
fundamental rights of a large number of
persons, or it should appear unjust or
unduly harsh or oppressive on account of
their poverty or disability or socially or
economically   disadvantaged    position  to
require the person or persons affected by
such infringement to initiate and pursue
action in the civil courts. Ordinarily, of
course, a petition under
Article 32
should
not be used as a substitute for enforcement
of the right to claim compensation for
infringement of a fundamental right through
the ordinary process of civil court. It is
only in exceptional cases of the nature
indicated by us above, that compensation
may be awarded in a petition under Article
32. This is the principle on which this
Court awarded compensation in
Rudul Shah v.
State of Bihar5
. So also, this Court
awarded compensation to Bhim Singh, whose
fundamental right to personal liberty was
grossly violated by the State of Jammu and
Kashmir6. If we make a fact analysis of the
cases where compensation has been awarded
by this Court, we will find that in all the
cases, the fact of infringement was patent
and incontrovertible, the violation was
gross and its magnitude was such as to
shock the conscience of the court and it
would have been gravely unjust to the
51
person   whose    fundamental   right   was
        violated, to require him to go to the civil
        court for claiming compensation.”


      What is said about
Article 32
of the Constitution

is also true for jurisdiction of High Courts under
Article 226.
47. This Court time and again forged and fashioned

new    designs    to   enforce    fundamental      rights     and    to

redress other grievance of the people.                   There are

several    instances      of   this     Court    and   High   Courts

issuing directions for carrying out investigation by

Special     Investigation        Team    which    consisted     even

retired officers. This Court in
Guruvayoor Devaswom

Managing    Committee and        another vs.      C.K. Rajan        and

others
, (2003) 7 SCC 546, has elaborately noticed the

scope     of     Public    Interest       Litigation      and       has

catalogued the principles evolved by this Court in

paragraph 50 of the judgment. Eleven principles have

been summarized. In sub-para (ix) this Court held:
“50.(i) XXX        XXX
(ix) The Court in special situations may
        appoint a Commission, or other bodies for
        the purpose of investigating into the
52
allegations and finding out facts. It may
        also   direct   management   of  a   public
        institution taken over by such Committee.
        (See
Bandhua Mukti Morcha, Rakesh Chandra
        Narayan   v.  State   of   Bihar
and
A.P.
        Pollution Control Board v. Prof. M.V.
        Nayudu
.)”
48. Different High Courts and this Court have passed

several       orders    constituting       Special          Investigation

Team to carry out investigations in cases where such

requirement       was    found     necessary.      Before         Division

Bench      of     Bombay        High      Court        in
Ranjitsing

Brahmajeetsing         Sharma    and     Ors.    Vs.    Kisan      Baburao

Hazare and Ors.
, 2004 (3) MhLJ 760, was a case where

SIT     was     constituted      which     consisted         of   retired

Director      General     of     Police.    Initially         order   was

passed on 04.09.2003 by consent of the parties with

regard to SIT to be headed by Mr. S.S. Puri, retired

Director General of Police. When a subsequent order

dated 24.09.2003 was passed providing that Mr. S.S.

Puri will exercise all powers exercisable by Director

General of Police, as if he is in service and the

Government Resolution was issued on 26.09.2003 to the

said effect, an application was filed for recalling

the     subsequent       direction       dated     24.09.2003.        The
53
submission was made before the Court that Mr. S.S.

Puri    being     not     in     service   and    as    a    result   of

direction issued by the Court there were two Director

Generals of Police in the State of Maharashtra which

was    contrary      to    the    provisions     of    the
All   India

Services      Act,      1951
read    with    the   Indian      Police

Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954 and I.P.S. (Fixation of

Cadre Strength) Regulations, 1955. The submission was

also   made     that      in   exercise    of    jurisdiction       under
Article    226
the        High Court       cannot overstep         limits

prescribed by statute. It was contended that order of

the Court trenches upon the statutory machinery which

has been envisaged in the
Cr.P.C
. for investigation

of offences. The Division bench of Bombay High Court

repelled the submission it held that the order of the

High    Court     does     not     supplant      the   provisions      of
Cr.P.C
. or disabled the machinery of investigation

that has been designed under the Code. The Division

Bench in paragraph 27 observed:
“27. Good governance in a civil society is
       inextricably woven with the fabric of
       ordered liberty. Enforcement of law, the
       investigation of crimes and the prosecution
       of     offenders    constitute    important
       components of a system which is guided by
       the ideals of the Rule of Law. Ideals in
54
the distant horizon they seem to be when
    the conscience of a society is aroused by
    wrongdoing which is of a systemic nature.
    The evolution of a society from market
    control to market reform is an important
    milestone in development. The dominance of
    market forces furnishes new avenues for the
    generation of wealth. On the other hand,
    the sanctity of the economic system and its
    stability can be destroyed by systemic
    franks   of   the    kind   that    contemporary
    economics have had to confront. Effective
    investigation    and    prosecution     are  the
    hallmarks of a legal system committed to
    the protection of human rights as they are
    of a legal regime that protects legitimate
    forms of economic activity. Courts must and
    do   have   a    healthy    respect     for  the
    demarcation     of     powers     between    the
    executive,    the     legislature      and   the
    judiciary. Equally, nothing can be as
    destructive of the rule of law as the lack
    of independence and impartiality of the
    investigation and prosecutorial processes.
    When systemic issues of the kind involved
    here arise before the Court, the obligation
    of the court as expounder of constitutional
    precept warrants flexible and effective
    remedies. The evolution of legal doctrine
    is not stratified in a frozen dialogue.
Courts   must    and   do    respond    to  felt
    necessities of the time ensuring that in
    the   process    they   do    not   offend   the
    constitutional distribution of powers or
    statutory        prohibitions.         Doctrinal
    immutability     should     not    stultify    a
    democratic society in its effort to find
    effective measures for unheralded wrongs.”
49. A   Full   Bench   of   the    Madras   High   Court   in   R.

Sankarasubbu vs. The Commissioner of Police, Egmore,
55
Chennai,   2013    (1)   CTC    1,    appointed   one       Mr.   R.K.

Raghavan, former Director of CBI. In this context in

paragraph 76(i) following has been stated:
“76.(i)   We   hereby   appoint  Mr.   R.K.
     Raghavan, former Director of Central Bureau
     of Investigation, as Investigating Officer
     of Special Investigation Team(SIT), to be
     assisted by Dr. M. Narayana Reddy, former
     Professor and Head of the Department of
     Forensic   Medicine,   Osmania  University,
     Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh to investigate
     this case.”
50. This   Court    in
Advocates      Association,        Bangalore

vs. Union of India and others
, (2013) 10 SCC 611, has

noticed    that    the   High        Court   of   Karnataka       has

constituted   SIT    which      was     headed    by    a    retired

Director of CBI. Paragraph 7 of the judgment is as

follows:
“7. The High Court, by order dated 16-5-
     20121, constituted a Special Investigation
     Team (SIT) headed by Dr R.K. Raghavan, a
     retired Director of CBI as Chairman and Mr
     R.K. Dutta, Director General of Police,
     CID, Bangalore as Convenor along with other
     police officials to investigate into the
     incident with reference to the complaints
     lodged by the police, advocates as well as
     media against each other and to conclude
     the same within 3 months from the date of
     the government notification. In pursuance
     of the same, the State Government issued a
     series of notifications constituting and
     reconstituting SIT for reasons of non-
56
availability       of        officers       to    be     its
       members.”



51. Although      this     Court      ultimately        entrusted       the
investigation to CBI but the fact we notice that the

High   Court     had    appointed         SIT   which   was    headed   by

retired CBI Director General. Recently this Court in
SUNITA    DEVI    AND    ANOTHER          VS.   UNION   OF     INDIA    AND

OTHERS
, (2018) 3 SCC 664, has                     appointed a SIT to

investigate a case of murder where one Shri Shri M.L.

Sharma, IPS (retired), former Special                          Director,

CBI,     was   appointed       as    Chairman      of    the    SIT.    In

paragraph 10 following was directed:
“10. Having examined the entire materials
       placed on record, we deem it proper to
       constitute a Special Investigating Team
       (SIT) to reinvestigate FIR No. 221 of 2001
       titled “State v. Manvir Singh” registered
       at   Police   Station  Pilakhua,   District
       Ghaziabad, U.P. Shri M.L. Sharma, IPS
       (retired), former Special Director, CBI, is
       appointed as the Chairman of the SIT. Shri
       M.L. Sharma is permitted to take assistance
       of two officers of his choice of CBI as its
       members. We direct the SIT to proceed as
       regards further investigation in respect of
       FIR No. 221 of 2001 and to submit its
       report within a period of three months from
       today. Needless to say that appropriate
       secretarial assistance and logistic support
       shall be made available to the SIT by the
57
Government of Uttar Pradesh. The Government
       of Uttar Pradesh is also directed to
       provide to the Chairman and the members of
       the SIT all      travelling, boarding and
       lodging expenses while discharging their
       responsibility entrusted to them.”
52. Learned counsel for the appellants relied on a

judgment    of    this   Court    in    Board    of     Control    for

Cricket in
India vs. Cricket Association of Bihar and

others
, 2014 (7) SCC 385, where suggestion to include

Mr. M.L. Sharma, retired IPS was not accepted. In his

place one Mr. B.B. Mishra, IPS of the 1983 Batch was

included.
53. The judgments as noted above indicate that the

High Courts and this Court in their several judgments

have        included retired Police Officers to be part

of SIT or to head a SIT. Learned Attorney General has

submitted     that    these     are    those    cases    where     the

appointment      of   retired    officers      was    made   but   the

Court had no occasion to consider the legality of

such appointment in exercise of jurisdiction under
Article    226
or
Article    32.
We   having     noticed    the

expansive nature of jurisdiction under
Article 226
and the exposition of law of this Court extracted
58
above,        the    jurisdiction            of    constitutional     courts

under
Article 226
and
Article 32
can be used to

forge new           methodology to achieve the constitutional

objectives. No fetter can be read in the jurisdiction

under
Article 32
or 226 as contended by the learned

Attorney General. For sufficient reason investigation

can be handed over to a person who is retired or no

longer in employment. The functions which are to be

performed       by     that       person      is     under   authority     of

Court’s       order. There            may be      varied situations       and

circumstances          where      a    former      officer   is    entrusted

with     an     investigation           or    any    other    function     to

achieve an object or purpose. When the constitutional

courts direct particular officer to carry on specific

job    that     order    cannot         be    treated   to    be   put   that

person    in        office   of       that    post   with    all   necessary

consequences. The particular object is entrusted or

only a specific job is entrusted to the officer which

he has to carry. The Court in issuing such direction

neither creates any ex-cadre post nor                          affects the

post of officer by giving any kind of                          appointment

to a post. The violation of
All India Services Act,

1951
or Rules framed thereunder cannot be read in
59
entrustment        of specific      job to           a retired       officer.
Learned Attorney General has submitted that in view

of subsequent Government Order dated 09.12.2002 which

has   been    placed     before          us    now        re-employment     of

Government servants beyond the age of superannuation

of 60 years is not permissible. He has also referred

to    the    All    India     (Death-cum-Retirement                 Benefits)

Rules,      1958    where        under        Rule        16(1)A   there   is

provision     of     giving      extension           in    service    to   the

incumbents     of the       posts of          the Cabinet          Secretary,

Defence       Secretary,          Home         Secretary,           Director,

Intelligence Bureau, Secretary, Research and Analysis

Wing and Director, Central Bureau of Investigation

for such period as it may deem proper. There cannot

be    any     quarrel       to      the        above        provision      nor

applicability of the above provision in facts of the

present case. Present is not a case where Government

has   decided      to   extend      the       services       of    respondent

No.2. It is relevant to note that the High Court

issued      direction       in     paragraph              45(1)    appointing

respondent No.2 as a Special Officer to head Idol

Wing-CID, Chennai to deal with the cases of theft of

Idols and antiques in all stages, for a period of one
60
year, after his superannuation w.e.f. 30.11.2018. The

Court further directed “the Government to pass orders

to that effect”.         The Court clearly intended that in

the    above    regard    Government        may    pass   appropriate

orders. It is open for the Government to issue orders

enabling respondent No.2 to carry on functions as per

the     direction.       Learned              Attorney        has    taken

exception to direction No.3 by which                      is directed

that    respondent     No.2    shall    draw      the   same     pay    and

benefits that were available to him at the time of

his retirement as Special Officer. On objection being

raised    to the      said direction,         learned counsel           for

respondent No.2 has fairly submitted before us that

respondent No.2 is ready to carry on and discharge

his    duties    as   per     orders    of    this      Court       without

drawing any pay and benefits as directed by the High

Court. We are of the view that the High Court instead

of issuing direction No.3 ought to have given option

to the State Government either to continue/re-employ

respondent No.2 or in alternative fix some honorarium

for    the   duties    entrusted       on    respondent       No.2.     The

State    Government      having    not       passed     any     order    in

consequence of which respondent No.2 may continue in
61
the office of Inspector General of Police, justice

would be served when the State Government is directed

to pay some honorarium during the period respondent

No.2   performed       his    duties       under    the    order    of   the

Court in addition to his pension. We, however, make

it clear that any pay and benefits which have already

been   extended to       respondent No.2                shall neither     be

recovered nor adjusted.
54. We,    thus,       conclude        that       the    High    Court    in

exercise of jurisdiction under
Article 226
can very

well direct                           respondent No.2 to head the

Special Investigation Team to carry out investigation

and    other    functions       after        attaining      the    age    of

superannuation. We, further, hold that directions of

the    High      Court        dated        30.11.2018       to     continue

respondent      No.2     in    Idol        Wing    of     CID    after   his

superannuation is sustainable.
55. Learned Attorney General as well as Shri Mukul

Rohtagi further submitted that there are allegations

against        respondent       No.2,       several      complaints      were

filed and it cannot be said that the respondent No.2
62
is the competent officer to continue as head of the

Idol Wing. It is submitted that respondent No.2 in

the writ petition has filed affidavit on 27.11.2018

with regard to which there was no opportunity given

to the appellant to file reply. Alongwith affidavit

dated 27.11.2018 several self-serving documents were

brought      on   record   by    respondent    No.2    which     were

relied by the High Court. It is, further, submitted

that   alongwith        I.A.No.180358   of     2018   as    well    as

I.A.No.30023       of    2019             details      of     various

complaints were brought on record before this Court.

On the basis of which it is clear that respondent

No.2 cannot claim to be an officer with clean records

and officer having no complaints.
56. Learned counsel appearing for the PIL refuting

the above submission submitted that before the High

Court no grievance was raised against respondent No.2

regarding his competence or complaints against him,

it is only after the orders have been passed by the

High Court on 30.11.2018 that certain complaints were

obtained against respondent No.2 which are sought to

be   filed    along     with    I.A.No.30023    of    2019.    It   is
63
submitted that complaints which have been brought on

record    are     complaints       which   were    obtained     in    the

third and fourth week of December, 2018. The High

Court    in     the   impugned      judgment      before     issuing    a

direction       to continue      respondent No.2        in the       Idol

Wing     has    thoroughly     examined         the   credential       of

respondent No.2. The High Court in paragraph 34 of

the    judgment has      noticed the        statement of       learned

Additional       Advocate      General      that      there    are     no

allegations against respondent No.2 except that he

has not submitted the report to Additional Director

General of Police. Following observation was made by

the High Court in paragraph 34:
“34.     Even earlier, during the earliest
        of hearings, when it was mentioned before
        this Court about such conduct of the Police
        Department, the learned Additional Advocate
        General fairly submitted that the only
        blemish on the part of the officer is that
        he has not submitted the reports to the
        Additional Director General of Police and
        that apart there are no allegations against
        him.”
57.    The     reasons   for   directing        respondent     No.2    to

continue       have   been   set    out    by   the   High    Court    in

paragraph Nos. 35 to 41. The High Court has taken
64
note   of    the   fact    that   the   Government   order   dated

01.08.2018 transferring the cases to CBI having been

quashed, it has become just and necessary for the

Court as the custodian of the Idols, in the role of

parens      patriae   to     exercise    its   jurisdiction     to

formulate a solution. Following has been stated in

paragraph 35:
“35. Now, considering that the Government
       order has been quashed and that the State
       is not inclined to continue the cases, the
       CBI has    categorically refused to take up
       the cases and expressed its intention to
       assist the existing team; that the Central
       Government has so far remained silent, an
       extraordinary situation has arisen, by
       which, a vacuum has been created and this
       Court has to take a timely decision to
       protect the idols and treasures of the
       temples. Hence it has become just and
       necessary for this Court as the custodian
       of the Idols, in the role of parens patriae
       to exercise its jurisdiction to formulate a
       solution to bring about a         continuity
       in the investigation and to safe guard the
       idols, which are valuable properties of
       this country. It has come to the knowledge
       of this Court that Mr.A.G.Pon Manickavel,
       I.P.S in the rank of Inspector General of
       Police is       attaining superannuation in
       the forenoon of 30.11.2018. The credibility
       of the officer is evident from the fact he
       has been fair and          impartial in his
       actions. This Court is also satisfied with
       the procedure followed by him in securing
       the accused. It was also brought to the
       knowledge   of   this  Court,    that   even
65
recently,   more   than   250  idols   were
        unearthed by him based on the information
        received from credible sources. Some idols
        were also recovered during transit. He has
        been able to keep the informants intact and
        show tremendous progress.”
58. In paragraph 36 the Court has noticed the details

of the work accomplished by Idol Wing and the Idols

recovered by the SIT headed by respondent No.2. In

paragraph 40 of the judgment, the High Court also

noticed        the        Performance        Appraisal        Report        of

respondent No.2 and it noticed that respondent was

assessed       by    28     officers      and     he    has   been      given

excellent grading by 27 officers, except one officer

who made adverse remarks which had been set aside by

the Central Administrative Tribunal. We, thus, are of

the     view    that        the   High       Court      had     after      due

examination          of     all   relevant        documents        taken     a

decision to continue respondent No.2 to head the Idol

Wing.     The       High     Court     has      referred      to     various

judgments of the High Court and this Court where work

and conduct of respondent No.2 was appreciated which

observations         were    extracted       by   the    High      Court   in

support of its conclusion.
66
59. The       statement       of    Additional           Advocate      General

noted    by    the    High     Court       in    paragraph       34    clearly

indicates that                before the High Court there were

no allegations against respondent No.2 as to come to

the conclusion that he was not a fit person to be

directed to continue in the Idol Wing. The complaints

which have been now referred to and relied by the

appellant       are     the        complaints          which     have     been

submitted      after    the        judgment       of     the    High    Court.
Alongwith I.A.No.10291 of 2018 the petitioners have

referred      to   certain      complaints         in     paragraph      6    in

tabular       chart.     The        said        chart     indicates       that

complaints are of 17, 18 and 26 December, of 2018.

They    are the       complaints which            were submitted          even

after the filing of the SLP in this Court. We are not

required to enter into correctness or otherwise of

the allegations in the complaints. The High Court in

its     direction      has     observed           that     if    there       are

materials      against respondent               No.2 the        same can      be

placed before the High Court for further direction.

On     the    strength        of     the        complaints       which       are

subsequently submitted after the judgment of the High
67
Court, we are not persuaded to accept the submission

of the appellant that respondent No.2 was not a fit

person to be allowed to head the Idol Wing after

30.11.2018.        In   so     far   as    submission      of   learned

counsel for the appellant that after filing of the

affidavit      on 27.11.2018         by the      respondent No.2    no

opportunity was given to the appellant, it is useful

to extract paragraph 34 of the judgment where High

Court       observes    “As     an    affidavit      was    filed   on

27.11.2018, again a direction in similar lives was

issued by us on 27.11.2018 to place any materials if

available before this Court. However, till date no

such materials have been placed before us.” We, thus,

are    of    the   view      that    the   High    Court    had   given

opportunity to place the materials, if any. We, thus,

are of the view that the High Court did not commit

any error in directing respondent No.2 to continue to

head    the    Idol     Wing     after     his    superannuation    on

30.11.2018.
Issue No.5
60. Now we come to the 10 directions issued by the

High Court in paragraph 45 of the judgement which
68
have been assailed by the learned Attorney General on

the ground that each and every direction is contrary

to law. We will take up each direction separately:
(1) By     direction    No.1,    respondent      No.2   was

        directed to function as Special Officer to

        head     Idol      Wing-CID,    Chennai       on    his

        superannuation on 30.11.2018. The Government

        was directed to pass orders to that effect.
We have already while considering Issue Nos.3

        and 4 held that respondent No.2 could have

        been directed to work as a Special Officer to

        head Idol Wing-CID, hence, we do not find any

        error in direction No.1.
(2) With regard to direction No.2, Special Team

        was already constituted by the earlier order

        of the High Court dated 21.07.2017 which was

        directed to be continued to which direction

        no exception can be taken.
(3) With    regard     to    direction   No.3,     it   was

        directed to respondent No.2 to draw the same

        pay and benefits that were available to him
69
at the time of his retirement for the entire

tenure of his term as Special Officer. We are

of the view that instead of such direction,

the High Court ought to have given an option

to the State Government either to pass an

order for re-employment/re-engagement or the

liberty ought to have been given to State to

fix some honorarium in addition to pension

which   would      have    been     drawn   by    respondent

No.2. During the course of hearing learned

counsel      for   respondent        No.2   has    submitted

that respondent No.2 is ready to carry on his

duty    as   entrusted         by   the   High    Court   even

without receiving any emoluments. We are of

the view that in the facts and circumstances

of the case, direction No.3 deserves to be

modified to the           effect that the State shall

fix a honorarium to be paid to respondent

No.2 in addition to pension to be drawn by

him. We further observe that in the event any

amount has already been paid to respondent

No.2 in pursuance to the direction of the
70
High Court, the same shall not be recovered

    and adjusted.
(4) By direction No.4 the High Court directed the

    Special       Officer      to    investigate           the     cases

    thoroughly and submit all the reports before

    the Court in a sealed cover to enable the

    Court to monitor the investigation. We have

    noticed that an Additional Director General

    of Police was appointed to head the Idol Wing

    by    order     dated       29.11.2018,           it     was      not

    necessary for the High Court to burden itself

    with scrutinising each and every report and

    requiring       each      and      every        report       to   be

    submitted      before      the     Court.       There    being      a

    higher     Officer        posted     in     the       Idol     Wing,

    progress       and    result       of     the     investigation

    ought    to    have     been     reported        to    Additional

    Director General of Police and the report in

    the   High     Court      was    necessary        when       certain

    directions         were    required        by     the        Special

    Officer.      We     modify      direction        No.4       to   the

    effect     that       report       of     progress        of      the
71
investigation       shall       be     submitted    to     the

    Additional Director General of Police of Idol

    Wing and report to the High Court may be

    submitted by the Special Officer only when

    any further directions are required from the

    High Court.
(5) With    regard      to    direction       No.5,    by     this

    direction the Special Officer is directed to

    continue      to   not   only    investigate       and    file

    charge sheets and prosecute in the pending

    cases but also to continue to do so in the

    cases arising in future during his tenure. No

    exception can be taken.
(6) The    direction     No.6      which    requires    CBI    and

    other agencies of Central Government shall

    continue to give appropriate support to the

    Special Officer. No exception can be taken

    since CBI itself sent letter dated 19.09.2018

    communicating its support.
(7) With regard to direction 7 serious objection

    has    been    raised     by     the    learned    Attorney
72
General. He submits that the said direction

    gives        exemption           to     respondent       No.2.     The

    respondent No.2 cannot be held above law. We

    are     of        the     view        that    no   one     including

    respondent No.2 is above the law. The High

    Court has given liberty to the State or any

    competent authority to place the materials

    before       the        Court    for     further    direction      if

    there are any materials against respondent

    No.2.    The        liberty          given    in   direction      No.7

    amply    protects           the        interest    of    the     State

    which needs no interference.
(8) Direction No.8 pertains to communications to

    concerned Departments to extend co-operation

    to the Special Team with which no exception

    can be taken.
(9) With     regard           to         direction     No.9,    learned

    Attorney General submits that the High Court

    ought not to have given any direction with

    regard to financial aspects. He submits that

    there        is     a     procedure          for   allocation      of
73
finances      for    which    passing     of   budget    is

          required. It is to be noted that Idol Wing

          has been created by the State in 1983 and for

          several decades Idol Wing has been continuing

          without provision of any separate division to

          handle the financial aspects. We are of the

          view that there was no such requirement to

          issue any direction to create such division

          to   handle    the    financial   aspects.      The     Idol

          Wing has to be run as per budget allocation

          and in any case of requirement it is always

          open   to   the     higher   Police     authorities     and

          State Government to do the needful. Direction

          No.9, thus, is to be deleted.
(10) Direction No.10 is general direction to which

          no exception can be taken.
Issue No.5 is decided accordingly.
Issue No.6
61. The   High    Court       while    delivering    judgment      on

30.11.2018 noticed the order dated 29.11.2018 which
74
was   brought    into   the   notice   of   the   Court   by

respondent No.2 with regard to which observation has

been made by the High Court in paragraphs 47 ad 48 of

the judgment.    In paragraphs 47 and 48 following has

been observed:
“47. When we are about to pronounce this
      order, the petitioner in WP.No.20392 of
      2018 produced a copy of the proceedings
      issued by the Government of Tamil Nadu in
      Police Note No.SC/19/2018 dated 29.11.2018
      indicating   that  one   Thiru.Abhay  Kumar
      Singh, IPS, Additional Director General of
      Police/Chief Vigilance Officer, Tamil Nadu
      Newsprint and Papers Limited, Karur has
      been transferred and posted as Additional
      Director General of Police, Idol Wing, CID,
      Chennai by upgrading the post of Inspector
      General of Police, Idol Wing CID.
48. We are of the view that the State all
      along, is not inclined to continue with the
      investigation of idol theft cases as the
      same   were  transferred   to  CBI  despite
      pendency of the stay order of this Court.
It is also pertinent to note that after the
      orders were reserved, they have upgraded
      the post of the Additional Director General
      of Police and appointed an officer, by
      order dated 29.11.2018, which action is
      inappropriate and it would amply prove the
      transfer of cases in a most hurried manner
      within a single day i.e., on 01.08.2018.
      Similarly, the manner in which the present
      order dated 29.11.2018 has been passed,
      will     speak    for     itself.    Hence,
      notwithstanding the order dated 29.11.2018
      passed by the Government, which has become
      redundant, Tr.A.G.Pon Manickavel shall take
      charge as Special Officer to head the Idol
      Wing as ordered by us, in order to preserve
75
the idols as well as recovery of the stolen
        idols to uphold the cultural heritage of
        this land.”
62. The above observation itself indicates that by

the   Government order          dated 29.11.2018              the post          of

Inspector     General         of     Police          was      upgraded          as

Additional        Director      General         of    Police           who     was

appointed by the State Government on 29.11.2018. The

order dated 29.11.2018 being not under challenge in

the writ petition, it was not necessary for the High

Court to make any observation in that regard. Without

there     being     any      challenge          to   the      order          dated

29.11.2018, the High Court was not right in observing

that order dated 29.11.2018 has become redundant. We,

thus,    disapprove the         observation made              by the          High

Court in paragraphs 47 and 48 that the order dated

29.11.2018        has       become        redundant.        Order            dated

29.11.2018    was       a   Government          order      which       was     not

challenged    in     the     writ    petition,          the    same          shall

remain effective that the Idol Wing shall be headed

by    the    Additional        Director          General          of     Police

appointed    on     29.11.2018.           The    Idol      Wing    shall        be

headed by the Additional Director General of Police.
76
We, however, observe that Special Officer shall take

all    appropriate      steps    along       with      his   Team    and   he

shall       submit    report     to        the   Additional         Director

General of the result of the investigations so that

appropriate further action be taken.                     Issue No.6 is,

thus, answered accordingly.
63. Before we close, we need to clarify one aspect

and notice one necessary caution with regard to what

has been said above, i.e.,
(i)     Insofar as filing of the statutory reports

              as per the procedure prescribed in the
Code

              of     Criminal    Procedure
,         necessary        reports

              have to be filed by the officer authorized

              as per
Code of Criminal Procedure
.
(ii)    There might arise exceptional cases where

              the    direction    for        appointment       of    retired

              officers may be unavoidable to achieve the

              goal    of   justice         but   the    High   Court       may

              resort to the power under
Article 226
only

              after weighing all pros and cons and after
77
exhausting all options and as a matter of

          last resort. Taking services of a retired

          police     officer           or     any      other     retired

          personnel is not to be normally resorted to

          since    in     the     State       concerned,       there    is

          always    no     dearth        of    competent       and     able

          officers, hence whenever the Court finds it

          necessary to take assistance of services of

          the     retired       officers          or      personnel,    it

          should     be     with        necessary          caution     and

          resorted to only when there are very valid

          and unavoidable circumstances.
64. In view of the foregoing discussions, the appeals

are partly allowed. The judgment of the High Court is

modified to the following extent:-
(1) The direction No.9 issued in paragraph 45 of

        the judgment of the High Court is deleted and

        directions        Nos.3        and    4     are     modified    as

        indicated in paragraphs 60(3) and 60(4) of

        this judgment.
(2) The order of the High Court in paragraph 48

        that the Government order dated 29.11.2018
78
has become redundant is set aside.
65. Parties shall bear their own costs.
......................J.
                                  ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )



                              ......................J.
                                   ( K.M. JOSEPH )
New Delhi,
APRIL 12, 2019.
79