[Cites
4
, Cited by
8
]
Supreme Court of India
Oriental Insurance Company Limited vs Mahendra Construction on 1 April, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 2182, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 317, (2019) 137 ALL LR 232, (2019) 202 ALLINDCAS 97, (2019) 2 ACJ 1582, (2019) 2 CLR 8 (SC), (2019) 2 RECCIVR 852, (2019) 3 CIVILCOURTC 523, (2019) 3 JCR 1 (SC), (2019) 3 PUN LR 287, (2019) 7 SCALE 187, (2020) 1 ALLMR 425, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 1886
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
1

                                                                                              Reportable



                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                              CIVIL APPEAL NO.3359 OF 2019
                                          (Arising out of SLP(C) No.3381 of 2019)



     Oriental Insurance Company Limited                                       Appellant



                                                          Versus


     Mahendra Construction                                                  Respondent




                                                     JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J


     1                   Leave granted.
2                   This appeal arises from a decision rendered by the National Consumer Disputes

     Redressal Commission1 on 19 September 2018. The NCDRC partly allowed the appeal

     filed by the insurer against a decision of the State Consumer Disputes Redressal

     Commission2 dated 3 April 2017, directing the insurer to pay seventy-five percent of the

     amount awarded by the SCDRC. The SCDRC had allowed an insurance claim in the

     amount of Rs 23.84 lakhs, together with interest at the rate of 7% per annum from the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
date of the institution of the complaint.
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.04.12
16:15:52 IST
Reason:
3                   The respondent, Mahendra Construction, was the original complainant before the
     1 “NCDRC”
     2 “SCDRC”
2
SCDRC. The respondent purchased a hydraulic excavator machine in 2004-05. The

excavator was insured with New India Assurance Company Limited from 15 November

2004 to 14 November 2005. A claim was lodged under the insurance policy on 12 April

2005 on the ground that the excavator had been set on fire by Naxalites. The claim

was settled by the earlier insurer. According to the respondent, the machine was under
repair until 10 October 2006.
4     On 10 October 2006, the excavator was insured with the appellant from 11

October 2006 to 10 October 2007. A premium of Rs 43,847 was paid to the appellant

for an insurance cover of Rs 32 lakhs. Five days after the issuance of the insurance

cover, the excavator is alleged to have caught fire at a work site on 15 October 2006.
The insurer deputed a surveyor for a spot survey on 17 October 2006 and a report was

submitted on 26 October 2006. It appears that other surveyors were also appointed.


5     On 25 November 2008, the insurance claim was repudiated on the ground that all

material facts which were required to be disclosed through the proposal form to enable

the insurer to assess the risk profile had not been disclosed. More specifically, it was

stated that under paragraph 25(g) of the printed proposal form, the details of claims

lodged during the preceding three years were required to be disclosed but were not

furnished and, in consequence, the insurer was deprived of the opportunity to assess

the risk profile of the vehicle at the time of accepting the proposal for insurance. This

led to the institution of a complaint before the SCDRC.
6     The claim was allowed by the SCDRC in the amount of Rs 23.84 lakhs, together

with interest.   The SCDRC accepted the contention of the insured that the

Administrative Officer who had prepared the pre-insurance report had been “fully

satisfied” about the previous insurance cover and claim and with reference to paragraph
3
25(g) of the proposal form, the insurance policy with New India Assurance Company

Limited had been “enclosed”.
7       In appeal, the NCDRC held that since the previous insurance policy was annexed

to the proposal, the appellant could have known of the claims lodged with the previous

insurer on making an enquiry.        Alternatively, it was held that if there was a non-

disclosure of information under paragraph 25(g), the appellant could have returned the

proposal. The NCDRC held that the insurer could have discovered the true state of

facts with the exercise of ordinary diligence and was, hence, not justified in repudiating

the claim.
8       Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has drawn the attention of

the Court to the disclosure which was required to be made in paragraph 25(g) of the

proposal for insurance. Paragraph 25 requires a disclosure of:
(i)     The date of purchase of the vehicle by the proposer;
(ii)    Whether the vehicle was new or second-hand at the time of purchase;
(iii)   Whether the vehicle was in a good condition and, if not, full details;
(iv)    The name and address of the previous insurer;

(v)     The previous policy number, together with the period of insurance;

(vi)    The type of cover; and
(vii)   Claims lodged during the preceding three years.
9       The proposal form which was filled up in order to obtain the policy of insurance

merely records the date of purchase of the vehicle as 2004. As against the other

queries, there is a handwritten endorsement, namely, “enclosed”.
4
10      The NCDRC entered a finding that since the previous insurance policy had been

enclosed with the proposal form, the insurer could, upon further enquiry, have learnt of

the status of the claims under the earlier policy. The NCDRC considered the exception

to
Section 19
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 and held that the insurer could have

easily verified the claims submitted by the insured under the previous policy. It was thus

held that the insurer cannot deny the benefit of insurance on account of the information

not having been disclosed in the proposal form. However, the NCDRC noted that the

insured had not expressly disclosed the previous claim and in consequence, deducted

twenty-five of the amount payable under the contract of insurance.


11      In our view, this line of reasoning of the NCDRC is flawed. Insurance is governed

by the principle of utmost good faith, which imposes a duty of disclosure on the insured

with regard to material facts. In MacGillivray on Insurance Law3 the rule concerning

duty of disclosure is stated in the following terms:
“[Subject to certain qualifications considered below], the
                 assured must disclose to the insurer all facts material to an
                 insurer’s appraisal of the risk which are known or deemed to
                 be known by the assured but neither known or deemed to be
                 known by the insurer. Breach of this duty by the assured
                 entitles the insurer to avoid the contract of insurance so long
                 as he can show that the non-disclosure induced the making of
                 the contract on the relevant terms…”



Elaborating on the principle, in
Life Insurance Corporation of India v Smt. G M

Channabasamma4
, this Court has held:
“7...It is well settled that a contract of insurance is contract
                 uberrima fides and there must be complete good faith on the
                 part of the assured. The assured is thus under a solemn
                 obligation to make full disclosure of material facts which may
                 be relevant for the insurer to take into account while deciding
                 whether the proposal should be accepted or not. While

3 Twelfth Edition, Sweet and Maxwell (2012)
4 (1991) 1 SCC 357
5
making a disclosure of the relevant facts, the duty of the
               insured to state them correctly cannot be diluted…”



In
LIC of India v Asha Goel5
, a two-judge Bench of this Court held thus:
“12…The contracts of insurance including the contract of life
               assurance are contracts uberrima fides and every fact of
               material (sic material fact) must be disclosed, otherwise, there
               is good ground for rescission of the contract. The duty to
               disclose material facts continues right up to the conclusion of
               the contract and also implies any material alteration in the
               character of the risk which may take place between the
               proposal and its acceptance. If there are any misstatements
               or suppression of material facts, the policy can be called into
               question. For determination of the question whether there
               has been suppression of any material facts it may be
               necessary to also examine whether the suppression
               relates to a fact which is in the exclusive knowledge of
               the person intending to take the policy and it could not be
               ascertained by reasonable enquiry by a prudent person.”
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)



In
Satwant Kaur Sandhu v New India Assurance Co. Ltd6
, a two-judge Bench of this

Court held that under a contract of insurance, the insured is under a “solemn obligation”

to make a true and full disclosure of information asked for in the proposal form:
“18…Nonetheless, it is a contract of insurance falling in the
               category of contract uberrimae fidei, meaning a contract of
               utmost good faith on the part of the assured. Thus, it needs
               little emphasis that when an information on a specific
               aspect is asked for in the proposal form, an assured is
               under a solemn obligation to make a true and full
               disclosure of the information on the subject which is
               within his knowledge. It is not for the proposer to determine
               whether the information sought for is material for the purpose
               of the policy or not. Of course, the obligation to disclose
               extends only to facts which are known to the applicant and not
               to what he ought to have known. The obligation to disclose
               necessarily depends upon the knowledge one possesses. His
               opinion of the materiality of that knowledge is of no
               moment…”
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)



5 (2001) 2 SCC 160
6 (2009) 8 SCC 316
6
It was further held there is a clear presumption that any information sought in the

proposal form is a “material fact”:
“25. The upshot of the entire discussion is that in a contract of
             insurance, any fact which would influence the mind of a
             prudent insurer in deciding whether to accept or not to accept
             the risk is a “material fact”. If the proposer has knowledge of
             such fact, he is obliged to disclose it particularly while
             answering questions in the proposal form. Needless to
             emphasise that any inaccurate answer will entitle the insurer
             to repudiate his liability because there is clear presumption
             that any information sought for in the proposal form is material
             for the purpose of entering into a contract of insurance.”



Information regarding insurance claims lodged by the respondent for his excavator in

the preceding three years was a material fact. The burden of establishing that the

insured made a false representation and suppressed material facts lies on the insurer.

The insurer has placed on the record the best possible evidence in support of the plea

that there was a misrepresentation and a suppression of material facts. The mere

disclosure of a previous insurance policy did not discharge the obligation which was

cast on the respondent, as the proposer, to make a full, true and complete disclosure of

the claims which were lodged under the previous policy in the preceding three years.

The proposal form contained a specific question regarding claims lodged in the

preceding three years. The respondent was under a bounden duty to disclose that the

excavator was previously insured with another insurer and that a claim for damage to

the excavator on 12 April 2005 had been settled. It was only in the affidavit of evidence

dated 6 January 2017, that the respondent disclosed that New India Assurance

Company Limited had paid an amount of Rs 36.66 lakhs by cheque on 23 September

2005. This material fact was suppressed from the proposal form.
7
12    The burden cannot be cast upon the insurer to follow up on an inadequate

disclosure by conducting a line of enquiry with the previous insurer in regard to the

nature of the claims, if any, that were made under the earlier insurance policy. On the

contrary, it was the plain duty of the respondent while making the proposal to make a

clear and specific disclosure. The insurance policy with New India Assurance Company

Limited was for the period from 15 November 2004 to 14 November 2005.                 The

excavator remained uninsured from 15 November 2005 until 10 October 2006. The

case of the respondent was that during that period, it was under repair. This fact,

together with the receipt of the earlier insurance claim, was material to the decision of

the insurer on whether to accept the proposal for insurance. The disclosures which

were required in paragraph 25(g) of the proposal form were material to assess the risk

profile of the vehicle at the time of accepting the proposal for insurance.


13    The SCDRC proceeded on the hypothesis that the insurer had not denied the

averment of the respondent in the complaint that the Administrative Officer was ‘fully

satisfied’ of the previous insurance cover and claim, as is evident from the use of the

expression “enclosed” in paragraph 25(g).         The averment in paragraph 8 of the

complaint was specifically denied by the insurer. But, that apart, it is evident on a bare

reading of the proposal form that material information which was required to be

disclosed was suppressed by the insured. The proposal form contains a declaration of

the insured that the statements which are made are true to the knowledge of the

proposer and the declaration forms the basis of the contract with the insurer.


14    In the circumstances, the decision of the SCDRC to allow the claim was

erroneous and the NCDRC equally erred in affirming the decision.
8
15    Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the insured urged that the respondent

relied on the Administrative Officer who filled in the requisite details in the proposal

form. The fact of the matter is that the respondent was under an obligation to make a

full disclosure of the status of the previous insurance policy, together with the material

facts relevant to the claim which had been lodged with New India Assurance Company

Limited. The fact that such a claim was lodged and had been settled at Rs 36.66 lakhs

was suppressed. This suppression goes to the very root of the contract of insurance

which would validate the grounds on which the claim was repudiated by the insurer.


16    We accordingly allow the appeal and set aside the impugned judgment and order

of the NCDRC dated 19 September 2018. The complaint filed by the respondent shall

stand dismissed. However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be

no order as to costs.
……..……………………………............................J.
                                        [DR DHANANJAYA Y CHANDRACHUD]




                                       ……………………………………............................J.
                                        [HEMANT GUPTA]

NEW DELHI
APRIL 01, 2019