[Cites
6
, Cited by
111
]
Supreme Court of India
Caretel Infotech Ltd. vs Hindustan Petroleum Corporation ... on 9 April, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 3327, 2019 (14) SCC 81, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 458, 2019 (5) ABR 174, (2019) 2 CURCC 225, 2019 (4) KCCR SN 343 (SC), (2019) 6 SCALE 70, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 2629
Author:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench:
S.A. Bobde
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
Indira Banerjee
REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.3588 OF 2019
                                       [Arising out of SLP(C) No.46 of 2019]



                      CARETEL INFOTECH LTD.                                  ….APPELLANT


                                                        Versus



                      HINDUSTAN PETROLEUM
                      CORPORATION LIMITED & ORS.                             ….RESPONDENTS


                                                  JUDGMENT
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1.    Leave granted.
2.    Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (respondent No.1)

                         floated an e-public tender on 4.12.2017 for setting up call centres for

                         receiving, recording and replying to information enquiries and
Signature Not Verified
complaints from LPG customers of IOC/HPC/BPC.               The appellant
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
participated in the tender. Clause 20 of the tender reads as under:
Date: 2019.04.09
16:25:25 IST
Reason:
1
“20. Black List/Ban/Holiday List

          i. Bids received from parties who have been
          banned/blacklisted/put on holiday list or parties in respect of
          whom the action for blacklisting and holiday listing has been
          initiated by HPCL/any Government/Quasi Government
          Agencies or PSUs, shall not be considered for either evaluation
          or for award of work. Offer of Vendor who has not submitted
          declaration on black listed or holiday listed shall be considered
          as non-responsive and offer shall be rejected.
ii. The bidder shall give a written declaration indicating that
          they are not on holiday list/banned/blacklisted as on due date of
          this tender.”
3.    The appellant was issued a show cause notice on 5.12.2017 in

respect of another tender, i.e., after floating of the tender, but before

submitting of the bid, for blacklisting on the allegation of furnishing false

information and bid documents, submitted for providing Kisan Call

Centre Services to the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation &

Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare,

Government of India.
4.    The show cause notice alleged that on questions being raised about

the correctness of information furnished by the appellant in the bid

documents regarding running of call centres at different locations, an

inquiry was made through officers and despite further information being
2
sought, the same was not forthcoming. The operative portion of the show

cause notice reads as under:
“Accordingly, in the above circumstances a situation has,
      prima facie, emerged that M/s Caretel Infotech Pvt. Ltd. has
      endeavoured to procure the above tender by providing false,
      misleading and wrong information. Therefore, the Department
      hereby issues notice to M/s Caretel Infotech Pvt. Ltd. to show
      cause as to why suitable action for blacklisting the firm (M/s.
      Caretel Infotech Pvt. Ltd.) should not be initiated. You are
      requested to clarify your position within 7 (seven) days from the
      date of issue of this letter. Response received after expiry of the
      provided time limit will not be entertained.”
                                                    (emphasis supplied)
5.    The appellant submitted the bid in respect of the e-tender on

19.12.2017. In terms of clause 20 extracted aforesaid, a format had been

provided for the declaration to be made, which is as under:
“DECLARATION NON BLACKLISTED/NON
                BANNED/NON HOLIDAY LISTED PARTY

       WE CONFIRM THAT WE HAVE NOT BEEN BANNED OR
       BLACK LISTED OR DELISTED OR HOLIDAY LISTED
       BY ANY GOVERNMENT OR QUASI GOVERNMENT
       AGENCIES OR PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS

       Date: __________         Name of Tenderer: _____________

       Place: _________         Signature & Seal
                                of Tenderer      : _____________

       Note: If a bidder has been banned by any Government or
       Quasi Government Agencies or Public Sector Undertakings,
3
this fact must be clearly stated with details. If this declaration
       is not given along with the UNPRICED Bid, the tender will be
       rejected as non-responsive.”


            The appellant submitted the declaration in terms aforesaid,

      i.e., stating that the appellant had not been blacklisted by any

      Government or Quasi Government Agency or Public Sector

      Undertakings.
6.    The appellant also submitted an undertaking, once again, in the

prescribed form. The format of undertaking is as under:
“ON LETTER HEAD

                         Undertaking by the bidder

      I/we hereby undertake that the entire information furnished/given
      to you in our bid and attachments are true to the best of our
      knowledge and belief and nothing therein is false.
I/We further undertake, that if it is found during the tender stage
      (before accepting our bid/placement of Purchase Order by HPCL)
      that any information or document furnished/submitted by us is
      false or incorrect, then we agree that HPCL shall be free to reject
      our tender/bid. If the same is found to be false or incorrect during
      any stage after accepting of our bid/placement of Purchase Order,
      then HPCL shall have the right to summarily cancel our tender and
      procure the balance quantity from any alternate source. HPCL
      shall have the right to recover the differential amount between the
      rates of our contract and the rates at which HPCL is compelled to
      procure from the alternate source, if the latter rate is higher. To
4
this effect, the recovery can be made by HPCL by encashing any
      bank guarantee that we may have submitted or from any pending
      bills under this contract or any other contract with HPCL. Further
      HPCL shall be at liberty to take any appropriate action as deemed
      fit in such an eventuality.
I/we further undertake as and when called upon by Hindustan
      Petroleum Corporation Limited, to produce, for its inspection,
      original(s) of the document(s) of which copies have been annexed
      hereto.
Date: __________         Name of Bidder: _____________

       Place: _________         Signature & Seal
                                of Bidder        : _____________”
7.    Respondent No.1 evaluated the technical and financial bids and

declared the appellant as L-1 and respondent No.3 as L-2 on 16.1.2018.
The letter of acceptance of the tender awarded to the appellant was issued

on 12.2.2018 for a value of Rs.791 lakh basic for services to be rendered

for a period of two years.
8.    Respondent No.3 filed a writ petition in the Bombay High Court

on 17.2.2018, assailing the declaration of the appellant as L-1. The

purchase order in favour of the appellant confirming the terms of contract

and mode of payment was issued on 21.2.2018.          One day later, on

22.2.2018, the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare passed an
5
order blacklisting and debarring the appellant from participating in any

tender process of the Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture and

Farmers’ Welfare for two years with effect from the date of issue of the

order. This order was assailed by the appellant by filing a writ petition

before the Delhi High Court, which was pleased to issue notice on

9.3.2018, and we are informed that subsequently, on 12.3.2019, that

petition was dismissed and a Letters Patent Appeal filed against the same

is pending.
9.      Respondent No.3, having become aware of the factum of

blacklisting of the appellant amended the petition to incorporate the said

fact.   The writ petition was allowed by the impugned order of the

Division Bench dated 21.12.2018.
10.     The decision of the High Court is predicated on two facts – firstly

the non-disclosure of the factum of the show cause notice issued to the

appellant amounted to violation of the undertaking. Linked to this issue

is that clause 20(iii) of the tender provided for an integrity pact “ensuring

transparency and fair dealing” and that integrity pact had been duly

signed and submitted by the appellant. Secondly, the Division Bench

doubted the compliance, by the appellant, of clause 8 read with clause
6
10(g) of Section 4 of the tender. This controversy pertains to the clause

dealing with the business continuity and the requirement of submitting a

valid ISO certificate for the purpose of securing the tender. The relevant

clauses read as under:
“8. Business Continuity

      OMCs currently have an agreement for inbound calls with a
      service provider based in different Regions. The successful bidder
      has to submit the transition plan to migrate to new platform and
      facility with “ZERO” disruption of services with respect to
      following areas:
a) Toll-free services.
b) IVRS based call handling.
c) Diversion of call traffic at the successful bidder’s premises.
d) Trained Operators at the time of Go-Live date.”

      ....         ....          ....          ....         ....
“10. Other Mandatory Requirements:
xxxx         xxxx          xxxx          xxxx         xxxx
g) Valid ISO Certification 27001 for security and ISO 2301 for
      Business Continuity.”



             It is not disputed that the certificate of registration submitted

      by the appellant was issued by Elite Certifications Pvt. Ltd.,

      respondent No.2.      However, respondent No.3 sought to throw

      doubts on the certificate and the High Court found reason to
7
believe the same even though in the counter affidavit filed by

         respondent No.1 a stand was taken to the contrary.
11.      On 7.1.2019, notice was issued on the present appeal filed against

the impugned order and an interim order was passed in the following

terms:
“In the meantime, Respondent No.1 (HPCL) may take a
         decision but not implement it. The petitioner may continue under
         the contract until further orders.”


         The result of the same is that the appellant has continued to give

services under the contract now for almost more than thirteen (13)

months out of the contract for two years and respondent No.1, though is

stated to have issued a notice to the appellant in pursuance of the

directions contained in the impugned order, has deemed it fit not to

proceed with the inquiry and to await the verdict in the present appeal.
12.      We have heard Mr. Shyam Diwan, learned senior counsel for the

appellant, Mr. K.V. Vishwanathan, learned senior counsel for respondent

No.3 and Mr. Parijat Sinha, learned counsel for respondent No.1. The

submissions on the two aspects advanced by learned counsel for the

parties and our findings are recorded hereinafter.
8
Blacklisting:
13.   Mr. Shyam Diwan, learned senior counsel for the appellant

contends that the impugned order misreads the blacklisting clause 20.

The submission was that undoubtedly, the appellant could not have been

categorised as a party who has been banned/blacklisted/put on holiday

list. This is also in the context of the fact that such blacklisting has

severe consequences and the clause itself provided that non-submission

of declaration in the prescribed format would make the bid non-

responsive and the offer would be rejected. In terms of clause 20(ii), the

written declaration had to be given as on the due date of the tender. The

format in which this declaration was to be given was specified and was

not left to the own words of the bidder. The format extracted aforesaid

clearly stated that such declaration was required to be furnished only if

the bidder had “been banned or black listed or delisted or holiday listed.”

That position was not prevalent on the date of submission of the bid, on

19.12.2017 as by that date only a show cause notice had been issued, on

5.12.2017. The order of blacklisting was passed on 22.2.2018, after the

date of acceptance of the tender and placement of the purchase order on

the appellant, on 21.2.2018.
9
14.     In the aforesaid context, it is also contended that ‘Annexure 21’

lays down the ‘Guidelines for Holiday Listing (Banning of Business

Dealing)’. That occasion would arise if the tender awarding authority,

i.e., respondent No.1 would have initiated any process and as per clause

2.5, the banning was to be with prospective effect, i.e., for future business

dealings. The contract in question, having already been placed on the

appellant, there can be no question of retrospective blacklisting of the

appellant.
15.     The second limb of the submission is based on clause 20(i) to the

extent it refers to “or parties in respect of whom the action for

blacklisting and holiday listing has been initiated by HPCL/any

Government/quasi Government agencies or PSUs.” This clause, it was

submitted, had to be read with the wordings of the show cause notice.

Undisputedly, the format in which the information had to be furnished

only provided for an eventual blacklisting having taken place.          The

operative portion of the show cause notice, extracted aforesaid, states

“why suitable action for blacklisting the firm (M/s. Caretel Infotech Pvt.

Ltd.) should not be initiated.”1 The requirement of clause 20(i) was the


1 Emphasis supplied
10
actual initiation. Thus, it was pleaded that blacklisting had not been

“initiated” by mere issuing of the show cause notice, as the notice was to

show cause as to why proceedings should not be initiated, i.e., a prior

stage.
16.      On the other hand, Mr. Vishwanathan, learned senior counsel for

respondent No.3, contended that the format was prescribed in the context

of clause 20(ii), which was a case where blacklisting had already taken

place, as on the due date of the tender. However, as per clause 20(i) there

were four eventualities: (a) banned; (b) blacklisted; (c) put on holiday

list; or (d) action for blacklisting or holiday listing had been initiated. It

was his submission that the present case was one where blacklisting had

been, at least, initiated and, therefore, the appellant was duty bound to

make a disclosure of this fact along with his tender, not as per the format,

but in terms of the undertaking to be given by the bidder, which required

full disclosure. That undertaking, it was submitted, was breached, as

held by the impugned order.
17.      Learned counsel further contended that the plea sought to be raised

by the appellant, on the interpretation of clause 20(i), was not even the

case pleaded by the appellant in their challenge to the blacklisting order,
11
in their writ petition, but what was pleaded there was only the absence of

an opportunity of hearing.
18.   In the alternative, learned counsel also sought to contend that

respondent No.1 had not complied with the interim directions, at the

stage of issuing notice on 7.1.2019, and ought to have implemented the

impugned order and held an inquiry and that inquiry report ought to have

been placed before the Court.
19.   On the other hand, learned counsel for respondent No.1 submitted

that respondent No.1 had, in its wisdom, stayed its hand after issuance of

notice in pursuance to the impugned order and preferred to await the

decision of this Court.
20.   On careful consideration of the rival submissions, we are of the

view that there is force in the contention of learned counsel for the

appellant. We are, in fact, in agreement with both the aspects, i.e., the

interpretation of clause 20 read with the format, as well as with the effect

of the show cause notice.
21.   It is no doubt true that clause 20 does provide for four

eventualities, as submitted by learned counsel for respondent No.3. The

present case is not one where on the date of submission of the tender the
12
appellant had been banned, blacklisted or put on holiday list.          The

question before us, thus, would be the effect of an action for blacklisting

and holiday listing being initiated. The declaration to be given by the

bidder is specified in clause 20(ii), which deals with the first three

aspects. The format enclosed with the tender documents also refers only

to these three eventualities. It is not a case where no specific format is

provided, where possibly it could have been contended that the disclosure

has to be in respect of all the four aspects. The format having been

provided, if initiation of blacklisting was to be specified, then that ought

to have been included in the format.          It cannot be said that the

undertaking by the appellant made it the bounden duty of the appellant to

disclose the aspect of a show cause notice for blacklisting. We say so as

there is a specific clause with the specific format provided for, requiring

disclosures, as per the same.
22.     It may be possible to contend that the format is not correctly made.

But then, that is the problem of the framing of the format by respondent

No.1.    It appears that respondent No.1 also, faced with the factual

situation, took a considered view that since clause 20(i) provided for the

four eventualities, while the format did not provide for it, the appellant
13
could not be penalised. May be, for future the format would require an

appropriate modification!
23.   If we refer to the undertaking submitted by the appellant all that it

states is that the information furnished in the bid and attachments are true

to the best of the knowledge and belief of the bidder. In case any false or

incorrect information is submitted, the bid can be rejected. It cannot be

said that there is any false information given by the appellant as to violate

the stated condition 4 of clause 20(i). We may look at another angle of

the same issue, i.e., the integrity pact provided for in clause 20(iii) with

the format thereof, a detailed one. The integrity pack provided that the

“parties shall make certain commitments to each other in regard to

ensuring transparency and fair dealing in the procurement activities of the

Corporation.” The duly signed integrity pact is an essential condition for

a valid bid.   This clause, thus, deals with the transparency and fair

dealing of the activities carried out under the tender were it to be awarded

insofar as the procurement activities are concerned. Once again, this

would not have any relevance to the stated fourth part of clause 20(i).
24.   We may also look at this aspect from another perspective.

Blacklisting has very serious consequences. A show cause notice may
14
result in blacklisting or may not result in blacklisting. The mere show

cause notice being issued, to visit such a severe consequence on a bidder,

may be difficult to sustain.
25.   The case of the appellant is further fortified by even the language

used in the show cause notice. The show cause notice itself, in the last

paragraph, calls upon the appellant to show cause as to why suitable

action for blacklisting “should not be initiated.” Pursuant to the response

of the appellant, the next stage would have been the initiation of the

blacklisting process, if the explanation was not found satisfactory. The

term used in the blacklisting clause 20(i), on the other hand, talks about a

situation where blacklisting has already been initiated. Plain English

words used must be given their ordinary grammatical meaning, an aspect

discussed in a little more detail hereinafter.
26.     Thus, it is difficult to accept the submission of learned counsel for

respondent No.3 that the show cause notice dated 5.12.2017 itself

amounted to the process of blacklisting having already been initiated.
27.   On both these accounts it cannot be said that the appellant would

be disentitled to the contract.
28.   Insofar as the effect of the blacklisting order dated 22.2.2018 is
15
concerned, in the eventuality of respondent No.1 considering it proper to

initiate certain action, that would have to be in terms of the guidelines for

blacklisting of HPCL. The guidelines itself show that the ban would

have prospective effect, for future business dealings. Thus, the same

would have no application to the tender awarded.
Business Continuity Certificate:
29.     The second reason which found favour with the High Court was

the doubts created by respondent No.3 over the Business Continuity

Certificate filed by the appellant.     Clause 8, dealing with business

continuity, requires the successful bidder to submit the transition plan to

migrate to new platform and facility with zero disruption of services,

with respect to four aspects provided hereinbefore. In terms of clause

10(g), valid ISO Certificate 27001 for security and ISO 2301 for business

continuity have to be provided. It is not in question that the appellant did

submit a certificate of business continuity, as obtained from respondent

No.2.
30.     Respondent No.3 has sought to cast doubts on this business

certificates, and the Division Bench, in terms of the impugned order, has

also embarked on a course of inquiry into this certificate by calling upon
16
parties to file their affidavits and has thereafter taken a call to express its

own doubts over the certificate. In our view, such a course of action was

not permissible.
31.     There are serious disputes relating to the allegations made by

respondent No.3, which are rebutted by the appellant. Opportunity had to

be afforded to cross-examine the deponents who had filed affidavits.

This would really not be possible in writ proceedings and could have

only been determined in suit proceedings. There cannot always be a

shortcut, through a process of writ proceedings under
Article 226
of the

Constitution of India, when such disputes exist. We may usefully refer to

the observations of this Court in
Roshina T v. Abdul Azeez K.T. & Ors.,2
opining that the writ jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution of

India is not intended to replace ordinary remedies by way of a civil suit,

and this jurisdiction should not be exercised casually or lightly on mere

asking by the litigant.
32.     We may notice another important aspect also, i.e., reluctance of

respondent No.1 to accept the allegations of respondent No.3.                If

respondent No.1 itself had doubts on the certificate, that would have been

another matter. This is not so as is apparent from the affidavit filed by

2 (2019) 2 SCC 329
17
respondent No.1. In any case, at best, this aspect ought to have been left

to the wisdom of respondent No.1, rather than the Court embarking on

the course of action it followed, as if it was sitting in appeal over a

decision of respondent No.1. We may add that if respondent No.1 itself

has any doubts on these certificates, nothing prevented, nor still prevents

respondent No.1 from looking into this aspect.
33.   We do not agree with the contention of learned senior counsel for

respondent No.3 that the interim order dated 7.1.2019 mandated

respondent No.1 to enquire into all these aspects, in pursuance of the

directions contained in the impugned order. All that was observed was

that respondent No.1 “may” take a decision, but the interdict was against

implementing it.     Respondent No.1 in its wisdom, as submitted by

learned counsel for respondent No.1, has chosen not to proceed further,

after issuance of notice to the appellant and has decided to await the

decision of this Court. We have already come to the conclusion that it

was not really within the domain of the High Court to have issued the

direction, as it sought to do.
34.   The operative directions of the High Court, as contained in para 47

of the judgment, to take appropriate decisions, in the conspectus of the
18
observations made, really amounts to directing respondent No.1 to breach

its contract with the appellant. We are of the view that, thus, no such

direction ought to have been issued to compel a breach of the contract by

the appellant.
35.   We, thus, are unable to sustain the impugned order even on this

ground.
Epilogue:
36.   We consider it appropriate to make certain observations in the

context of the nature of dispute which is before us. Normally parties

would be governed by their contracts and the tender terms, and really no

writ would be maintainable under
Article 226
of the Constitution of

India. In view of Government and Public Sector Enterprises venturing

into economic activities, this Court found it appropriate to build in certain

checks and balances of fairness in procedure. It is this approach which

has given rise to scrutiny of tenders in writ proceedings under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. It, however, appears that the window has

been opened too wide as almost every small or big tender is now sought

to be challenged in writ proceedings almost as a matter of routine. This

in turn, affects the efficacy of commercial activities of the public sectors,
19
which may be in competition with the private sector. This could hardly

have been the objective in mind. An unnecessary, close scrutiny of

minute details, contrary to the view of the tendering authority, makes

awarding of contracts by Government and Public Sectors a cumbersome

exercise, with long drawn out litigation at the threshold. The private

sector is competing often in the same field. Promptness and efficiency

levels in private contracts, thus, often tend to make the tenders of the

public sector a non-competitive exercise.       This works to a great

disadvantage to the Government and the Public Sector.
37.
In
Afcons Infrastructure Limited v. Nagpur Metro Rail

Corporation Limited & Anr.3
, this Court has expounded further on this

aspect, while observing that the decision making process in accepting or

rejecting the bid should not be interfered with.          Interference is

permissible only if the decision making process is arbitrary or irrational

to an extent that no responsible authority, acting reasonably and in

accordance with law, could have reached such a decision. It has been

cautioned that Constitutional Courts are expected to exercise restraint in

interfering with the administrative decision and ought not to substitute


3 (2016) 16 SCC 818
20
their view for that of the administrative authority. Mere disagreement

with the decision making process would not suffice.
38.      Another aspect emphasised is that the author of the document is

the best person to understand and appreciate its requirements. In the

facts of the present case, the view, on interpreting the tender documents,

of respondent No.1 must prevail. Respondent No.1 itself, appreciative of

the wording of clause 20 and the format, has taken a considered view.

Respondent No.3 cannot compel its own interpretation of the contract to

be thrust on respondent No.1, or ask the Court to compel respondent

No.1 to accept that interpretation. In fact, the Court went on to observe

in the aforesaid judgment that it is possible that the author of the tender

may give an interpretation that is not acceptable to the Constitutional

Court, but that itself would not be a reason for interfering with the

interpretation given. We reproduce the observations in this behalf as

under:
“15. We may add that the owner or the employer of a project,
         having authored the tender documents, is the best person to
         understand and appreciate its requirements and interpret its
         documents. The constitutional courts must defer to this
         understanding and appreciation of the tender documents, unless
         there is mala fide or perversity in the understanding or appreciation
         or in the application of the terms of the tender conditions. It is
         possible that the owner or employer of a project may give an
         interpretation to the tender documents that is not acceptable to the
21
constitutional courts but that by itself is not a reason for interfering
         with the interpretation given.”
39.      We may also refer to the judgment of this Court in
Nabha Power

Limited (NPL) v. Punjab State Power Corporation Limited (PSPCL) &

Anr.,4
authored by one of us (Sanjay Kishan Kaul, J.).                The legal

principles for interpretation of commercial contracts have been discussed.
In
the said judgment
, a reference was made to the observations of the

Privy Council in Attorney General of Belize v. Belize Telecom Ltd. 5 as

under:
“16. Before discussing in greater detail the reasoning of the Court
         of Appeal, the Board will make some general observations about
         the process of implication. The court has no power to improve
         upon the instrument which it is called upon to construe, whether it
         be a contract, a statute or articles of association. It cannot introduce
         terms to make it fairer or more reasonable. It is concerned only to
         discover what the instrument means. However, that meaning is not
         necessarily or always what the authors or parties to the document
         would have intended…”

         ....          ....         ....          ....         ....
“19. ...
..In Trollope & Colls Ltd. v. North West Metropolitan
         Regional Hospital Board
[1973] 1 WLR 601, 609 Lord Pearson,
         with whom Lord Guest and Lord Diplock agreed, said:
“the court does not make a contract for the parties. The court

4 (2018) 11 SCC 508
5 (2009) 1 WLR 1988 (PC)
22
will not even improve the contract which the parties have
               made for themselves, however desirable the improvement
               might be. The court’s function is to interpret and apply the
               contract which the parties have made for themselves. If the
               express terms are perfectly clear and free from ambiguity,
               there is no choice to be made between different possible
               meanings: the clear terms must be applied even if the court
               thinks some other terms would have been more suitable. An
               unexpressed term can be implied if and only if the court
               finds that the parties must have intended that term to form
               part of their contract: it is not enough for the court to find
               that such a term would have been adopted by the parties as
               reasonable men if it had been suggested to them: it must
               have been a term that went without saying, a term necessary
               to give business efficacy to the contract, a term which,
               though tacit, formed part of the contract which the parties
               made for themselves.”
40.    Nabha Power Limited (NPL)6 also took note of the earlier

judgment of this court in Satya Jain (Dead) Through LRs. and
Ors. vs.

Anis Ahmed Rushdie (Dead) Through LRs
. and Ors.7, which discussed

the principle of business efficacy as proposed by Bowen, L.J. in the

Moorcock8. It has been elucidated that this test requires that terms can be

implied only if it is necessary to give business efficacy to the contract to

avoid failure of the contract and only the bare minimum of implication is

to be there to achieve this goal. Thus, if the contract makes business

sense without the implication of terms, the courts will not imply the
6 (supra)
7 (2013) 8 SCC 131
8 (1889) LR 14 PD 64 (CA)
23
same.
41.         The judgment in Nabha Power Limited (NPL)9 concluded with the

following observations in para 72:
“72. We may, however, in the end, extend a word of caution. It
      should certainly not be an endeavour of commercial courts to look
      to implied terms of contract. In the current day and age, making of
      contracts is a matter of high technical expertise with legal brains
      from all sides involved in the process of drafting a contract. It is
      even preceded by opportunities of seeking clarifications and
      doubts so that the parties know what they are getting into. Thus,
      normally a contract should be read as it reads, as per its express
      terms. The implied terms is a concept, which is necessitated only
      when the Penta-test referred to aforesaid comes into play. There
      has to be a strict necessity for it. In the present case, we have
      really only read the contract in the manner it reads. We have not
      really read into it any ‘implied term’ but from the collection of
      clauses, come to a conclusion as to what the contract says. The
      formula for energy charges, to our mind, was quite clear. We have
      only expounded it in accordance to its natural grammatical
      contour, keeping in mind the nature of the contract.”
42.         We have considered it appropriate to, once again, emphasise the

aforesaid aspects, especially in the context of endeavours of courts to

give their own interpretation to contracts, more specifically tender terms,

at the behest of a third party competing for the tender, rather than what is

propounded by the party framing the tender. The object cannot be that in

every contract, where some parties would lose out, they should get the


9 (supra)
24
opportunity to somehow pick holes, to disqualify the successful parties,

    on grounds on which even the party floating the tender finds no merit.
43.   The observations made aforesaid should be understood in the

    larger context, so as to avoid situations similar to the one we find in the

    impugned order.
Conclusion:
44.   The result of the aforesaid discussion is that the impugned order is

    set aside and the writ petition filed by respondent No.3 is accordingly

    dismissed.
45.   The appeal is accordingly allowed, leaving the parties to bear their

    own costs.
..….….…………………….J.
                                                          [S.A. Bobde]




                                               ...……………………………J.
                                                    [Sanjay Kishan Kaul]
New Delhi.
April 09, 2019.
25