[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Cheriyath Jyothi vs Sainudeen on 24 April, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2259
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
Ajay Rastogi
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
1


                                                                          REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.1424 OF 2016
                         Cheriyath Jyothi                …        Appellant(s)
                                                    :Versus:
                         Sainudeen and Anr.              …        Respondent(s)




                                               JUDGMENT
A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
1.   This appeal takes exception to the judgment and order

                         passed by the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam dated 4 th

                         March, 2015 in O.P.(C) No.1819 of 2014 (O).
2.   Briefly stated, the appellant made a representation to the

                         Secretary, Karakulam Gram Panchayath on 6 th May, 2013,

                         complaining that the occupant in the neighbouring plot had

                         erected an unauthorised building and was using the same as a

                         Plant for making Rubber Sheets on commercial basis. The
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEETU KHAJURIA
Date: 2019.04.24
appellant claims to be occupying House K.P. No.V/168 of the
17:33:49 IST
Reason:
Karakulam Gram Panchayath in Survey No.43/2­1­3 of
2
Vattappara Village. The representation reads thus:
“Cheriyath Jyothi B.Sc., M.B.B.S.,
                       ‘the cloister’, nr. Rock Park,
                      Venkode P.O., Vasttappara,
                       thiruvanathapurm­695028.
No.jyo/cT/01
                                                      May 06, 2013.
To
     the secretary, karakulam grama panchayath,
     karakulam P.O., Thiruvananthapuram Dt.
ILLEGAL HAZARDOUS BUILDING : REQUEST DEMOLITION

     Sir,

     I.     I am the resident of the house KP No.V/168 of the
     karakulam panchayath KP No.V/168 as well as the 3.37 are
     plot in survey no.43/2­1­3 of vattappara village on which it
     stands is fully owned by me.
II.    this is to bring to your kind notice the existence of
     what I presume an unauthorized building being used as a
     plant for making rubber sheets on a commercial basis in the
     plot adjacent to my residence(skech enclosed as appendix A).
III.   The above building is in complete violation of the
     provisions and conditions of the Kerala Panchayath Building
     Rules 2011 and is a severe health hazard to those living in
     the vicinity (as elaborated in Appendix B).
IV.   I feel that in the interests of the public the above
     structure ought to be demolished.
V.   my complaints on the matter to Mr. Zain­ud­din
     known to be the owner of the plant has fallen on deaf ears.
VI.   in view of the above it is hereby requested of you to
     kindly look into the matter and do the needful at the earliest.
Yours faithfully
                                                        Sd.
(C.Jyothi)
     Enclosures: 1. Appendix A vide para II and
3
2. appendix B vide para III.”
3.   That representation was placed before the Lok Adalat

organised by the Thiruvananthapuram District Legal Services

Authority, under
Section 19
of the Legal Services Authorities

Act, 1987. The Lok Adalat passed the following Award on 23 rd

August, 2013:
“LOK ADALAT

           Organized by the Thiruvananthapuram District Legal
     Services Authority under
Section 19
of the Legal Services
     Authorities Act (Act 39 of 1987)

                THIS THE 23RD DAY OF AUGUST, 2013

       Name of Judicial Officer                 : V. Thulseedharan
         Name of member                         : N. Gopakumar
         Name of member                         : V. Maya

                 LOK ADALAT CASE No. PL No.2746 of 2013.
From the court/tribunal of
                                  No.
                                                  plaintiff
                                                  petitioner
                                                  claimant

           Dr. Cheriyath Jyothi              Vs.          Sainuddin,
           Rock park, Vengode                      Rock Park,
           Vengode
                                             Defendant/Respondent

            Referred under
section 20(1) (i)
a/20 (1) (i) (b)/20(1) (ii)
     of the
Legal Services Authorities Act
(Act 39 of 1987).
This cause referred to the Lok Adalath organized by
     the Thiruvananthapuram District Legal Services Authority
     under
Section 19
of the Legal Services Authorities Act (Act
     39 of 1987), coming on before us for endeavours for
4
settlement of the dispute between the parties, being subject
     matter of this cause, in the presence of the parties and their
     counsel, and after a full and frank discussion of all issues
     factual and legal arising from the cause, the parties having
     agreed before us that there shall be an award / order /
     decree in terms of settlement hereto made and the parties
     and their counsel herein having, in acceptance of the same
     signed this in our presence, it is decreed / ordered:­

           Both parties present. Respondent ready to demolish
     the existing building possessing the rubber sheeting
     machinery within a period of 3 months. Failing which
     the petitioner may approach the appropriate authority
     for executing the award.
(sd.)               (sd.)               (sd.)
     JUDICIAL OFFICER        MEMBER              MEMBER

            (sd.)                                 (sd.)
     Plaintiff/Petitioner                 Defendant/Respondent
     Claimant/Appellant

       Counsel for
     Plaintiff/Petitioner
     Claimant/Appellant                  Counsel for
                                    Defendant/Respondent”
                                                 (emphasis supplied)
4.   Notably, from the original order sheet it is noticed that,

initially, the description of the property belonging to the

respondent was given as “temporary shed”, which was struck

of and instead, was described as “existing building”. Be that as

it may, the appellant then approached the Court of Principal

Munsif, Nedumangad, by way of E.P. No.10/2014 in PL

No.2726/2013 for executing the award passed by the Lok
5
Adalat. The Executing Court accepted the grievance of the

appellant and issued directions for removal of the structure in

the neighbouring plot belonging to the respondent. The

operative order passed by the Court of Principal Munsif reads

thus:
“6. Thus the circumstances under which the petitioner filed
        this petition before the Lok Adalath and circumstances
        under which the award was passed reveal that what was
        intended by the parties is nothing but to demolish it for ever.
        Admittedly the structure was not demolished. That was born
        out from the photographs produced in this case. In such
        circumstances I find that the award is to be executed
        through process of court. The decree holder has to take
        necessary steps for executing the award and arrange men
        and machinery to execute the award.
Amin is directed to execute award on 22/07/2014 and
        file report before Court on 23/07/2014.”
5.      The respondent assailed the said order before the High

Court, inter alia contending that after the award was passed

by the Lok Adalat, he had demolished the “temporary shed”, a

position which was verified by the Panchayat authorities. He

has placed reliance on photographs in support of this plea.
The respondent asserted that he had thereafter applied for

permission to construct the structure as per the prescribed

norms, and pursuant to the building plan submitted by him,
6
the same was approved by the competent authority and permit

came to be issued on 9 th October, 2013. The respondent

asserts that he was permitted to construct the new shed,

having plinth area of 9.49 Sq.Mts., after leaving statutory open

space, as provided in the approved plan. In conformity with

the said approved plan, the respondent constructed a new

structure   which    was    compliant     with    the   requirements

specified as per the permit issued in his favour in that regard.

The stand taken by the respondent found support from the

affidavit filed by the Secretary, Karakullam Gram Panchayat,

Nedumangad, Thiruvalla. The relevant portion of the said

affidavit filed on 9th January, 2015, on behalf of the

Panchayat, reads thus:
“3.    It is submitted that as per the above Ext.P3 order
     petitioner demolished the existing building and applied for a
     building permit to construct 9.49 sq. meter of building. The
     plan submitted by the petitioner was approved and Ext.P7
     permit was issued. As per the Ext.P7 a petitioner
     constructed the building in accordance with the approved
     plan and permit. The construction was made by the
     petitioner in accordance with the approved plan and permit
     issued by the 2nd Respondent. The 2nd Respondent has not
     noted any violation of the provisions of the Kerala
     Panchayath Building Rules, 2011 in the construction, and
     hence the above building was numbered as K.P. 11/982­A.
     In Ext. P7 permit there was a mistake that instead of stating
7
commercial purpose it were mistakenly stated as residential
     purpose. When it was brought into the notice of this
     respondent, it was rectified as commercial purpose by order
     dated 1.12.2014.
4.     It is submitted that E.P.No.10/2014 was filed by the
       st
     1 Respondent to execute the award of Lok Adalat in PL
     No.2746/2013. This Respondent is not a party in the above
     E.P. And hence this respondent is not aware of the Ext. P10
     order. Since this Respondent is not a party to the above E.P.
     proceedings, this Respondent could not bring the correct
     facts to the notice of the Munsiff Court, Nedumangaud.
5.    Under the above circumstances this Hon’ble Court
     may be pleased to accept this statement and order
     accordingly.”
6.   Since the appellant contested the factual position stated

by the respondent, as well as mentioned in the affidavit filed

on behalf of the Panchayat, the High Court deemed it

appropriate to appoint an Advocate Commissioner. The

Advocate Commissioner visited the site and submitted his

report on 18th February, 2015, which reads thus:
“BEFORE THE HONOURABLE HIGH COURT OF Kerala
                      AT ERNAKULAM
                    O.P. (c) 1819 OF 2014

          Report and rough sketch submitted by Advocate M.M.
     Bashir as per the order of the Hon’ble family court
     Nedumangadu in EP No.10/2014 dated 11.2.2015.
As per the order of the Hon’ble Family Court
     Nedumangadu directing me to prepare a sketch and to
8
submit a report regarding the building in question and also
the activities being carried on there. I have visited the
disputed property on 13.02.2015 for executing the order of
the Hon’ble court at about 3:30 PM with the presence of both
the parties and filing this report with true sense. The
disputed property is situated in Vattappara village which is
5kms far from the Nedumangad court center.
I have prepared a rough plan regarding the disputed
property and mentioned the disputed building as (1). The
disputed building is a new one when I was visited the
property and having an age of nearly 1.5 years and not
working for the same period. The building was made with the
permission of the Karakulam Grama Panchayath. The
property if the respondent is lying on the western side of the
disputed building. Separating these two properties a
compound wall is there which is constructed of granite and
cement hollow bricks having a height of 1.70 meters.
The disputed building is a shed constructed by granite
and cement hollow bricks with oralium sheet roof which is
used for Rubber Sheet making. In the shed there are two
rubber sheet making machines are fixed and made an open
waste water canal which is going to the bio gas tank. The
said tank is having an age of more than 25 years. The
difference between the bio gas tank and the disputed shed is
3.70 meters. The shed is situated in the petitioner’s property
having a difference of 1.25 meters on the north­western side
and 2.10 meters on the south­western side from the property
of the respondent. There is compound wall separating the
properties of the petitioner and the respondent. The
temporary residential structure of the respondent is situated
2.35 meters far from the above compound wall. At the time
of my visit it is very well noted that there is no harm to the
respondent due to the non working of the disputed shed. It
is presume that there will be no damage or harm to the
respondent at the present stage. The property of the
petitioner is filled with yielding rubber which is not taking
yield for the last 1.5 years. The number of trees is nearly 50.
This report is submitting before Hon’ble family court
nedumangad along with order and the rough plan.
Dated this the 18th day of February 2015.
sd.
M.M. Bashir
                                     Advocate Commissioner”
9
7.    Indeed, the appellant contested the correctness of the

said report. However, the High Court after taking into account

the relevant material and including the report submitted by

the Advocate Commissioner, concluded that the purport of the

award passed by the Lok Adalat did not preclude the

respondent from constructing a new structure after taking due

permission from the competent authority in that regard. The

High Court rejected the argument of the appellant that the

award was in the nature of a permanent prohibition from

putting up any construction on the plot occupied by the

respondent. Having so held, the High Court, taking note of the

apprehension of the appellant that the respondent may start

operating Rubber Sheet­making machinery, which would

inevitably cause air and water pollution, granted liberty to the

appellant to take recourse to the remedy as may be

permissible in law. The High Court also observed that such

proceedings be decided on its own merits and in accordance

with law. The view so taken by the High Court is the subject
10
matter of challenge in this appeal.
8.   The appellant has argued the matter in person. Although

the respondents have been served and respondent No.2 is

represented through counsel, none appeared when the matter

was called out for hearing.
9.   We have considered the relevant material placed on

record and on considering the same in its proper perspective,

we find no reason to interfere with the final conclusion

recorded by the High Court in allowing the writ petition and

setting aside the order passed by the Executing Court. As

noticed from the representation submitted by the appellant to

the Gram Panchayath, the core grievance was with regard to

the unauthorised structure erected on the plot occupied by the

respondent and which was being used as a Plant for making

Rubber    Sheets   on    a   commercial       basis.     The   grievance

essentially was that the structure was in complete violation of

the provisions and conditions of the Kerala Panchayath

Building Rules, 2011 and also contributed to severe health

hazards   to   those    living    in   the   vicinity.   However,   the
11
Panchayath was essentially concerned with the unauthorised

structure erected on the subject plot by respondent No.1. That

grievance stood redressed by the award passed by the Lok

Adalat recording the assurance given by respondent No.1 that

he would demolish the existing structure within a period of

three months. The fact that the structure, as it existed on the

date of making of the award, was removed by respondent No.1

is reinforced from the stand taken by the Panchayath in its

affidavit.   Furthermore,    respondent    No.1    admittedly,

constructed a new building on the same plot after taking prior

permission of the competent authority in that regard, which

presupposes that the structure as existed thereat in August,

2013 was removed, without which the new building could not

have been erected. The fact that permit was granted to

respondent No.1 to construct the new building is not only

supported by the permit dated 9th October, 2013 (Annexure­

P8), but also from the affidavit filed on behalf of the Gram

Panchayath dated 9th January, 2015 and including the factual

position stated in the report of the Advocate Commissioner
12
dated 18th February, 2015.
10. The moot question is the width of the award passed by

the Lok Adalat dated 23rd August, 2013. It is, in our opinion,

obviously limited to removal of the existing structure on the

stated plot occupied by respondent No.1 within three months.

That structure, as aforesaid, came to be removed, which fact is

reinforced from the circumstances discussed hitherto. The

Executing Court, however, erroneously opined that the

structure, as it existed at the time of making of the award, was

still not demolished. That finding is in the teeth of the

documentary evidence and the assertions made on affidavit by

respondent No.1 as well as the Gram Panchayath and

including the factual position mentioned in the report of the

Advocate Commissioner. The High Court rightly rejected the

argument of the appellant that the effect of the award was to

completely prohibit putting up of any structure/building on

the stated plot occupied by respondent No.1, irrespective of

the permission granted by the competent authority in that

regard. The High Court was right in observing that whether
13
respondent No.1 had constructed the structure as per the

permit was a matter to be considered by the competent

authority who had issued such a permit and it would be open

to the appellant to approach that authority for appropriate

reliefs, if so advised. Similarly, insofar as the nuisance likely to

be caused to the appellant due to the activities of the

respondent in the form of air pollution, water pollution, noise

pollution or any other infringement of right, the appellant

must take recourse to the appropriate remedy in that regard.

Further, those proceedings will have to be decided on its own

merits. The view so taken by the High Court is, in our opinion,

unexceptional.
11. We hold that the scope of the award was limited to

removal of the structure as it existed at the relevant time. No

direction has been issued to respondent No.1 to forebear from

carrying on his legitimate activities, including business

activities, from the stated plot occupied by him.            If the

activities of the respondent are in violation of any law or

regulation, it would be open to the appellant to approach the
14
concerned statutory authority or appropriate forum and seek

relief in that regard as per law. Thus, we find no infirmity in

the impugned judgment of the High Court.
12. In view of the above, this appeal is dismissed but with

the observations made hitherto. No order as to costs.
All applications are also disposed of.
……………………………..J
                                    (A.M. Khanwilkar)




                                    ……………………………..J
                                    (Ajay Rastogi)
New Delhi;
April 24, 2019.