[Cites
6
, Cited by
47
]
Supreme Court of India
Pawan Kumar vs Babulal Since Deceased Through Lrs on 2 April, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 461, (2019) 136 ALL LR 207, (2019) 145 REVDEC 600, (2019) 1 RENTLR 647, (2019) 201 ALLINDCAS 45, (2019) 2 ALL RENTCAS 1, (2019) 2 CGLJ 244, (2019) 2 CIVILCOURTC 741, (2019) 2 CLR 604 (SC), (2019) 2 CURCC 19, (2019) 2 RECCIVR 744, (2019) 3 CAL HN 136, (2019) 3 ICC 98, 2019 (4) SCC 367
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Indu Malhotra
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019 (@ SLP(C)NO. 36694 OF 2017)
         PAWAN KUMAR VS. BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH LRS AND ORS.

                                                                                                  1
                                                                                          Reportable

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019
                               (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.36694 of 2017)


                         PAWAN KUMAR                                                     …Appellant


                                                                VERSUS


                         BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH
                         LRS. AND ORS.                                                 …Respondents



                                                         JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.    Leave granted.
2.     This appeal questions the final judgment and order dated 18.08.2017

                         passed by the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jaipur in SBRFA
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MUKESH KUMAR
No.511 of 2016.
Date: 2019.04.02
17:10:34 IST
Reason:
3.      The appellant filed a suit for declaration of title with respect to

                         premises in Kasba Fatehpur’s main market which were more particularly
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019 (@ SLP(C)NO. 36694 OF 2017)
PAWAN KUMAR VS. BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH LRS AND ORS.
2
described in the plaint and prayed that he be declared owner of the premises

       and that the sale deed dated 24.07.2006 executed by the first defendant in

       favour of the second defendant be cancelled. The material averments in the

       plaint were:
(a) A shop in said premises was held by the first defendant, namely,

                     father of the appellant on rent from the erstwhile owner;
(b) The first defendant having become old, it was the appellant who

                     had been looking after the entire business;
(c) The erstwhile owner had filed suit for possession which matter

                     came right upto this Court;
(d) There was a compromise between the erstwhile owner and the first

                      defendant under which the premises where the shop is situate, were

                     agreed to be sold in favour of first defendant;
(e) The first defendant was not having enough money and as such it

                      was the appellant who arranged all the money on his own after

                     borrowing from money lenders on interest;
(f) At the time of preparing the sale deed, the first defendant had

                     indicated that the premises be taken in his name;
(g) Even after purchase of the premises in the name of the first

                      defendant, the appellant was conducting the business in the said

                     shop;
(h) The first defendant had executed a document on a stamp paper on

                      14.03.2002 in the presence of witnesses which was verified by
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019 (@ SLP(C)NO. 36694 OF 2017)
PAWAN KUMAR VS. BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH LRS AND ORS.
3
Notary Public acknowledging that the appellant had paid the entire

                     consideration towards purchase of the premises.
(i) The second defendant was also a tenant in the premises and after

                      the purchase as aforesaid he was making payment of rent to the

                     appellant.
(j) Taking undue advantage of the old age and fragile health of the

                      first defendant, the second defendant got written a document in his

                      favour with respect to first floor of the disputed shop from the first

                      defendant on 19.07.2002.
With the case as aforesaid, Civil Suit No.126 of 2006 was filed by the

        appellant in the court of District Judge, Sikar.
4.       The second defendant filed his written statement denying the case

        pleaded by the appellant. Nine years later, the second defendant submitted

        an application under
Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure
(for

        short ‘
CPC
’) praying for rejection of the plaint on the ground that the suit

        was barred under
Section 4
of the Benami Transaction (Prohibition) Act,

        1988 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’).
5.       The trial court allowed said application under Order VII Rule 11,
CPC
and by its order dated 23.09.2016 rejected the plaint. The relevant portion of

        true translation of the decision of the trial court was as under:
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019 (@ SLP(C)NO. 36694 OF 2017)
PAWAN KUMAR VS. BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH LRS AND ORS.
4
“11.     In this way in the present case, the Plaintiff in
                        his Plaint has himself stated that he wants to purchase
                        the disputed property in the name of his father from his
                        own income or by the money which he had taken on
                        interest. In my humble opinion under
Section-4
of the
                        Benami Transaction (Prohibition) Act, 1988 filing of
                        present Suit is prohibited. Hence, the judgment of the
                        Hon’ble Court produced on behalf of the
                        Applicant/Defendant are applicable on the present case.
                        The Plaint of the Plaintiff is prohibited under Order-7
                        Rule-11(3)
C.P.C
.”
6.       The appellant, being aggrieved filed SBRFA No.511 of 2016 in the

        High Court which appeal was dismissed by the High Court vide its judgment

        and order dated 18.08.2017. It was observed by the High Court as under:
“From the averments made in the plaint it is clear that
                        plaintiff is seeking declaration in his name in respect of
                        suit property with a clear stipulation that he purchased
                        the said property from his own funds/sources in the
                        name of his father and his father was not real owner of
                        the suit property, the Act of 1988 provides that no suit,
                        claim or action to enforce any right in respect of any
                        property held benami against the person in whose name
                        the property is held, shall lie by or on behalf of a person
                        claiming to be the real owner of such property. It is not
                        the case of the plaintiff that property in question was
                        held by the defendant No.1 – father, for joint
                        benefit/joint ownership. The suit was clearly hit by
section 4
of the Act of 1988 and the learned trial court
                        rightly allowed the application under
Order 7 Rule 11
                        CPC
.”
7.       The decision rendered by the High Court is presently under appeal.

        Mr. Abhishek Gupta, learned Advocate appearing for the appellant invited
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019 (@ SLP(C)NO. 36694 OF 2017)
PAWAN KUMAR VS. BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH LRS AND ORS.
5
our attention to the documents on record including the writing dated

         14.03.2002 executed by First Defendant and father of the Appellant. The

         relevant portion of said document dated 14.3.2002 was as under:
“I, Babu Lal Son of late Shri Tara Chand Meharishi,
                        Caste – Brahmin, am the Resident of Near Laxminath
                        Press, Fatehpur, District-Sikar (Raj.)

                        In my name in Kasba Fatehpur near Saraswati Library
                        there is shop along with rooms made over its terrace.
                        Since this property (shop) was purchased by my elder
                        son Pawan Kumar by the money earned with his own
                        income, but in order to give respect to me he had got the
                        Registry of this shop in my name. Hence, over this
                        entire property only his right. In future neither mine nor
                        any of my other successors shall have any right in this
                        property.
I have written my this script in my full senses, with
                        healthy and sound mind, without under any coercion or
                        influence in the presence of two witnesses to my elder
                        son Pawan Kumar, so that it shall remain as proof and in
                        future during their mutual partition amongst brothers, in
                        connection with this shop any kind of dispute would not
                        arise.”
8.      Mr. Abhishek Gupta, learned Advocate relied upon the decision of

         this Court in
Marcel Martins v. M. Printer
and others1 and submitted that

         the case pleaded of the Appellant was fully covered by
Section 4 (3)
of the

         Act and that the courts below were not justified in rejecting the plaint under

         Order VII Rule 11,
CPC
.
Mr. R.K. Singh, learned Advocate appearing for
1
(2012) 5 SCC 342
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019 (@ SLP(C)NO. 36694 OF 2017)
PAWAN KUMAR VS. BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH LRS AND ORS.
6
the respondent, on the other hand, contested the submission and relied upon

         a decision of this Court in
Om Prakash and another v. Jai Prakash2
.
9.      Before we consider the rival submissions, we must note
Section 4
of

         the Act, as it stood before it was amended by Act 43 of 2016, was as under:
“4. Prohibition of the right to recover property held
                        benami.—

                        (1) No suit, claim or action to enforce any right in
                        respect of any property held benami against the person
                        in whose name the property is held or against any other
                        person shall lie by or on behalf of a person claiming to
                        be the real owner of such property.
(2) No defence based on any right in respect of any
                        property held benami, whether against the person in
                        whose name the property is held or against any other
                        person, shall be allowed in any suit, claim or action by
                        or on behalf of a person claiming to be the real owner of
                        such property.
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply,—
(a) where the person in whose name the property is held
                        is a coparcener in a Hindu undivided family and the
                        property is held for the benefit of the coparceners in the
                        family; or
(b) where the person in whose name the property is held
                        is a trustee or other person standing in a fiduciary
                        capacity, and the property is held for the benefit of
2
(1992) 1 SCC 710
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019 (@ SLP(C)NO. 36694 OF 2017)
PAWAN KUMAR VS. BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH LRS AND ORS.
7
another person for whom he is a trustee or towards
                        whom he stands in such capacity.”
10.      In Marcel Martins1 a suit was filed in the year 1990 praying for

        declaration that the plaintiffs were co-owners of certain properties to the

        extent of their contribution.                    After a full-fledged trial, the Suit was

        dismissed by the Trial Court but the judgment was reversed by the High

        Court. While considering the question whether the case of the plaintiffs

        would come within the purview of Sub-Section (3) of
Section 4
of the Act,

        the matter was dealt with by this Court as under:-
“28. The critical question then is whether sub-section (3)
                       of
Section 4
saves a transaction like the one with which
                       we are concerned.
29. Sub-section (3) to
Section 4
extracted above is in two
                       distinct parts. The first part comprises clause (a) to
Section 4(3)
which deals with acquisitions by and in the
                       name of a coparcener in a Hindu Undivided Family for
                       the benefit of such coparceners in the family. There is no
                       dispute that the said provision has no application in the
                       instant case nor was any reliance placed upon the same by
                       the learned counsel for the respondent-plaintiffs.
30. What was invoked by Mr Naveen R. Nath, learned
                       counsel appearing for the respondents was
Section 4(3)(b)
of the Act which too is in two parts viz. one that deals
                       with the trustees and the beneficiaries thereof and the
                       other that deals with the persons standing in a fiduciary
                       capacity and those towards whom he stands in such
                       capacity. It was argued by Mr Nath that the circumstances
                       in which the purchase in question was made in the name
                       of the appellant assumes great importance while
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019 (@ SLP(C)NO. 36694 OF 2017)
PAWAN KUMAR VS. BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH LRS AND ORS.
8
determining whether the appellant in whose name the
                       property was acquired stood in a fiduciary capacity
                       towards the respondent-plaintiffs.
31. The expression “fiduciary capacity” has not been
                       defined in the 1988 Act or any other statute for that
                       matter. And yet there is no gainsaying that the same is an
                       expression of known legal significance, the import
                       whereof may be briefly examined at this stage.
32. The term “fiduciary” has been explained by Corpus
                       Juris Secundum as under:
“A general definition of the word which is
                          sufficiently comprehensive to embrace all cases
                          cannot well be given. The term is derived from
                          the civil or Roman law. It connotes the idea of
                          trust or confidence, contemplates good faith,
                          rather than legal obligation, as the basis of the
                          transaction, refers to the integrity, the fidelity, of
                          the party trusted, rather than his credit or ability,
                          and has been held to apply to all persons who
                          occupy a position of peculiar confidence toward
                          others, and to include those informal relations
                          which exist whenever one party trusts and relies
                          on another, as well as technical fiduciary
                          relations.
The word ‘fiduciary’, as a noun, means one who
                          holds a thing in trust for another, a trustee, a
                          person holding the character of a trustee, or a
                          character analogous to that of a trustee with
                          respect to the trust and confidence involved in it
                          and the scrupulous good faith and condor which
                          it requires; a person having the duty, created by
                          his undertaking, to act primarily for another’s
                          benefit in matters connected with such
                          undertaking. Also more specifically, in a statute, a
                          guardian, trustee, executor, administrator,
                          receiver, conservator or any person acting in any
                          fiduciary capacity for any person, trust or estate.”
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019 (@ SLP(C)NO. 36694 OF 2017)
PAWAN KUMAR VS. BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH LRS AND ORS.
9
33. Words and Phrases, Permanent Edn. (Vol. 16-A, p. 41)
                       defines “fiducial relation” as under:
“There is a technical distinction between a
                            ‘fiducial relation’ which is more correctly
                            applicable to legal relationships between parties,
                            such as guardian and ward, administrator and
                            heirs, and other similar relationships, and
                            ‘confidential relation’ which includes the legal
                            relationships, and also every other relationship
                            wherein confidence is rightly reposed and is
                            exercised.
Generally, the term ‘fiduciary’ applies to any
                            person who occupies a position of peculiar
                            confidence towards another. It refers to integrity
                            and fidelity. It contemplates fair dealing and
                            good faith, rather than legal obligation, as the
                            basis of the transaction. The term includes those
                            informal relations which exist whenever one
                            party trusts and relies upon another, as well as
                            technical fiduciary relations.”
34. Black’s Law Dictionary (7th Edn., p. 640) defines
                       “fiduciary relationship” thus:
“Fiduciary relationship.—A relationship in
                            which one person is under a duty to act for the
                            benefit of the other on matters within the scope
                            of the relationship. Fiduciary relationships—
                            such as trustee-beneficiary, guardian-ward,
                            agent-principal, and attorney-client—require the
                            highest duty of care. Fiduciary relationships
                            usually arise in one of four situations: (1) when
                            one person places trust in the faithful integrity of
                            another, who as a result gains superiority or
                            influence over the first, (2) when one person
                            assumes control and responsibility over another,
                            (3) when one person has a duty to act for or give
                            advice to another on matters falling within the
                            scope of the relationship, or (4) when there is a
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019 (@ SLP(C)NO. 36694 OF 2017)
PAWAN KUMAR VS. BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH LRS AND ORS.
10
specific relationship that has traditionally been
                            recognised as involving fiduciary duties, as with
                            a lawyer and a client or a stockbroker and a
                            customer.”
35. Stroud’s Judicial Dictionary explains the expression
                       “fiduciary capacity” as under:
“Fiduciary capacity.—An administrator who
                            [had] received money under letters of
                            administration and who is ordered to pay it over
                            in a suit for the recall of the grant, holds it ‘in a
                            fiduciary capacity’ within the Debtors Act, 1869
                            so, of the debt due from an executor who is
                            indebted to his testator’s estate which he is able
                            to pay but will not, so of moneys in the hands of
                            a receiver, or agent, or manager, or moneys due
                            on an account from the London agent of a
                            country solicitor, or proceeds of sale in the
                            hands of an auctioneer, or moneys which in the
                            compromise of an action have been ordered to
                            be held on certain trusts or partnership moneys
                            received by a partner.”
36. Bouvier’s Law Dictionary defines “fiduciary capacity”
                       as under:
“What constitutes a fiduciary relationship is
                            often a subject of controversy. It has been held
                            to apply to all persons who occupy a position of
                            peculiar confidence towards others, such as a
                            trustee, executor, or administrator, director of a
                            corporation or society, medical or religious
                            adviser, husband and wife, an agent who
                            appropriates money put into his hands for a
                            specific purpose of investment, collector of city
                            taxes who retains money officially collected, one
                            who receives a note or other security for
                            collection. In the following cases debt has been
                            held to be not a fiduciary one: a factor who
                            retains the money of his principal, an agent
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019 (@ SLP(C)NO. 36694 OF 2017)
PAWAN KUMAR VS. BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH LRS AND ORS.
11
under an agreement to account and pay over
                            monthly, one with whom a general deposit of
                            money is made.”
37. We may at this stage refer to a recent decision of this
                       Court in
CBSE v. Aditya Bandopadhyay3
, wherein
                       Raveendran, J. speaking for the Court
in that case
explained the terms “fiduciary” and “fiduciary
                       relationship” in the following words: (SCC pp. 524-25,
                       para 39)

                            “39. The term ‘fiduciary’ refers to a person
                            having a duty to act for the benefit of another,
                            showing good faith and candour, where such
                            other person reposes trust and special confidence
                            in the person owing or discharging the duty. The
                            term ‘fiduciary relationship’ is used to describe a
                            situation or transaction where one person
                            (beneficiary) places complete confidence in
                            another person (fiduciary) in regard to his
                            affairs, business or transaction(s). The term also
                            refers to a person who holds a thing in trust for
                            another (beneficiary). The fiduciary is expected
                            to act in confidence and for the benefit and
                            advantage of the beneficiary, and use good faith
                            and fairness in dealing with the beneficiary or
                            the things belonging to the beneficiary. If the
                            beneficiary has entrusted anything to the
                            fiduciary, to hold the thing in trust or to execute
                            certain acts in regard to or with reference to the
                            entrusted thing, the fiduciary has to act in
                            confidence and is expected not to disclose the
                            thing or information to any third party.”

                       It is manifest that while the expression “fiduciary
                       capacity” may not be capable of a precise definition, it
                       implies a relationship that is analogous to the relationship
                       between a trustee and the beneficiaries of the trust.
The
                       expression is in fact wider in its import for it extends to all
3
(2011) 8 SCC 497
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019 (@ SLP(C)NO. 36694 OF 2017)
PAWAN KUMAR VS. BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH LRS AND ORS.
12
such situations as place the parties in positions that are
                       founded on confidence and trust on the one part and good
                       faith on the other.
38. In determining whether a relationship is based on trust
                       or confidence, relevant to determining whether they stand
                       in a fiduciary capacity, the court shall have to take into
                       consideration the factual context in which the question
                       arises for it is only in the factual backdrop that the
                       existence or otherwise of a fiduciary relationship can be
                       deduced in a given case. Having said that, let us turn to
                       the facts of the present case once more to determine
                       whether the appellant stood in a fiduciary capacity vis-à-
                       vis the respondent-plaintiffs.”
11.      The factual aspects of the matter were, thereafter, considered and in

        paras 42 and 43 it was observed:-
“42. … …That conclusion gets strengthened by the fact
                       that the parties had made contributions towards the sale
                       consideration paid for the acquisition of the suit property
                       which they would not have done if the intention was to
                       concede the property in favour of the appellant.
43. … … Reposing confidence and faith in the appellant
                       was in the facts and circumstances of the case not unusual
                       or unnatural especially when possession over the suit
                       property continued to be enjoyed by the plaintiffs who
                       would in law and on a parity of reasoning be deemed to be
                       holding the same for the benefit of the appellant as much
                       as the appellant was holding the title to the property for
                       the benefit of the plaintiffs.”
12.      It was, thus, concluded that the transaction was completely saved

        from the mischief of
Section 4
of the Act by reason of the same falling under

        Sub-Section (3)(b) and that the Suit was not barred under the Act. This
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019 (@ SLP(C)NO. 36694 OF 2017)
PAWAN KUMAR VS. BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH LRS AND ORS.
13
judgment was rightly relied upon by Mr. Abhishek Gupta, learned Advocate.

        On the other hand, the reliance placed by Mr. R.K. Singh on the decision in

        Om Prakash2, in our view, is completely misplaced. The issue there was

        whether prohibition under
Section 4
would apply in relation to actions

        initiated before the coming into force of the Ordinance or not? In any event

        of the matter, the issue whether the provisions of the Act are retrospective

        has already been settled4.
13.      In the present case, the controversy has arisen in an application under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
. Whether the matter comes within the purview of
Section 4(3)
of the Act is an aspect which must be gone into on the strength

        of the evidence on record.                  Going by the averments in the Plaint, the

        question whether the plea raised by the appellant is barred under
Section 4
of the Act or not could not have been the subject matter of assessment at the

        stage when application under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
was taken up for

        consideration. The matter required fuller and final consideration after the

        evidence was led by the parties. It cannot be said that the plea of the

        appellant as raised on the face of it, was barred under the Act. The approach

        must be to proceed on a demurrer and see whether accepting the averments
4
R. Rajgopal Reddy through LRs. Vs. Padmini Chandrasekharaiah through LRs.
(1995) 2 SCC 630
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019 (@ SLP(C)NO. 36694 OF 2017)
PAWAN KUMAR VS. BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH LRS AND ORS.
14
in the plaint the suit is barred by any law or not. We may quote the

         following observations of this Court in
Popat and Kotecha Property vs.

         State Bank of India Staff Association5
:
“10. Clause (d) of Order 7 Rule 7 speaks of suit, as
                            appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred
                            by any law. Disputed questions cannot be decided at
                            the time of considering an application filed under
Order 7 Rule 11 CPC
. Clause (d) of Rule 11 of Order
                            7 applies in those cases only where the statement
                            made by the plaintiff in the plaint, without any doubt
                            or dispute shows that the suit is barred by any law in
                            force.”
14.     We, therefore, allow this appeal, set aside the view taken by the courts

         below and dismiss the application preferred by the second defendant under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
. Since the Suit has been pending since 2006, we

         direct the Trial Court to expedite the matter and dispose of the pending Suit

         as early as possible and preferably within six months from today. Needless

         to say that the merits of the matter will be gone into independently by the

         Trial Court.
5
(2005) 7 SCC 510
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3367 OF 2019 (@ SLP(C)NO. 36694 OF 2017)
PAWAN KUMAR VS. BABULAL SINCE DECEASED THROUGH LRS AND ORS.
15
15.      The appeal stands allowed in aforesaid terms. No costs.
………………………….J.
                                                                 [Uday Umesh Lalit]




                                                              ………………………….J.
                                                                  [Indu Malhotra]
        New Delhi;
April 02, 2019.