[Cites
10
, Cited by
22
]
Supreme Court of India
Kulsum R. Nadiadwala & Ors vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 17 April, 2012
Equivalent citations: AIR 2012 SUPREME COURT 2718, 2012 (6) SCC 348, 2012 AIR SCW 3079, 2012 (4) AIR BOM R 385, 2012 (4) AIR JHAR R 199, (2012) 4 MPLJ 12, (2012) 117 REVDEC 271, (2012) 5 ANDHLD 70, (2012) 3 ICC 162, (2012) 7 SCALE 212, (2012) 3 JCR 32 (SC), AIR 2012 SC (CIV) 1855, (2012) 4 ALLMR 464 (SC), (2012) 4 MPHT 324, (2012) 116 ALLINDCAS 64 (SC), (2012) 2 CLR 100 (SC), (2013) 1 CIVLJ 34, (2012) 5 MAH LJ 563, (2012) 93 ALL LR 924, (2012) 2 CURCC 202, (2012) 114 CUT LT 741, (2012) 5 BOM CR 802
Bench:
Anil R. Dave
,
H.L. Dattu
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.4473 OF 2000


KULSUM R. NADIADWALA              ... APPELLANT

                                   VERSUS

STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ORS.    ... RESPONDENTS


                                  O R D E R
1.    This appeal is directed against the judgment and order passed  by  the
High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition No.2699  of  1987  dated
21.07.1998.  By  the  impugned  judgment  and  order,  the  High  Court  has
dismissed the writ petition filed by one of the interested  persons,  having
interest in land Survey No.119/3 Pt.  situated  at  Village  Malad,  Taluka,
Borivali, District Bombay Suburban.
2.    Section 4 Notification dated 24.10.1975, under the provisions  of  the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
(for short 'the Act') came to be  issued  by  the
State Government to acquire certain piece of  lands  situated  in  different
villages for the purpose of establishing Central  Ordinance  Depot  for  the
Union of India (Military).
3.    The beneficiary of these lands is the  Central  Government.  They  are
served, but at the time of hearing of this appeal,  they  were  not  present
before the Court and, therefore, we had no  occasion  to  hear  the  learned
counsel for the Union of India.
4.    We have heard Mr. Jay Savla, learned counsel for  the  appellants  and
Mr. Shankar Chillarge, learned counsel for the State of Maharashtra.
5.    The appellants, herein,  claim  that  they  are  the  legal  heirs  of
deceased Ismail Nadiadwala. During the lifetime of  Ismail  Nadiadwala,  the
State Government had issued notifications under
Sections 4
and
6
of the  Act
to acquire various lands for a  public  purpose,  namely,  for  establishing
military personnel ordinance on the  land  which  belonged  to  late  Ismail
Nadiadwala and one Ibrahim Nadiadwala. They had  a  joint  interest  in  the
property.
6.     After  such  acquisition  and  without  issuing  any  notice  to  the
appellants and after hearing only Ibrahim Nadiadwala, the award came  to  be
passed by the State Government vide  order  dated  23.09.1986.  Immediately,
thereafter, Ibrahim Nadiadwala had requested the State Government to  permit
him to look into the records to find out whether  he  had  issued  with  any
notice. Since such permission was  not  granted  to  him,  he  had  filed  a
petition  before  the  High  Court  under
Articles  226
and
227
of   the
Constitution of India, inter  alia,  questioning  the  notifications  issued
under
Sections 4
and
6
of the Act.
7.    As we have already noticed, the Division  Bench  of  the  Bombay  High
Court has dismissed the petition filed by the appellants.
8.    Learned counsel appearing for the appellants would  contend  that  the
respondent-State, while issuing the notification under
Section 4(1)
of  the
Act, had not complied with the mandatory requirement, that  is,  to  publish
the notification in  a  public  place.  Secondly,  it  is  stated  that  the
appellants' predecessor was recorded as the owner of  the  property  and  no
individual notice was issued to him. It is further contended that
Section  6
of the notification was the subject matter of a  Writ  Petition  before  the
High Court in Writ Petition No.149/1979.  The  High  Court  vide  its  order
dated 6.9.1982, while allowing the petition, had  quashed  the  notification
dated 22.11.1978 issued under
Section 6
of the Act and the order  so  passed
was  not  questioned  by  the  respondent-State  before  any  other   forum.
According to learned counsel, since the  order  so  passed  by  the  learned
Judge had attained finality, the respondent cannot now contend that  it  was
confined only to the appellants in the said Writ Petition.  Learned  counsel
further submits that after the Award  was  made,  possession  of  the  lands
requires to be taken as provided under
Section 16
of the Act.  According  to
learned counsel, in  the  instant  case,  the  respondents  have  not  taken
possession of the lands as envisaged under
Section 16
of  the  Act.   Their
stand appears to be that since the lands were already in possession  of  the
Defence establishment, possession as required under
Section 16
of  the  Act
need not be resorted to.  Lastly, learned counsel would  submit  that  after
Section 6
notification was issued at the instance of the beneficiary of  the
notification, certain lands came to be deleted from
Section  6
notification
and the same could not have been done without  resorting  to  provisions  of
Section 48
of the Act. For all these  reasons,  the  learned  counsel  would
contend that, the notification  issued  by  the  State  Government  qua  the
appellants requires to be quashed.
9.    Per contra, learned counsel for  the  State  submits  that  there  was
delay on the part of the legal representatives of the registered  owner  and
they did not approached the Court within a reasonable time,  and  therefore,
the Writ Petition ought to have been rejected by the High Court only on  the
ground of delay and laches on the part of the appellants in approaching  the
Court.  Insofar, as the other legal  contentions  advanced  by  the  learned
counsel for the appellants before us, it appears that  the  learned  counsel
had no answers whatsoever.    In  fact,  he  did  not  also  answered  them.
10.
Section 4
of the Land Acquisition Act reads as under :
“Publication of preliminary notification and power of
      officers thereupon.-
(1)Whenever it appears to the[ appropriate Government] the  land
      in any locality[ is needed or] is likely to be needed for  any  public
      purpose[ or for a company], a notification to  that  effect  shall  be
      published in  the  Official  Gazette[  and  in  two  daily  newspapers
      circulating in that locality of which at least one  shall  be  in  the
      regional language], and the Collector shall cause public notice of the
      substance of such notification to be given at convenient places in the
      said locality[ (the last of the dates  of  such  publication  and  the
      giving of such public notice, being hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
      date of the publication of the notification)].
(2) Thereupon  it  shall  be  lawful  for  any  officer,  either
      generally or specially authorized by such Government in  this  behalf,
      and for his servants and workman,-
to enter upon and survey and take levels of any land in such
      locality;
to dig or bore into the sub- soil;
to do all other acts necessary to ascertain whether the land  is
      adapted for such purpose;
to set out the boundaries of the land proposed to be  taken  and
      the intended line of the work (if any) proposed to be made thereon;
to mark such levels, boundaries and line by  placing  marks  and
      cutting trenches; and,
            where otherwise the survey cannot be completed  and  the  levels
      taken and the boundaries and line marked, to cut down and  clear  away
      any part of any standing crop, fence or jungle;
Provided that no person shall enter into any  building  or  upon
      any enclosed court or garden attached to a dwelling house (unless with
      the consent of the occupier thereof) without  previously  giving  such
      occupier at least seven days' notice in writing of his intention to do
      so.“



      The said provisions came up for consideration  before  this  Court  in
the case of
Collector (District Magistrate) Allahabad & Anr.  Vs.  Raja  Ram
Jaiswal
, (1985) 3 SCC 1.  In
the  said  decision
,  the  Court  specifically
observed that there are two requirements for the  issuance  of  Notification
under
Section 4
of the Act.  The first requirement is that the  notification
requires to be published in an Official Gazette and the  second  requirement
is that the acquiring authority should cast public notices of the  substance
of such notification in a convenient place in  the  locality  in  which  the
land proposed to be acquired is situate.  The  Court  has  further  observed
that both the contentions are cumulative and they are mandatory.
11.   In the instant case, the respondents before the High Court  had  filed
their  reply  affidavit.  They  did  not  dispute  the  contentions  of  the
appellants that they had not issued any public  notices  as  required  under
Section 4
of the Act.  They  only  reiterated  that  such  notification  was
published in the Official Gazette.
12.   Since the mandatory requirement as required under
Section 4(1)
of  the
Act is not complied with by the respondents, while acquiring  the  lands  in
question, in our opinion, the entire acquisition proceedings requires to  be
declared as null and void. This Court in
J&K Housing Board v. Kunwar  Sanjay
Krishan Kaul
,(2011) 10 SCC 714, has observed that  all  the  formalities  of
serving notice to the interested person, stipulated under
Section 4
of  the
Act, has to be mandatorily complied with in  the  manner  provided  therein,
even though  the  interested  persons  have  knowledge  of  the  acquisition
proceedings. This Court further observed thus:
32. It is settled law that  when  any  statutory  provision  provides  a
   particular manner for doing a particular act, the said thing or act must
   be done in accordance with the manner prescribed therefor  in  the  Act.
Merely because the parties  concerned  were  aware  of  the  acquisition
   proceedings or served with individual notices does not make the position
   alter when the statute makes it very clear that all the procedures/modes
   have to be strictly complied with in the manner provided therein. Merely
   because the landowners failed to submit their objections within 15  days
   after the publication of notification under Section 4(1)  of  the  State
   Act, the authorities cannot be permitted to claim that it  need  not  be
   strictly resorted to.
13.   In view of the conclusion that we have  reached  on  the  first  issue
canvassed by learned counsel for the appellants, we do not  think  that  the
other issues that the learned counsel for  the  appellants  has  raised  and
canvassed before us need to be answered.
14.   In view of the above, while allowing  this  appeal,  we  restrict  the
claim of the appellants only to 50% of the lands in question, namely,  lands
in  Survey  No.119/3  Pt.  situated  at  Village  Malad,  Taluka,  Borivali,
District Bombay Suburban.
15.   We further direct that the  respondents  shall  handover  50%  of  the
vacant possession of the said land to the appellants forthwith.
No costs.
Ordered accordingly.
...................J.
                                                                (H.L. DATTU)

                                                       ...................J.
                                                              (ANIL R. DAVE)

NEW DELHI;
APRIL 17, 2012