[Cites
4
, Cited by
27
]
Supreme Court of India
Avishek Goenka vs Union Of India & Anr on 27 April, 2012
Equivalent citations: AIR 2012 SUPREME COURT 2226, 2012 AIR SCW 2837, 2012 CLC 634 (SC), (2012) 4 ALLMR 455 (SC), (2012) 2 KCCR 51, (2012) 3 JCR 51 (SC), (2012) 3 JCR 94 (SC), 2012 (2) SCC(CRI) 712, 2012 (5) SCC 275, 2012 (4) SCALE 602, 2012 (4) SCALE 611, 2012 (4) ALL MR 455, 2012 (5) SCC 321, (2012) 114 ALLINDCAS 190 (SC), AIR 2012 SC (CIVIL) 1540, (2012) 3 CIVILCOURTC 525, (2012) 2 KER LT 577, (2012) 3 ALL WC 3053, (2012) 2 ACC 356, (2012) 2 CURCC 205, (2012) 2 MAD LW 961, (2012) 3 KANT LJ 413, (2012) 4 MAD LJ 633, (2012) 3 MAD LW 334, (2012) 52 OCR 247, (2012) 4 SCALE 611, (2012) 4 SCALE 602, (2012) 92 ALL LR 710, (2012) 4 ALL WC 3455, (2012) 3 CIVLJ 837, AIRONLINE 2012 SC 715
Author:
Swatanter Kumar
Bench:
Swatanter Kumar
,
A.K. Patnaik
,
S.H. Kapadia
REPORTABLE


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                         CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                    WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 285 OF 2010





      Avishek Goenka                                   … Petitioner

                                   Versus
      Union of India   & Anr.                             … Respondents





                               J U D G M E N T
Swatanter Kumar, J.
1.    The petitioner is a  businessman  engaged  in  the  business  of
      distribution of pre-paid virtual and tangible calling value for mobile
      phone subscribers and also sells new customer  acquisition  packs  and
      follows it  up,  by  collection  of  customer  application  forms  and
      executing tele-calling, to  verify  customer  credentials.    In  this
      Public Interest Litigation, the petitioner has attempted to  highlight
      the grave  issue  of  non-observance  of  norms/regulations/guidelines
      related to proper and effective  subscriber  verification  by  various
      service providers.  In fact, according to  the  petitioner,  there  is
      rampant flouting  of  norms/regulations/guidelines  relating  to  this
      subject matter and there is no proper verification of the  subscribers
      prior to selling of the pre-paid mobile connections to them.
2.    The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (for short, “TRAI”) is
      the regulatory body for the telecommunications sector in India and the
      Union of India  has  responsibility  to  issue  guidelines  and  frame
      regulations and conditions of licence, in consultation with the  TRAI,
      to  ensure  coordination,  standardization  and  compliance  with  the
      regulations, as well as  protecting  the  security  interests  of  the
      country.
3.    It is the averment of the petitioner that the telecom sector has
      witnessed the most fundamental structural  and  institutional  reforms
      since 1991.   This sector has grown  significantly  in  the  last  few
      years.   As per the Annual Report for 2009-2010 of the  Department  of
      Telecommunication, Ministry of Communications and  IT,  Government  of
      India (for short “DoT”), as on 31st December, 2009, the Indian telecom
      sector had about 5622.11 million connections.   The  tele-density  per
      hundred  population,  which  is  an  important  indicator  of  telecom
      penetration in the country, has increased from 2.32 per cent in March,
      1999 to 47.88 per cent in December, 2009.    The  Eleventh  Five  Year
      Plan for 2007-2012 had provided a target of 600  million  connections,
      but the industry has already provided around 700 million  connections,
      thus far exceeding the target. Different random studies in relation to
      pre-paid  Subscriber  Identity  Module  (SIM)  cards  show  widespread
      violation of guidelines for Know Your Customer (KYC)  and  even  other
      common guidelines.   The SIM cards are  provided  without  any  proper
      verification,  which  causes  serious  security  threat  as  well   as
      encourages malpractices in the telecom sector.  It appears that 65 per
      cent of all pre-paid SIM cards issued in Jammu & Kashmir  and  39  per
      cent of all pre-paid SIM cards in Mumbai, may have been issued without
      verification; which means that 1 out of every 6 pre-paid SIM cards  is
      issued without  proper  verification.    The  averment  is  that  such
      unverified SIM cards are also used in terrorist attacks.
4.    This Court, in the case of
State  (NCT  of  Delhi)  Vs.  Navjot
      Sandhu
alias Afsan Guru [(2005) 11 SCC 600] had,  with  some  caution,
      referred to a large number of calls which had been made by  terrorists
      from instruments containing  unverified  SIM  cards.   It  is  further
      averred by the petitioner that around 80 per cent of the pre-paid  SIM
      cards may be purchased in pre-activated form which is in violation  of
      the notifications issued by the DoT, dated  22.11.2006  and  23.3.2009
      respectively, banning the sale of pre-activated SIM  cards.    Another
      significant fact that has been brought out in this petition  is  that,
      pre-paid SIM  cards,  which  are  the  most  commonly  issued  without
      verification, constitute 96 per cent of  the  total  SIM  cards  sold.
      This indicates the seriousness of the problem as well as the  security
      hazard that emerges from the telecom sector.
5.    Thus, the petitioner has prayed  that  there  should  be  strict
      implementation  of  subscriber   verification   guidelines,   physical
      verification be compulsory in future and physical  re-verification  of
      existing subscriber base be conducted in a transparent manner. He also
      seeks the prevention of inflated subscriber base. On  all  matters  in
      relation to these prayers, he pleads for issuance of appropriate writ,
      orders or directions.  Upon notice, the DoT as well as  the  TRAI  had
      put in appearance and placed on record the guidelines  issued  by  the
      DoT, as well as the comments of TRAI, respectively.
6.    The petitioner, during the pendency of the  petition,  filed  an
      Interim Application, I.A. No. 6 of 2012,  wherein  he  referred  to  a
      circulation containing the draft norms prepared by the  Government  of
      India (DoT) in relation to :
• Re-verification of existing customer base.
            • Verification process as followed in Assam, J&K to be extended
              across country.
• Mail of SIM card and activation details to the address of the
              subscriber, both being  sent  separately.    This  method  is
              similar to that of delivery of debit, credit cards.
            • Refuse to recognize government ID cards as sufficient  proof,
              etc.
7.    According to the petitioner, these norms have not  been  adhered
      to and in fact, the present instructions /  guidelines  formulated  by
      DoT are at variance to the norms, ignoring essential  precautions  for
      verification of subscriber identity and safe distribution of  pre-paid
      SIM cards.
8.    We have already noticed that the rapid expansion of the  telecom
      sector  and  its  impact  on   development,   both,   equally   impose
      responsibility on the Government of India, the regulatory body and the
      various stakeholders  in  the  telecom  sector  to  carry  out  proper
      verification of the pre-paid SIM cards and ensure national safety  and
      security.   To achieve this object, it is  primarily  for  the  expert
      bodies and  the  Government  of  India  to  act  and  discharge  their
      respective functions.
9.    In terms of
Section 11
of the Telecom  Regulatory  Authority  of
      India Act, 1997 (for short, ‘the Act’), it is a  statutory  obligation
      upon the TRAI to recommend a regulatory regime which  will  serve  the
      purpose of development, facilitate competition and promote efficiency,
      while taking due precautions in regard to  safety  of  the  people  at
      large and  the  various  other  aspects  of  subscriber  verification.
      Similarly, the DoT is responsible for discharging  its  functions  and
      duties as, ultimately, it is the responsibility of the  Government  to
      provide for the safety of its citizens.  The TRAI has to regulate  the
      interests of telecom service  providers  and  subscribers,  so  as  to
      permit and ensure orderly growth of telecom sector.  The Government of
      India and  TRAI,  both,  have  to  attain  this  delicate  balance  of
      interests by providing relevant instructions or guidelines in a timely
      manner and ensuring their implementation in accordance with law.
10.   While referring to the guidelines issued by DoT and the comments
      of  TRAI  thereupon,  the  petitioner  has  raised,  inter  alia,  but
      primarily, the following objections :
i)  Despite  clear  guidelines  and  decision   to   complete   re-
verification  of  existing  customer  base,  scheduled   to   be
           completed between 1st November,  2009  to  31st  October,  2010,
           which time was further  extended  to  31st  December,  2010,  no
           effective steps have been taken to complete this exercise.
ii) Re-verification has been left in the  hands  of  the  interested
           stakeholders, i.e., the service providers  themselves,  who  are
           not taking appropriate and effective steps to complete  the  re-
           verification exercise.
iii) The delivery  of  the  pre-paid  SIM  card  to  the  prospective
           subscribers should be  effected  by  registered  post  and  home
           delivery process, so as to provide  basic  verification  of  the
           address of the subscriber.
iv) There should be no relaxation of requirement for  photograph  of
           the subscriber in the Customer Acquisition Forms (CAF).
v) Lastly, that there should be heavy penalty for violation of  the
           guidelines and particularly, for providing pre-paid SIM cards to
           subscribers whose identity and addresses are unverified.
11.   Before this Court, the DoT filed  its  instructions  dated  14th
      March, 2011, relating to various aspects involved in the present  case
      and  specifically,  on  the  manner  of  verification  of  new  mobile
      subscribers (pre-paid  and  post-paid).    These  instructions,  inter
      alia,  dealt  with  the  verification   and   activation   of   mobile
      connections, special guidelines for issue  of  mobile  connections  to
      foreigners and outstation users, bulk mobile  connections,  change  in
      the name of subscriber, disconnection, lodging of complaints and  even
      imposition  of  penalties.    Clause  3(vii)  of  these   instructions
      provided that pre-activated SIM cards are not to be sold.   In case of
      sale of pre-activated SIM cards, a penalty of Rs.  50,000/-  per  such
      connection shall be levied  upon  the  service  provider/licensee,  in
      addition to immediate disconnection of the mobile connection.
12.   Most of the  grievances  raised  by  the  petitioner  have  been
      appropriately dealt with under  these  instructions.    But,  however,
      some of the issues have not been comprehensively provided  for.    The
      TRAI filed an affidavit dated  14th  March,  2012,  dealing  with  the
      instructions  of  the  DoT,  dated  14th  March,  2011.  In  the  said
      affidavit, however, TRAI suggested certain variations as  provided  in
      Annexure R-I to their affidavit.  According to TRAI, the  verification
      of identity is dealt with differently  in  different  countries,  some
      have provided stringent standards of documentation  of  identification
      while others have not  issued  any  guidelines  and  left  it  to  the
      discretion of the service provider.   In India, TRAI recommended  that
      the Customer Acquisition Form (CAF) have a “unique” number, which  may
      be affixed at a central warehouse, rather than prior to  distribution.
       TRAI also recommended that the CAF form  should  be  simpler  in  its
      content as the form presently  in  use  is  not  serving  its  purpose
      adequately.  TRAI has annexed to its affidavit,  as  Annexure  I,  the
      sample form which should be adopted as a regular form to be filled  in
      by the subscriber.   According to TRAI, in a manner  similar  to  bulk
      users, even individual users should disclose all  the  SIM  cards  and
      connections in the name of such individual, with due  verification  by
      the licensee. Also differing with the instructions of DoT on the issue
      of manner of conversion from pre-paid  to  post-paid  connections  and
      vice-versa,  as  well  as  regarding  the  transferability  of  mobile
      connections, TRAI submits that the both  should  be  permissible,  the
      former being treated as a change in tariff plan (not as a fresh  or  a
      transferred connection) and the latter as  a  new  mobile  connection,
      subject to consent of the existing owner of the mobile connection.
13.   The other issue on which DoT and TRAI differed is,  whether  the
      employees of the  licensee/service  provider  should  be  required  to
      personally update  the  subscriber  details  in  the  database.  While
      according to DoT, this should be carried out by the employees  of  the
      licensee itself, however, according to TRAI, it can be done  by  their
      authorized representatives, keeping  in  view  various  factors,  like
      expense, time, efficiency and practicability.  Both TRAI and  DoT  are
      agreeable that such a  database  of  all  the  registered  subscribers
      should be maintained by the licensee and the same be  made  accessible
      to  the  security  agencies.   Giving  an  example  of  the   Nigerian
      Communication Commission, which maintains a similar  database  of  all
      registered subscribers, TRAI concludes that even the general  evidence
      demonstrates that such database makes verification and tracing of  the
      identity of the subscriber easier,  particularly  in  absence  of  the
      Unique  ID  cards.   Some  of  the  licensees  and  service  providers
      intervened in the present writ petition and have taken  a  stand  that
      they are, in fact, maintaining  database  details  of  all  registered
      subscribers.   Such  information  is  also  made  available   to   the
      Government Department or security agencies on demand and in accordance
      with law.
14.   If one examines the powers and functions of TRAI, as  postulated
      under
Section 11
of the Act, it is clear  that  TRAI  would  not  only
      recommend, to the DoT, the terms and conditions upon which  a  licence
      is granted to a service provider but has to also ensure compliance  of
      the same and may recommend revocation of licence in the event of  non-
      compliance with the regulations.   It has to perform very  objectively
      one of its main functions, i.e., to facilitate competition and promote
      efficiency in the operation of the telecommunication services,  so  as
      to facilitate growth  in  such  services.   It  is  expected  of  this
      regulatory authority to  monitor  the  quality  of  service  and  even
      conduct periodical survey to ensure proper implementation.
15.   What emerges from the above discussion is that the  stakeholders
      DoT, TRAI and the licencees are ad idem  in  regard  to  most  of  the
      issues in terms of the instructions prepared  by  the  DoT.   However,
      there are certain points on which there is  a  difference  of  opinion
      between the DoT and the TRAI.  This limited divergence is required  to
      be resolved by further clarification and  issuance  of  more  specific
      instructions.  These issues fall under two categories: - firstly, what
      has been pointed out by the petitioner and secondly, where the DoT and
      the TRAI hold different opinion as noticed above.  Proper deliberation
      between the stakeholders possessed of technical  knowhow  can  resolve
      such issues usefully and effectively.
16.   The abovementioned points of divergence between TRAI and DoT are
      matters which will have serious ramifications not only  vis-à-vis  the
      regulatory authorities and the licensees but also on  the  subscribers
      and the entire country.  These aspects demand serious deliberation  at
      the hands of the technical experts.  It will not  be  appropriate  for
      this Court to examine these technical aspects,  as  such  matters  are
      better left in the domain of the statutory or  expert  bodies  created
      for that purpose.  The  concept  of  ‘regulatory  regime’  has  to  be
      understood and applied by the courts, within the framework of law, but
      not by substituting their own views,  for  the  views  of  the  expert
      bodies like an appellate court.  The regulatory regime is expected  to
      fully regulate and control activities in  all  spheres  to  which  the
      particular law relates.
17.   We have clearly stated that it is not for this Court to  examine
      the merit or otherwise of such policy  and  regulatory  matters  which
      have been determined by  expert  bodies  having  possessing  requisite
      technical knowhow and are statutory in  nature.   However,  the  Court
      would step in and direct the technical bodies to consider  the  matter
      in accordance  with  law,  while  ensuring  that  public  interest  is
      safeguarded and arbitrary decisions do not prevail.  This Court in the
      case of
Delhi Science Forum & Ors. v. Union of India
[AIR 1996 SC 1356
      = (1996) 2 SCC 405], while  dealing  with  provision  of  licences  to
      private companies as well as establishment, maintenance and working of
      such licences under the provisions of the
Telegraph Act, 1885
, applied
      the  ‘wednesbury  principle’  and  held  that  ‘as  such  the  Central
      Government is expected to put such conditions while granting  licences
      which shall safeguard the public interest  and  the  interest  of  the
      nation.  Such conditions should be commensurate with  the  obligations
      that flow while parting with the privilege which has been  exclusively
      vested in the Central Government by the Act’.  It is the specific case
      of the petitioner and some of the  affected  parties  in  the  present
      proceedings that certain very important aspects,  including  security,
      have not been appropriately dealt with in the instructions dated  14th
      March, 2011.
18.   Some divergence on certain specific  issues  of  the  regulatory
      regime has been projected in the instructions and  comments  filed  by
      TRAI and DoT.  They need  to  be  resolved  but,  in  absence  of  any
      technical knowhow or expertise being available  with  this  Court,  it
      will not be appropriate to decide, by a judicial dictum, as  to  which
      of the views expressed by these high  powered  bodies  would  be  more
      beneficial to the regulatory regime and will prove more  effective  in
      advancing the public interest.  Essentially this should be left to  be
      clarified  and  the  disputes  be  resolved  by  the   expert   bodies
      themselves.  It is a settled canon of law that in a regulatory regime,
      the terms and conditions imposed thereunder should be unambiguous  and
      certain.  It is expected that the authorities concerned would  enforce
      the regulatory regime with exactitude.   Therefore,  it  is  not  only
      desirable but also imperative that TRAI and DoT seriously cogitate  on
      the issues where divergence has been expressed between them and  bring
      unanimity in the terms and conditions of licences which would form  an
      integral part of the instructions dated 14th March, 2011.
19.   It may be  noticed  here  that,  as  interveners,  some  of  the
      licensees and/or service providers had criticized some  of  the  terms
      and conditions of licence proposed under the instructions  dated  14th
      March, 2011.  These interveners not only made  some  suggestions  with
      regard to the ambit and scope of the guidelines  and  instructions  by
      TRAI or DoT but also intended to raise certain disputes vis-à-vis  DoT
      in the capacity of licensees subject  to  the  impugned  instructions.
      Without any reservation, we make it clear that we are not directly  or
      indirectly entering upon the  adjudication  of  any  dispute  or  even
      differences between the service provider/licensee on the one hand  and
      TRAI or DoT on the other.  If they or any of them have  any  claim  or
      dispute with the  other,  they  should  resolve  the  same  by  taking
      recourse to independent proceedings in accordance with law.
20.   In view of our above discussion, we  partially  allow  the  writ
      petition. The instructions dated 14th March, 2011 issued by DoT be and
      hereby are accepted by the Court subject to the following conditions:
(i)   We hereby direct the constitution of a  Joint  Expert  Committee
           consisting of two experts from TRAI and two experts from DoT  to
           be chaired by the  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Communications  and
           Information Technology, Government of India.
(ii)  This Committee shall discuss and resolve  the  issues  on  which
           TRAI in its  affidavit  has  given  opinion  divergent  to  that
           declared by DoT in its  instructions  dated  14th  March,  2011.
Following are the points of divergence that require  examination
           by the Joint Expert Committee :
(a)    Whether  re-verification  should  be  undertaken  by  the
                 service provider/licensee, the  DoT  itself  or  any  other
                 central body?
(b)   Is there any need for enhancing the penalty for  violating
                 the instructions/guidelines including sale of pre-activated
                 SIM cards?
(c)   Whether delivery of SIM cards may be made by post?   Which
                 is the best mode of delivery of SIM cards  to  provide  due
                 verification of identity and address of a subscriber?
(d)   Which of the application forms, i.e., the existing one  or
                 the  one  now  suggested  by  TRAI  should  be  adopted  as
                 universal application form for purchase of a SIM card?
(e)    In  absence  of  Unique  ID  card,  whether  updating  of
                 subscriber details should be the  burden  of  the  licensee
                 personally or could it  be  permitted  to  be  carried  out
                 through an authorized representative of the licensee?
(f)   In the  interest  of  national  security  and  the  public
                 interest,  whether   the   database   of   all   registered
                 subscribers should be maintained by DoT or by the  licensee
                 and how soon  the  same  may  be  made  accessible  to  the
                 security agencies in accordance with law?
(iii) The above notified Committee shall resolve the  above  specified
           issues and any other ancillary issue arising therefrom and  make
           its recommendations known to the DoT within  three  months  from
           today.
(iv)  The DoT shall take into consideration the recommendations of the
           Joint Expert Committee.  The instructions issued  by  DoT  dated
           14th March, 2011 shall thereupon be amended, modified,  altered,
           added to or substituted accordingly.   They  shall  then  become
           operative in law and binding upon all concerned.
(v)   Composite  instructions,  so  formulated,  shall  positively  be
           issued by the DoT within 15  weeks  from  today  and  report  of
           compliance submitted to the Registry of this Court.
21.   The writ petition is disposed  of  with  the  above  directions.
      There shall be no order as to costs.
….…………......................CJI.
(S.H. Kapadia)






                                             …….…………......................J.
                                                              (A.K. Patnaik)






                                           ...….…………......................J.
                                                           (Swatanter Kumar)
      New Delhi
      April 27, 2012