[Cites
8
, Cited by
41
]
Supreme Court of India
Avishek Goenka vs Union Of India & Anr on 27 April, 2012
Author:
Swatanter Kumar
Bench:
Swatanter Kumar
,
A.K. Patnaik
,
S.H. Kapadia
REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                         CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                    WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 265 OF 2011

      Avishek Goenka                                  … Petitioner

                                   Versus
      Union of India   & Anr.                           … Respondents





                               J U D G M E N T
Swatanter Kumar, J.
1.    Alarming rise in heinous crimes like kidnapping, sexual  assault
      on women and dacoity have impinged upon the  right  to  life  and  the
      right to live in a safe environment which are within the  contours  of
Article 21
of the Constitution of India.    One  of  the  contributory
      factors to such increase is use of black films on  windows/windshields
      of four-wheeled  vehicles.   The  petitioner,  as  a  public  spirited
      person, has invoked the  extra-ordinary  jurisdiction  of  this  Court
      under
Article 32
of the Constitution in the  present  public  interest
      litigation, praying  for  certain  directions  to  stop  this  menace.
      According to the  petitioner,  this  Court  should  issue  a  writ  or
      direction   requiring   use   of   such   safety   glasses   on    the
      windows/windshields in vehicles  having  100  per  cent  Visual  Light
      Transmission  (for  short  ‘VLT’)  only  and,  to  that  extent,   the
      petitioner challenges  the  correctness  of  Rule  100  of  the  Motor
      Vehicles Rules, 1989 (for short  “the  Rules”).   He  also  prays  for
      prohibition on use of black films on  the  glasses  of  the  vehicles,
      proper implementation of law in that behalf and  finally,  for  taking
      stringent actions against the offenders,  using  vehicles  with  black
      filmed glasses.  He also prays that a larger police  force  should  be
      deputed to monitor such offences.
2.    The use of black films upon the vehicles gives immunity  to  the
      violators in committing a crime and is used as a tool of  criminality,
      considerably increasing criminal activities.  At times, heinous crimes
      like dacoity, rape, murder and even terrorist acts are committed in or
      with the aid of vehicles having black films pasted on the side windows
      and on the screens of the vehicles.  It is stated that because of non-
      observance of the norms, regulations and guidelines  relating  to  the
      specifications for the front and rear windscreens and the side windows
      of the vehicles, the offenders can move undetected  in  such  vehicles
      and commit crimes without hesitation.
3.    The word ‘tinted’ means shade or hue as per the dictionary.  The
      rear and front and side glasses of vehicles  are  provided  with  such
      shade or tint, and therefore, they are widely referred to  as  ‘tinted
      glasses’, which is different from ‘black films’.  The glasses  of  the
      vehicles having a coating of black films cannot be termed  as  ‘tinted
      glasses’ because they are not manufactured as such.
4.    Besides aiding in commission  of  crimes,  black  films  on  the
      vehicles are also at times positively correlated with motor  accidents
      on the roads.  It is for the reason that the comparative visibility to
      that through normal/tinted glasses which are manufactured as  such  is
      much lesser and the persons  driving  at  high  speed,  especially  on
      highways, meet with accidents because of use of black filmed glasses.
5.    The use of black films also prevents  the  traffic  police  from
      seeing the activity in the car and communicating with  the  driver  of
      the vehicle. The petitioner  also  cites  that  the  number  of  fatal
      accidents of vehicles having black films is much higher in India  than
      in other parts of the world.  The black  filmed  vehicles  have  lower
      visibility and therefore, the chances of accident are increased by  18
      per cent to 38 per cent due to low visibility.  He has  also  referred
      to the World Health Organization’s data, pertaining to  deaths  caused
      on roads, which, in India have  crossed  that  of  China,  though  the
      latter has more vehicles, population and area in comparison to  India.
      A device called luxometer can  measure  the  level  of  opaqueness  in
      windows owing to the application of black films but this device  is  a
      scarce resource  and  is  very  scantily  available  with  the  police
      personnel in India.
6.    The Court can take a judicial notice of the fact  that  even  as
      per the reports, maximum crimes are committed  in  such  vehicles  and
      there has been a definite rise in the commission  of  heinous  crimes,
      posing a threat to security of individuals and the State, both.
7.    Whatever are the rights of an individual, they are regulated and
      controlled by the statutory provisions of the Act and the Rules framed
      thereunder.   The citizens at large have a right to life i.e. to  live
      with dignity, freedom and safety.  This right emerges from
Article  21
of the Constitution of  India.   As  opposed  to  this  constitutional
      mandate, a trivial individual protection  or  inconvenience,  if  any,
      must yield in favour of the larger public interest.
8.    The petitioner claims to have received various replies from  the
      police department of different States like Tamil  Nadu,  West  Bengal,
      Delhi and Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi.  On the  basis  of  the
      replies received under the provisions of the
Right to Information Act,
      2005
, copies of which have been annexed to the writ  petition,  it  is
      averred that these authorities are of the unanimous opinion that black
      films should be banned.  Black filmed glasses help  in  commission  of
      crime as well as hiding the criminals even during  vehicle  checks  at
      ‘Naka’ points.  Non-availability  of  electronic  devices  to  measure
      violations and lack of police force to  enforce  the  Rules  are  also
      apparent from these replies.  The petitioner also states that the  use
      of black  films  is  not  prevalent  in  developed  and/or  developing
      countries all over the world.  In fact, in some of the  countries,  it
      is specifically banned.  In Afghanistan, Belarus, Nigeria, Uganda  and
      even in Pakistan, use of black films on the vehicle glasses is banned.
      Use of black films is not  prevalent  in  United  States  of  America,
      United Kingdom, Germany and other countries as well.
9.    In order to examine the  merits  of  the  prayers  made  by  the
      petitioner in the present application, it will be necessary for us  to
      refer to the relevant laws.
10.
The Motor Vehicle Act, 1939
was enacted to consolidate and amend
      the laws relating to  motor  vehicles.
This  Act
was  subjected  to
      various amendments.  Finally, the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for  short
      ‘the Act’) was enacted, inter alia, with the object and reason  being,
      to provide  for  quality  standards  for  pollution  control  devices,
      provisions  for  issuing  fitness  certificate  of  the  vehicle   and
      effective ways of tracking down traffic offenders.
Section 190
of the
      Act provides that any person who drives or  causes  or  allows  to  be
      driven in any public place a motor vehicle or a trailer which has  any
      defect, or violates the  standards  prescribed  in  relation  to  road
      safety, or violates the provisions  of  the  Act  or  the  Rules  made
      therein, is punishable as per the provisions  of  the  Act.  In  other
      words, alteration to  the  conditions  of  the  vehicle  in  a  manner
      contravening the Act is not permissible in law.
Section  52
of  the
      Act declares that no owner of a  motor  vehicle  shall  so  alter  the
      vehicle  that  the  particulars  contained  in  the   certificate   of
      registration are at variance with those originally  specified  by  the
      manufacturer.  However, certain changes are permissible  in  terms  of
      the proviso to this Section and that too  with  the  approval  of  the
      Central Government/competent authority.   In terms of
Section  53
of
      the Act, if any registering authority or  other  prescribed  authority
      has reason to believe that any motor vehicle within  its  jurisdiction
      is in such a condition that its use in a public place would constitute
      a danger  to  the  public,  or  that  it  fails  to  comply  with  the
      requirements of the Act or the Rules made thereunder, whether  due  to
      alteration of vehicle violative of
Section 52
of the Act or otherwise,
      the Authority may, after giving opportunity of  hearing,  suspend  the
      registration certificate for the period required for rectification  of
      such defect, and if the defect is still not removed, for  cancellation
      of registration.   In exercise of its power, under various  provisions
      of the Act, the Central Government has framed the Rules.  Chapter V of
      the Rules deals with construction, equipment and maintenance of  motor
      vehicles.  Rule 92 mandates that no person shall use or cause or allow
      to be used in any public place any motor vehicle which does not comply
      with the provisions of this Chapter.  There are different Rules  which
      deals with various aspects of construction and maintenance of vehicles
      including lights, brakes, gears and other  aspects  including  overall
      dimensions of the vehicles.  Rule 100 of  the  Rules  concerns  itself
      with  the  glass  of  windscreen  and  VLT  of  light  of  such  glass
      windscreen.  It specifically provides for fixation of glasses made  of
      laminated safety glass conforming to Indian standards IS:2553-Part 2 –
      1992 and even for the kind of windscreen wipers required to  be  fixed
      on the front screen of the vehicle.   Relevant part of Rule 100,  with
      which we are concerned, reads as under:-
“100. Safety glass.—(1) The glass of windscreens and the windows
           of every motor vehicle  188[other  than  agricultural  tractors]
           shall be of safety glass:
Provided that in the case of three-wheelers  and  vehicles  with
           hood and side covers, the  windows  may  be  of  189[acrylic  or
           plastic transparent sheet.]


           Explanation.—For the purpose of this rule,—
i)  "safety  glass"   means   glass   conforming   to   the
                    specifications of the Bureau of Indian Standards or  any
                    International Standards and so manufactured  or  treated
                    that if  fractured,  it  does  not  fly  or  break  into
                    fragments capable of causing severe cuts;
ii) any windscreen or window at the front  of  the  vehicle,
                    the inner surface of which is  at  an  angle  more  than
                    thirty degrees to the longitudinal axis of  the  vehicle
                    shall be deemed to face to the front.
[(2) The glass of the windscreen and rear window of every  motor
           vehicle shall  be  such  and  shall  be  maintained  in  such  a
           condition that the visual transmission of light is not less than
           70%. The glasses used for side windows are  such  and  shall  be
           maintained in such condition that  the  visual  transmission  of
           light is  not  less  than  50%,  and  shall  conform  to  Indian
           Standards [IS: 2553— Part 2—1992];
(3) The glass of the front windscreen  of  every  motor  vehicle
           [other than two wheelers and agricultural tractors] manufactured
           after three years from the coming  into  force  of  the  Central
           Motor  Vehicles  (Amendment)  Rules,  1993  shall  be  made   of
           laminated safety glass:
Provided that on and from three months after the commencement of
           the Central Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Rules, 1999, the glass of
           the front windscreen of every  motor  vehicle  other  than  two-
           wheelers and agricultural tractors shall be  made  of  laminated
           safety glass conforming to the Indian  Standards  IS:  2553—Part
           2—1992.
Explanation.—For  the  purpose  of  these  sub-rules  "laminated
           safety glass" shall mean  two  or  more  pieces  of  glass  held
           together by an intervening layer or layers of plastic materials.
           The laminated safety glass will crack and break under sufficient
           impact, but the pieces of  the  glass  tend  to  adhere  to  the
           plastic material and do not fly, and if a hole is produced,  the
           edges would be less jagged than they would be in the case of  an
           ordinary glass.”
11.   From the above provisions, it is clear that the Rules deal  with
      every minute detail of construction and maintenance of a vehicle.   In
      other  words,  the  standards,  sizes  and  specifications  which  the
      manufacturer of a vehicle is required to adhere to while manufacturing
      the vehicle are exhaustively dealt with under  the  Rules.    What  is
      permitted has been specifically provided for and  what  has  not  been
      specifically stated would obviously be deemed to  have  been  excluded
      from these Rules.   It would neither be permissible nor  possible  for
      the Court to  read  into  these  statutory  provisions,  what  is  not
      specifically provided for.  These are the specifications which are  in
      consonance with the prescribed IS No. 2553-Part 2 of 1992 and  nothing
      is ambiguous or uncertain.   Let us take a  few  examples.   Rule  104
      requires that every motor vehicle, other than three wheelers and motor
      cycles shall be fitted with two red reflectors, one each on both sides
      at their rear.  Every motor cycle, shall be fitted with at  least  one
      red reflector at the rear.  Rule 104A, provides that two white  reflex
      in the front of the vehicle on each  side  and  visible  to  on-coming
      vehicles from the front at night.   Rule 106 deals with deflections of
      lights and requires that no lamp showing a light to the front shall be
      used on any motor vehicle  including  construction  equipment  vehicle
      unless such lamp is so constructed, fitted  and  maintained  that  the
      beam of light emitted therefrom is permanently deflected downwards  to
      such an extent that it is not capable of dazzling any person whose eye
      position is at a distance of 8 metres from  the  front  of  lamp  etc.
      Rules 119 and 120 specify the kind, size and manner in which the  horn
      and silencer are to be fixed in a vehicle.
12.   These provisions demonstrate the extent  of  minuteness  in  the
      Rules and  the  efforts  of  the  framers  to  ensure,  not  only  the
      appropriate manner of construction and  maintenance  of  vehicle,  but
      also the safety of other users of the road.
13.   Rule 100 provides for glass of windscreen and windows  of  every
      motor vehicle.  The glass used has to  be  ‘safety  glass’.   Then  it
      provides for the inner surface angle on the windscreen.   Rule 100 (2)
      provides that the glass of the windscreen and  rear  window  of  every
      motor vehicle shall  be  such  and  shall  be  maintained  in  such  a
      condition that VLT is not less than 70 per cent and  on  side  windows
      not less than 50 per  cent  and  would  conform  to  Indian  Standards
      [IS:2553-Part2-1992].
14.   The said IS, under clause 5.1.7, deals with VLT standards and it
      provides for the same percentage of VLT through the safety  glass,  as
      referred to in Rule 100(2) itself.
15.   Having dealt with the relevant provisions of law,  we  may  also
      refer to a statistical fact that the number of violators of  Rule  100
      has gone up from 110 in the year 2008 to 1234 in  the  year  2010,  in
      Delhi alone.  This itself shows an increasing trend  of  offenders  in
      this regard.
16.   In face of the  language  of  the  Rule,  we  cannot  grant  the
      petitioner the relief prayed for, that there should be  100  per  cent
      VLT.   This Court cannot issue directions that  vehicles  should  have
      glasses with 100 per cent VLT.  Rule 100 of the Rules is a valid piece
      of legislation and is  on  the  statute  book.   Once  such  provision
      exists, this Court cannot issue directions contrary to  the  provision
      of law.   Thus, we decline to grant this prayer to the petitioner.
17.    However,  the  prayer  relating  to  issuance   of   directions
      prohibiting use of black films on the glasses  of  vehicles  certainly
      has merit.  On the plain reading of the Rule, it  is  clear  that  car
      must have safety glass having VLT at the time of manufacturing 70  per
      cent for windscreen and 50 per cent for side windows.  It should be so
      maintained in that condition thereafter.   In other  words,  the  Rule
      not impliedly, but specifically, prohibits alteration of such  VLT  by
      any means subsequent to its manufacturing.  How and  what  will  be  a
      “safety glass” has been explained in Explanation to  Rule  100.    The
      Explanation while defining ‘laminated safety  glass’  makes  it  clear
      that two or more pieces of  glass  held  together  by  an  intervening
      layers of plastic materials so that the glass is held together in  the
      event of impact.  The Rule and the explanation do not  contemplate  or
      give any leeway to the manufacturer or user of the vehicle to, in  any
      manner, tamper with the VLT.  The Rule and the IS only specify the VLT
      of the glass itself.
18.    Two  scenarios  must  be  examined.  First,  if  the  glass  so
      manufactured already has the VLT as specified, then  the  question  of
      further reducing it by any means shall be in clear violation  of  Rule
      100 as well as the prescribed  IS.   Secondly,  the  rule  requires  a
      manufacturer to manufacture the  vehicles  with  safety  glasses  with
      prescribed VLT. It is the minimum percentage that has been  specified.
       The manufacturer may manufacture vehicle with a  higher  VLT  to  the
      prescribed limit or even  a  vehicle  with  tinted  glasses,  if  such
      glasses do not fall short of the minimum prescribed VLT  in  terms  of
      Rule 100.  None can be permitted to create his  own  device  to  bring
      down the percentage of  the  VLT  thereafter.    Thus,  on  the  plain
      reading of the Rule and the IS standards, use of black  films  of  any
      density is impermissible.  Another adverse  aspect  of  use  of  black
      films is that even if they reflect tolerable  VLT  in  the  day  time,
      still in the night it would clearly violate the prescribed VLT  limits
      and  would  result  in  poor  visibility,   which   again   would   be
      impermissible.
19.   The legislative intent attaching due significance to the ‘public
      safety’ is evident from  the  object  and  reasons  of  the  Act,  the
      provisions  of  the  Act  and  more  particularly,  the  Rules  framed
      thereunder.  Even if we assume, for the sake of  argument,  that  Rule
      100 is capable of any interpretation, then this Court should  give  it
      an interpretation which would serve the  legislative  intent  and  the
      object of framing  such  rules,  in  preference  to  one  which  would
      frustrate  the  very  purpose  of  enacting  the  Rules  as  well   as
      undermining the public safety and interest.  Use of these black  films
      have been proved to be criminal’s paradise and a  social  evil.    The
      petitioner has rightly brought on record the unanimous view of various
      police authorities right from the States of Calcutta, Tamil  Nadu  and
      Delhi to the Ministry of Home Affairs  that  use  of  black  films  on
      vehicles has jeopardized the security  and  safety  interests  of  the
      State and public at large.   This certainly  helps  the  criminals  to
      escape from the eyes of the police and aids in commission  of  heinous
      crimes like sexual assault on women, robberies, kidnapping, etc.    If
      these crimes can be reduced by enforcing the prohibition  of  law,  it
      would further the cause of Rule of Law and Public Interest as well.
20.   This Court in the case of
Hira  Tikoo  v.  Union  Territory  of
      Chandigarh
[(2004) 6 SCC 765], while dealing with  the  provisions  of
      town planning and the land allotted to the allottees, upon  which  the
      allotees had made full payment, held that such allotment was found  to
      be contravening other statutory provisions and the allotted  area  was
      situated under the reserved forest land and land in periphery  of  900
      meters of Air Force Base.  The Court held that  there  was  no  vested
      right and public welfare should prevail as the  highest  law.    Thus,
      this Court, while relying upon the maxim  “salus  populi  est  suprema
      lex”, modified the order of the High Court holding that the  allottees
      had no vested right and the land forming part of the forest area could
      not be taken away for other purposes.
Reference can also be  made  to
      the judgment of this Court in
Friends Colony Development Committee  v.
      State of Orissa
[AIR 2005 SC 1], where this Court, while referring  to
      construction activity violative of the regulations and control orders,
      held that the regulations made under
Orissa  Development  Authorities
      Act, 1982
may meddle with private rights  but  still  they  cannot  be
      termed arbitrary or unreasonable.  The private  interest  would  stand
      subordinate to public good.
21.   In the present case as well, even if some  individual  interests
      are likely to suffer, such individual or private interests  must  give
      in to the larger public interest.  It is the duty of all  citizens  to
      comply with the law.  The Rules  are  mandatory  and  nobody  has  the
      authority in law to mould these rules for the purposes of  convenience
      or luxury and certainly not for crime.  We may also note that a  Bench
      of this Court, vide its Order  dated  15th  December,  1998  in  Civil
      Appeal No. 3700 of 1999 titled
Chandigarh Administration and Others v.
      Namit Kumar & Ors.
, had permitted the use of  ‘light  coloured  tinted
      glasses’ only while specifically disapproving  use  of  films  on  the
      vehicles.  Subsequently, in the same case, but on  a  different  date,
      another Bench of this Court vide its order reported at [(2004)  8  SCC
      446] made a direction that mandate of sub-Rule (2) of Rule  100  shall
      be kept in mind while dealing with such cases.
22.   Rightly so, none of the orders of this Court have permitted  use
      of black films.  Rule 100(2)  specifies  the  VLT  percentage  of  the
      glasses at the time of  manufacture  and  to  be  so  maintained  even
      thereafter.  In Europe, Regulation No. 43 of the  Economic  Commission
      for Europe of the United Nations (UN/ECE) and  in  Britain,  the  Road
      Vehicles (Construction and Use) Regulations, 1986, respectively, refer
      to the International Standard ISO 3538 on this  issue,  providing  for
      VLT percentage of 70 and 75 per cent respectively.
23.   In light of the above  discussion,  we  have  no  hesitation  in
      holding that use of black films or  any  other  material  upon  safety
      glass, windscreen and side windows is  impermissible.    In  terms  of
      Rule 100(2), 70 per cent and 50 per cent VLT standard are relatable to
      the manufacture of the safety glasses for the windshields  (front  and
      rear) and the side windows respectively. Use of  films  or  any  other
      material upon the windscreen or the side windows is  impermissible  in
      law.   It is the VLT  of  the  safety  glass  without  any  additional
      material being pasted upon the safety glasses which must conform  with
      manufacture specifications.
24.   Another issue that has been raised in the present Writ  Petition
      is that certain VIPs/VVIPs are using black films on their vehicles for
      security reasons.   Even this practice is not supported by law, as  no
      notification by the  competent  authority  has  been  brought  to  our
      notice, giving exemption to such vehicles from the operation  of  Rule
      100 or any of its provisions.   Be that as it may, we do not  wish  to
      enter upon the arena of the security  and  safety  measures  when  the
      police  department  and  Home   Ministry   consider   such   exemption
      appropriate.   The cases of the persons who have been provided with  Z
      and Z+ security category may be considered by a  Committee  consisting
      of the Director  General  of  Police/Commissioner  of  Police  of  the
      concerned State and the Home Secretary of that State/Centre.   It will
      be for that Committee to examine such cases for grant of exemption  in
      accordance  with  law  and  upon  due  application  of  mind.    These
      certificates should be provided only in relation to official  cars  of
      VIPs/VVIPs, depending upon the category of security that  such  person
      has been  awarded  by  the  competent  authority.     The  appropriate
      government is free to  make  any  regulations  that  it  may  consider
      appropriate in this regard.
25.   The competent  officer  of  the  traffic  police  or  any  other
      authorized person shall challan such vehicles for violating  Rules  92
      and 100 of the Rules with effect from the specified date and thereupon
      shall also remove the black films from the offending vehicles.
26.   The manufacturer of the vehicle  may  manufacture  the  vehicles
      with tinted glasses which have  Visual  Light  Transmission  (VLT)  of
      safety glasses windscreen (front and rear) as 70 per cent VLT and side
      glasses as 40 per cent VLT, respectively.   No black film or any other
      material can be pasted on  the  windscreens  and  side  glasses  of  a
      vehicle.
27.   For the reasons afore-stated, we prohibit the use of black films
      of any VLT percentage or any other material upon the  safety  glasses,
      windscreens  (front  and  rear)  and  side  glasses  of  all  vehicles
      throughout    the    country.    The    Home    Secretary,    Director
      General/Commissioner of Police of the respective  States/Centre  shall
      ensure compliance with this direction.   The directions  contained  in
      this judgment shall become operative and enforceable with effect  from
      4th May, 2012.
28.   With the above directions, we partially allow this writ petition
      and prohibit use of black films of any percentage VLT upon the  safety
      glasses, windscreens (front and rear)  and  side  glasses.    However,
      there shall be no order as to costs.
….…………......................CJI.
(S.H. Kapadia)






                                             …….…………......................J.
                                                              (A.K. Patnaik)






                                           ...….…………......................J.

      (Swatanter Kumar)
      New Delhi
      April 27, 2012