[Cites
6
, Cited by
31
]
Supreme Court of India
Hardev Singh vs Union Of India & Anr on 14 September, 2011
Equivalent citations: AIR 2012 SUPREME COURT 286, 2011 AIR SCW 6076, 2012 LAB. I. C. 65, 2012 (2) AIR JHAR R 667, 2011 (3) SERVLJ 419 SC, (2013) 1 ALL WC 121, (2011) 3 SERVLJ 419, 2011 (10) SCALE 503, 2011 (10) SCC 121, (2012) 7 SERVLR 1, (2011) 10 SCALE 503, (2012) 1 MAH LJ 557, (2012) 1 MPLJ 341
Author:
Anil R. Dave
Bench:
Anil R. Dave
,
Mukundakam Sharma
1



                                                   NON-REPORTABLE




          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3973 OF 2010 





Hardev Singh                                          .....Appellant.




                            Versus


U.O.I. & Anr.                                         .....Respondents





                      J U D G M E N T
ANIL R. DAVE, J.
1.    Aggrieved by the Judgment and Order dated 26.4.2010 passed 


by the Principal Bench of the Armed Forces Tribunal, New Delhi in 


T.A. No. 541 of 2010 (O.A. No. 29 of 2010),   the appellant has filed 


this appeal under Section 30 of the Armed forces Tribunal Act, 2007.
2
2.        The appellant was commissioned as an Officer in Indian Army 


on   17.6.1973.   Over a period of time, he rose to the rank of Major 


General   and   retired   on   30.4.2010.   During   his   service   tenure,   he 


performed his duties well and he had also carried out several special 


assignments   and   he   was  suitably   honoured   by   Indian   Army.    Being 


aggrieved by the aforestated order passed by the Tribunal, he has filed 


this appeal, as according to him,  he was wrongly denied promotion to 


the rank of Lieutenant General.
3.        The facts giving rise to the present litigation in a nutshell  are as 


under:
Grievance of the appellant  is that he was not promoted to the 


rank of Lieutenant General.  According to him, the policy with regard 


to   promotion   had   been   changed   after   Special   Selection   Board 


(hereinafter   referred   to   as   the   `SSB')     had   been   constituted   for 


considering cases of officers of 1973 batch for promotion to the rank 


of Lieutenant General.  After the SSB started the process of selecting 


officers   for   promotion   to   the   rank   of   Lieutenant   General,   the 


Government   had   promulgated   a   new   policy   dated   31.12.2008   with
3
regard to promotion.     Formerly, the policy with regard to promotion 


was   based   on   `value-judgment'   and   on   that   basis   the   SSB   was   to 


consider overall profile of all the concerned officers.  According to the 


said Policy, confidential remarks, war operation report, course report, 


honours and awards and disciplinary background of each officer was 


to be considered while taking a final   decision with regard to giving 


promotion to him to the rank of Lieutenant General. The said policy 


was   changed   with   effect   from   1st  January,   2009.   Instead   of     the 


aforestated   `value   judgment',             a   new   policy   described   as 


`quantification method'  has been adopted for giving promotion to the 


rank   of   Lieutenant   General.     According   to   the   new   policy,   while 


considering   cases   for   promotion,   92%     weightage   is   to   be   given   to 


confidential   reports,   3%   to   courses,   honours   and   awards   and   5% 


weightage is to be given to value judgment.
4.     The learned  counsel for the appellant  submitted that the   new 


policy was adopted at the time when the appellant and other officers 


of   1973   batch   became   due   for   promotion   to   the   rank   of   Lieutenant 


General.  According to him, the SSB had already started the procedure 


for considering officers of 1973 batch during calendar year 2008 and, 


therefore, the policy could not have been changed.  According to him,
4
this was not permissible in law because once the SSB was constituted 


in 2008 and had started procedure for considering the officers of 1973 


batch   for   their   promotion   to   the   rank   of   Lieutenant   General,   new 


policy, even if framed could not have been implemented but the same 


could have been implemented only for the officers of 1974 batch. The 


learned   counsel   relied   upon   the   judgments   delivered   in   the   cases   of 


P. Mahendran & Ors. v. State of Karnataka & ors. [(1990) 1 SCC 


411];  Maharashtra   State   Road   Transport   Corpn.   &   ors.   v.
Rajendra   Bhimrao   Mandve   &   Ors.   [(2001)   10   SCC   51];
K. 


Manjusree v. State of Andhra Pradesh and another
[(2008) 3 SCC 


512]  so as to substantiate his submissions.
5.     He   also   submitted   that   every   year,   the   SSB   used   to   consider 


officers of a particular batch for promotion to the rank of  Lieutenant 


General.     In   the   calendar   year   2006,   1971   batch   officers   were 


considered for promotion to the rank of Lieutenant General; in 2007, 


officers of 1972 batch were considered for promotion to the said rank 


but in 2008, officers of 1973 batch were not considered. The officers 


of   1973   batch   were   considered   in   2009.     Had   the   officers   of   1973 


batch   been   considered   in   calendar   year   2008,   they   could   have   been 


considered as per the old policy.
5
6.      He also submitted that though the appellant was awarded `Kirti 


Chakra', the said fact was not given due weightage while considering 


the appellant's case for his promotion.
7.      As the appellant had not been promoted, the appellant had filed 


non-statutory   and   statutory   complaints   but   the   said   complaints   were 


not properly considered and were disposed of without assigning any 


reason.     In   the   circumstances,   the   appellant   was   constrained   to 


approach   the   Armed   Forces   Tribunal,   Jaipur   Bench,   by   filing   an 


Original Application.   The said application was thereafter transferred 


to the Armed Forces Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi.  The said 


application   was   rejected   by   the   judgment   dated   26th  April,   2010, 


which has been challenged in this appeal.
8.      According  to the learned counsel, if the earlier policy based on 


`value judgment'  had been followed by considering overall profile of 


the appellant, the appellant would have been selected for promotion to 


the   rank   of   Lieutenant   General.       According   to   him,     the   appellant, 


who was an outstanding officer, ought to have been promoted to the 


rank of Lieutenant General.
6
9.      In   substance,   the   counsel   submitted   that   the   entire   procedure 


followed by the SSB was incorrect and the appellant  and the officers 


of 1973 batch ought to have been  assessed  as  per old policy and  in 


that event, the appellant would have been found fit for promotion and, 


therefore, it was submitted that the appellant deserved promotion   to 


the   rank   of  Lieutenant   General.     It   was   further   submitted   that   the 


appellant retired on 30.4.2010 but had he been promoted to the rank of 


Lieutenant General, he would not have been made to retire. Finally, he 


submitted that the appeal deserves to be allowed and relief sought for 


in the appeal be granted.
10.     On   the   other   hand,   Mr.   P.P.   Tripathi,   learned   Additional 


Solicitor   General   submitted   that   the   judgment   delivered   by   the 


Tribunal is just and proper.  He submitted that Indian Army is having 


a   pyramidal   organisation   and   it   has   framed   its   promotion   policy 


accordingly.  Till 15th December, 2004,  promotions up to the rank of 


Major were given on the basis of seniority whereas promotions from 


the rank of Major to Lieutenant General and onwards were strictly on 


merit and they were given promotion on the basis of recommendations 


of   a   Selection   Board.     However,   as   per   the   new   policy,   at   present 


promotions upto the rank of Lieutenant Colonel are by time scale and
7
thereafter   the   promotions   to   higher   ranks   are   given   on   the 


recommendation of the Selection Board.
11.     He submitted that the averments  of the appellant to the effect 


that   the   policy   with   regard   to   promotions   was   changed   after 


commencement of selection process of the officers of 1973 batch for 


their   promotion   to   the   rank   of   Lieutenant   General   is   incorrect.     He 


submitted   that   the   old   policy,   which   was   prevalent   up   to   31st 


December, 2008, was never applied in case of the appellant and other 


officers  of 1973 batch  for their promotion  to the rank of Lieutenant 


General.   He submitted that first meeting of the SSB for considering 


cases of the appellant and other officers of 1973 batch was convened 


on 9th  January, 2009. He denied that the SSB had ever convened its 


meeting prior to 2009 for the aforestated purpose.  It was clarified that 


only the process of collecting relevant data had been started in 2008 


because  for   the  purpose   of  considering  cases  of  all  officers  of  1973 


batch, certain record was to made available to the SSB in a particular 


form   and   the   process   being   lengthy,   needful   was   done   by   the 


ministerial staff for collecting the data in 2008, but the said data was 


considered by the SSB only after 1st January, 2009 i.e. when the new 


policy had been implemented.
8
12.      So far as `Kirti Chakra' is concerned,  it was submitted that the 


appellant was awarded `Kirti Chakra' in 1985 when he was working 


in   the   rank   of   Major.     The   said   fact   cannot   be   considered   for   ever.
While giving promotions to the higher ranks, the aforestated fact was 


duly   considered   by   the   Selection   Board   earlier.       The   said   fact   was 


considered while considering the appellant's case for giving him four 


promotions   i.e.   upto   Major   General.     The   award/   honour   cannot   be 


considered for ever as per normal promotion policy.   As per the new 


policy, marks for awards are allotted only for two times after receipt 


of   the   award/honour.     In   the   circumstances,   in   the   case   of   the 


appellant, award of `Kirti Chakra' had rightly not been considered by 


the SSB when it had convened its meeting in January, 2009.
13.      The   case   of   the   appellant   was   considered   twice   by   the   SSB 


along   with   other   officers   of   1973   batch.     His   case   was   considered 


when the SSB convened its meeting on 9th  January, 2009 and his case 


was   again   considered,   by   way   of   a   second   chance,   by   the   SSB   in 


December, 2009 but the appellant was not empanelled for promotion 


on both the occasions for the reasons that there were many other more 


meritorious   officers   and,   therefore,   the   appellant   could   not   be 


promoted to the rank of Lieutenant General.
9
14.     The   learned   counsel   for   the   respondents   also   denied   that   the 


appellant was having `outstanding' grade.  He submitted that most of 


the   time   the   appellant   was   considered   `above   average'   and   the   said 


fact was duly considered by the SSB.   He further submitted that the 


appellant   had   not   levelled   any   allegations   with   regard   to   mala   fides 


and,   therefore,   the   recommendations   made   by   the   SSB   cannot   be 


faulted with.   The averments and allegations with regard to pressure 


exerted by officers so as to grant   `8' instead of `9' points were also 


baseless.
15.     The   learned   counsel   also   relied   upon   judgments   delivered   by 


this   Court   in   the   cases   of
Union   of   India   &   Ors  v.  Lt.   Gen. 


Rajendra   Singh   Kadyan   and   Another
,   [(2000)   6   SCC   698];
Lakhwinder Singh v. Union of India and Ors.
[(2008) 7 SCC 648] 


so  as  to  substantiate   his  submissions.
He  further submitted  that  the 


appellant   had   a   right   to   be   considered   for   promotion   but   he   had   no 


right to be promoted as observed by this Court in the case of
Union of 


India & Ors. v. S.L. Dutta and Anothers
.
[(
1991) 1 SCC 505] and 


Roshan Lal Tandon v. Union of India
[ AIR 1967 SC 1889].
10
16.    For the aforestated reasons and for the reasons recorded by the 


Tribunal, the learned counsel submitted that the appeal deserves to be 


dismissed with costs.
17.    We   heard   the   learned   counsel   and   also   perused   the   relevant 


material placed before this Court.
18.    It   cannot   be   disputed   that   no   employee   has   a   right   to   get 


promotion; so the appellant had no right to get promotion to the rank 


of   Lieutenant   General   but   he   had   a   right   to   be   considered   for 


promotion   to   the   rank   of   Lieutenant   General   and   if     as   per   the 


prevailing policy, he was eligible to be promoted to the said rank, he 


ought to have been considered.  In the instant case, there is no dispute 


to the fact that the appellant's case was duly considered by the SSB 


for his promotion to the rank of Lieutenant General.
19.    The   main   grievance   ventilated   in   the   appeal   is   with   regard   to 


change of promotion policy.  The case of the appellant is to the effect 


that after starting the selection process, the respondents could not have 


changed   the   policy.     According   to   the   appellant,   the   policy   was 


changed   with   effect   from   1st  January,   2009,   whereas   the   selection 


process for promoting the appellant along with other officers of 1973
11
batch started in December, 2008.  According to him relevant material 


was prepared  and placed before  the SSB and in fact  it convened its 


meeting   and   started   doing   the   needful   in   December,   2008   and, 


therefore,     it   was   not   open   to   the   respondents   to   change   the   policy 


after having started the process for selection.   The appellant had also 


relied upon the judgments delivered by this Court to substantiate his 


case   to   the   effect   that   after   initiating   the   selection   process,   the 


authorities   and   the   SSB   should   not   have   given   effect   to   the   new 


policy.
20.     Upon perusal of the contents of the counter affidavit filed and 


submissions   made   on   behalf   of   the   respondents   by   the   learned 


Additional   Solicitor   General,   it   is   clear   that   the   first   meeting   of   the 


SSB   to   consider   the   cases   of   the   appellant   and   other   officers   for 


promotion   to   the   rank   of   Lieutenant   General   was   convened   on   9th 


January, 2009, and not prior thereto.  The counsel had however, stated 


that the ministerial staff of the respondents had collected relevant data 


in   2008   because   relevant   material   for   considering   cases   of   all   the 


concerned officers was to be placed before the SSB when its meeting 


was   to   be     convened.     For   the   said   reason,   necessary   exercise   for 


collecting the data and putting it in a proper form was done in 2008
12
but,   in   fact,   the   said   data   was   considered   by   the   SSB   only   when   it 


convened its meeting in January, 2009, i.e. after the new policy had 


come into force.
21.     The   above   facts   would   make   it   clear   that   the   cases   of   the 


appellant   and   others   were   never   considered   by   the   SSB   in   2008   or 


prior to 1st January, 2009.  It means that the cases were considered as 


per the new policy and, therefore, all submissions made on behalf of 


the appellant that the policy was changed after the process of selection 


had   been   started   are   not   correct   and,   therefore,   they   are   to   be 


discarded.
22.     The   grievance   made   by   the   appellant   with   regard   to   non-
consideration   of   award   of   `Kirti   Chakra'   is   also   not   having   any 


substance for the reason that as per the new policy, the grant of such 


an award/honour is to be considered only twice.   In 1985, when the 


appellant   was   in   the   rank   of   Major,   he   was   awarded   `Kirti   Chakra' 


and the said fact was duly considered till he got promotion to the rank 


of Major General.   As per the new policy, this honour, which he had 


secured in 1985 could not have been considered again and, therefore, 


it was rightly not taken into account.   We also find substance in the
13
policy   that   if   a   person   has   performed   his   duty   excellently   at   a 


particular   stage   in   his   career,   then   that   performance   of   excellence 


cannot be considered for the entire life.  When an officer has to get his 


promotion strictly on merits, his performance should be commendable 


throughout   and   especially   during   last   few   years.     The   case   of   the 


appellant   was   considered   in   2009   for   his   promotion   to   the   rank   of 


Lieutenant General and, therefore, the achievements of the appellant 


in 1985 could not have been ordinarily considered by the SSB.  In the 


circumstances,   the   submissions   relating   to   not   considering   `Kirti 


Chakra' award would not help the appellant.
23.     The   appellant   has   tried   to   evaluate   his   qualities   and 


competence.     Though,   he   believed   himself   to   be   an   `outstanding' 


officer,   it   is   stated   that   most   of   the   time   he   was   considered   `above 


average'.   He was hardly considered as an `outstanding' officer.   We 


are in complete agreement with the view expressed by this court in the 


case   of  Air   Vice   Marshal   S.L.   Chhabra,   VSM   (Retd.)  v.  U.O.I. 


[1993 Supp (4) SCC 441] wherein it has been held in para 13 that:
"According   to   us,   neither   the   High   Court   nor   this 

        Court can moderate, the appraisal and the grading of 

        the appellant for a particular year.   While exercising 

        the power of judicial review, a Court shall not venture
14
to assess and appraise the merit or the grading of an 

       officer.     If   the   Appraisal   Report   of   the   year   1987 

       giving the appellant `5.3' stands, then according to the 

       criteria fixed, the case of the appellant could not have 

       been considered for extension."
The entire relevant service record of the appellant was placed before 


the   SSB   on   two   different   occasions,   in   January,   2009   and   in 


December, 2009.   On both the occasions, the appellant  failed to get 


himself empanelled in the list of selected officers for the reason that 


there   were   better   officers   available   for   limited   number   of   posts 


available in the higher rank.
24.    In   absence   of   any   allegation   with   regard   to   mala   fides,   we 


would not like to look into the assessment of the SSB    in relation to 


the appellant's performance.
25.    In our opinion, it is always open to an employer to change its 


policy in relation to giving promotion to the employees.    This court 


would normally not interfere in such policy decisions.
26.    We would like to quote the decision of this Court in the case of
Virender S. Hooda & Ors.  v.  State of Haryana and Anr
.
15
[(1999)   3   SCC   696]  where   this   Court   had   held   in   para   4   of   the 


judgment that:
"........When a policy has been declared by the 


        State as to the manner of filling up the post and that 


        policy   is   declared   in   terms   of   rules   and   instructions 


        issued to the Public Service Commission from time to 


        time and so long as these instructions are not contrary 


        to   the   rules,   the   respondents   ought   to   follow   the 


        same."
Similarly,   in   the   case   of  Balco
                                                Employees'   Union  (Regd.)
                                                                                        v.
Union of India and Others [(2002) 2 SCC 333], it has been held 


that   a   court   cannot   strike   down   a   policy   decision   taken   by   the 


Government  merely   because   it   feels   that  another   policy   would   have 


been fairer or wiser or more scientific or logical.   It is not within the 


domain of the court to weigh the pros and cons of the policy or to test 


the degree of its beneficial or equitable disposition.
27.     For the aforestated reasons, we are of the view that no injustice 


had been caused to the appellant as his case was duly considered for 


promotion to the rank of Lieutenant General by the SSB twice but as 


other   officers   were   found   better   than   the   appellant,   he   could   not   be
16
promoted.   In the circumstances, we do not find any substance in the 


appeal and, therefore, the appeal deserves to be dismissed.
28.    The appeal is dismissed  with no order as to costs.
...............................................J.

                                     (Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)


                                                      


                                        ..............................................J.

                                    (ANIL R. DAVE)




New Delhi

September 14,  2011.