[Cites
9
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Panchmahal Vadodara Gramin Bank & Ors vs D.M. Parmar on 21 September, 2011
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2011 SC 628
Author:
H.L. Gokhale
Bench:
A.K. Patnaik
,
H.L. Gokhale
Panchmahal Vadodara Gramin Bank & Ors.
                                     v.
                                 D.M. PARMAR
                       (CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2093 OF 2007)

                             September 21, 2011

                    [A.K. PATNAIK AND H.L. GOKHALE, JJ.]
                              [2011] 12 SCR 690

    The following order of the Court was delivered
                                  O R D E R
1. These are two appeals filed by way of special leave under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India against the  common  order  dated  5.8.2005  in
Letters Patent Appeals No. 1736/2004 and 1869/2004 passed  by  the  Division
Bench of the Gujarat High Court.
2. The facts briefly are that D.M. Parmar was  appointed  in  Panchmahal
Vadodara Gramin Bank, ‘the Bank’ for short, as an  officer  by  order  dated
16.4.1988. He joined the bank on 25.4.1988 and was confirmed in  service  on
9.5.1991. He worked as a Manager at  Chundadi  branch  of  the  bank  during
25.3.1996 to 21.6.1997 and during  this  period  he  had  granted  advances,
renewed various loan accounts and extended more  finance  to  the  borrowers
under Crop Loan Scheme. A show cause notice dated  15/20.5.1999  was  issued
to him to show  cause  why  disciplinary  action  should  not  be  initiated
against him for various acts of omission  and  commission  committed  during
his posting as a Manager of Chundadi branch of the bank  during  the  period
25.3.1996 to 21.6.1997. He replied saying that he was not fully  experienced
in handling a big branch and in discharging duties as a Branch  Manager  and
the acts of omission and commission were on  account  of  his  inexperience.
The reply furnished by him was not accepted by the bank and  a  charge-sheet
dated 20.26.4.1999 was issued to him alleging  various  acts  of  misconduct
committed by him. He submitted his  reply  dated  2.5.2009  and  denied  the
charges. An Enquiry Officer was appointed to conduct  the  enquiry  and  the
Enquiry Officer submitted  his  findings  in  his  report  dated  30.10.2000
holding that D.M. Parmar is guilty of most of the charges. The  disciplinary
authority  thereafter  gave  an  opportunity  to  D.M  Parmar  to   make   a
representation against the findings of the Enquiry Officer and he  submitted
his representation. The disciplinary authority granted  a  personal  hearing
to him to show cause as to why the proposed punishment of  dismissal  should
not be imposed on him. He appeared before  the  disciplinary  authority  and
prayed that leniency be showed to him. The disciplinary authority,  however,
passed an order of dismissal dated 6.12.2000.
3. D.M. Parmar then carried an appeal against the order of  disciplinary
authority. The appeal was dismissed by  the  appellate  authority  by  order
dated 17.2.2001. Aggrieved, he filed a writ petition registered  as  Special
Civil Application No.6260/2001 before  the  Gujarat  High  Court.  The  writ
petition was, however, withdrawn on 2.7.2002 by D.M. Parmar  to  enable  him
to make a representation to the concerned authority of the bank. He  made  a
representation  to  the  bank  against  the  order  of  dismissal  but   the
representation was rejected by order dated 6.8.2002.
4. D.M. Parmar then filed a fresh writ petition No.6260/2001 before  the
High Court. A learned  single  Judge  of  the  High  Court  heard  the  writ
petition and passed the judgment  dated  13.8.2004.  In  the  judgment,  the
learned single Judge observed that he had  heard  learned  counsel  for  the
respective parties extensively and gone through the entire  records  of  the
Enquiry Office and he was of the opinion that the Enquiry Officer has  fully
and properly scrutinised the relevant material before him  before  recording
the  findings  on  the  charges  levelled  against  D.M.  Parmar  and   that
reasonable opportunity had been given to him during the course  of  enquiry.
The learned single Judge, however, held in the judgment that no  reason  had
been mentioned in  the  order  of  dismissal  as  to  why  the  disciplinary
authority selected the penalty of dismissal  although  in  the  rules  there
were other minor and major penalties mentioned.  The  learned  single  Judge
also found in his judgment that there was almost  total  non-application  of
mind with regard to the quantum of punishment. The learned single Judge  was
of the view that the disciplinary authority was  required  to  consider  the
fact that there was  no  finding  that  there  was  dishonest  intention  or
dishonest act on the part of D.M. Parmar. The learned single  Judge  further
observed in his judgment that in the absence of any adverse past record,  he
could not have been lightly dismissed  from  service  on  the  charges.  The
learned single Judge has, therefore, quashed  the  order  of  dismissal  and
directed reinstatement of D.M. Parmar but further directed  that  he  should
not get any backwages since he had not done any work since he was  dismissed
from  service.  The  learned  single  Judge  remanded  the  matter  to   the
disciplinary authority for passing appropriate order with regard to  quantum
of punishment with the  observation  that  the  disciplinary  authority  may
impose any penalty except the penalty of dismissal, removal  or  termination
from service.
5. Aggrieved by the judgment of the learned single Judge, the bank filed
Letters Patent Appeal No.1736/2005 and  D.M.  Parmar  filed  Letters  Patent
Appeal No.1869/2005. The Division Bench of the  High  Court,  after  hearing
learned counsel for the parties, however,  sustained  the  judgment  of  the
learned  single  Judge  and  dismissed  both  the  appeals.  The  bank  has,
therefore,  filed  C.A.  No.2093/2007  and  D.M.  Parmar  has   filed   C.A.
No.2094/2007 before this Court.
6. Mr. C.U. Singh, learned senior counsel appearing for  the  bank,  the
appellant in C.A. No.2093/2007, submitted that the findings of  the  Enquiry
Officer would show that D.M. Parmar was guilty of very serious  charges  and
was required to be dismissed from service on account of  acts  of  integrity
and dishonesty and lack of probity on the part of D.M  Parmar.  He  referred
to the  order  of  disciplinary  authority  dated  6.12.2000  to  show  that
disciplinary authority  after  careful  consideration  of  findings  of  the
Enquiry  Officer  and  the  entire  records  of  enquiry  had  come  to  the
conclusion that grave lapses in sanction/disbursement in many loan  accoutns
had been established against him and the  magnitude  of  irregularities  and
blatant disregard of set  procedures  and  norms  for  sanction/disbursement
were of a serious nature.  He  submitted  that  the  disciplinary  authority
after considering the nature of irregularities had come  to  the  conclusion
that the acts of misconduct committed by D.M. Parmar  could  not  be  viewed
leniently  and  that  he  had  abused  his  position  and  power  which  was
detrimental to the interest of the bank. He was of the opinion that ends  of
justice would be met if the punishment of dismissal was imposed on him.  Mr.
Singh vehemently submitted that the finding  of  the  learned  single  Judge
which has been  sustained  by  the  Division  Bench  that  the  disciplinary
authority did not apply his mind before deciding to impose  the  penalty  of
dismissal on D.M Parmar was, therefore, factually not correct. He  submitted
that considering the serious nature of misconduct committed by D.M.  Parmar,
this is a fit case in which the order of dismissal should have  been  passed
by the disciplinary authority and the High Court should not have  interfered
with the order of dismissal.
In support of his  submissions,  he  relied  on
the decisions of this Court in
Disciplinary  Authority-cum-Regional  Manager
Vs. Nikunja Bihari Patnaik
(1996) 9 SCC 69 and in
Chairman  &  M.D.,  United
Commercial Bank Vs. P.C. Kakkad
, (2005) 4 SCC 364 in which  this  Court  has
taken a view that officers/employees of the bank should be  seriously  dealt
with for charges of misconduct in the interest of  discipline  of  the  bank
and such officers  are  required  to  discharge  their  duties  with  utmost
integrity, honesty, devotion and diligence and should not do anything  which
is unbecoming of a bank officer.
He also relied  on  a  recent  decision  of
this Court in
General Manager(P), Punjab & Sind Bank & Ors. Vs. Daya  Singh
,
(2010) 11 SCC 233 in which this Court has  taken  a  view  that  conclusions
arrived at by the Enquiry Officer on the basis of  evidence  should  not  be
interfered with by the High Court lightly.
7. Mr. Nachiketa Joshi, learned counsel appearing for D.M.  Parmar,  the
appellant in C.A. No. 2094/2007, on the other  hand,  submitted  that  there
has been gross violation of principles of natural  justice  in  as  much  as
D.M. Parmar had filed a petition dated 3.11.1999 before the Enquiry  Officer
making  a  prayer  that  he  should  be  furnished  some   papers,   namely,
chargesheet  served  on  his  predecessor  in  office,  one   L.K.   Parmar,
information in regard to working and functioning of L.K Parmar  in  Chundadi
branch at the relevant time, copies of inspection report, completion  report
and rectification certificate issued by the Head Office of the  bank  during
his tenure as the branch manager of  Chundadi  branch,  statement  of  loans
disbursed, crop loan schedules, extracts of land holding, renewal forms  and
Ikrarnama issued by him,  P.S.S.  Statement  of  loan  accounts  during  his
tenure and copies of letters written by  him  requesting  the  authority  to
post a second officer in the branch. He submitted that the  prayer  was  not
granted by the Enquiry Officer and instead the prayer  was  opposed  by  the
Presenting Officer on behalf of the bank. He vehemently  argued  that  these
documents mentioned in his application dated 3.11.1999  before  the  Enquiry
Officer were relevant for the defence of D.M. Parmar and as these  have  not
been furnished  to  him,  there  was  violation  of  principles  of  natural
justice. Mr. Joshi cited the decision of this Court in
Narinder  Mohan  Arya
Vs. United India Insurance Co.Ltd
.
&
Ors, (2006) 4  SCC  713  and  Union  of
India & Ors. Vs. Prakash Kumar Tandon
, (2009)  2  SCC  541,  in  which  this
Court has held that principles of natural justice and fair play have  to  be
observed by the Enquiry Officer in  a  disciplinary  enquiry.
He  submitted
that in the latter case of
Union of India & Ors. Vs.  Prakash  Kumar  Tandon
(supra), this Court also  held  that  when  an  application  was  filed  for
summoning the witnesses by delinquent officer,  it  was  obligatory  on  the
part of the enquiry officer to pas an order on such an application.  Relying
on this observation in the aforesaid case, he submitted that in the  present
case, although an application was filed  for  furnishing  the  documents  by
D.M. Parmar, no order was passed by  the  enquiry  officer  and,  therefore,
this is case where principles of natural justice have been violated.
8. Mr. Joshi further submitted that this Court has held in
Kailash  Nath
Gupta Vs. Enquiry Officer, (R.K. Rai), Allahabad Bank & Ors.
, (2003)  9  SCC
480 that where the quantum of punishment is disproportionate to the  gravity
of charge, the Court will interfere  with  the  quantum  of  punishment.  He
pointed out that in the aforesaid case, the Court, after going  through  the
charge against the delinquent officer, held that  the  charge  was  only  in
respect of some procedural irregularities which did not warrant the  extreme
punishment of dismissal from service. He submitted that in  this  case  also
the charges, if held to be proved, are only acts of  irregularities  and  no
charge of misappropriation has been  established  against  D.M.  Parmar.
He
also relied on the decision of this Court in
Administrator, Union  Territory
of Dadra and Nagar Haveli Vs. Gulabhia M. Lad
, (2010) 5 SCC 775  wherein  it
has been held that exercise of discretion in  imposition  of  punishment  is
dependent on host of factors such as gravity of  misconduct,  past  conduct,
the nature of duties assigned  to  the  delinquent,  responsibility  of  the
position that the delinquent  holds,  previous  penalty,  if  any,  and  the
discipline required to be maintained in the department or  establishment  he
works. He submitted  that  all  these  factors  have  not  been  taken  into
consideration by the disciplinary authority by imposing  the  punishment  of
dismissal from service.
9. We have considered the submissions of learned counsel for the parties
and we find that in the enquiry report, the Enquiry Officer has  dealt  with
the request of D.M. Parmar with regard to the documents  he  had  asked  for
and he has held that the documents were asked for  in  connection  with  the
irregularities of L.K. Parmar but  these  irregularities  committed  by  the
earlier  officer  have  no  connection  with  the   serious   irregularities
committed by D.M. Parmar. The Enquiry Officer has further held that  if  any
irregularities were committed by the earlier officer L.K. Parmar,  the  same
have not to be included in the chargesheet issued to D.M. Parmar. Thus,  the
Enquiry Officer has taken a view, and we think it is a right view, that  the
documents to show the  irregularities  committed  during  the  time  of  the
previous manager of the bank L.K. Parmar had no  relevance  to  the  charges
against D.M. Parmar. As has been held by this Court in
Narinder  Mohan  Arya
Vs. United India Insurance Co.Ltd
. (supra) cited by Mr.  Joshi,  it  is  not
possible to lay down any rigid rules of principles of natural justice  which
depends on the facts and circumstances of each case but the concept of  fair
play in action is the basis. In the facts and circumstances of the case,  we
find that the documents called for by D.M. Parmar during  the  enquiry  have
been found by the Enquiry Officer as not to  be  relevant  for  the  charges
against D.M. Parmar and we are of the  considered  view  that  if  the  said
documents were not allowed to be inspected  by  D.M.  Parmar  as  delinquent
officer, there has been no violation of principles of natural justice.
10. On an examination of the enquiry report, we find that there were  as
many as ten charges against D.M. Parmar and  the  charges  were  of  serious
nature and out of these charges, only one charge was not fully  proved,  one
charge was partly proved and one charge was deleted and rest of the  charges
were proved. In  the  conclusion,  the  enquiry  officer  has  recorded  the
following findings:
“FINDINGS
    (1) He did not take  all  possible  steps  to  ensure  and  protect  the
    interest of the Bank. In fact he took such steps and did  such  acts  of
    omission and commission, which were derogatory, detrimental, prejudicial
    and injurious to the interest of the Bank.     ..... Proved.
    (2) He showed gross negligence and  indifference  in  discharge  of  his
    duties. ..... Proved.
(3) He did not discharge his duties with utmost  integrity  and  honesty
    but in fact did such acts of lack of probity on his part.  .... Proved.
    (4)  He  did  not  maintain  discipline  in  all  transactions  and   in
    discharging his duties s a Manager. In fct, he misused  and  abused  his
    position as a Manager of the  branch.                             ......
Proved
    (5) He did not perform  his  duties  with  devotion  and  diligence  and
    violated and flouted the rules of  the  Bank.                      .....
    Proved.
(6) He committed acts of breach of trust. .....Proved.
    (7) By his acts of  misdeeds,  he  tarnished  the  image  of  the  bank.
    ..... Proved.
(8)   He   did   acts    of    unbecoming    of    a    Bank    Officer.
      ....Proved.”
These findings are all based on adequate material  referred  to  in  the
    inquiry report and these materials are mainly bank records. As has  been
    held by this Court in the recent decision in
General Manager(P),  Punjab
    & Sind Bank & Ors. Vs. Daya Singh
, (2010) 11 SCC 233, in which one of us
    (H.L. Gokhale, J.) was a party, as  long  as  there  are  materials  and
    evidence in support of the findings, the  High  Court  cannot  interfere
    with such findings in  exercise  of  powers  of  judicial  review  under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. The learned  single  Judge  of
    the High Court and the Division Bench of the High Court have, therefore,
    rightly not interfered with the  findings.  Once  the  findings  of  the
    Enquiry Officer, which have been quoted above, are not interfered  with,
    we fail to see how the delinquent officer can avoid  the  punishment  of
    dismissal from service. The findings include not only  serious  acts  of
    negligence but also acts of dishonesty and lack of  probity.  The  Court
    cannot probably take a view that punishment of dismissal was  shockingly
    or strikingly disproportionate to the gravity of charges proved  against
    D.M. Parmar.
11. In the result, the impugned judgment of the Division Bench and the
learned single Judge are set aside and the writ petition filed by D.M.
Parmar is dismissed. Accordingly, C.A. No.2093/2007 is allowed and C.A.
NO.2094/2007 is dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.