[Cites
4
, Cited by
22
]
Supreme Court of India
Mohd. Salman vs Committee Of Management & Ors on 8 September, 2011
Bench:
Anil R. Dave
,
Mukundakam Sharma
1



                                                               REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

          CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 6601-6602 OF 2008

MOHD. SALMAN                                      Appellant (s)

                 VERSUS

COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT & ORS.                    Respondent(s)



                                  O R D E R
1.      We propose to dispose of both the appeals by this common 

judgment and order as the issues involved are inter-connected.
2.      The issue that arises for consideration in these appeals 

is   whether   the   appellant   is   entitled   to   claim   deemed 

confirmation   of   his   service   as   an   Assistant   Teacher   in   the 

respondent no. 1 institution on an interpretation of Rule 26 of 

the   Uttar   Pradesh   Ashaskiya   Arabi   Tatha   Farsi   Madarson   Ki 

Manyata   Niyamawali.     However,   before   we   deal   with   the 

contentions   on   the   legal   issues   which   arise   for   our 

consideration, it would be necessary to state certain facts for 

proper appreciation of the issues.
3.      The   appellant   was   appointed   on   1st  March,   1989   as   an 

Assistant Teacher in the primary section of Madarsa Hanifa Ahle 

Sunnat Bahrul Uloom, Mau.  A copy of the appointment order dated 

22.2.1989 is placed on record.   The said order not only states
2
that by virtue of the said order, the appellant was appointed in 

the   said   Madarsa   to   the   post   of   Assistant   Teacher 

Tahtania(primary)   but   it   was   also   mentioned   therein   that   the 

said appointment is purely on probationary basis.   In the said 

letter,   the   appellant   was   further   informed   that   his   services 

could   regularised   but   only   if   his   performance   during   probation 

period was found to be good/satisfactory.  It was also indicated 

therein   that  if   his  performance   during  the   aforesaid  period   is 

not   satisfactory,  then   he  could   be  terminated   from  the   service 

of Madarsa anytime without assigning any reason.
4.         The appellant was appointed initially on probation for a 

period of one year.   The said period of probation was extended 

for a further period of one year.   The respondent no. 1 in the 

counter   affidavit  filed   has  annexed   a  series   of  letters   issued 

on   behalf   of   respondent   no.   1   to   the   appellant.     One   of   such 

letters   is   dated   10.4.1992.     By   writing   the   aforesaid   letter, 

the respondent no. 1 informed the appellant that his application 

for   extension   of   probation   period   was   received   but   since   his 

teaching work was not satisfactory, therefore, respondent no. 1 

had   decided  to   give  him   a  chance   again  to   improve  his   work  so 

that   in   future   his   services   could   be   made   permanent.     By   the 

said   letter,   his   probation   period   was   extended   for   one   year 

more.
5.         There   is   yet   another   letter   which   is   also   placed   on
3
record   which   is   dated   13.2.1993   wherein   by   referring   to   the 

earlier   letter   dated   10.4.1992,   respondent   no.   1   informed   the 

appellant that earlier the committee extended his probation time 

and   again   to   improve   his   performance   and   teaching   work   but   it 

appeared   to   them   that   the   appellant   did   not   possess   teaching 

capability   at   all.     By   the   said   letter,   the   appellant   was 

directed   to   show   cause   as   to   why   his   service   should   not   be 

dispensed with from the Madarsa.
6.       Even   thereafter,   there   is   a   letter   issued   on   3.4.1993 

wherein his attention was drawn to the earlier letters directing 

him to improve his performance to which according to respondent 

no.   1,   the   appellant   did   not   pay   any   heed   or   attention.     The 

appellant   was,   therefore,   intimated   that   his   service   now   stood 

terminated in terms of clause 26 of Rules, 1987.
7.       The   aforesaid   order   came   to   be   challenged   by   the 

appellant by filing a writ petition in the Allahabad High Court 

which was allowed on the ground that on expiry of the two years' 

period   of  probation,   there  is   an  automatic   confirmation  of   the 

service   of   the   appellant   and,   therefore,   the   decision   of   this 

Court   in  the   case  of
The
                                    
                                    State
                                               of   Punjab
                                                           Vs.  Dharam  Singh
AIR 

1968   1210   becomes   applicable.     Consequent   upon   the   aforesaid 

findings, the order of termination dated 3.4.1993 was set aside 

with   a   further   direction   that   the   appellant   be   reinstated   in 

service.
4
8.       Being aggrieved by
the said judgment
and order passed by 

the   learned   Single   Judge   of   the   Allahabad   High   Court,   the 

respondents filed an appeal before the Division Bench which was 

entertained   and   was   registered   as   Special   Appeal   No.   329   of 

2005.     By   the   impugned   judgment   and   order,   the   appeal   was 

allowed and judgment and order of the learned Single Judge was 

set aside and the writ petition filed by the present appellant 

was dismissed.   The appellant, therefore, has filed the present 

appeal as against the said impugned judgment and order in which 

we have heard learned counsel appearing for the parties who have 

taken   us   through   the   records   as   also   the   relevant   rule 

concerning   the   service   of   the   appellant   as   also   the   decisions 

which   are   referred   to   and   relied   upon   by   the   learned   Single 

Judge as also by the Division Bench of the High Court.
9.       The   contention   of   Ms.   Purnima   Bhat,   learned   counsel 

appearing for the appellant is that the service of the appellant 

must be accepted as a case of deemed confirmation on expiry of 

the   period   of   probation   of   two   years   as   held   by   the   learned 

Single   Judge.
In   support   of   the   aforesaid   contention,   the 

counsel   has   relied   upon   the   decision   of   this   Court   in
Dharam 

Singh
(supra).
She has also drawn our attention to the decision 

of   this   Court   in   the   case   of
M.K.   Agarwal  Vs.  Gurgaon   Gramin 

Bank and Others
1987 Suppl. SCC 643.
5
10.      Learned counsel appearing for the respondent nos. 1 and 2 

Mr. Anis Suhrawardy and Mr. Shrish Mishra respectively, however, 

has drawn our attention to the aforesaid correspondences between 

respondent   no.   1   and   the   appellant.     In   support   of   their 

submission   that   the   service   of   the   appellant   continued   on 

probation   they   referred   to   the   contents   of   the   order   of 

appointment   and   the   series   of   the   letters.     In   terms   and 

conditions of his appointment, his services could be terminated 

without assigning any reason or on the ground of suitability at 

any point of time.
In support of their contentions, they have 

also relied upon the decisions of this Court in
State of Uttar 

Pradesh  Vs.  Akbar   Ali   Khan
AIR   1968   SC   1842   and   also   the 

decision in the case of
Kedar Nath Bahl Vs. The State of Punjab  

and   Others
1974(3)SCC   21.   In   the   light   of   the   aforesaid 

submissions of the learned counsel appearing for the parties, we 

have considered the records.
11.      There   is   no   dispute   with   regard   to   the   fact   that   the 

appointment   of   the   appellant   as   the   Assistant   Teacher   in   the 

primary   Section   of   the   aforesaid   school   was   on   probation 

initially for a period of one year.  The appointment letter also 

specifically   conveys   the   position   and   the   stipulation   that   his 

services   could   be   regularised   only   if   his   performance   during 

probation period was found to be good/satisfactory.   Rule 26 to 

which   reference   was   made   again   and   again   is   extracted 

hereunder:-
6
"The   appointment   of   a   candidate   against   the 
       permanent   vacancy   shall   be   made   on   probation.     The 
       period   of   probation   shall   be   one   year.     It   can   be 
       extended   by   one   year.     Before   the   completion   of 
       probation period, the Committee of Management shall be 
       entitled to pass an order for removal from service."
12.         Having considered the language of the aforesaid rule, we 

are of the considered opinion that the decision in the case of
Dharam   Singh
(supra)   is   not   applicable   to   the   facts   and 

circumstance of the present case.
In fact, the aforesaid Rule 

26 is somewhat similar to the Rule which was considered by this 

Court   in   the   case   of
Akbar   Ali   Khan
(supra).
A   constitution 

Bench   of   this   Court   in   the   case   of
Akbar   Ali   Khan
(supra) 

examined relevant provisions contained in Rules 12 and 14 of the 

UP   Subordinate   Revenue   Executive   Service   (Tahsildar)   Rules 

dealing with the provision of probation period.   The said rule 

provided that the period of probation would be two years which 

could be extended by the Board to three years.  The Constitution 

Bench of this Court considered as to whether a probationer stood 

confirmed   after   the   expiry   of   the   period   of   probation   in 

paragraph 5 of
the said judgment
.   This Court held in paragraph 

5 as follows:-
"The   respondent   was   posted   as   a   Tehsildar   and 
       placed on probation for two years.  The initial period 
       of probation was liable to be extended by the Board of 
       Revenue or by the Governor.   There is no rule that on 
       the expiry of the period of probation the probationer 
       shall   be   deemed   to   have   been   confirmed   in   the   post 
       which he is holding as a probationer.  If a probationer 
       was   found   not   to   have   made   sufficient   use   of   his 
       opportunities   or   had   failed   to   pass   the   departmental 
       examination "completely" or if he had otherwise failed 
       to   give   satisfaction   he   may   be   reverted   to   his 
       substantive   appointment   again   confirmation   in   the
7
appointment at the end of the period of probation could 
       only   be   made   if   the   probationer   had   passed   the 
       departmental   examination   for   tahsildars   "completely"
and   the   Commissioner   reported   that   he   was   fit   for 
       confirmation and that his integrity was unquestionable. 
       It   is   common   ground   in   this   case   that   the   respondent 
       had   not   passed   the   departmental   examination   before 
       1955.     He   had   therefore   not   qualified   himself   for 
       confirmation."
13.       Having   held   thus,   this   Court   recorded   its   opinion   in 

paragraph 6 in the following manner:-
"The scheme of the rules is clear: confirmation 
       in   the   post   which   a   probationer   is   holding   does   not 
       result   merely   from   the   expiry   of   the   period   of 
       probation, and so long as the order of confirmation is 
       not made, the holder of the post remains a probationer. 
       It   has   been   held   by   this   Court   that   when   a   first 
       appointment   or   promotion   is   made   on   probation   for   a 
       specified   period   and   the   employee   is   allowed   to 
       continue   in   the   post,   after   the   expiry   of   the   said 
       period   without   any   specific   order   of   confirmation   he 
       continues   as   a   probationer   only   and   acquires   no 
       substantive right  to hold  the post.   If  the order  of 
       appointment itself states that at the end of the period 
       of probation the appointee will stand confirmed in the 
       absence   of   any   order   to   the   contrary,   the   appointee 
       will   acquire   a   substantive   right   to   the   post   even 
       without an order of confirmation.  In all other cases, 
       in the absence of such an order or in the absence of 
       such a service rule, an express order of confirmation 
       is necessary to give him such a right.  Where after the 
       period of probation an appointee is allowed to continue 
       in the post without an order of confirmation, the only 
       possible view to take is that by implication the period 
       of probation has been extended, and it is not a correct 
       proposition to state that an appointee should be deemed 
       to be confirmed from the mere fact that he is allowed 
       to continue after the end of period of probation."
14.       The   aforesaid   rule   which   is   referred   to   in   the   case   of
Akbar Ali Khan
(supra) appears to be similar to the case in hand.
So far the case of
Dharam Singh
(supra)  which is relied upon by 

the   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the   appellant   is   concerned, 

the   rule   which   was   considered
in   that   case
was   rule   6(3).     A
8
bare   perusal   of   the   said   rule   would   indicate   that   by   adding   a 

proviso   to  the   substantive  rule,   a  maximum   period  of   probation 

was   provided   and   in   that   context,   this   Court   has   held   that   in 

view   of   the   aforesaid   proviso,   the   Rule   postulates   that   there 

would   be   an   automatic   confirmation   after   expiry   of   the   period 

mentioned in Rule 6(3).
Because a maximum period of probation 

was   provided   in   the   service   rules   in   the   case   of
Dharam 

Singh
(supra),   therefore,  in   that  decision,   it  was   held  by   this 

Court that continuation of the probationer thereafter would ipso 

facto  be   held   as   deemed   confirmation.     The   said   decision   is, 

therefore,   not   applicable   to   the   present   case   and   is   clearly 

distinguishable.
15.      The   correspondences   which   are   on   record   also   indicate 

that   the   service   of   the   appellant   was   also   found   to   be   not 

satisfactory   by   the   respondent   and   the   said   fact   was   also 

brought   to   the   notice   of   the   appellant   continuously   and 

repeatedly   so   as   to   give   him   an   opportunity   to   improve   his 

performance.   However, despite the said opportunity granted and 

also   extension,   his   performance   and   service   were   not   improved 

and,   therefore,   the   service   was   terminated   under   the   aforesaid 

letter dated 3.4.1993.
16.
In the  case of
Kedar Nath  Bahl  Vs.  The State  of Punjab  

and Others
reported in 1974 (3) SCC 21, this Court clearly laid 

down the proposition of law that where a person is appointed as
9
a   probationer   in   any   post   and   a   period   of   probation   is 

specified,   it   does   not   follow   that   at   the   end   of   the   said 

specified   period   of   probation   he   obtains   confirmation 

automatically even if no order is passed on that behalf.  It was 

also held in that decision that unless the terms of appointment 

clearly indicate that confirmation would automatically follow at 

the   end   of   the   specified   period   or   that   there   is   a   specific 

service rule to that effect, the expiration of the probationary 

period   does   not   necessarily   lead   to   confirmation.     This   Court 

went on to hold that at the end of the period of probation an 

order confirming the officer is required to be passed and if no 

such   order   is   passed   and   if   he   is   not   reverted   to   his 

substantive post, the result merely is that he continues in his 

post as a probationer.
17.      In   our   considered   opinion,   the   ratio   of   the   aforesaid 

decision is also clearly applicable to the facts of the present 

case.   In the present case, in the appointment letter issued to 

the   appellant,   it   was   specifically   mentioned   that   his   service 

would   be   regularised   only   when   his   performance   during   the 

probation period is found to be good/satisfactory.
18.      In view of the aforesaid stipulation, so long an order is 

not passed holding that the service of the appellant is good and 

satisfactory, it could not have been held that his service could 

be regularised automatically by a deeming provision.
10
19.     In   that   view   of   the   matter,   we   find   no   merit   in   these 

appeals   which   are   dismissed   leaving   the   parties   to   bear   their 

own costs.
......................J.
                                             (DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)



                                             ......................J.
                                             (ANIL R. DAVE)

NEW DELHI
SEPTEMBER 08, 2011.