[Cites
4
, Cited by
268
]
Supreme Court of India
Bedanga Talukdar vs Saifudaullah Khan & Ors on 28 September, 2011
Author:
Altamas Kabir
Bench:
Altamas Kabir
REPORTABLE


             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION




                               I.A. No. 5-8

                                   IN

          CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 8343-8344 OF 2011

       [Arising out of S.L.P (C) No.20152-20153 of 2010]




Bedanga Talukdar                                       ... Appellant


                                VERSUS


Saifudaullah Khan & Ors.                              ...Respondents 




                               O R D E R
1.     Leave granted.
2.     These   appeals   are   directed   against   the   impugned 


judgment   and   order   dated   4th              March,   2010   in 



Writ  Petition  (C)  No.  950  of  2010  and  impugned  judgment 



and order dated 2nd July, 2010 in Writ Petition (C) No.3382 



of 2010 passed by the High Court of Guwahati, allowing the  



writ petitions filed by the respondent No.1 whereby Assam 



Public   Service   Commission   (hereinafter   referred   to   as 



"respondent No. 3") was directed to examine the entitlement
- 1 -
of respondent No.1 by taking into account the identity card  



produced by him.
3.    We   may   notice   the   bare   essential   facts   necessary   for 


the   determination   of   the   controversy   involved   in   these 



appeals .
4.    The   respondent   No.   3   issued   an   advertisement 


on   10th  August,   2006   bearing   advertisement   No.6/2006, 



announcing   its   intention   to   hold   the   preliminary 



examination   of   the   Combined   Competitive   Examination, 



2006 for screening candidates for the Main Examination for 



recruitment to various posts educated in the advertisement.
The   last   date   for   the   receipt   of   the   completed   application  



forms   was   fixed   as   11th  September,   2006.     In   this 



advertisement,   although,   posts   had   been   reserved   for 



various   categories   such   as   OBC/MOBC,   SC,   ST(P)   and 



ST(H),   but   there   was   no   reservation   in   favour   of   the 



disabled   candidates   as   required   under   the   Persons   with 



Disabilities   [Equal   Opportunities,   Protection   of   Rights   and 



Full Participation], Act,1995.
- 2 -
5.    Consequently,  a  Public   Interest  Litigation   being   P.I.L. 


No.61/2006   was   filed   in   the   High   Court   by   Order 



dated   13th  March,   2007.       The   High   Court   by   an   interim 



order   directed   respondent   No.3   not   to   conduct   any 



examination during the pendency of the petition.   By order 



dated 13th March, 2007, the High Court directed respondent 



No.3   to   make   a   fresh   advertisement   on   the   basis   of   the 



requisitions   to   be   received  from   the   Government   of   Assam 



(respondent   No.2)   incorporating   reservation   of   3%   for 



persons with disabilities.
6.    In   compliance   with   the   orders   of   the   High   Court 


dated   13th  March,   2007,   respondent   No.   3   issued   a 



corrigendum   on   5th  June,   2007   reserving   three   per   cent 



vacancies   for   Physically   Handicapped   persons,   in   terms   of 



Persons with Disabilities [Equal Opportunities, Protection of 



Rights and Full Participation], Act,1995.   Applications were 



invited   for   one   post   in   the   Assam   Civil   Service 



Class-I   (Jr.   Grade)   from   persons   suffering   from   Locomotor 



Disability,   in   connection   with   the   conduct   of   Combined
- 3 -
Competitive   (Preliminary)   Examination,   2006   for   screening 



candidates   for   the   Main   examination   for   the   posts   already 



mentioned   in   the   earlier   advertisement   No.   6/2006.     It   is  



evident that this corrigendum was issued in continuation of 



advertisement No. 6/2006 dated 10th August, 2006.  It was 



provided therein that candidates, who had applied earlier to 



the   advertisement   No.   6/2006   dated   10th  August,   2006, 



need   not   apply   again   but   the   candidates   with   Locomotor 



Disability must produce supporting documents in the office 



of   the   Assam   Public   Service   Commission   or   in   the 



examination   hall   before   the   commencement   of   the 



examination.     The   Last   date   for   submission   of   the 



applications under the corrigendum was 6th July, 2007.
7.    Respondent   No.1   had   applied   in   response   to   the  


advertisement dated 10th August, 2006.  Since there was no 



requirement   for   submission   of   any   details   with   regard   to 



any   disability,   he   had   not   submitted   any   disability 



certificate.        Although,   in   view   of   the   corrigendum, 



respondent   No.1   was   not   required   to   make   an   application 



afresh,   he   was   required   to   produce   necessary   supporting
- 4 -
documents   in   the   office   of   the   Commission   or   in   the 



examination   hall   before   the   commencement   of   the 



preliminary   examination.     Respondent   No.1   had   been 



certified   by   the   District   Medical   Board,   Dhubri,   to   be  



physically   disabled   to   the   extent   of   50%   on   21st  January, 



2004. On the basis of this certificate, respondent No.1 was 



issued   an   identity   card   by   the   District   Social   Welfare 



Officer, Dhubri on 18th  February, 2004 which specified his 



disability   to   be   Locomotor   Disability   to   the   extent   of   50%.
The   preliminary   examination   was   held   on   23rd  September, 



2007.
8.    We   may   notice   here   that   respondent   No.1   did   not 


submit   the   mandatory   documents,   to   substantiate   his 



candidature   in   the   seat   reserved   for   candidates   with 



"Locomotor Disability", on or before 6th  July, 2007, i.e., the 



last   date   for   submission   of   applications.     He   also   did   not  



submit the mandatory documents even at the time when he 



appeared   in   the   preliminary   examination.     Therefore,   he 



appeared   in   the   examination   as   a   general   category 



candidate.
- 5 -
9.     Both   the   appellant   and   respondent   No.1   successfully 


participated   in   the   preliminary   examination.                        The 



advertisement   had   clearly   specified   that   "candidates   who 



are   declared   by   the   Commission   to   have   qualified   for 



admission to the Main examination will have to apply again 



in the prescribed application form, which will be supplied to  



them."     It   was   the   claim   of   respondent   No.1,   that   he   had  



specifically indicated in Column No. 11 of his application in 



the   prescribed   form   for   the   Main   examination   that   he 



suffers  from  Locomotor   Disability  upto  50%.    According  to 



him,   he   had   submitted   the   certificate   dated   21st  January, 



2004 issued by the District Medical Board, Dhubri.   Being  



satisfied  Respondent  No.3  had  permitted  him   to  appear  in 



the Main examination.
10.    Having         successfully         completed         the         written 


examination,   both   the   candidates,   i.e.,   appellant   and 



respondent No.1, were called for interview on 1st December, 



2008.     It   was   the   case   of   respondent   No.1   that   he   had 



produced the necessary documents in support of his claim
- 6 -
of Locomotor Disability to the extent of 50%, along with the 



other certificates and testimonials at the time of interview.
The   Commission,   respondent   No.   3,   published   the   list   of 



selected   candidates   on   15th  June,   2009.     The   name   of 



respondent No.1 did not appear in the said list.  In fact, the 



appellant was shown to have been selected for appointment 



in   the   Assam   Public   Service   Commission   as   a   physically 



handicapped candidate.
11.    Respondent   No.1   made   an   application   under   the 


provisions   of
Right   to   Information   Act,   2005
before   the 



appropriate   authority   seeking   the   details   of   the   marks 



scored by him as well as the details of the marks obtained  



by   other   physically   handicapped   candidates   called   for   the 



interview.        From   the   information   supplied   to   him, 



respondent   No.   1   came   to   know   that   he   had   scored   817 



marks,   whereas   the   appellant   had   scored   695   marks.
Respondent   No.   1   thereafter   made   a   representation   dated 



14th  September,   2009   addressed   to   the   Chairman   of 



respondent No.3 as well as the Secretary of the Commission 



making   a   grievance   that   his   candidature   had   been
- 7 -
arbitrarily rejected, even though, he had scored more marks 



than   appellant   in   the   examination.   It   appears   that 



respondent   No.   1   had   also   reiterated   that   his   claim   for 



being considered in the Locomotor  Disability category, was 



duly supported by the necessary documents, i.e., certificate 



issued   by   the   District   Medical   Board,   Dhubri 



dated   21st  January,   2004   and   the   identity   card   issued   by 



the District Social Welfare Officer.
12.    He had further stated that at the time of interview, he 


had   produced   the   necessary   documents   in   support   of   his 



claim.     According   to   respondent   No.   1,   on   4th  December, 



2009, the Deputy Secretary of the Commission (respondent 



No.3)   had   informed   him   that   the   identity   card   showing 



respondent No. 1 to be suffering from Locomotor Disability 



was   not   submitted   alongwith   the   application   form   for   the 



Main   examination,   though   the   same   was   a   compulsory 



document.     Respondent   No.   1   was   accordingly   asked   to 



submit the same to the Commission as early as possible on 



receipt   of   the   communication   dated   4th  December,   2009.
Respondent           No.             1         replied         vide         his         letter 



                            - 8 -


dated   10th         December,   2009   addressed   to   the
Deputy   Secretary   of   the   Commission,   stating   that   all 



necessary   documents   showing   that   he   is   a   physically 



handicapped   person   suffering   from   Locomotor   Disability 



were submitted alongwith the application form of the Main 



examination.     Respondent   No.   1   also   reiterated   his   claim 



that all documents were verified by the Commission at the 



time of interview on 1st December, 2008.  In the letter dated 



10th December, 2009, respondent No. 1 also mentioned that 



as directed by the Deputy Secretary of the Commission, an 



attested   copy   of   the   ID   card   issued   to   him   by   the   District 



Social Welfare Officer, Dhubri is being forwarded.
13.    It would be relevant to notice here that the select list  


dated   15th  June,   2009   was   challenged   in   Writ   Petition 



No. 2755 of 2009 and other connected cases.  The aforesaid  



writ petition was disposed of by the High Court by remitting 



the matter back to respondent No.3 to take a fresh decision 



and publish a revised list.   The reservation in the category  



of Locomotor  Disability was not the issue before the Court
- 9 -
in   the   aforesaid   writ   petition.     The   procedural   anomaly 



related to women candidates.
14.    Subsequently,   respondent   No.   1   filed   Writ   Petition 


No. 67 of  2010 seeking a direction  to include  his name  in  



the   fresh   list   to   be   issued   by   the   respondent   No.3, 



Commission.   This writ petition was dismissed by the High 



Court   being   premature   on   7th  January,   2010.     Thereafter, 



on 5th February, 2010, the Commission published a revised 



list,   wherein   name   of   respondent   No.   1   was   again   not 



included   in   the   list   of   candidates   selected   for   the  



appointment.
15.    Respondent No. 1, therefore, challenged the select list 


by Writ Petition No. 950 of 2010.  The writ petition was filed  



on 8th February, 2010.  The High Court granted an ex-parte 



order on 11th February, 2010 directing respondent No.3 not 



to issue the appointment / posting orders to the appellant.
16.    In   the   counter   affidavit   filed   to   this   writ   petition, 


respondent No.3 specifically stated that the documents had
- 10 -
not   been   submitted   by   the   respondent   No.   1   within   the 



prescribed   time.     On   14th  March,   2010,   the   writ   petition 



filed   by   respondent   No.   1   was   allowed.     A   direction   was 



issued   to   respondent   No.3   to   reconsider   the   matter   afresh 



based   on   the   identity   card   submitted   on   10th  December, 



2009.     We   may   notice   here   that   this   direction   had   been 



issued by the High Court in spite of the categoric assertion  



made   by   the   respondent   No.3   that   the   candidature   of   the  



respondent   No.   1   had   been   rejected   on   the   basis   of   the 



resolution   dated   8th  January,   2010.     In   its   meeting   dated 



8th  January,   2010,   respondent   No.3   had   resolved   that 



respondent   No.   1   did   not   submit   the   identity   card   along  



with   the   form.     This   was   vital   to   support   the   claim   of 



respondent No.1 to be considered for  the  post reserved for 



the candidates having Locomotor Disability.   Therefore, his 



candidature was rejected for non-fulfillment of an essential 



condition.      However, pursuant  to the directions issued by 



the   High   Court   in   its   order   dated   4th  March,   2010, 



respondent   No.3   in   its   meeting   held   on   21st  May,   2010 



again   thoroughly   examined   the   matter   relating   to   the 



entitlement   of   respondent   No.   1   for   final   selection   as   a
- 11 -
physically   handicapped   (Locomotor   Disability)   candidate.
Upon   a   thorough   scrutiny   and   re-examination   of   the   facts 



and  the  material  on  record, the  claim  of  respondent No. 1 



was   not   accepted.     The   name   of   appellant   was   duly 



reiterated   as   the   candidate   selected   for   appointment.
A communication to that effect was sent to the appellant as 



well as respondent No. 1 on 31st May, 2010.
17.    At   this   stage,   respondent   No.   1   filed   Writ   Petition 


No. 3382 of 2010 challenging the minutes dated 21st  May, 



2010 and the communication dated 31st  May, 2010.       The 



aforesaid writ petition has been allowed by the High Court 



with   observations   that   respondent   No.3   was   under   a   legal 



obligation   to   examine   the   petitioner's   entitlement   for 



selection by taking into account his identity card.  The High 



Court   notices   that   the   resolution   of   the   respondent   No.3 



contained   in   the   minutes   of   the   meeting   dated   21st  May, 



2010 would indicate that the Commission had resolved not 



to   consider   the   case   of   respondent   No.   1   for   selection   for  



appointment   against   the   solitary   post   earmarked   for 



physically handicapped candidates on  the ground that  the
- 12 -
identity   card,   which   was   required   to   be   submitted   by 



respondent   No.   1  at  different  stages.     The   High   Court  has  



held that the aforesaid decision, is not rendered in the light  



of the directions given by the High Court in Paragraph 13 of  



the   order   dated   4th          March,   2010   passed   in   Writ 



Petition  (C) No. 950 of 2010.   It has been observed by the  



High  Court  that   the   question   of  belated  submission  of  the 



identity   card   having   been   already   answered   by   the   Court 



and directions having been issued to take into account the  



same, the Public Service Commission could not have acted 



in   the   manner   it   has   done.     This   writ   petition   was, 



therefore, allowed with the following observations:-
"For   the   aforesaid   reasons,   we   set   aside   the 

      resolution dated 21.5.2010 of the Commission as 

      well   as   the   communication   dated   31.5.2010   and 

      direct   that   the   Public   Service   Commission   will 

      now   examine   the   entitlement   of   the   petitioner   by 

      taking into account the identity card produced by 

      him.   For   the   purpose   of   clarification,   we   deem   it 

      appropriate to add that while considering the case 

      of   the   petitioner   the   acceptability,   veracity   or 

      otherwise of the contents of the identity card and 

      the   effect   of   the   said   contents,   if   found   to   be 

      acceptable,   would   be   considered   by   the 

      Commission."
- 13 -
These   directions   are   challenged   by   the   appellant   in   these 



appeals.
18.    We have heard the counsel for the parties.
19.    Mr.   Jayant   Bhushan,   learned   senior   counsel, 


appearing   for   the   appellant   herein   submits   that   in   the 



advertisement dated 5th  June, 2007, one post was reserved 



for   person   suffering   from   Locomotor   Disability   only.     The 



advertisement also further provided that those who applied 



earlier   in   response   to   advertisement   No.6/2006   dated 



10th August, 2006 need not apply again, but the candidates 



with   Locomotor   Disability   must   produce   supporting 



documents   in   the   office   of   Assam   Public   Service 



Commission   or   in   the   examination   hall   before 



commencement   of   the   examination.     The   advertisement 



further   provided   that   candidates   who   are   declared   by   the 



Commission   to   have   qualified   for   admission   to   the   main 



examination   will   have   to   apply   again   in   prescribed
- 14 -
application   form,   which   will   be   supplied   to   them.     All 



candidates   applying   in   the   category   of   persons   with 



Locomotor   Disability   upto   50%   were   required   to   send   a 



certificate   of   Locomotor   Disability   from   the   appropriate 



authority.  According to Mr. Bhushan, respondent No. 1 did 



not   submit   the   necessary   certificate   in   the   office   of   the 



respondent   No.   3   or   in   the   examination   hall   before 



commencement   of   the   examination.     In   fact,   he   did   not 



submit   even   the   ID   card   till   after   the   interview.     By   the  



time, he submitted the ID card, even the Select List of the  



successful   candidates   had   been   published.                      Since 



respondent No. 1 had not submitted the requisite disability 



certificate   within   the   stipulated   period   as   provide   in   the 



advertisement,   respondent   No.   3   rejected   his   candidature 



for valid reasons in its resolution dated 8th January, 2010.
20.    Mr.   Bhushan   submits   that   direction   issued   by   the 


High Court are contrary to the settled principle of law that  



there can  be no  variation  in  the   conditions  of  eligibility as 



laid down in the advertisement, unless a specific stipulation
- 15 -
is   made   about   any   particular   condition   being   relaxable   at 



the   discretion   of   the   concerned   authority.     Learned   senior 



counsel   submits   that   the   High   Court  has   erred  in   holding 



that   the   rigour   of
Article   14
would   not   be   automatically 



applicable   "to   the   domain   of   appointment   in   public   office 



where   the   employer   must   strive   to   pick   the   best   talent 



available.     To   achieve   such   result,   the   employer   must   be 



conferred a wide discretion to act in relaxation of the rigour 



of   the   terms   of   an   advertisement.     The   requirements   spelt 



out   in   an   advertisement   for   appointment   in   public   service 



must,   therefore,   not   to   be   understood   to   be   inflexible 



leaving   no   room   for   elasticity".     Learned   senior   counsel 



further   submitted   that   the   High   Court   failed   to   appreciate 



that claim of respondent No. 1 had been rejected upon due  



consideration   by   respondent   No.   3   after   according   him   an 



adequate   opportunity   by   resolution   dated   8th  January, 



2010.
21.    According   to   the   learned   senior   counsel,   the   High 


Court has proceeded on the erroneous assumption that the
- 16 -
Commission   had   itself   treated   candidature   of   many 



candidates   to   be   provisional   on   account   of   the   fact   that 



requisite certificates of age or educational qualifications had 



not   been   submitted   along   with   the   application   form.
According   to   Mr.   Bhushan,   the   High   Court   has   wrongly 



concluded   that   the   Public   Service   Commission   had   itself 



treated   the   condition   about   the   submission   of   necessary 



certificates   to   be   not   mandatory   and   inflexible 



requirements.  According to the learned senior counsel, the 



aforesaid   conclusion   of   the   High         Court   is   factually 



incorrect.
22.    The   learned   senior   counsel   submits   that   respondent 


No.3   had   in   fact   rejected   the   candidature   of   respondent 



No.1  strictly  in  accordance   with  the  instructions  issued in 



the   "Information   to   the   candidates   on   the   Combined 



Competitive   (Main)   Examination".     Instruction   No.   13 



clearly   stipulates   that   "any   application   form   received 



without   all   or   some   of   the   enclosures   is   liable   to   be 



summarily   rejected.     Any   enclosure   which   was   not   sent
- 17 -
along with the application earlier but sent subsequently by 



                the   candidates   will   not   be   entertained.     Thus   candidates 



                must   ensure  that   the  application   form   is   properly   filled  in 



                and   is   accompanied   by   all   the   relevant   documents."
Mr. Bhushan submits that in the case of respondent No. 1, 



                he was required to submit an attested copy of certificate of 



                Locomotor   Disability.     The   High   Court   records   that   the 



                necessary   certificate   was   not   submitted   by   respondent 



                No.  1 before  the   last  date  of  receipt  of  applications,  which 



                was 11th September, 2006.  Learned senior counsel has also 



                relied on a judgment of this Court in the case of
Karnataka 


                Public   Service   Commission   &   Ors.  Vs.  B.M.   Vijaya 


                S
hankar & Ors. 1
23.    On   the   other   hand,   Mr.   V.   Hazarika,   learned   senior 


                counsel submits that the respondent No.3 reconsidered the 



                entire   issue   after   the   High   Court   set   aside   the   resolution  



                passed   by   respondent   No.3   on   8th                January,   2010.
Respondent   No.   1   had   to   file   W.P.   (C)   No.   950   of   2010   as  





1 (1992) 2 SCC 206
- 18 -
respondent   No.3   again   illegally   rejected   his   candidatures.
He, therefore, challenged the selection of the appellant.
24.    In the aforesaid writ petition, it was stated that in the 


application,   respondent   No.1   had   specifically   mentioned 



against   Column   No.   11   of   the   application   form   that   he 



suffers   from   Locomotor   Disability   upto   50%.     He   had 



submitted a certificate issued by the District Medical Board,  



Dhubri dated 21st  January, 2004 in support of his claim to 



be a physically handicapped person along with the identity 



card   issued   by   the   District   Social   Welfare   officer.     It   was 



further his claim in the writ petition that he had qualified in 



the   main   examination   and   was   called  for   interview   by   call 



letter dated 1st  December, 2008.   It was further the case of 



the  respondent  No.   1  that   he   had  produced   the   necessary 



documents  in  support  of  his  claim  of  Locomotor  Disability 



to   the   extent   of   50%   along   with   the   other   certificates   and 



testimonials   at   the   time   of   interview.     However,   when   the 



select   list   was   published   on   15th  June,   2009,   the   name   of 



respondent   No.1   was   not   included   therein.     It   was   in   fact
- 19 -
the   appellant,   who   had   been   selected   for   appointment.     It 



was also the case of the respondent No. 1 that the appellant  



had scored 695 marks whereas respondent No.1 had scored 



817   marks   in   the   examination.     In   spite   of   having   scored 



higher marks, he was illegally and arbitrarily not selected.
25.    The   respondent   No.1   had,   therefore,   submitted   a 


representation on 14th September, 2009 to respondent    No. 



3,   seeking   to   question   the   selection   of   the   appellant,   who 



had scored lesser marks.  In the representation, respondent 



No.1   had   specifically   stated   that   he   had   submitted   the 



necessary supporting documents along with the application 



form.     The   said   documents   were   verified   at   the   time   of 



interview   on   11th  December,   2008.     The   documents   were 



also enclosed with the representation dated 14th September, 



2009.     Therefore,   on   4th  December,   2009,   the   Deputy 



Secretary of the Commission had informed respondent No. 



1   that   the   identity   card   showing   him   to   be   suffering   from  



Locomotor   Disability   was   not   submitted   along   with   the 



application   form   for   the   main   examination.     Though   the
- 20 -
same   is   a   compulsory   document.     Respondent   No.1   was, 



therefore, asked to submit the same to the Commission as 



early  as   possible.    On   receipt   of   the   communication   dated 



4th  December,   2009,   respondent   No.1   through   his   letter 



dated   10th  December,   2008   addressed   to   the   Deputy 



Secretary of the Commission reiterated that the documents 



had   already   been   submitted   and   verified   by   the 



Commission.     However,   he   again   sent   an   attested   copy   of 



the   identity   card   issued   to   him   by   the   District   Social 



Welfare Officer, Dhubri.
26.    Learned   senior   counsel   submits   that   taking   into 


consideration   the   aforesaid   facts,   the   High   Court   correctly 



came   to   the   conclusion   that   respondent   No.   3   had   not 



specifically   denied   the   claim   of   the   appellant   that   he   had 



produced   the   identity   card   at   the   time   of   interview 



on   11th  December,   2008.     The   High   Court   had   also   taken 



into   consideration   that   the   candidature   of   three   other 



candidates,   who   had   not   submitted   the   necessary 



documents   was   treated   as   provisional.     These   candidates
- 21 -
were included in the select list.   Therefore, the High Court 



has   rightly   concluded   that   the   condition   with   regard   to 



submission   of   certificates   and   testimonials   along   with   the 



application   or   before   the   preliminary   examination   was   not 



mandatory.   The action of the respondent No.3 in rejecting 



the candidature in the resolutions dated 8th  January, 2010 



and 21st May, 2010 were rightly quashed by the High Court.
27.    Mr.   Bhushan,   in   reply,   submitted   that   upon   a 


thorough   examination   of   the   entire   fact   situation, 



respondent No.3 in its resolution dated 21st  May, 2010 has 



clearly   observed   that   respondent   No.1   was   treated   as   a 



general candidate all along in the examination process and 



was not treated as physically handicapped with Locomotor 



Disability.     The   respondent   No.3   also   looked   into   the 



question   whether   any   other   candidate,   who   had   not 



furnished any essential document with the application or at 



the time of interview but submitted them after the interview 



were   accepted   or   not.   Upon   examination   of   the   issue, 



respondent No.3 has observed that in fact the candidature
- 22 -
of   one   applicant   namely   Smt.   Anima   Baishya   was 



specifically   rejected   as   she   had   submitted   the   application 



before   the   Chairperson   of   respondent   No.3   on 



26th  February, 2009, claiming herself to be a SC candidate 



for   the   first   time.     In   the   case   of   respondent   No.   1,   the 



identity card was submitted for the first time with the letter 



dated   10th  December,   2009   much   after   the   examination 



process was over.
28.    We have considered the entire matter in detail.  In our 


opinion, it is too well settled to need any further reiteration  



that   all   appointments   to   public   office   have   to   be   made   in 



conformity with
Article 14
of the Constitution  of India.   In 



other words, there must be no arbitrariness resulting from 



any undue favour being shown to any candidate. Therefore, 



the   selection   process   has   to   be   conducted   strictly   in 



accordance   with   the   stipulated   selection   procedure.
Consequently, when  a particular  schedule  is  mentioned in 



an   advertisement,   the   same   has   to   be   scrupulously 



maintained.   There   can   not   be   any   relaxation   in   the   terms 



and conditions of the advertisement unless such a power is
- 23 -
specifically reserved.  Such a power could be reserved in the 



relevant   Statutory   Rules.     Even   if   power   of   relaxation   is 



provided   in   the   rules,   it   must   still   be   mentioned   in   the  



advertisement.   In the absence of such power in the Rules, 



it could still be provided in the advertisement.  However, the 



power   of   relaxation,   if   exercised   has   to   be   given   due 



publicity.     This   would   be   necessary   to   ensure   that   those 



candidates   who   become   eligible   due   to   the   relaxation,   are 



afforded   an   equal   opportunity   to   apply   and   compete.
Relaxation   of   any   condition   in   advertisement   without   due 



publication   would   be   contrary   to   the   mandate   of   quality 



contained in
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution of India.
29.    A perusal of the advertisement in this case will clearly 


show that there was no power of relaxation.  In our opinion,  



the   High   Court   committed   an   error   in   directing   that   the 



condition   with   regard   to   the   submission   of   the   disability 



certificate   either   along   with   the   application   form   or   before 



appearing in the preliminary examination could be relaxed 



in the case of respondent No. 1.   Such a course would not
- 24 -
be permissible as it would violate the mandate of
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution of India.
30.    In   our   opinion,   the   High   Court   was   in   error   in 


concluding   that   the   respondent   No.3   had   not   treated   the 



condition   with   regard   to   the   submission   of   the   certificate 



along   with   the   application   or   before   appearing   in   the 



preliminary   examination,   as   mandatory.     The   aforesaid 



finding,   in   our   opinion,   is   contrary   to   the   record.     In   its 



resolution   dated   21st  May,   2010,   the   Commission   has 



recorded the following conclusions:-
"Though   Shri   S.   Khan   had   mentioned   in   his   letter 

       dated   10.12.2009   that   he   was   resubmitting   the 

       Identity Card with regard to Locomotor Disability he, 

       in fact, had submitted the documentary proof of his 

       Locomotor Disability for the first time to the office of 

       the   A.P.S.C.   through   his   above   letter   dated 

       10.12.2009.       However,   after   receiving   the   Identity 

       Card   the   matter   was   placed   before   the   full 

       Commission   to   decide   whether   the   Commission   can 

       act   on   an   essential   document   not   submitted   earlier 

       as   per   terms   of   advertisement   but   submitted   after 

       completion of entire process of selection.



       The   Commission   while   examining   the   matter   in 

       details   observed   that   Shri   S.   Khan   was   treated   as 

       General   candidate   all   along   in   the   examination 

       process   and   was   not   treated   as   Physically 

       Handicapped   with   Locomotor   Disability.     Prior   to 

       taking   decision   on   Shri   S.   Khan   it   was   also   looked  

       into   by   the   Commission,   whether   any   other 

       candidate's   any   essential   document   relating   to
- 25 -
right/benefits etc. not furnished with the application 

       or   at   the   time   of   interview   but   submitted   after 

       interview   was   accepted   or   not.     From   the   record,   it 

       was found that prior to
Shri S. Khan
's case, one Smt. 

       Anima Baishya had submitted an application before 

       the Chairperson on 26.2.2009 claiming herself to be 

       a S.C. candidate for the first time.  But her claim for 

       treating   herself   as   a   S.C.   candidate   was   not 

       entertained   on   the   grounds   that   she   applied   as   a 

       General   candidate   and   the   caste   certificate   in 

       support of her claim as S.C. candidate was furnished 

       long after completion of examination process."
31.    In   the   face   of   such   conclusions,   we   have   little 


hesitation   in   concluding   that   the   conclusion   recorded   by 



the High Court is contrary to the facts and materials on the 



record.   It  is   settled   law   that   there   can   be   no   relaxation   in 



the   terms   and   conditions   contained   in   the   advertisement 



unless   the   power   of   relaxation   is   duly   reserved   in   the 



relevant rules and/or in the advertisement. Even if there is 



a power of relaxation in the rules, the same would still have 



to   be   specifically   indicated   in   the   advertisement.   In   the 



present case, no such rule has been brought to our notice.
In   such   circumstances,   the   High   Court   could   not   have 



issued   the   impugned   direction   to   consider   the   claim   of 



respondent   No.1   on   the   basis   of   identity   card   submitted 



after the selection process was over, with the publication of 



the select list.
- 26 -
32.    In view of the above, the appeals are allowed and the 


impugned   judgment   and   order   dated   4th  March,   2010 



passed in W.P.(C) No.950 of 2010 and impugned judgment 



and order dated 2nd  July, 2010 passed in W.P.(C) No.3382 



of 2010 of the High Court are set aside.
...................................J.

                                                  [Altamas Kabir]





                                       ...................................J.

                                        [Surinder Singh Nijjar]

New Delhi;
September 28, 2011.
- 27 -