[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Government Of National Capital ... vs Union Of India on 20 July, 2023
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
2023 INSC 635                                                                     REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                                           Writ Petition (C) No. 678 of 2023



             Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi                   …Petitioner



                                                        Versus



             Union of India & Ors.                                              …Respondents




                                                      ORDER
1.             On 19 May 2023, eight days after the Constitution Bench of this Court

             pronounced the judgment in
Government of NCT of Delhi v. Union of India1
[“2023 Constitution Bench judgment”], the President in exercise of powers

             under
Article 123
of the Constitution promulgated the Government of National

             Capital Territory of Delhi (Amendment) Ordinance 2023 [“NCT Ordinance”]. The

             NCT Ordinance amends the
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act
1991 [“GNCTD Act”]. The Preamble to the Ordinance states that Parliament has

             exclusive and plenary jurisdiction with respect to the national capital in view of
Signature Not Verified
Articles 239-AA(3)(b)
and
239-AA(7):
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2023.07.20
21:17:47 IST
Reason:
1 Civil Appeal No. 2357 of 2017
1
“AND WHEREAS, keeping in mind various reports of
             various Commissions and since Delhi is the capital city of
             the nation, the Constitution retained certain exclusive and
             plenary jurisdiction in the Parliament while incorporating
Article 239-AA
in general and
Article 239-AA(3)(b)
read
             with
Article 239-AA(7)
in particular.
[…]

             AND WHEREAS for the purpose of giving effect to
Article
             239(l)
read with
Article 239AA
and in exercise of powers of
Article 239AA(3)(b)
and
Article 239AA(7)
of the
             Constitution of India, which includes the power to
             supplementing the provisions under
Article 239-AA
including the power to make suitable amendments
             thereof, an Ordinance namely the Government of National
             Capital Territory of Delhi (Amendment) Ordinance, 2023 is
             proposed to provide for a comprehensive scheme of
             administration of services deployed in the functioning of
             NCTD and other allied issues thereby balancing the local
             and domestic interests of the people staying in the NCTD
             with the democratic will of the entire nation reflected
             through the President of India.”
                                                  (emphasis supplied)
2.    The NCT Ordinance inserts Section 3A in the GNCTD Act 1991. Section 3A

stipulates that notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, order, or

decree of any Court, the Legislative Assembly shall have the power to enact laws

as prescribed in
Article 239-AA
, except with respect to Entry 41 of List II of the

Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. The provision excludes Entry 41 of List II

from the legislative competence of NCTD in addition to Entries 1,2, and 18 of List

II which are excluded by Article 239-AA. In effect, Section 3A amends Article 239-

AA.
3.    In addition to excluding the legislative power of NCTD with respect to Entry

41 of List II, the NCT Ordinance also establishes a new scheme for the distribution

of executive power over services between the Union of India and the Government

of NCTD. A brief overview of the scheme is provided below:
2
(i)     The President shall constitute any authority, board, commission or

        statutory body in and for NCTD, or appoint or nominate any office

        bearer or member to the body. [
Section 45D
]
(ii)    The National Capital Civil Service Authority [“Authority”] is

        constituted. The Authority shall consist of the Chief Minister of NCTD,

        the Chief Secretary of the Government of NCTD, and the Principal

        Home Secretary of the Government of NCTD. Decisions shall be

        taken by a majority of votes of the members present and voting.
[
Section 45E
]
(iii)   The authority has the power, inter alia, to recommend transfers and

        postings of Group A officers and officers of DANICS serving in the

        affairs of NCTD (excluding those serving in connection with Entries

        1,2,18 of List II), recommend on all matters connected with and falling

        under the subject of ‘vigilance’ and ‘non-vigilance’ for the purpose of

        disciplinary proceedings, to make recommendations on transfer and

        postings, and on the suitability of officers on postings. [
Section 45H
]
(iv)    The Lieutenant Governor shall return the recommendation made by

        the Authority for reconsideration if he differs from the recommendation

        of the Authority. In case of a difference of opinion between the

        Lieutenant Governor and the Authority, the decision of the Lieutenant

        Governor shall be final. [
Section 45H
]
(v)     Proposals which may, inter alia, affect the peace of NCTD, interests

        of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and socially and

        educationally backward community, or proposals on matters which
3
affect the relations of the Government of NCTD with the Central

             Government, State Government, Supreme Court of India or the High

             Court of Delhi shall be placed before the Lieutenant Governor for

             opinion. [
Section 45J(4)
]
(vi)   The Secretary of the Council of Ministers or the Departments shall

             bring a proposal of the Council of Ministers or the concerned

             Departments to the attention of the Lieutenant Governor if they are of

             the opinion that the proposal is not in accordance with law or that the

             proposal will bring NCTD into “controversy” with the Central

             Government, the State Governments, the Supreme Court or the High

             Court of Delhi. [
Section 45K
]
4.    The petitioner has instituted proceedings under
Article 32
of the constitution

challenging the constitutional validity of the 2023 Ordinance.
5.    The 2023 Ordinance is challenged on three broad grounds:
(i)    Section 3A, by excluding NCTD’s legislative power over Entry 41 of

             List II, in effect amends a constitutional provision, that is,
Article 239-
AA(3)(a);
(ii)   The provisions of the NCT Ordinance remove the executive power

             vested   in   the   Government      of   NCTD over       the   day-to-day

             administration of National Capital from the elected government of

             NCTD and place it exclusively in the Lieutenant Governor, a

             nominated head. The 2023 Constitution Bench judgment in the

             specific context of services observed that the people are the ultimate

             sovereign and the executive is accountable to the public through the
4
“triple chain of accountability”.   The triple chain of accountability

                   requires the permanent executives to be responsible to the elected

                   government, the elected government to be responsible to the

                   legislature, and the legislature to be responsible to the public. The

                   2023 Ordinance abrogates the principles of collective responsibility

                   and the triple chain of accountability which are important facets of

                   NCTD’s governance structure;
(iii)
Article 239-AA(7)(b)
is not a sui generis provision in the constitutional

                   scheme. Other provisions of the Constitution (such as Articles

                   4,169,239A, 244A,312, Part D Fifth Schedule, and Paragraph 21

                   Sixth Schedule) also stipulate that certain laws made by Parliament

                   shall not deemed to be a constitutional amendment though it has the

                   effect of amending the constitution. Article 239-AA(7)(b) does not vest

                   Parliament with wide powers to abolish the constitutional scheme of

                   governance envisaged for NCTD in Article 239-AA; and
(iv)    The President could not have exercised the power to promulgate an

                   Ordinance under
Article 123
because circumstances which warranted

                   immediate action did not exist. There was no urgency to promulgate

                   the Ordinance when the monsoon session of Parliament was going to

                   begin in a few months.
6.         The Government of NCT has also sought a stay of the NCT Ordinance2 on

the ground that it prevents the Government of NCTD from meeting its popular

mandate. Mr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, learned senior counsel highlighted
2
IA No. 130505 of 2023
5
instances where senior bureaucrats have ignored the orders of the concerned

Minister to call the National Disaster Relief Force for aiding with the flood situation

in Delhi, the Directorate of Vigilance has issued work allocation order in direct

contravention to prior orders of the Minister-in-charge, and the Lieutenant

Governor has terminated the contract of 437 consultants working with various

departments of the government of NCTD without any consultation with the elected

government. Additionally, the letter issued by the Lieutenant Governor on 5 July

2023 terminating the engagement of specialists/fellow/consultants is also sought

to be stayed.
7.    Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General appearing for the Union of India

made a reference to paragraph 95 of the 2023 Constitution Bench judgment. In the

said paragraph, this Court observed as follows:
“The legislative power of the Union extends to all entries
                under the State List and Concurrent List, in addition to the
                Union List. The executive power of the Union, in the
                absence of a law upon executive power relating to any
                subject in the State List, shall cover only matters relating
                to the three entries which are excluded from the legislative
                domain of NCTD. As a corollary, in the absence of a law or
                provision of the Constitution, the executive power of the
                Lieutenant Governor acting on behalf of the Union
                Government shall extend only to matters related to the
                three entries mentioned in
Article 239AA(3)(a)
, subject to
                the limitations in
Article 73.
[…] However, if Parliament
                enacts a law granting executive power on any subject
                which is within the domain of NCTD, the executive power
                of the Lieutenant Governor shall be modified to the extent,
                as provided in that law.”
8.    Mr. Harish Salve, learned senior counsel appearing for the Lieutenant

Governor submitted that the consultants were terminated because their

appointment was arbitrary.
6
9.
Article 239-AA(3)(a)
stipulates that the legislative assembly of NCTD has

the power to make laws with respect to matters enumerated in the State List and

Concurrent List insofar as such matter is applicable to Union Territories except

entries 1,2, and 18 of List II and entries 64, 65 and 66 of List II insofar as they relate

to the above entries. The issue for consideration before the 2023 Constitution

Bench was whether
Article 239-AA(3)(a)
, excludes by implication,                              NCTD’s

legislative competence over Entry 41 of List II. The Constitution Bench held that
Article 239-AA
does not exclude the legislative power of NCTD over any entries

other than those which are expressly excluded. This Court also held that NCTD will

have executive power over Entry 41 of List II because executive power is co-

extensive with legislative power.
10.      Since in view of
Article 239-AA(3)(b)
, Parliament also has legislative power

over Entry 41 of List II, a corresponding issue on the extent of executive power of

the Union of India and the Government of NCTD on matters over which both

Parliament and the legislative assembly of NCTD have the power to enact laws

arose.
11.      Drawing upon the principles in
Articles 73
and 1623, the 2023 Constitution

Bench held that on entries over which Parliament also has legislative competence,

the executive power of NCTD shall be “subject to and limited by” the executive

power expressly conferred upon the Union of India by provisions of the Constitution




3 The proviso to
Article 73
states that the Union of India shall not have executive power on matters over

which the State can also enact on unless such power is expressly granted by the Constitution or law of
Parliament. The proviso to
Article 162
states that on matters over which both the state legislature and
Parliament can make laws, the executive power of States shall be subject to and limited by the executive
power expressly conferred upon Union of India by a law of Parliament or by the Constitution.
7
or a law made by Parliament. Thus, the position of law is that a law enacted by

Parliament can limit the executive power of NCTD over “services”.
12.   The power of Parliament to enact a law granting the Union of India executive

power over services is not in contention. It is now a settled position of law. However,

this Court while deciding the constitutional validity of the 2023 Ordinance must

decide if the exercise of such a power is valid.
13.   There are two preliminary considerations which arise at this stage. The first

is on the import of Section 3A. Section 3A removes Entry 41 of List II from the

legislative competence of NCTD. On the exclusion of Entry 41 from NCTD’s

legislative power, the government of NCTD ceases to have executive power over

services because executive power is co-terminus with                the legislative power.

Therefore, the issue whether a law could completely remove NCTD’s executive

power over Entry 41 is interconnected with the validity of Section 3A.
14.   The Preamble to the 2023 Ordinance states that the law is made in exercise

of powers under
Article 239-AA(3)(b)
and
Article 239-AA(7).
Article 239-AA(3)(b)
states that Parliament has the power to make laws with respect to “any matter” for

NCTD.
Article 239-AA(7)(a)
grants Parliament the power to enact a law for “giving

effect to, or supplementing” the provisions of
Article 239-AA
, and for all matters

incidental to it.
Article 239-AA(7)(b)
stipulates that such a law shall not be deemed

to be an amendment to the Constitution even if the law amends the Constitution or

has the effect of amending the Constitution.
Article 239-AA(7)
is extracted below:
“(7)(a) Parliament may, by law, make provisions for giving
             effect to or supplementing the provisions contained in the
             foregoing clauses and for all matters incidental or
             consequential thereto.
(b) Any such law as is referred to in sub-clause (a) shall
             not be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for
8
the purpose of
Article 368
notwithstanding that it contains
                any provision which amends or has the effect or amending,
                this Constitution.”
15.      While
Article 239-AA(7)(a)
states that the law must only give effect to or

supplement the provisions of
Article 239-AA
,
Article 239-AA(7)(b)
states that the

law shall not be deemed an amendment to the Constitution even if it has the effect

of amending Article 239-AA. A primary reading of
Article 239-AA(7)(a)
indicates that

the law shall not alter the existing constitutional structure envisaged for NCTD in

Article 239-AA. However, a prima facie reading of
Article 239-AA(7)(b)
denotes that

the law enacted under
Article 239-AA(7)(a)
could alter the existing constitutional

structure of governance of NCTD. This apparent conflict between the two clauses

on the nature of law making power vis-à-vis NCTD’s constitutional structure of

governance needs to be resolved by this Court.
16.     Neither the 2018 Constitution Bench judgment4 nor the 2023 Constitution

Bench judgment has dealt with the interpretation of
Article 239-AA(7).
We are of

the considered opinion that the disposal of the writ petition requires this Court to

answer a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution. We

accordingly refer the following questions to a Constitution Bench:
(i)     What are the contours of the power of Parliament to enact a law under

                Article 239-AA(7); and
(ii)    Whether Parliament in the exercise of its power under
Article 239-
AA(7) can abrogate the constitutional principles of governance for

                NCTD.
4
Government of NCT of Delhi v. Union of India, Civil Appeal No.
2357 of 2017
9
17.     We are also of the opinion that it would be appropriate for the Constitution

Bench to dispose of the writ petition because of the protracted legal battle between

the Union of India and the Government of NCTD on the administration of NCTD.

We direct the Registry to place the papers of this petition before the Chief Justice

of India on the administrative side for the constitution of a Constitution Bench to

answer the questions identified above and for the disposal of the petition. IA No.

130505 of 2023 seeking a stay of the NCT Ordinance is dismissed.
…………...…...….......………………........CJI.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                               …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                              [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha]




                                                …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                 [Manoj Misra]

New Delhi;
July 20, 2023
-CKB-
10