[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Gostho Behari Das vs Dipak Kumar Sanyal on 28 July, 2023
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
B.R. Gavai
1


2023 INSC 653                                                              REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.4725 OF 2023
                                   (Arising out of SLP(C)No.13789/2022)




                         GOSTHO BEHARI DAS                            .. APPELLANT(S)


                                                       V.


                         DIPAK KUMAR SANYAL & ORS.                    .. RESPONDENT(S)




                                                JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL, J.
Leave granted.
The question this Court must consider, is: –

                            “Whether the suspension of the Petitioner’s license to

                            practice medicine is alien to the nature and types of

                            punishment and penalties specified under the Contempt
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
of
Courts Act, 1971
?”
   Indu Marwah
   Date: 2023.07.28
   15:45:29 IST
   Reason:
2
THE FACTS
1. The present appeal stands filed against the judgement

       rendered by the High Court of Calcutta, (Circuit Bench at

       Jalpaiguri) in MAT No. 67 of 2022, by which it upheld

       various orders passed by learned single Judge dated 5 th,

       11th, 12th and 14th July, 2022 in contempt proceedings

       bearing number WPCRC9 of 2022, whereby vide the order

       dated 11th July,2022 the Petitioner/Appellant’s licence to

       practice medicine, was suspended.
2. Further with the order dated 14th July 2022, while

       extending the period of suspension till 19 th August 2022, the

       petitioner was asked to show cause as to why such

       suspension be not affected for a period of two years.
3. A perusal of the record reveals that the Appellant had

       unauthorizedly constructed a structure which was in

       deviation     with   the   plans   sanctioned   by   the   Siliguri

       Municipal Corporation.1 Respondent No.1(private party) filed

       numerous        complaints     against    such       unauthorised

       construction, but to no avail. Discontented by the non­


1 Hereafter, “SMC”
3
intervention of the Commissioner of SMC 2, and the SMC3 ­

       appellant herein filed a writ petition before the High Court.
Vide order dated 22nd December 2016 passed in W.P No.

       11464 (W) of 2016, Respondent No. 3 was directed to have

       the construction so made, inspected and submit a report

       before the court. On the next date of hearing, that is 19 th

       December 2017 it was directed that the representation that

       stood already filed before the Municipal Corporation dated

       2nd August 2007, was to be considered and a reasoned order

       was to be passed thereon.
4. Pursuant to the above direction, an order dated 13 th June

       2018, directing the Respondents No. 3 to demolish the

       unauthorised construction, was passed. This order however,

       came to be quashed by the High Court observing the

       Commissioner SMC, not to be the competent authority and

       instead, only the Board of Councillors of the SMC, who

       could pass orders for demolition. Subsequently, vide a fresh

       order dated 25thJune 2019 the Board of Councillors of SMC

       while observing the construction to be unauthorised,

       ordered its demolition. In furtherance thereto, Respondent
2 Hereafter, Respondents No. 2
3 Hereafter, Respondents No. 3
4
No. 2 passed an order dated 3 rd August 2019 directing the

  demolition to be carried out.
5. Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner, (Appellant herein)

  filed a Writ Petition bearing No. 349/2019 before the High

  Court of Calcutta (circuit bench at Jalpaiguri.) The same

  was disposed of with the observation that an appeal from

  the order dated 25th June 2019, lay before the Principal

  Secretary,   Urban     Development   and   Municipal   Affairs,

  Government of West Bengal. The said authority passed

  orders on 8thJanuary 2020 and 28thJuly 2020 directing the

  SMC to take necessary steps to aid the petitioner in

  undertaking    self­    demolition   of    the   unauthorised

  construction and, in the event of his failure to do so,

  directed that the SMC itself undertakes such steps to do so.
6. Respondent No. 1 then filed a contempt petition in WPA No.

  349 of 2019. It is hereunder that the license to practice

  medicine, of the Appellant herein, was suspended.




  LAW ON THE ISSUE AT HAND
5
7. The grant, regulation and suspension of the licence to

        practice medicine is governed by the
National Medical

        Commission Act, 2019
. It facilitates the maintenance of a

        medical          register        for      India      and   enforces   high   ethical

        standards in regards of all aspects of medical services. A

        statutory body namely the National Medical Commission

        looks after the above­mentioned activities.
8. A perusal of the provisions of this Act as well as the now

        repealed,
Medical Council Act, 1956
shows that the power to

        punish a registered medical practitioner for “misconduct”

        rest exclusively with the body envisaged under this Act.
The

        Act
itself provides for an exhaustive, complete mechanism to

        revoke         the       licence          of   a     registered   practitioner   for

        professional misconduct.                           The same may be done after

        holding an inquiry and complying with the principles of

        audi alterum partem.
9. The instant dispute involves the question as to whether

        such a punishment could be handed down under the

        Contempt of Courts Act, 19714.
4 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘
Contempt Act
’
6
10. Contempt of Court is defined in the Act under
Section 2(a)
:
“2(a). “Contempt of Court” means civil contempt
        or criminal contempt;”
11. Civil contempt, with which the present case concerns itself,

  is defined under
Section 2(b)
which reads as follows:
“2(b). “civil contempt” means wilful disobedience
        o any judgment, decree, direction, order, writ or
        other process of a court or wilful breach of an
        undertaking given to a court;”
12. The punishment for contempt of Court is prescribed under
Section 12
of the Contempt Act, which reads as under:
“12. Punishment for contempt of court.­ (1) Save
       as otherwise expressly provided in this Act or in
       any other law, a contempt of court may be
       punished with simple imprisonment for a term
       which may extend to six months, or with fine
       which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with
       both:
Provided that the accused may be discharged or
       the punishment awarded may be remitted or on
       apology being made to the satisfaction of the court.
Explanation.­ An apology shall not be rejected
       merely on the ground that it is qualified or
       conditional if the accused makes it bona fide.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any
       other law for the time being in force, no court shall
       impose a sentence in excess of that specified in
       sub­section (1) for any contempt either in respect
       of itself or of a court subordinate to it.
xx           xx         xx”
7
13. It may be noted that right from the Privy Council onwards,

      judicious and sparing use of the power of contempt has

      been an accepted proposition. In Parashuram Detaram

      Shamdasani v. Emperor5 the Council had observed­

             “… this summary power of punishing for contempt
             of court should be used sparingly and only in
             serious cases. It is a power which a Court must of
             necessity possess; its usefulness depends on the
             wisdom and restraint with which it is exercised…”
14. A Bench of seven judges in C.S. Karnan, In re6, had,

      referring to various decisions of other jurisdictions, observed



              “63. The authority to punish for contempt of court
             has always been exercised by the judiciary from
             times immemorial [ In one of the earliest legal
             pronouncements dealing with the subject, Justice
             Wilmot in R. v. Almon, 1765 Wilmot's Notes 243 :
97 ER 94 explained the philosophy behind the
             power to punish for contempt of court. The passage
             now a classic exposition runs as follows : (ER p.
100)“… and whenever men's allegiance to the laws
             is so fundamentally shaken, it is the most fatal and
             most dangerous obstruction of justice, and, in my
             opinion, calls out for a more rapid and immediate
             redress than any other obstruction whatsoever; not
             for the sake of the Judges, as private individuals,
             but because they are the channels by which the
             King's justice is conveyed to the people.”] . The
             justification for the existence of that is not to afford
             protection to individual Judges [ “14. … the law of
             contempt is not made for the protection of Judges

5 1945 AC 264
6 (2017) 7 SCC 1
8
who may be sensitive to the winds of public opinion.
             Judges are supposed to be men of fortitude, able to
             thrive    in    a    hardy     climate.”    [Douglas,
             J., Craig v. Harney, 1947 SCC OnLine US SC 79,
             para 14 : 91 L Ed 1546 : 331 US 367 at p. 376
             (1947)]] but to inspire confidence in the sanctity
             and efficacy of the judiciary [ “… The object of the
             discipline enforced by the Court in case of contempt
             of court is not to vindicate the dignity of the court
             or the person of the Judge, but to prevent undue
             interference with the administration of justice.”
             [Bowen, L.J. — Helmore v. Smith (2), (1886) 35 Ch
             D 449 at p. 455 (CA)]] , though they do not and
             should not flow from the power to punish for
             contempt. They should rest on more surer
             foundations. The foundations are—the trust and
             confidence of the people that the judiciary is
             fearless and impartial.”
15. Krishna Iyer J. speaking for himself and Bhagwati J. in
Baradakanta Mishra v. Registrar Orissa High
Court 7

      (Constitution Bench), observed­



             “65. … we would like to underscore the need to
             draw the lines clear enough to create confidence in
             the people that this ancient and inherent power,
             intended to preserve the faith of the public in
             public justice, will not be so used as to provoke
             public hostility as overtook the Star Chamber. A
             vague and wandering jurisdiction with uncertain
             frontiers, a sensitive and suspect power to punish
             vested in the prosecutor, a law which makes it a
             crime to publish regardless of truth and public
             good     and     permits    a    process    of brevi
             manu conviction, may unwittingly trench upon civil
             liberties and so the special jurisdiction and
             jurisprudence bearing on contempt power must be
             delineated with deliberation and operated with
             serious circumspection by the higher judicial
7 (1974) 1 SCC 374
9
echelons. So it is that as the palladium of our
             freedoms, the Supreme Court and the High Courts,
             must vigilantly protect free speech even against
             judicial umbrage — a delicate but sacred duty
             whose     discharge   demands     tolerance and
             detachment of a high order.”
16.
In
W.B. Administrative Tribunal v. SK. Monobbor

      Hossain8
, (two­Judge Bench) has observed that the tenor of

      the dicta of this Court on the topic (contempt) is crystal

      clear.     The Court has time and again asserted that the

      contempt jurisdiction enjoyed by the Courts is only for the

      purpose of upholding the majority of the judicial system

      that exists. While exercising this power, the Courts must

      not be hypersensitive or swung by emotions but must act

      judiciously.    The principle of sparing use stood reiterated in

      Prashant Bhushan, In re9

       On the aspect of Punishment under a specified statute
17. A Bench of seven judges in
Bar Council of Maharashtra

       v. M.V Dabholkar10
had observed as follows, in respect of

       the role of Bar Councils and the powers of disciplinary

       action vested within them, as under­



8 (2012) 11 SCC 761
9 (2021) 3 SCC 160
10 (1975) 2 SCC 702
10
“24. The scheme and the provisions of the Act
      indicate that the constitution of State Bar Councils
      and Bar Council of India is for one of the principal
      purposes to see that the standards of professional
      conduct and etiquette
laid down by
the Bar Council
      of India are observed and preserved. The Bar
      Councils therefore entertain cases of misconduct
      against advocates. The Bar Councils are to
      safeguard the rights, privilege and interests of
      advocates. The Bar Council is a body corporate. The
      Disciplinary Committees are constituted by the Bar
      Council. The Bar Council is not the same body as its
      Disciplinary Committee. One of the principal
      functions of the Bar Council in regard to standards
      of professional conduct and etiquette of advocates is
      to receive complaints against advocates and if the
      Bar Council has reason to believe that any advocate
      has been guilty of professional or other misconduct
      it shall refer the case for disposal to its Disciplinary
      Committee. A most significant feature is that no
      litigant and no member of the public can
      straightaway commence disciplinary proceedings
      against an advocate. It is the Bar Council of a State
      which initiates the disciplinary proceedings.”


                                   (emphasis supplied)
18. This Court in Supreme Court
Bar Association v. Union

 of India
, (1998) 4 SCC 409 (five­Judge Bench) categorically

 held that –

       “39. Suspending the licence to practice of any
       professional like a lawyer, doctor, chartered
       accountant etc. when such a professional is
       found guilty of committing contempt of court, for
       any specified period, is not a recognized or
11
accepted punishment which a court of record
         either under the common law or under the
         statutory law can impose on a contemner in
         addition to any of the other recognized
         punishments.”
                                  (emphasis supplied)
19. A reading of sub­section (1) of
Section 12
of the Act shows

  that    the   punishment   prescribed    therein      is   simple

  imprisonment, not exceeding six months or a fine not

  exceeding        Rs.2,000/­Sub­Section          (2)         reads

  “notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for

  the time being in force” this implies that save and except

  the punishment provided in sub­Section (1) no other

  punishment can be prescribed to a person guilty of

  committing contempt of Court.
20. In view of the above, this Court has no hesitation in

  holding   that   the   punishment    handed    down        to   the

  contemnor is entirely foreign to the Act and, therefore,

  unsustainable. The Court, in awarding such punishment

  showed complete disregard for the statutory text of the
Contempt of Courts Act
1971, which is abundantly clear in

  respect of the punishment that can be imposed thereunder.
12
21. A medical practitioner guilty of contempt of Court may

  also be so for professional misconduct but the same would

  depend on the gravity/nature of the contemptuous conduct

  of the person in question.     They are, however, offences

  separate and distinct from each other.       The former is

  regulated by the
Contempt of Court Act, 1971
and the

  latter is under the jurisdiction of the
National Medical

  Commission Act, 2019
.
22. The Division Bench in the impugned judgment did not

  consider or discuss this issue nor was any final decision

  taken by the Single Judge in the subject contempt

  proceedings.
23. The question raised in the instant appeal is answered in

  the above terms.
24. The appellant has submitted before the High Court that

  the requisite demolition has been carried out with the

  exception of approximately 250 mm in the rear portion of

  the concerned building as, removal of the same would have

  rendered the building, legally constructed, to be unsafe. In

  respect of the unauthorized construction that remains, we
13
direct that an undertaking be furnished before the

     concerned High Court that remedial construction to

     safeguard the soundness of the existing building and the

     consequent demolishing of the unauthorized construction

     shall be completed within a reasonable time.
25. Consequently, the judgment of the Court’s below, i.e., the

     Division Bench and the orders of the Single Judge, High

     Court of Calcutta, (Circuit Bench and Jalpaiguri) in MAT

     No.67 of 2022 and orders dated 11 th, 12th and 14th of July

     2022 are set aside. The licence of the appellant, to practice

     medicine is revived.
26. The    appeal   is    allowed   accordingly.   The     pending

     application(s), if any, stands disposed of. No costs.
………………………J.
                                                  (B.R. GAVAI)


                                               ………………………J.
                                                (SANJAY KAROL)


Date : 28 July, 2023;
Place : New Delhi.