[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Arvind Kumar vs State Of Nct, Delhi on 17 July, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023 INSC 622


                                                                           REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2390 OF 2010


                            Arvind Kumar                                     … Appellant


                                                       versus


                            State of NCT, Delhi                           … Respondent


                                                  JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.   By this appeal, the appellant­accused has taken an
                            exception to the order of his conviction passed by the
                            Sessions Court for the offence punishable under
Section 302
of the Indian Penal Code (for short, “
IPC
”).     The learned
                            Sessions Judge held that the case of the appellant­accused
                            was covered by “thirdly” in
Section 300
of IPC. The learned
                            Sessions Judge held that the appellant­accused has failed to
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
bring the case within the protective umbrella of the exception
   Anita Malhotra
   Date: 2023.07.17
   16:24:05 IST
   Reason:                  4 to
Section 300
of IPC. By the impugned judgment of the
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                          Page 1 of 16
High Court, the conviction of the appellant has been
      confirmed.       The Trial Court sentenced the appellant to
      undergo a life sentence.           By the time the appellant was
      released on bail by this Court by the order dated 27 th
      November 2017, the appellant had undergone incarceration
      for a period of about 8 years and 11 months.
2.     The case of the prosecution is that one Shashi Bala
      (PW­12) who was a Sub­inspector of Police was posted as a
      Duty Officer in I.P. Estate Police Station, Delhi on 28 th
      December 1994. One constable Mohd. Rashid (the deceased)
      was on duty as “Munshi­Roznamacha”.             At about 5.45 pm,
      the deceased came to the reporting room and started talking
      on the official telephone of the Police Station. After noticing
      that the deceased was talking on the phone for about 5 to 7
      minutes, Shashi Bala (PW­12) advised him not to keep the
      official telephone engaged as the Police Station may receive
      some urgent calls.          The case of the prosecution is that the
      deceased did not pay heed to the advice of PW­12.              The
      appellant was posted as a guard at the Police Station. The
      appellant was carrying a Semi­Automatic Fire (SAF) – carbine.
      PW­12 Shashi Bala, around 5.55 pm, requested the appellant
      to ask the deceased to desist from continuing with his
      conversation on the telephone.            Therefore, the appellant
      entered the duty room where the deceased was sitting and
      talking on the phone. The appellant put his hand on the
      shoulder of the deceased and advised him to end the call.
      The initial case of the prosecution was that the deceased
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                         Page 2 of 16
playfully pushed the appellant while holding the SAF carbine
      of the appellant. The appellant tried to extricate his SAF.
      During the scuffle, SAF got entangled in the chain attached to
      the appellant’s belt which led to the accidental firing of five
      rounds from the said automatic weapon.             The deceased got
      five rounds of bullets in his neck. The police personnel
      present rushed the deceased to a hospital where he was
      declared dead.
3.     Initially, based on a statement of Shashi Bala (PW­12),
      an offence under
Section 304A
was registered against the
      appellant. On the next day of the incident, the father of the
      deceased submitted a complaint to the Deputy Commissioner
      of Police and to the Commissioner of Police, Delhi. Based on
      the said complaints, the investigation was transferred to the
      Crime Branch. According to the prosecution, the opinion of
      the expert ruled out any possibility of accidental fire from SAF
      carbine.    It was also revealed by the father of the deceased
      that prior to the incident, the deceased had caught the
      accused      and    Shashi     Bala   in   objectionable    condition.
      Therefore, Shashi Bala and the appellant got annoyed and
      they threatened to kill the deceased.          On the basis of the
      investigation carried out by the Crime Branch,
Section 302
of
      IPC was applied while filing the chargesheet.
4.     We    must     record   here   that   the   High    Court   has
      disbelieved the prosecution’s case about the existence of
      motive.     The prosecution’s case was that the deceased had
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                            Page 3 of 16
seen the appellant and PW­12 in a compromising position and
      therefore, they held a grudge against the deceased. After
      considering the evidence of PW­3, PW­18 and PW­22 on the
      alleged motive of the crime, the High Court came to the
      conclusion that motive was not established. The High Court
      relied upon the testimony of PW­13 Karim Baksh who stated
      that he heard the cry of the deceased “Mujhe Bachao” and
      sound of the firing of SAF. The witness stated that when he
      saw the deceased lying on the chair with bullet injuries, the
      appellant was telling PW­12 Shashi Bala in Hindi “Madam
      aapne yeh kya karva diya, Mere to bache barbad ho jayenge".
      According to the witness, Shashi Bala responded by telling
      the accused that: "tum phikr mat karo may bhi tumhare
      saath hu, court tak tumhara saath dungi". The Court applied
      the doctrine of res gestae covered by
Section 6
of the Indian
      Evidence Act 1872 (for short, “the
Evidence Act
”).
RIVAL SUBMISSIONS
5.     The learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant
      has taken us through the notes of evidence of the relevant
      witnesses. He submitted that taking the prosecution case as
      correct, in the scuffle between the deceased and the
      appellant, the SAF got entangled in the chain of the
      appellant’s belt which resulted in the accidental firing of
      bullets from the SAF. He submitted that once the motive is
      discarded, the prosecution’s case based on circumstantial
      evidence must fail. He urged that no offence was committed
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                   Page 4 of 16
by the appellant in view of
Section 80
of IPC as the death was
      as a result of purely an accident.
6.     In the alternative, he submitted that at the highest, the
      second part of
Section 304
of IPC was applicable.            He
      submitted that the Courts below have committed an error by
      invoking Section 302.
7.     Learned counsel for the State supported the impugned
      judgments. Learned counsel pointed out that the reports of
      the ballistic expert and ocular evidence clearly show that the
      appellant certainly had knowledge that the use of SAF carbine
      may cause death.
CONSIDERATION OF THE SUBMISSIONS
8.     There is no dispute that the deceased was the victim of
      five bullets fired from the SAF carbine held by the appellant
      and that the bullet injuries caused his death. The Trial Court
      and the High Court held that the defence of accidental firing
      cannot be accepted and that the act of firing bullets by the
      appellant was intentional. The Court rejected the defence of
      the accident pleaded by the appellant by taking recourse to
Section 80
of IPC.
9.     The motive alleged by the prosecution was that the
      deceased had seen PW­12 Shashi Bala (Sub­Inspector) and
      the appellant in a compromising position. The allegation is
      that as the deceased had seen both in a compromising
      position, PW­12 and the appellant were annoyed with him
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                      Page 5 of 16
and thus, threatened to kill him. It is not necessary for us to
      go into the issue of the existence of motive as the High Court
      in paragraph 34 of the impugned judgment has recorded a
      finding after considering the testimony of PW­3 Nazir Ahmed,
      PW­18 Sub­Inspector Ram Singh and PW­22 Shaukat Ali, the
      father of the deceased that the case of the prosecution
      regarding the existence of motive does not inspire confidence.
      Therefore, we will have to proceed on the footing that the
      motive was not proved. Therefore, the failure to prove the
      existence of the motive is one of the circumstances which
      makes the prosecution case regarding intentional firing by the
      appellant not worthy of acceptance.
10.    There are two witnesses who claim that they were
      eyewitnesses to the incident. PW­12 Shashi Bala is one such
      witness who stated in her examination­in­chief that:­
                        “On 28.12.94 I was posted as DO in PS
                        I.P. Estate with duty hours from 12.00
                        noon to 6.00 p.m. On that day deceased
                        ct.Md.Rashid was also discharging duty
                        as Roznamcha Munshi till 8.00 p.m. At
                        about 5.45 p.m. deceased came to my
                        office i.e reporting room and started
                        making phone call while sitting chair
                        lying in front of me leaving a table which
                        was lying between in two tables. He
                        continued the phone call for nearly 5/7
                        minutes. I asked the deceased not to
                        continue the talks and make the
                        telephone engaged as some urgent call
                        may be recd. in the PS. But the deceased
                        did not take it seriously but he continued
                        making the phone call. At about 5.55
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                      Page 6 of 16
p.m. I asked Santri Ct.Arvind i.e
                        accused present in the court today to
                        restrained the deceased from talking
                        the phone call for such a long period.
Accd. asked the deceased to leave the
                        telephone by putting his hand on the
                        shoulder. Taking it as a joke deceased
                        caught hold the SAF of accused and
                        accd. tried to take back his SAF.
During this scuffle the SAF of the
                        accused got entangled in the chain
                        tied with the belt of accused and
                        during this course the fire is opened
                        from accused which hit the deceased
                        on his neck and chest and blood
                        started coming out from his wound. I
                        got sent the decd. to JPS hospital who
                        was declared dead by the concerned
                        Doctor.”
                                               (emphasis added)

      In the examination­in­chief, she stated that the father of the
      deceased after one month of the incident threatened to kill
      her as she was not willing to change her version.            It is
      pertinent to note that PW­12 Shashi Bala was not declared as
      a hostile witness.
11.    The only other witness apart from PW­12 who claims to
      be an eyewitness is PW­25 Satbir Singh Sherawat. He was
      not a member of the police force, but he was a part of CISF
      and was posted on internal security duty at the police station.
      His version is also important to be noted which reads thus:
“I was present at PS I.P. Estate at about 6
                      p.m. I saw that one constable posted there
                      at PS I.P. Estate and was sitting on chair
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                        Page 7 of 16
at Control Room in front of Duty Officer
                      and he was making call from the
                      telephone kept in control room and I was
                      waiting to make a call from the said phone
                      for giving my O.K report. I kept on waiting
                      in the gallery on the door of the control
                      room and in the meantime the duty
                      officer asked the said constable not to
                      leave the busy so long, as it was an
                      official phone. He did not pay any heed
                      to the request of the said duty officer.
                      The duty officer requested the Santri to
                      ask the said constable to leave the
                      phone for other person. The Santri also
                      went there and requested the said
                      constable for leaving the said phone
                      but he did not pay any heed to his
                      request also. The Santri caught him by
                      his right arm as he was holding the
                      receiver of the phone by his left hand
                      and he casually pushed the Santri. The
                      Santri again requested him to leave the
                      phone and in response the said
                      constable making the call caught the
                      SAF of the Santri and while making fun
                      with each other, pushed him and at
                      that time accidental fire took place
                      from the said SAF and five rounds from
                      the said SAF hit the person making the
                      phone call. WSI Shashi Bala was also
                      present there and she had also
                      requested the constable making the
                      phone not to touch the SAF as it was
                      dangerous, prior to the incident. The
                      Santri at that time was the accused
                      present in the Court whose name was
                      known as Arvind (present in the Court
                      today, correctly identified by the
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                     Page 8 of 16
witness). A public person was also
                      present there but I do not know his name.
                      I did not know the name of the constable
                      who was making the call after the bullet
                      hit him at his chest and he was badly
                      injured in the incident and after hearing
                      the noise of the bullet all the staff of the
                      PS gathered there. The SAF was kept on
                      the table after the incident and I was not
                      aware as to how many rounds were there
                      in the magazine of the same and the same
                      were not taking out in my present. No
                      conversation took place between the
                      accused and WSI Shashi Bala in my
                      presence.”
                                                (emphasis added)

      We may note here that even this witness was not declared as
      hostile.
12.    Thus, the version of PW­12 and PW­25 who were
      claiming to be the eyewitnesses completely supports the
      defence of the appellant of accidental firing and in any case,
      they have not deposed that the appellant intentionally fired
      bullets at the deceased. PW­22, the father of the deceased,
      who was not an eyewitness, deposed in support of the case
      that the appellant intentionally opened fire. But his testimony
      on motive has been disbelieved by the High Court. Moreover,
      admittedly, his second statement in which the aforesaid
      allegation was made, was recorded three to four months after
      the incident. In his earlier statement recorded by the police
      after the incident, this version was not found as can be seen
      from his cross­examination.
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                      Page 9 of 16
13.    There are four reports/opinions of the ballistic expert on
      record. Two reports mention that the bullets were shot at a
      close distance about which there is no dispute. Pursuant to
      the queries made by the investigating officer, a second report
      dated 18th August 1995 was submitted by the ballistic expert,
      Smt. Asha Dhir. Clauses 4 and 5 of the said report read thus:
“4. The 9 mm carbine marked A under
                      reference received in the laboratory having
                      change lever in 'A' (i.e. auto) position, it
                      could fire if the firearm would have been
                      cocked and the trigger was pressed and
                      could go on firing as long as having trigger
                      remain pressed.
5. The firearm under reference can be
                      cocked by entangling with the chain,
                      provided, if the change lever is not at
                      'S' (safety) position. If the trigger is
                      pressed in cocked condition, it will
                      fire.”
                                               (emphasis added)

      There is also an opinion dated 22nd December 1995 of the
      same      expert    which   records   that   the   possibility   of
      simultaneously cocking and pressing the trigger of SAF after
      entangling with a chain is ruled out. If this opinion is read
      with the opinion dated 18th August 1995, it is apparent that if
      the change lever is not in safety position, the firearm can be
      cocked by entangling with a chain.
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                        Page 10 of 16
14.    Going by the evidence of prosecution witnesses, it will
      have to be held that the SAF got entangled with the chain
      attached to the belt of the appellant. Considering the opinion
      of the expert, it is obvious that when the incident occurred,
      the change lever was not kept in a safety position by the
      appellant and therefore, SAF got cocked which resulted in the
      firing of five bullets. The appellant must take the blame for
      not taking the elementary precaution of keeping the change
      lever in the safety position.
15.    Having carefully perused the statement of the appellant
      recorded under
Section 313
of CrPC, the case of the
      prosecution that he intentionally opened fire by aiming at the
      deceased was not put to the appellant.
16.    What remains is the statement attributed to the
      appellant and the response of PW­12 to the appellant’s
      statement. These statements were read in evidence in view of
Section 6
of the Evidence Act. According to the prosecution
      witness PW­13­Karim Baksh, after the firing was heard, the
      appellant was heard telling PW­12 that “Madam aapne yeh
      kya karva diya, Mere to bache barbad ho jayenge". Reply of
      Shashi Bala was: "tum phikr mat karo may bhi tumhare
      saath hu, court tak tumhara saath dungi". The only other
      witness who deposed about such statements is PW­5 Zahir
      Ahmed. According to him, he heard the appellant telling PW­
      12 “Madam, apane isko marva diya ab mera kya hoga”. Both
      the witnesses have stated that they heard the cry “Mujhe
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                   Page 11 of 16
bachao”. Surprisingly, PW­25, who claims to have seen the
      incident has not deposed about any such statements made by
      the appellant, PW­12 and the deceased. PW­5 claims to have
      attended the funeral of the deceased. He admitted that as per
      the instructions of the father of the deceased, he met an
      inspector of the Crime Branch two months after the incident
      when his statement was recorded. Till that time, he did not
      report anything to the police about what he heard. PW­13
      stated that PW­6, PW­17 and certain other persons were
      present when he heard the accused making aforesaid
      statements. Both PW­6 and PW­17 did not support the
      prosecution. The others who were present according to PW­13
      were not examined by the prosecution. Therefore, the version
      of the prosecution about the appellant and PW­12 making
      such statements does not inspire confidence.
17.    We will also examine the effect of such statements
      assuming that the same were really made. These statements
      were allegedly made immediately after the incident. The
      statements do have a connection with the incident. The
      statements were allegedly made spontaneously. Therefore, the
      Courts have treated the statements as relevant by invoking
      the doctrine of res gestae incorporated in
Section 6
of the
      Indian Evidence Act. We have held that the theory of the
      prosecution that the appellant fired intentionally has not been
      established. The appellant was instructed by PW­12 to go to
      the deceased and to prevent him from continuing the use of
      the telephone. Therefore, he went near the deceased. It is the
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                    Page 12 of 16
reaction or the action of the deceased which resulted in the
      SAF getting entangled with the chain attached to the
      appellant’s belt; which led to the accidental fire from SAF.
      Therefore, the accused spontaneously reacted by telling PW­
      12 what she has got done from him. While implementing the
      direction issued by PW­12, the accidental fire took place and
      that is how the appellant became responsible for the death. It
      is in this context that the reaction of the appellant has to be
      understood. By those words, he has blamed the PW­12. The
      statement attributed to PW­12 means that she would support
      the appellant before the Court by telling the truth. If the
      theory of accidental firing is accepted, the interpretation of
      the aforesaid statements as made by us becomes a possible
      interpretation which is consistent with normal human
      conduct.
18.
Section 6
of the Evidence Act and illustration (a) below
Section 6
read thus:
“6. Relevancy of facts forming part of
                    same transaction.––Facts which, though
                    not in issue, are so connected with a fact
                    in issue as to form part of the same
                    transaction, are relevant, whether they
                    occurred at the same time and place or
                    at different times and places.
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of the murder of B by
                        beating him. Whatever was said or
                        done by A or B or the by­standers at
                        the beating, or so shortly before or
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                    Page 13 of 16
after it as to form part of             the
                        transaction, is a relevant fact.
(b) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
(c) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
(d) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..”

      PW­5 and PW­13 have attributed the aforesaid statements
      mentioned in paragraph 16 above to the appellant and PW­12
      Shashi Bala which were immediately made after the incident
      of firing. The alleged statements are certainly connected with
      the fact in issue, namely, the alleged act of the appellant of
      killing the deceased. Therefore, assuming that the statements
      attributed to the appellant and PW­12 were in fact made, the
      conduct of the appellant of making the said statement
      becomes relevant in view of
Section 6
.
Section 5
of the
      Evidence Act provides that evidence may be given in a
      proceeding of the existence or non­existence of every fact in
      issue and of such other facts which are declared to be
      relevant under the provisions of
Chapter II of the Evidence
      Act, 1872
.
Section 6
is applicable to facts which are not in
      issue. Such facts become relevant only when the same satisfy
      the tests laid down in
Section 6
. Hence, the statement of an
      accused to which
Section 6
is applicable cannot be treated as
      a confession of guilt. The statement becomes relevant which
      can be read in evidence as it shows the conduct of the
      appellant immediately after the incident. In any case, in the
      facts of the case, we have held that the version of the two
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                           Page 14 of 16
witnesses who have deposed about the appellant making such
      statement does not inspire confidence.
19.    The prosecution has failed to prove that the appellant
      had either any intention of causing the death of the deceased
      or the intention of causing such bodily injury to the deceased
      which was likely to cause his death. Assuming that when the
      appellant approached the deceased to stop him from using
      the telephone, he was aware that the change lever was not in
      a safety position, it is not possible to attribute knowledge to
      him that by his failure to keep SAF in the safety position, he
      was likely to cause the death of the deceased. The knowledge
      of the possibility of the deceased who was himself a policeman
      pulling SAF carbine cannot be attributed to the appellant. In
      fact, the appellant could not have imagined that the deceased
      would do anything like this.        Thus, by no stretch of the
      imagination, it is a case of culpable homicide as defined
      under
Section 299
of IPC as the existence of none of the three
      ingredients      incorporated   therein   was   proved   by   the
      prosecution.
20.    However, there is a failure on the part of the appellant
      who was holding a sophisticated automatic weapon to ensure
      that the change lever was always kept in a safety position.
      This was the minimum care that he was expected to take
      while he approached the deceased.          Thus, there is gross
      negligence on the part of the appellant which led to a loss of
      human life. Due to his rash and negligent act, the deceased
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                      Page 15 of 16
lost his life.     Therefore, the appellant is guilty of a lesser
      offence punishable under
Section 304A
of IPC for which the
      maximum sentence is imprisonment for two years.              The
      appellant has undergone a sentence of more than eight years.
21.    Hence, the appeal is partly allowed. The conviction of
      the appellant under
Section 302
of the IPC is set aside and he
      is held guilty of committing the offence punishable under
Section 304A
of IPC. The appellant has undergone the
      maximum sentence prescribed for the said offence.         Hence,
      his detention in prison is no longer required. Hence, his bail
      bonds are cancelled.
……..….……………J.
                                                (Abhay S. Oka)



                                                ……...………………J.
                                                (Rajesh Bindal)
      New Delhi;
July 17, 2023.
Criminal Appeal No.2390 of 2010                                      Page 16 of 16