[Cites
26
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Anbazhagan vs The State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police on 20 July, 2023
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
,
Prashant Kumar Mishra
2023 INSC 632
                                                               REPORTABLE


                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2043 OF 2023
            (Arising out of S.L.P. (Criminal) No. 9289 of 2019)


       ANBAZHAGAN                                    …APPELLANT(S)


                                      VERSUS


       THE STATE REPRESENTED BY
       THE INSPECTOR OF POLICE                       …RESPONDENT(S)




                                 JUDGMENT
J.B. PARDIWALA, J. :
1.       Leave granted.
2.       This appeal is at the instance of a convict accused and is

       directed against the judgment and order passed by the High

       Court of Judicature at Madras dated 04.04.2019 in Criminal

       Appeal No. 193 of 2019 by which the High Court dismissed the

       appeal filed by the appellant herein thereby affirming the

       judgment and order of conviction and sentence passed by the
1
Additional Sessions Judge, Namakkal in Sessions Case No. 41

of 2017.
3.       It appears from the materials on record that the

appellant herein and his father were put on trial in the Court of

the Additional Sessions Judge, Namakkal in Sessions Case No.

41 of 2017 for the offence punishable under Section 302 read

with
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code (for short, ‘
IPC
’). The

Trial Court held the appellant herein guilty for the offence of

culpable homicide not amounting to murder punishable under

Section 304 Part I of the IPC and sentenced him to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for a period of 10 years with a fine of Rs.
10,000/- and in default of payment of the amount of fine,

further rigorous imprisonment of one year. The co-accused i.e.

father of the appellant herein came to be acquitted by the Trial

Court.
4.       The appellant herein being dissatisfied with the judgment

and order of conviction and sentence passed by the Trial Court

went in appeal before the High Court. The High Court dismissed

the appeal affirming the conviction of the appellant herein for

the offence punishable under
Section 304
Part I of the
IPC
.
2
5.     At the outset, Mr. S. Nagamuthu, the learned senior

counsel appearing for the appellant herein, submitted that he is

not pressing this appeal on merits. He submitted that his only

endeavour is to persuade this Court to alter the conviction of

the appellant from the offence punishable under
Section 304
Part I of the
IPC
to
Section 304
Part II of the
IPC
and reduce the

sentence accordingly.
FACTUAL MATRIX
6.     It appears from the evidence on record that the appellant

is an agriculturist. He owns agriculture land in a village by

name   Sirukinathupalayam      situated   in   Tamil   Nadu.   The

deceased namely Balasubramaniam was also an agriculturist

and had his own agriculture land adjacent to the agriculture

land of the appellant herein. There was a pathway leading to

the agriculture land of the appellant over which the deceased

had some issues. At the time of the incident, the appellant had

cultivated Cassava plants (Tapoica) which was ready for

harvesting. On 25.10.2015 at around 7 am, the appellant and

his father were harvesting the crop and had also arranged for a

lorry for transporting the same from their field. At around 11
3
am, the deceased came at the place of the incident and

threatened the driver of the lorry saying he should not drive his

lorry through the pathway leading to the agriculture field of the

appellant. At that point of time, the appellant and his father

were in their field. The appellant is said to have asked the driver

of the lorry to move the lorry to his field to load the crop. This

was questioned by the deceased which resulted in a quarrel. It is

the case of the prosecution that after verbal altercation between

the appellant and the deceased for quite some time, the

appellant is alleged to have picked up a “Hoe” (Kalaikottu – in

Tamil, a gardening tool with a small metal blade attached with a

wooden handle used mainly for weeding) & inflicted a single

blow on the head of the deceased as a result of which the

deceased fell unconscious and later died in the hospital.
7.     The FIR was lodged on 25.10.2015 at 19.30 Hrs. On

completion of the investigation, police filed charge sheet for the

offence of murder. The case was committed to the Court of

Sessions as the offence was exclusively triable by the Sessions

Court. The Additional Sessions Judge, Namakkal vide order

dated 06.09.2017 framed the following charge:-
4
“Whereas the deceased Balasubramaniam has been
living with his wife Baby and family members at
Sevalkattu Moolai near Government High School in
Pandamangalam; that the Al is the son of A2; that
both the accused were living in Poosaripalayam; in
Sirukinatrypalayan: both the accused and the
deceased Balasubramaniarn had their agricultural
lands adjacent to each other's lands; that there was a
pathway between both these lands and that there has
been a prior enmity for a longtime regarding the
ownership of that pathway between both parties. On
25.10.2015 at 07.30 hrs Al and A2 were loading
tapioca cultivated and harvested in their lands on to a
lorry owned by one Mr. Palanival, having the
registration number TN 33 AF 3114 by parking that
lorry on the disputed pathway. At that time the
deceased Balasubramaniam came there and told
them that the lorry could not be led in and blocked it.
Then A2 yelled at the deceased Balasubramaniam
saying "You do not have a pathway here. You may
bring anyone you want" and then Al and A2 pushed
the deceased Balasubramaniam down and with an
intention to murder him Al had hit the head of the
deceased Balasubramaniam with a "weed removing
axe" (Kalaikothi) while A2 was pelting stones at him
whereby the deceased Balasubramaniam sustained
grievous injuries on his head. Balasubramaniam was
immediately carried to the Government Hospital in
Velur, then taken to Government Hospital in Namakkal
where he did not respond to treatment and was
declared dead at 05.20 pm. Therefore you the accused
have committed an offense punishable under 302
IPC
and which can be tried by this court.
I hereby issue an order that both of you Al and
A2 should be tried by this court for the commission of
the above offense.”
5
8.       The appellant and the co-accused (father of the appellant)

pleaded not guilty to the aforesaid charge and claimed to be

tried.     It appears that the prosecution examined many

witnesses. However, PW 8 – Chidambaram and PW 9 – Jeeva are

the main witnesses being the eye witnesses to the occurrence.

Both the eye witnesses have deposed that on the date of the

incident the appellant herein and the deceased picked up verbal

altercation in regard to the pathway and the appellant is said to

have inflicted one blow with the weapon of offence as

enumerated above on the head of the deceased leading to his

death.
ORAL EVIDENCE
9.       PW-8 namely Chidambaram in his examination in chief

has deposed as under:-
“I am now residing in Indira Nagar, Thaathaiyangar
         Patti. I am working as Lorry Driver. I know the present
         accused. About 3 years back I took my lorry to
         Anbazhagan's field in Poosari Palayam for
         transporting    harvest    of   tapioca.   Subramani,
         Veerasamy, Raja Manikkam and Jeeva accompanied
         me. While Subramani, Veerasamy, Raja Manikkam
         and Jeeva were harvesting the tubers of tapioca the
         person belonging to the adjacent field told us that the
         lorry should not move any further since he the
         accused have a dispute regarding the pathway in
6
which the lorry was on. I climbed into my lorry. At that
      time the accused Anbazhagan was plucking tapioca in
      his field. He then asked me to bring the lorry near his
      field. I told him about what the neighbor told me. But
      as I took my lorry ahead a verbal fight broke out
      between Anbazhagan and the neighbor. Then A2
      came to that place. She was yelling too. With the axe
      M.O.1 in his right hand, A1 Anbazhagan hit the
      neighbor on his head. The neighbor suffered injuries
      on his mouth.”
10.   PW-9 namely Jeeva in his examination in chief has

deposed as under:-
“I am now residing in Indira Nagar, Thaathaiyangar
       Patti. I I am a coolie. I know the accused present
       here. I went to pluck tapioca tubers in the garden of
       the accused Anbazhagan along with Chidambaram,
       Subramani, Veerasamy, Raja Manikkam between
       07.30 & 08.00 am on 25.10.2015 at Poosari
       Palayam. We went inside the field with Anbazhagan
       to gather the tubers. When we were clearing the
       plants after gathering the tubers Chidambaram drove
       the lorry inside the field. Immediately the deceased
       Balasubramaniam came inside. He was shouting at
       the driver and asked him as to who gave him the
       authority to enter inside. He told this to Anbazhagan.
The deceased Balasubramaniam was standing on
       the road. Both the accused present there were
       gathering tapioca. Incidentally the accused and the
       deceased started getting into a verbal quarrel. We are
       securing the plucked tubers. The fight became bigger.
       Hearing the louder sound we all came over to the
       road where the verbal fight was going on. At that
       time the accused hit the deceased at his head with
       the wedding axe causing injury. He fell down
       immediately.”
7
11.   PW-18 Dr. Anbumalar in her examination in chief has

state as under:-
“I am currently working as a Senior Doctor in
      Namakkal Government District Head Hospital. On
      26.10.2015, while I was on duty then the body of one
      Balasubramaniam (57 years old) was brought by one
      Arunagiri, Head constable for post- mortem
      examination with permission letter and accordingly
      on 26.10.2015 at 2.15 PM, the post- mortem was
      performed. The details of the post- mortem
      examination are as follows –
      External injuries respectively,

      There was bleeding from the ear and nose, above the
      left eye brow 3×2 cm cut injury. A cut injury
      measuring 4 × 2 cm was found on the left forehead.
The front skull bone was fractured on both sides (Both
      parietal bone).
Internal Inspection Details-
The skull bone was broken and the inner lining was
      torn. Left Side Temporal Bone 7.5 cm. was broken.
      There was a blood clot at the base of the skull. The
      inside of the sprout was red. Navicular bone was
      correct. Left ribs 3 and 4 were fractured.”
12.   The Trial Court, upon appreciation of the oral and

documentary evidence on record and more particularly having

regard to the genesis of the occurrence; the manner of assault

and the nature of the weapon, took the view that the case was
8
not one of murder punishable under
Section 302
of the IPC but

could be said one of culpable homicide not amounting to

murder punishable under
Section 304
Part I of the
IPC
and

accordingly sentenced the appellant herein.
13.    The High Court also came to the conclusion that the

Trial Court was right in holding the appellant herein guilty of

the offence punishable under
Section 304
Part I of the
IPC
.
14.    In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant is

here before this Court with the present appeal.


SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
15.    Mr. S. Nagamuthu, the learned senior counsel appearing

for the appellant herein submitted that considering the manner

in which the incident had occurred and the role attributed to

the appellant, the conviction deserves to be altered from
Section

304
Part I of the
IPC
to one under
Section 304
Part II of the
IPC
.

According to the learned senior counsel, the case does not fall

within clause thirdly of
Section 300
of the IPC. All that can be

attributed to the appellant is ‘knowledge’ and ‘not intention’.
9
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT STATE
16.    Dr. Joseph Aristotle S., the learned counsel appearing for

the respondent State on the other hand, submitted that the

Trial Court as well as the High Court rightly held the appellant

herein guilty of the offence punishable under
Section 304
Part I

of the
IPC
. According to the learned counsel, the case is not one

falling within the ambit of
Section 304
Part II of the
IPC
. He

would submit that the case falls within clause thirdly of
Section

300
of the IPC. He submitted that exception 4 to
Section 300
of

the IPC is attracted and therefore, the courts rightly convicted

the appellant for the offence punishable under
Section 304
Part

I of the
IPC
.
ANALYSIS
17.    Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the

parties and having gone through the materials on record, the

only question that falls for our consideration is whether the

conviction of the appellant herein for the offence punishable

under
Section 304
Part I of the
IPC
should be further altered to
Section 304
Part II of the
IPC
.
10
18.    We have given more than a fair idea as regards the

genesis of the occurrence and the role attributed to the

appellant herein. Dr. Karthikeyan (PW-15) was examined by the

prosecution in his capacity as the Medical Officer who

performed the post mortem of the deceased. In the post mortem

report, the doctor has noted three injuries, (i) cut injury over 4 x

2 cm on the left eye, (ii) cut injury 4 x 3 cm on the left forehead,

and (iii) 4 x 2 cm contusion around the left eye. The cause of

death assigned in the post mortem report appears to be shock

and haemorrhage due to head injury.
19.    As the only argument canvassed before us is that the

case does not travel beyond culpable homicide as the same falls

within the third part of
Section 299
of the IPC, the accused

could only be said to have knowledge that he is likely by his act

to cause death and not the intention to kill the deceased, we

must explain the fine distinction between the terms ‘intent’ and

‘knowledge’.
INTENT AND KNOWLEDGE :-
11
20.    The word “intent” is derived from the word archery or

aim. The “act” attempted to must be with “intention” of killing a

man.
21.    Intention, which is a state of mind, can never be precisely

proved by direct evidence as a fact; it can only be deduced or

inferred from other facts which are proved. The intention may be

proved by res gestae, by acts or events previous or subsequent

to the incident or occurrence, on admission. Intention of a

person cannot be proved by direct evidence but is to be deduced

from the facts and circumstances of a case. There are various

relevant circumstances from which the intention can be

gathered. Some relevant considerations are the following:-
1. The nature of the weapon used.
2. The place where the injuries were inflicted.
3. The nature of the injuries caused.
4. The opportunity available which the accused gets.
22.    In the case of Smt. Mathri v. State of Punjab, AIR 1964

SC 986, at page 990, Das Gupta J. has explained the concept of

the word ‘intent’.
The relevant observations are made by

referring to the observations made by Batty J. in the
12
decision
Bhagwant v. Kedari, I.L.R.
25 Bombay 202. They are

as under:-
“The word “intent” by its etymology, seems to have
      metaphorical allusion to archery, and implies “aim”
      and thus connotes not a casual or merely possible
      result-foreseen perhaps as a not improbable incident,
      but not desired-but rather connotes the one object for
      which the effort is made-and thus has reference to
      what has been called the dominant motive, without
      which, the action would not have been taken.”
                                       (Emphasis supplied)
23.
In the case of
Basdev v. State of Pepsu
, AIR 1956 SC

488, at page 490, the following observations have been made by

Chadrasekhara Aiyar J.:-
“6. ... Of course, we have to distinguish between
      motive, intention and knowledge. Motive is something
      which prompts a man to form an intention and
      knowledge is an awareness of the consequences of
      the act. In many cases intention and knowledge
      merge into each other and mean the same thing more
      or less and intention can be presumed from
      knowledge. The demarcating line between knowledge
      and intention is no doubt thin but it is not difficult to
      perceive that they connote different things. Even in
      some English decisions, the three ideas are used
      interchangeably and this had led to a certain amount
      of confusion.”
                                      (Emphasis supplied)
13
24.    In para 9 of the judgment, at page 490, the observations

made by Coleridge J. in Reg. v. Monkhouse, (1849) 4 COX CC

55(C), have been referred to. They can be referred to, with

advantage at this stage, as they are very illuminating:-
“The inquiry as to intent is far less simple than that
      as to whether an act has been committed, because
      you cannot look into a man's mind to see what was
      passing there at any given time. What he intends can
      only be judged of by what he does or says, and if he
      says nothing, then his act alone must guide you to
      your decision. It is a general rule in criminal law, and
      one founded on common sense, that juries are to
      presume a man to do what is the natural
      consequence of his act. The consequence is
      sometimes so apparent as to leave no doubt of the
      intention. A man could not put a pistol which he
      knew to be loaded to another's head, and fire it off,
      without intending to kill him; but even there the state
      of mind of the party is most material to be
      considered. For instance, if such an act were done by
      a born idiot, the intent to kill could not be inferred
      from the act. So if the defendant is proved to have
      been intoxicated, the question becomes a more subtle
      one; but it is of the same kind, namely; was he
      rendered by intoxication entirely incapable of forming
      the intent charged?”              (Emphasis supplied)
25.    Bearing in mind the test suggested in the aforesaid

decision and also bearing in mind that our legislature has used

two different terminologies ‘intent’ and ‘knowledge’ and separate

punishments are provided for an act committed with an intent
14
to cause bodily injury which is likely to cause death and for an

act committed with a knowledge that his act is likely to cause

death without intent to cause such bodily injury as is likely to

cause death, it would be proper to hold that ‘intent’ and

‘knowledge’ cannot be equated with each other. They connote

different things. Sometimes, if the consequence is so apparent,

it may happen that from the knowledge, intent may be

presumed. But it will not mean that ‘intent’ and ‘knowledge’ are

the same. ‘Knowledge’ will be only one of the circumstances to

be taken into consideration while determining or inferring the

requisite intent.
26.    In the case In re Kudumula Mahanandi Reddi, AIR

1960 AP 141, also the distinction between ‘knowledge’ and

‘intention’ is aptly explained. It is as under:-
“Knowledge and intention must not be confused.
17. … Every person is presumed to intend the
       natural and probable consequences of his act until
       the contrary is proved. It is therefore necessary in
       order to arrive at a decision, as to an offender's
       intention to inquire what the - natural and probable
       consequences of his acts would be. Once there is
       evidence that a deceased person, sustained injuries
       which were sufficient in the ordinary course of nature
       to cause death, the person who inflicted them could
       be presumed to have intended those natural and
15
probable consequences. His offence would fall under
      the third head of sec. 300, I.P.C.
18. … A man's intention has to be inferred from what
      he does. But there are cases in which death is
      caused and the intention which can safely be
      imputed to the offender is less grave. The degree of
      guilt depends upon intention and the intention to be
      inferred must be gathered from the facts proved.
Sometimes an act is committed which would not in
      an ordinary case inflict injury sufficient in the
      ordinary course of nature to cause death, but which
      the - offender knows is likely to cause the death.
      Proof of such knowledge throws light upon his
      intention.
19. …Under
sec. 299
there need be no proof of
      knowledge, that the bodily injury intended was likely
      to cause death. Before deciding that a case of
      culpable homicide amounts to murder, there must be
      proof of intention sufficient to bring it under
Sec.300
.
      Where the injury deliberately inflicted is more than
      merely ‘likely to cause death’ but sufficient in the
      ordinary course of nature to cause death, the higher
      degree of guilt is presumed.”                 (Emphasis
      supplied)


It has been further observed therein as under:-
“26. …Where the evidence does not disclose that
      there was any intention, to cause death of the
      deceased but it was clear that the accused had the
      knowledge that their acts were likely to cause death
      the accused can be held guilty under the second part
      of
sec. 304
, I.P.C. The contention that in order to
      bring the case under the second part of
sec. 304
,
      I.P.C. it must be brought within one of the exceptions
      to sec 300,
I.P.C
. is not acceptable.”
      (Emphasis supplied)
16
27.   Thus, while defining the offence of culpable homicide and

murder, the framers of the
IPC
laid down that the requisite

intention or knowledge must be imputed to the accused when

he committed the act which caused the death in order to hold

him guilty for the offence of culpable homicide or murder as the

case may be. The framers of the
IPC
designedly used the two

words ‘intention’ and ‘knowledge’, and it must be taken that the

framers intended to draw a distinction between these two

expressions. The knowledge of the consequences which may

result in the doing of an act is not the same thing as the

intention that such consequences should ensue. Except in cases

where mens rea is not required in order to prove that a person

had certain knowledge, he “must have been aware that certain

specified harmful consequences would or could follow.” (Russell

on Crime, Twelfth Edition, Volume 1 at page 40).
28.   This awareness is termed as         knowledge. But the

knowledge that specified consequences would result or could

result by doing an act is not the same thing as the intention

that such consequences should ensue. If an act is done by a

man with the knowledge that certain consequences may follow
17
or will follow, it does not necessarily mean that he intended

such consequences and acted with such intention. Intention

requires   something   more   than    a   mere   foresight   of   the

consequences. It requires a purposeful doing of a thing to

achieve a particular end. This we may make it clear by referring

to two passages from leading text-books on the subject. Kenny

in his Outlines of Criminal Law, Seventeenth Edition at page

31 has observed:-
“To intend is to have in mind a fixed purpose to reach
      a desired objective; the noun ‘intention’ in the present
      connexion is used to denote the state of mind of a man
      who not only foresees but also desires the possible
      consequences of his conduct…….. It will be noted that
      there cannot be intention unless there is also foresight,
      since a man must decide to his own satisfaction, and
      accordingly must foresee, that to which his express
      purpose is directed……… Again, a man cannot intend
      to do a thing unless he desires to do it.”
                                          (Emphasis supplied)
29.   Russell on Crime, Twelfth Edition, 1st Volume at page 41

has observed:-
“In the present analysis of the mental element in
      crime the word “intention” is used to denote the
      mental attitude of a man who has resolved to bring
      about a certain result if he can possibly do so. He
      shapes his line of conduct so as to achieve a
      particular end at which he aims………… Differing
      from intention, yet closely resembling it, there are two
18
other attitudes of mind, either of which is sufficient to
      attract legal sanctions for harm resulting from action
      taken in obedience to its stimulus, but both of which
      can be denoted by the word “recklessness”. In each
      of these the man adopts a line of conduct with the
      intention of thereby attaining an end which he does
      desire, but at the same time realises that this conduct
      may also produce another result which he does not
      desire. In this case he acts with full knowledge that
      he is taking the chance that this secondary result will
      follow. Here, again, if this secondary result is one
      forbidden by law, then he will be criminally
      responsible for it if it occurs. His precise mental
      attitude will be one of two kinds-(a) he would prefer
      that the harmful result should not occur, or (b) he is
      indifferent as to whether it does or does not occur.”
               (Emphasis supplied)
30.    The phraseology of
Sections 299
and
300
respectively of

the
IPC
leaves no manner of doubt that under these Sections

when it is said that a particular act in order to be punishable be

done with such intention, the requisite intention must be proved

by the prosecution. It must be proved that the accused aimed or

desired that his act should lead to such and such consequences.
For example, when under
Section 299
it is said “whoever causes

death by doing an act with the intention of causing death” it

must be proved that the accused by doing the act, intended to

bring about the particular consequence, that is, causing of

death. Similarly, when it is said that “whoever causes death by
19
doing an act with the intention of causing such bodily injury as

is likely to cause death” it must be proved that the accused had

the aim of causing such bodily injury as was likely to cause

death.
31.      Thus, in order that the requirements of law with regard

to intention may be satisfied for holding an offence of culpable

homicide proved, it is necessary that any of the two specific

intentions must be proved. But, even when such intention is not

proved, the offence will be culpable homicide if the doer of the

act causes the death with the knowledge that he is likely by his

such act to cause death, that is, with the knowledge that the

result of his doing his act may be such as may result in death.
32.      The important question which has engaged our careful

attention in this case is, whether on the facts and in the

circumstances of the case we should maintain the conviction of

the appellant herein for the offence under
Section 304
Part I or

we should further alter it to
Section 304
Part II of the
IPC
?

SECTIONS 299 AND 300 OF THE
IPC
:-
20
33.
Sections 299
and
300
of the IPC deal with the definition

of ‘culpable homicide’ and ‘murder’, respectively. In terms of
Section 299
, ‘culpable homicide’ is described as an act of

causing death (i) with the intention of causing death or (ii) with

the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause

death, or (iii) with the knowledge that such an act is likely to

cause death. As is clear from a reading of this provision, the

former part of it emphasises on the expression ‘intention’ while

the latter upon ‘knowledge’. Both these are positive mental

attitudes, however, of different degrees. The mental element in

‘culpable homicide’, that is, the mental attitude towards the

consequences of conduct is one of intention and knowledge.
Once an offence is caused in any of the three stated manners

noted-above, it would be ‘culpable homicide’.
Section 300
of the

IPC, however, deals with ‘murder’, although there is no clear

definition of ‘murder’ in
Section 300
of the IPC. As has been

repeatedly held by this Court, ‘culpable homicide’ is the genus

and ‘murder’ is its species and all ‘murders’ are ‘culpable

homicides’ but all ‘culpable homicides’ are not ‘murders’.

(see
Rampal Singh v. State of U.P.
, (2012) 8 SCC 289)
21
34.
In the case of
State of Andhra Pradesh v. Rayavarapu

Punnayya
, (1976) 4 SCC 382, this Court, while clarifying the

distinction between these two terms and their consequences,

held as under:-
“12. In the scheme of the Penal Code, ‘culpable
      homicide’ is genus and ‘murder’ is species. All
      ‘murder’ is ‘culpable homicide’ but not vice-versa.
      Speaking generally, ‘culpable homicide not amounting
      to murder’. For the purpose of fixing punishment,
      proportionate to the gravity of this generic offence, the
      Code practically recognises three degrees of culpable
      homicide. The first is what may be called ‘culpable
      homicide of the first degree’. This is the greatest form
      of culpable homicide, which is defined in
Section 300
as ‘murder’. The second may be termed as ‘culpable
      homicide of the second degree’. This is punishable
      under the first part of
Section 304
. Then, there is
      ‘culpable homicide of the third degree’. This is the
      lowest type of culpable homicide and the punishment
      provided for it is, also, the lowest among the
      punishments provided for the three grades. Culpable
      homicide of this degree is punishable under the
      second part of
Section 304
.”
                                         (Emphasis supplied)
35.
Section 300
of the IPC proceeds with reference to
Section

299
of the IPC. ‘Culpable homicide’ may or may not amount to

‘murder’, in terms of
Section 300
of the IPC. When a ‘culpable

homicide is murder’, the punitive consequences shall follow in

terms of
Section 302
of the IPC, while in other cases, that is,
22
where an offence is ‘culpable homicide not amounting to

murder’, punishment would be dealt with under
Section 304
of

the IPC. Various judgments of this Court have dealt with the

cases which fall in various classes of firstly, secondly, thirdly

and fourthly, respectively, stated under
Section 300
of the IPC. It

would not be necessary for us to deal with that aspect of the

case in any further detail.
36.    The principles stated in the case of
Virsa Singh v. State

of Punjab
, AIR 1958 SC 465, are the broad guidelines for the

courts to exercise their judicial discretion while considering the

cases to determine as to which particular clause of
Section 300
of the IPC they fall in. This Court has time and again deliberated

upon the crucial question of distinction between
Sections 299
and
300
of the IPC, i.e. ‘culpable homicide’ and ‘murder’

respectively.
In
Phulia Tudu v. State of Bihar
, (2007) 14 SCC

588, this Court noticed that confusion may arise if the courts

would lose sight of the true scope and meaning of the terms

used by the legislature in these sections. This Court observed

that the safest way of approach to the interpretation and
23
application of these provisions seems to be to keep in focus the

keywords used in the various clauses of these sections.
37.    This Court in
Phulia Tudu
(supra) has observed that the

academic distinction between ‘murder’ and ‘culpable homicide

not amounting to murder’ has always vexed the courts. The

confusion is caused if courts losing sight of the true scope and

meaning of the terms used by the legislature in these sections,

allow themselves to be drawn into minute abstractions. The

safest way of approach to the interpretation and application of

these provisions seems to be to keep in focus the keywords used

in the various clauses of
Sections 299
and
300
of the IPC. The

following comparative table will be helpful in appreciating the

points of distinction between the two offences:-
Section 299                  Section 300

A        person     Subject to certain exceptions
commits             culpable homicide is murder if the
culpable            act by which the death is caused
homicide if the     is done-
act by which
the death is
caused is done-

                          INTENTION
24
(a) with   the      (1) with the intention of causing
intention   of      death; or
causing death;
or

                    (2) with the intention of causing
(b)  with    the
                    such bodily injury as the offender
intention     of
                    knows to be likely to cause the
causing    such
                    death of the person to whom the
bodily    injury
                    harm is caused; or
as is likely to
cause death; or     (3) with the intention of causing
                    bodily injury to any person and
                    the bodily injury intended to be
                    inflicted is sufficient in the
                    ordinary course of nature to cause
                    death; or




                         KNOWLEDGE

(c)  with     the   (4) with the knowledge that the act
knowledge that      is so imminently dangerous that it
the act is likely   must in all probability cause
to cause death      death or such bodily injury as is
                    likely to cause death, and commits
                    such act without any excuse for
                    incurring the risk of causing
                    death or such injury as is
                    mentioned above.
38.   Clause (b) of
Section 299
of the IPC corresponds with

clauses (2) and (3) of
Section 300
of the IPC. The distinguishing

feature of the mens rea requisite under clause (2) is the
25
knowledge possessed by the offender regarding the particular

victim being in such a peculiar condition or state of health that

the internal harm caused to him is likely to be fatal,

notwithstanding the fact that such harm would not in the

ordinary way of nature be sufficient to cause death of a person

in normal health or condition. It is noteworthy that the

‘intention to cause death’ is not an essential requirement of

clause (2). Only the intention of causing the bodily injury

coupled with the offender's knowledge of the likelihood of such

injury causing the death of the particular victim, is sufficient to

bring the killing within the ambit of this clause. This clause (2)

is borne out by illustration (b) appended to
Section 300
of the

IPC.
39.    Clause (b) of
Section 299
of the IPC does not postulate

any such knowledge on the part of the offender. Instances of

cases falling under clause (2) of
Section 300
of the IPC can be

where the assailant causes death by a fist blow intentionally

given knowing that the victim is suffering from an enlarged liver,

or enlarged spleen or diseased heart and such blow is likely to

cause death of that particular person as a result; of the rupture
26
of the liver, or spleen or the failure of the heart, as the case may

be. If the assailant had no such knowledge about the disease or

special frailty of the victim, nor an intention to cause death or

bodily injury sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause

death, the offence will not be murder, even if the injury which

caused the death, was intentionally given. In clause (3) of
Section 300
of the IPC, instead of the words “likely to cause

death” occurring in the corresponding clause (b) of
Section 299
of the IPC, the words “sufficient in the ordinary course of

nature” have been used. Obviously, the distinction lies between

a bodily injury likely to cause death and a bodily injury

sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. The

distinction is fine but real and if overlooked, may result in

miscarriage of justice. The difference between clause (b) of
Section 299
of the IPC and clause (3) of
Section 300
of the IPC

is one of the degree of probability of death resulting from the

intended bodily injury. To put it more broadly, it is the degree of

probability of death which determines whether a culpable

homicide is of the gravest, medium or the lowest degree. The

word ‘likely’ in clause (b) of
Section 299
of the IPC conveys the
27
sense of probable as distinguished from a mere possibility. The

words “bodily injury…..sufficient in the ordinary course of

nature to cause death” mean that death will be the “most

probable” result of the injury, having regard to the ordinary

course of nature.
40.    For cases to fall within clause (3), it is not necessary that

the offender intended to cause death, so long as the death

ensues from the intentional bodily injury or injuries sufficient to

cause death in the ordinary course of nature. The decision in

the case of Rajwant Singh v. State of Kerala, AIR 1966 SC

1874, is an apt illustration of this point.
41.    The scope of clause thirdly of
Section 300
of the IPC has

been the subject matter of various decisions of this Court. The

decision in
Virsa Singh
(supra) has throughout been followed in

a number of cases by this Court. In all these cases the approach

has been to find out whether the ingredient namely the

intention to cause the particular injury was present or not? If

such an intention to cause that particular injury is made out

and if the injury is found to be sufficient in the ordinary course

of nature to cause death, then clause thirdly of
Section 300
of
28
the
IPC
is attracted.
Analysing clause thirdly and as to what the

prosecution must prove, it was held in
Virsa Singh
(supra) as

under:-
“15. First, it must establish, quite objectively, that a
      bodily injury is present;
16. Secondly, the nature of the injury must be proved;
      These are purely objective investigations.
17. Thirdly, it must be proved that there was an
      intention to inflict that particular bodily injury, that is
      to say, that it was not accidental or unintentional, or
      that some other kind of injury was intended…
18. Once these three elements are proved to be
      present, the enquiry proceeds further and,
19. Fourthly, it must be proved that the injury of the
      type just described made up of the three elements set
      out above is sufficient to cause death in the ordinary
      course of nature. This part of the enquiry is purely
      objective and inferential and has nothing to do with
      the intention of the offender.”
                                         (Emphasis supplied)
It was further observed as under:-
“20. … If they inflict injuries of that kind, they must
      face the consequences; and they can only escape if it
      can be shown, or reasonably deduced that the injury
      was accidental or otherwise unintentional.”
                                         (Emphasis supplied)
42.   Thus, it is clear that the ingredient of clause thirdly is not

the intention to cause death but on the other hand the
29
ingredient to be proved is the intention to cause the particular

injury that was present. It is fallacious to contend that wherever

there is a single injury only a case of culpable homicide is made

out         irrespective       of        other      circumstances.
In
Emperor v. Sardarkhan Jaridkhan
, AIR 1916 Bom 191, it

was observed as under:-
“Where death is caused by a single blow, it is always
         much more difficult to be absolutely certain what
         degree of bodily injury the offender intended.”
                                           (Emphasis supplied)
43.      Commenting upon the aforesaid observation of the

Bombay High Court, Justice Bose, in
Virsa Singh
(supra), held

thus:-
“23. … With due respect to the learned Judge he has
         linked up the intent required with the seriousness of
         the injury, and that, as we have shown, is not what
         the section requires. The two matters are quite
         separate and distinct, though the evidence about them
         may sometimes overlap.”
44.      As to how the intention is to be inferred even in a case of

single injury, Justice Bose further held as under:-
“23. … The question is not whether the prisoner
      intended to inflict a serious injury or a trivial one but
      whether he intended to inflict the injury that is proved to
30
be present. If he can show that he did not, or if the
totality of the circumstances justify such an inference,
then, of course, the intent that the section requires is not
proved. But if there is nothing beyond the injury and the
fact that the appellant inflicted it, the only possible
inference is that he intended to inflict it. Whether he
knew of its seriousness, or intended serious
consequences is neither here nor there. The question, so
far as the intention is concerned, is not whether he
intended to kill, or to inflict an injury of a particular
degree of seriousness, but whether he intended to inflict
the injury in question; and once the existence of the
injury is proved the intention to cause it will be
presumed unless the evidence or the circumstances
warrant an opposite conclusion. But whether the
intention is there or not is one of fact and not one of law.
Whether the wound is serious or otherwise, and if
serious, how serious, is a totally separate and distinct
question and has nothing to do with the question
whether the prisoner intended to inflict the injury in
question.
24. It is true that in a given case the enquiry may be
linked up with the seriousness of the injury. For example,
if it can be proved, or if the totality of the circumstances
justify an inference, that the prisoner only intended a
superficial scratch and that by accident his victim
stumbled and fell on the sword or spear that was used,
then of course the offence is not murder. But that is not
because the prisoner did not intend the injury that he
intended to inflict to be as serious as it turned out to be
but because he did not intend to inflict the injury in
question at all. His intention in such a case would be to
inflict a totally different injury. The difference is not one of
law but one of fact. …”
                                      (Emphasis supplied)
31
45. This   question      was   again   considered    in
Jagrup

Singh v. State of Haryana
, (1981) 3 SCC 616, by a Bench of

this Court consisting of Justice D.A. Desai and Justice A.P.

Sen and following the
ratio
laid down in
Virsa Singh
(supra)

it was held as under:-
“6. There is no justification for the assertion that the
    giving of a solitary blow on a vital part of the body
    resulting the death must always necessarily reduce
    the offence to culpable homicide not amounting to
    murder punishable under
Section 304
Part II of the
    Code. If a man deliberately strikes another on the
    head with a heavy log of wood or an iron rod or even a
    lathi so as to cause a fracture of the skull, he must,
    in the absence of any circumstances negativing the
    presumption, be deemed to have intended to cause the
    death of the victim or such bodily injury as is
    sufficient to cause death. The whole thing depends
    upon the intention to cause death, and the case may
    be covered by either clause Istly or clause 3rdly. The
    nature of intention must be gathered from the kind of
    weapon used, the part of the body hit, the amount of
    force employed and the circumstances attendant upon
    the death.”
The aforesaid decision of this Court in
Jagrup Singh
(supra)

has been strongly relied upon by the learned senior counsel

appearing for the appellant.
46. However, the learned senior counsel did not seek to rely

on the observations made in para 6
referred to above
in the

case of
Jagrup Singh
(supra).
The learned senior counsel
32
relied on the observations which we shall refer to hereinafter,

but after giving some factual background in the case of
Jagrup Singh
(supra). On the fateful evening, the marriage

of one Tej Kaur was performed. Shortly thereafter, the

appellant Jagrup Singh armed with a gandhala, his brothers

Billaur Singh armed with a gandasa and Jarmail Singh and

Waryam Singh armed with lathies emerged suddenly and

made a joint assault on the deceased Chanan Singh and the

three eyewitnesses, Gurdev Singh, PW 10, Sukhdev Singh,

PW 11 and Makhan Singh, PW 12. The deceased along with

the three eyewitnesses was rushed to the Rural Dispensary,

Rori where they were examined at 6 pm by Dr. Bishnoi, PW 3,

who found that the deceased had a lacerated wound 9 cm ×

11/2 cm bone deep on the right parietal region, 9 cm away

from the tip of right pinna; margins of wound were red,

irregular and were bleeding on touch; direction of wound was

anterior-posterior. The deceased succumbed to the injuries.

The Doctor who performed an autopsy on the dead body of

the deceased deposed before the Trial Court that the death of

the deceased was due to cerebral compression as a result of
33
the head injury which was sufficient in the ordinary course of

  nature to cause death. In the background of this case, this

  Court held:-
“14. … In our judgment, the High Court having held
      that it was more probable that the appellant Jagrup
      Singh had also attended the marriage as the
      collateral, but something happened on the spur of the
      moment which resulted in the infliction of the injury by
      Jagrup Singh on the person of the deceased Chanan
      Singh which resulted in his death, manifestly erred in
      applying Clause Thirdly of
Section 300
of the Code.
      On the finding that the appellant when he struck the
      deceased with the blunt side of the gandhala in the
      heat of the moment, without pre-meditation and in a
      sudden fight, the case was covered by Exception 4 to
Section 300
. It is not suggested that the appellant
      had taken undue advantage of the situation or had
      acted in a cruel or unusual manner. Thus, all the
      requirements of Exception 4 are clearly met. That
      being so, the conviction of the appellant Jagrup Singh,
      under
Section 302
of the Code cannot be sustained.
15. The result, therefore, is that the conviction of the
      appellant under
Section 302
is altered to one under
Section 304
, Part II of the
Indian Penal Code
. For the
      altered conviction, the appellant is sentenced to suffer
      rigorous imprisonment for a period of seven years.”
                                        (Emphasis supplied)
      We have noticed something in the aforesaid observations

made by this Court which, in our opinion, creates some

confusion. We have come across such observations in many

other decisions of this Court over and above the case of
Jagrup
34
Singh
(supra).
What we are trying to highlight is that in
Jagrup    Singh
(supra),   although     this   Court   altered   the

conviction from
Section 302
to
Section 304
Part II, it took

shelter of Exception 4 to
Section 300
of the IPC. The question is,

was there any need for the Court to take recourse to Exception 4

to
Section 300
of the IPC for the purpose of altering the

conviction from
Section 302
to
Section 304
Part II of the
IPC
. We

say so because there is fine difference between the two parts of
Section 304
of the IPC. Under the first part, the crime of murder

is first established and the accused is then given the benefit of

one of the exceptions to
Section 300
of the IPC, while under the

second part, the crime of murder is never established at all.
Therefore, for the purpose of holding an accused guilty of the

offence punishable under the second part of
Section 304
of the

IPC, the accused need not bring his case within one of the

exceptions to
Section 300
of the IPC.
47.
In
Jawahar Lal v. State of Punjab
, (1983) 4 SCC 159,

also the accused hit the deceased with a knife blow in front of

left side of his chest and as per the autopsy report the injuries

were found sufficient in an ordinary course of nature to cause
35
death. This Court took a view that the accused could be

attributed the knowledge that he was likely to cause an injury

which was likely to cause death. The relevant paras of
the said

judgment
is reproduced as under:
“17…….we should also not further dilate on this
      point in view of the decision of this Court in
Jagrup
      Singh v. State of Haryana
: 1981 Cri LJ 1136. In that
      case after referring to the evidence, this Court held
      that the appellant gave one blow on the head of the
      deceased with the blunt side of the gandhala and
      this injury proved fatal. The Court then proceeded to
      examine as to the nature of the offence because the
      appellant in the case was convicted for an offence
      under
Section 302
. Undoubtedly, this Court said that
      there is no justification for the assertion that the
      giving of a solitary blow on a vital part of the body
      resulting in death must always necessarily reduce
      the offence to culpable homicide not amounting to
      murder punishable under
Section 304
, Part II of the
      Code. The Court then proceeded to lay down the
      criteria for judging the nature of the offence. It may
      be extracted;
The whole thing depends upon the intention to
      cause death, and the case may be covered by either
      clause Firstly or clause Thirdly. The nature of
      intention must be gathered from the kind of weapon
      used, the part of the body hit, the amount of force
      employed and the circumstance attendant upon the
      death.
18. We may point out that decision in Jagrup Singh's
      Case 1981 Cri LJ 1136 was subsequently followed
      in Randhir Singh @ Dhire v. State of Punjab Decided
      on September 18, 1981 and in
Kulwant Rai v. State
      of Punjab Decided
on August 7, 1981 (Criminal
      Appeal No. 630 of 1981).
36
19. Having kept this criteria under view, we are of
      the opinion that the offence committed by the
      1st appellant would not be covered by clause Thirdly
      of Para 3 of
Section 300
and therefore, the conviction
      under
Section 302
, I.P.C. cannot be sustained.
20. What then is the offence committed by the
      1st appellant? Looking to the age of the 1st appellant
      at the time of the occurrence, the nature of the
      weapon used, the circumstances in which one blow
      was inflicted, the time of the day when the
      occurrence took place and the totality of other
      circumstances, namely, the previous trivial disputes
      between the parties, we are of the opinion that the
      1st appellant could be attributed the knowledge that
      he was likely to cause an injury which was likely to
      cause death. Accordingly, the 1st appellant is shown
      to have committed an offence under
Section 304
, Part
      II of the
Indian Penal Code
and he must be convicted
      for the same and sentenced to suffer rigorous
      imprisonment for five years maintaining the sentence
      of fine.”
48.
In
Camilo Vaz v. State of Goa
[(2000) 9 SCC 1 : 2000

SCC (Cri) 1128] the accused had hit the deceased with a danda

during a premeditated gang-fight, resulting in the death of the

victim. Both the trial court and the Bombay High Court

convicted the appellant under
Section 302
IPC. This Court,

however, converted the conviction to one under
Section 304
Part

II
IPC
and observed:- (SCC p. 9, para 14)

       “14. … When a person hits another with a danda on
        a vital part of the body with such a force that the
        person hit meets his death, knowledge has to be
37
imputed to the accused. In that situation case will
       fall in Part II of
Section 304
IPC as in the present
       case.”
                                       (Emphasis supplied)
49.
In
Jai Prakash v. State (Delhi Admin
.), (1991) 2 SCC

32, this Court, after an exhaustive review of various decisions,

more particularly, the principles
laid down in
Virsa Singh's

case (supra), concluded as under:-
“18. In all these cases, injury by a single blow was
      found to be sufficient in the ordinary course of nature
      to cause death. The Supreme Court took into
      consideration the circumstances such as sudden
      quarrel, grappling etc. as mentioned above only to
      assess the state of mind namely whether the accused
      had the necessary intention to cause that particular
      injury i.e. to say that he desired expressly that such
      injury only should be the result. It is held in all these
      cases that there was no such intention to cause that
      particular injury as in those circumstances, the
      accused could have been barely aware i.e. only had
      knowledge of the consequences. These circumstances
      under which the appellant happened to inflict the
      injury it is felt or at least a doubt arose that all his
      mental faculties could not have been roused as to form
      an intention to achieve the particular result. We may
      point out that we are not concerned with the intention
      to cause death in which case it will be a murder
      simplicitor unless exception is attracted. We are
      concerned under clause 3rdly with the intention to
      cause that particular injury which is a subjective
      inquiry and when once such intention is established
      and if the intended injury is found objectively to be
      sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause
      death, clause 3rdly is attracted and it would be
38
murder, unless one of the exceptions to
Section 300
is
      attracted. If on the other hand this ingredient of
      ‘intention’ is not established or if a reasonable doubt
      arises in this regard then only it would be reasonable
      to infer that clause 3rdly is not attracted and that the
      accused must be attributed knowledge that in
      inflicting the injury he was likely to cause death in
      which case it will be culpable homicide punishable
      under
Section      304
Part      II
IPC
.”
      (Emphasis supplied)
50.   In the case of Rajwant Singh (supra), after referring to

the relevant clauses of
Section 300
of the IPC, the following

observations have been made:-
“10. … The mental attitude is thus made of two
      elements (a) causing an intentional injury and (b)
      which injury the offender has the foresight to know
      would cause death….
11. … For the application of clause three it must first
      be established that the injury is caused, next it must
      be established objectively what the nature of that
      injury in the ordinary course of nature is. If the injury
      is found to be sufficient to cause death, one test is
      satisfied. Then it must be proved that there was an
      intention to inflict that very Injury and not some other
      injury and that it was not accidental or unintentional.
If this is also held against the offender the offence of
      murder is established.”                        (Emphasis
      supplied)
51.
In the case of
Anda v. State of Rajasthan
, AIR 1966 SC

148, the two relevant
Sections 299
and
300
respectively are
39
brilliantly analysed and the relevant observations are made at

page 151 in para 7. Before we refer to those observations, we

would refer to certain observations made earlier. They are as

under:-
“The offence of culpable homicide involves the doing of
      an act (which term includes illegal omissions) (a) with
      the intention of causing death, or (b) with the intention
      of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause
      death or (c) with the knowledge that the act is likely to
      cause death. If the death is caused in any of these
      three circumstances, the offence of culpable homicide
      is said to be committed……. Intention and knowledge
      in the ingredients of the section postulate the existence
      of a positive mental attitude and this mental condition
      is the special mens rea necessary for the offence. The
      guilty intention in the first two conditions contemplates
      the intended death of the person harmed or the
      intentional causing of an injury likely to cause his
      death. The knowledge in the third condition
      contemplates knowledge of the death of the person.
Sec. 300
tells us when the offence is murder and
      when it is culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
Sec. 300
begins by setting out the circumstances when
      culpable homicide turns out into murder which is
      punishable under
sec. 302
and the exceptions in the
      same section tell us when offence is not murder but
      culpable homicide not amounting to murder
      punishable under
sec. 304
. Murder is an aggravated
      form of culpable homicide. The existence of one of four
      conditions turns culpable homicide into murder while
      the special exceptions reduce the offence of murder
      again to culpable homicide not amounting to murder.”
      (Emphasis supplied)
40
52.    We will now refer to the relevant observations made in

para 10 at page 151. They are as under:-
“The third clause views the matter from a general
      stand-point. It speaks of an intention to cause bodily
      injury which is sufficient in the ordinary course of
      nature to cause death. The emphasis here is on the
      sufficiency of the injury in the ordinary course of
      nature to cause death. The sufficiency is the high
      probability of death in the ordinary way of nature and
      when this exists and death ensues and the causing of
      such injury is intended the offence is murder.
      Sometimes the nature of the weapon used, sometimes
      the part of the body on which the injury is caused,
      and sometimes both are relevant. The determinant
      factor is the intentional injury which must be sufficient
      to cause death, that is to say, the probability of death
      is not so high, the offence does not fall within murder
      but within culpable homicide not amounting to murder
      or something less. The illustration appended to the
      clause 3rdly reads:
‘(c) A intentionally gives Z a sword-cut or
          club-wound sufficient to cause the death of a
          man in the ordinary course of nature. Z dies in
          consequence. Here A is guilty of murder,
          although he may not have intended to cause Z's
          death.’ The sufficiency of an intentional injury
          to cause death in the ordinary way of nature is
          the gist of the clause irrespective of an intention
          to cause death. Here again, the exceptions may
          bring down the offence to culpable homicide not
          amounting to murder.”       (Emphasis supplied)
53.    This Court in
Vineet Kumar Chauhan v. State of

U.P.
, (2007)   14   SCC   660,   noticed    that   the   academic
41
distinction between ‘murder’ and ‘culpable homicide not

amounting to murder’ had vividly been brought out by this

Court in
State of A.P. v. Rayavarapu Punnayya
, (1976) 4

SCC 382, where it was observed as under:-
“…that the safest way of approach to the
      interpretation and application of
Sections 299
and
300
of the Code is to keep in focus the key words used in
      various clauses of the said sections. Minutely
      comparing each of the clauses of
sections 299
and
300
of the Code and the drawing support from the
      decisions of the court in
Virsa Singh v. State of
      Punjab
, (AIR 1958 SC 465 : 1958 Cri LJ 818)
      and Rajwant Singh v. State of Kerala, (AIR 1966 SC
      1874 : 1966 Cri LJ 1509) speaking for the court,
      Justice RS Sarkaria, neatly brought out the points of
      distinction between the two offences, which have been
      time and again reiterated. Having done so, the court
      said that wherever the Court is confronted with the
      question whether the offence is murder or culpable
      homicide not amounting to murder, on the facts of a
      case, it would be convenient for it to approach the
      problem in three stages. The question to be considered
      at the first stage would be that the accused has done
      an act by doing which he has caused the death of
      another. Two, if such causal connection between the
      act of the accused and the death, leads to the second
      stage for considering whether that act of the accused
      amounts to culpable homicide as defined in section
299. If the answer to this question is in the negative,
      the offence would be culpable homicide not amounting
      to murder, punishable under the First or Second part
      of
Section 304
, depending respectively, on whether
      this second or the third clause of
Section 299
is
      applicable. If this question is found in the positive but
      the cases come within any of the exceptions
      enumerated in
Section 300
, the offence would still be
42
culpable homicide not amounting to murder,
      punishable under the first part of
Section 304
of the
      Code. It was, however, clarified that these were only
      broad guidelines to facilitate the task of the court and
      not cast-iron imperative.”        (Emphasis supplied)
54.
In the case of
Tholan v. State of Tamil Nadu
, AIR 1984

SC 759, the accused stood in front of the house of the deceased

and used filthy language against some persons who were

unconnected with the deceased. The deceased came out of his

house and told the accused that he should not use vulgar and

filthy language in front of ladies and asked him to go away. The

accused questioned the authority of the deceased to ask him to

leave the place. In the ensuing altercation, the accused gave one

blow with a knife which landed on the (right) chest of the

deceased which proved to be fatal. This Court came to the

conclusion that the accused could not be convicted under
Section 302
, but was guilty under
Section 304
Part II. The

circumstances which weighed with this Court were : (i) there

was no connection between the accused and the deceased and

the presence of the deceased at the time of the incident, was

wholly accidental; (ii) altercation with the deceased was on the

spur of the moment and the accused gave a single blow being
43
enraged by the deceased asking him to leave the place; (iii) the

requisite intention could not be attributed to the accused as

there was nothing to indicate that the accused intended the

blow to land on the right side of the chest which proved to be

fatal.
55.
In
Chamru,   Son   of   Budhwa v. State   of   Madhya

Pradesh
, AIR 1954 SC 652, in somewhat similar circumstances,

where there was exchange of abuses between the two parties

both of whom were armed with lathis, they came to blows and

in the course of the fight that ensued, the accused struck

a lathi blow on the head of the deceased which caused a

fracture of the skull resulting in the death. In view of the fact

that the accused had given only one blow in the heat of the

moment, it was held that all that can be said was that he had

given the blow with the knowledge that it was likely to cause

death and, therefore, the offence fell under
Section 304
, Part II

of the
IPC
.
In
Willie (William) Slaney v. The State of Madhya

Pradesh
,     AIR 1956 SC 116, there was, as here, a sudden

quarrel leading to an exchange of abuses and in the heat of the

moment a solitary blow with a hockey-stick had been given on
44
the head.
The Court held that the offence amounted to culpable

homicide not amounting to murder punishable under Section

304, Part II.
56.
In
Kulwant Rai v. State of Punjab
, (1981) 4 SCC 245,

the accused, without any prior enmity or premeditation, on a

short quarrel gave a single blow with a dagger which later

proved to be fatal. This Court observed that since there was no

premeditation, Part 3 of
Section 300
of the IPC could not be

attracted because it cannot be said that the accused intended to

inflict that particular injury which was ultimately found to have

been inflicted. In the facts and circumstances of that case, the

conviction of the accused was altered from
Section 302
to that

under
Section 304
Part II
IPC
and the accused was sentenced to

suffer rigorous imprisonment for five years.
57.
In
Jagtar Singh v. State of Punjab
, (1983) 2 SCC 342,

the accused on the spur of the moment inflicted a knife-blow on

the chest of the deceased. The injury proved to be fatal. The

doctor opined that the injury was sufficient in the ordinary

course of nature to cause death. This Court observed that: (SCC

p. 344, para 8):-
45
“8. … The quarrel was of a trivial nature and even in
      such a trivial quarrel the appellant wielded a weapon
      like a knife and landed a blow in the chest. In these
      circumstances, it is a permissible inference that the
      appellant at least could be imputed with a knowledge
      that he was likely to cause an injury which was likely
      to cause death. …”                (Emphasis supplied)

This Court altered the conviction of the appellant from
Section

302
IPC to
Section 304
Part II
IPC
and sentenced the accused to

suffer rigorous imprisonment for five years.
58.   In Hem Raj v. State (Delhi Admn.), 1990 Supp SCC

291, the accused inflicted single stab injury landing on the

chest of the deceased. The occurrence admittedly had taken

place on the spur of the moment and in heat of passion upon a

sudden quarrel. According to the doctor the injury was sufficient

in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. This Court

observed as under: (SCC p. 295, para 14)”-
“14. The question is whether the appellant could be
      said to have caused that particular injury with the
      intention of causing death of the deceased. As the
      totality of the established facts and circumstances do
      show that the occurrence had happened most
      unexpectedly in a sudden quarrel and without
      premeditation during the course of which the appellant
      caused a solitary injury, he could not be imputed with
      the intention to cause death of the deceased or with
      the intention to cause that particular fatal injury; but
      he could be imputed with the knowledge that he was
      likely to cause an injury which was likely to cause
46
death. Because in the absence of any positive proof
      that the appellant caused the death of the deceased
      with the intention of causing death or intentionally
      inflicted that particular injury which in the ordinary
      course of nature was sufficient to cause death, neither
      clause I nor clause III of
Section 300
IPC will be
      attracted.”
                                      (Emphasis supplied)


This Court while setting aside the conviction under
Section 302
convicted the accused under
Section 304
Part II and sentenced

him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven years.
59.   We may lastly refer to the decision of this Court

in
Pulicherla Nagaraju v. State of A.P.
, (2006) 11 SCC 444 :
(2007) 1 SCC (Cri) 500, wherein this Court enumerated some of

the circumstances relevant to finding out whether there was any

intention to cause death on the part of the accused. This Court

observed : (SCC pp. 457-58, para 29)

      “29. Therefore, the court should proceed to decide the
      pivotal question of intention, with care and caution, as
      that will decide whether the case falls under
Section
      302
or 304 Part I or 304 Part II. Many petty or
      insignificant matters — plucking of a fruit, straying of
      cattle, quarrel of children, utterance of a rude word or
      even an objectionable glance, may lead to altercations
      and group clashes culminating in deaths. Usual
      motives like revenge, greed, jealousy or suspicion may
      be totally absent in such cases. There may be no
      intention. There may be no premeditation. In fact,
      there may not even be criminality. At the other end of
47
the spectrum, there may be cases of murder where the
        accused attempts to avoid the penalty for murder by
        attempting to put forth a case that there was no
        intention to cause death. It is for the courts to ensure
        that the cases of murder punishable under
Section
        302
, are not converted into offences punishable under
Section 304
Part I/II, or cases of culpable homicide not
        amounting to murder, are treated as murder
        punishable under
Section 302
. The intention to cause
        death can be gathered generally from a combination of
        a few or several of the following, among other,
        circumstances : (i) nature of the weapon used; (ii)
        whether the weapon was carried by the accused or
        was picked up from the spot; (iii) whether the blow is
        aimed at a vital part of the body; (iv) the amount of
        force employed in causing injury; (v) whether the act
        was in the course of sudden quarrel or sudden fight or
        free for all fight; (vi) whether the incident occurs by
        chance or whether there was any premeditation; (vii)
        whether there was any prior enmity or whether the
        deceased was a stranger; (viii) whether there was any
        grave and sudden provocation, and if so, the cause for
        such provocation; (ix) whether it was in the heat of
        passion; (x) whether the person inflicting the injury
        has taken undue advantage or has acted in a cruel
        and unusual manner; (xi) whether the accused dealt a
        single blow or several blows. The above list of
        circumstances is, of course, not exhaustive and there
        may be several other special circumstances with
        reference to individual cases which may throw light on
        the            question           of          intention.”
        (Emphasis supplied)
60.     Few important principles of law discernible from the

aforesaid discussion may be summed up thus:-
(1) When the court is confronted with the question, what

      offence the accused could be said to have committed, the
48
true test is to find out the intention or knowledge of the

accused in doing the act. If the intention or knowledge was

such as is described in Clauses (1) to (4) of
Section 300
of

the IPC, the act will be murder even though only a single

injury was caused. To illustrate : 'A' is bound hand and foot.
'B' comes and placing his revolver against the head of 'A',

shoots 'A' in his head killing him instantaneously. Here,

there will be no difficulty in holding that the intention of 'B'

in shooting 'A' was to kill him, though only single injury was

caused. The case would, therefore, be of murder falling

within Clause (1) of
Section 300
of the IPC. Taking another

instance, 'B' sneaks into the bed room of his enemy 'A' while

the latter is asleep on his bed. Taking aim at the left chest

of 'A', 'B' forcibly plunges a sword in the left chest of 'A' and

runs away. 'A' dies shortly thereafter. The injury to 'A' was

found to be sufficient in ordinary course of nature to cause

death. There may be no difficulty in holding that 'B'

intentionally inflicted the particular injury found to be

caused and that the said injury was objectively sufficient in

the ordinary course of nature to cause death. This would
49
bring the act of 'B' within Clause (3) of
Section 300
of the

IPC and render him guilty of the offence of murder although

only single injury was caused.
(2) Even when the intention or knowledge of the accused

may fall within Clauses (1) to (4) of
Section 300
of the IPC,

the act of the accused which would otherwise be murder,

will be taken out of the purview of murder, if the accused's

case attracts any one of the five exceptions enumerated in

that section. In the event of the case falling within any of

those exceptions, the offence would be culpable homicide

not amounting to murder, falling within Part 1 of
Section

304
of the IPC, if the case of the accused is such as to fall

within Clauses (1) to (3) of
Section 300
of the IPC. It would

be offence under Part II of
Section 304
if the case is such as

to fall within Clause (4) of
Section 300
of the IPC. Again, the

intention or knowledge of the accused may be such that

only 2nd or 3rd part of
Section 299
of the IPC, may be

attracted but not any of the clauses of
Section 300
of the

IPC. In that situation also, the offence would be culpable

homicide not amounting to murder under
Section 304
of
50
the
IPC
. It would be an offence under Part I of that section,

if the case fall within 2nd part of
Section 299
, while it

would be an offence under Part II of
Section 304
if the case

fall within 3rd part of
Section 299
of the IPC.

(3) To put it in other words, if the act of an accused person

falls within the first two clauses of cases of culpable

homicide as described in
Section 299
of the IPC it is

punishable under the first part of
Section 304
. If, however,

it falls within the third clause, it is punishable under the

second part of
Section 304
. In effect, therefore, the first part

of this section would apply when there is ‘guilty intention,’

whereas the second part would apply when there is no such

intention, but there is ‘guilty knowledge’.

(4) Even if single injury is inflicted, if that particular injury

was intended, and objectively that injury was sufficient in

the ordinary course of nature to              cause death, the

requirements of Clause 3rdly to
Section 300
of the IPC, are

fulfilled and the offence would be murder.
(5)
Section 304
of the IPC will apply to the following classes

of cases: (i) when the case falls under one or the other of
51
the clauses of
Section 300
, but it is covered by one of the

exceptions to that Section, (ii) when the injury caused is not

of the higher degree of likelihood which is covered by the

expression 'sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to

cause death' but is of a lower degree of likelihood which is

generally spoken of as an injury 'likely to cause death' and

the case does not fall under Clause (2) of
Section 300
of the

IPC, (iii) when the act is done with the knowledge that

death is likely to ensue but without intention to cause

death or an injury likely to cause death.
To put it more succinctly, the difference between

the two parts of
Section 304
of the IPC is that under the

first part, the crime of murder is first established and the

accused is then given the benefit of one of the exceptions to
Section 300
of the IPC, while under the second part, the

crime of murder is never established at all. Therefore, for

the purpose of holding an accused guilty of the offence

punishable under the second part of
Section 304
of the IPC,

the accused need not bring his case within one of the

exceptions to
Section 300
of the IPC.
52
(6) The word 'likely' means probably and it is distinguished

from more 'possibly'. When chances of happening are even

or greater than its not happening, we may say that the

thing will 'probably happen'. In reaching the conclusion, the

court has to place itself in the situation of the accused and

then judge whether the accused had the knowledge that by

the act he was likely to cause death.
(7) The distinction between culpable homicide (
Section 299
of the IPC) and murder (
Section 300
of the IPC) has always

to be carefully borne in mind while dealing with a charge

under
Section 302
of the IPC. Under the category of

unlawful homicides, both, the cases of culpable homicide

amounting to murder and those not amounting to murder

would fall. Culpable homicide is not murder when the case

is brought within the five exceptions to
Section 300
of the

IPC. But, even though none of the said five exceptions are

pleaded or prima facie established on the evidence on

record, the prosecution must still be required under the law

to bring the case under any of the four clauses of
Section

300
of the IPC to sustain the charge of murder. If the
53
prosecution fails to discharge this onus in establishing any

one of the four clauses of
Section 300
of the IPC, namely,

1stly to 4thly, the charge of murder would not be made out

and the case may be one of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder as described under
Section 299
of the

IPC.
(8) The court must address itself to the question of mens

rea. If Clause thirdly of
Section 300
is to be applied, the

assailant must intend the particular injury inflicted on the

deceased. This ingredient could rarely be proved by direct

evidence. Inevitably, it is a matter of inference to be drawn

from the proved circumstances of the case. The court must

necessarily have regard to the nature of the weapon used,

part of the body injured, extent of the injury, degree of force

used in causing the injury, the manner of attack, the

circumstances preceding and attendant on the attack.

(9) Intention to kill is not the only intention that makes a

culpable homicide a murder. The intention to cause injury

or injuries sufficient in the ordinary cause of nature to

cause death also makes a culpable homicide a murder if
54
death has actually been caused and intention to cause such

injury or injuries is to be inferred from the act or acts

resulting in the injury or injuries.
(10) When single injury inflicted by the accused results in

the death of the victim, no inference, as a general principle,

can be drawn that the accused did not have the intention to

cause the death or that particular injury which resulted in

the death of the victim. Whether an accused had the

required guilty intention or not, is a question of fact which

has to be determined on the facts of each case.

(11) Where the prosecution proves that the accused had the

intention to cause death of any person or to cause bodily

injury to him and the intended injury is sufficient in the

ordinary course of nature to cause death, then, even if he

inflicts a single injury which results in the death of the

victim, the offence squarely falls under Clause thirdly of
Section 300
of the IPC unless one of the exceptions applies.

(12) In determining the question, whether an accused had

guilty intention or guilty knowledge in a case where only a

single injury is inflicted by him and that injury is sufficient
55
in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, the fact

      that the act is done without premeditation in a sudden fight

      or quarrel, or that the circumstances justify that the injury

      was accidental or unintentional, or that he only intended a

      simple injury, would lead to the inference of guilty

      knowledge, and the offence would be one under
Section 304
Part II of the
IPC
.
61.     We once again recapitulate the facts of this case. On the

fateful day of the incident, the father and son were working in

their agricultural field early in the morning. They wanted to

transport the crop, they had harvested and for that purpose

they had called for a lorry. The lorry arrived, however, the

deceased did not allow the driver of the lorry to use the disputed

pathway. This led to a verbal altercation between the appellant

and the deceased. After quite some time of the verbal

altercation, the appellant hit a blow on the head of the deceased

with the weapon of offence (weed axe) resulting in his death in

the hospital.
62.     Looking at the overall evidence on record, we find it

difficult to come to the conclusion that when the appellant
56
struck the deceased with the weapon of offence, he intended to

cause such bodily injury as was sufficient in the ordinary

course of nature to cause death. The weapon of offence in the

present case is a common agriculture tool. If a man is hit with a

weed axe on the head with sufficient force, it is bound to cause,

as here, death. It is true that the injuries shown in the post

mortem report are fracture of the parietal bone as well as the

temporal bone. The deceased died on account of the cerebral

compression i.e. internal head injuries. However, the moot

question is – whether that by itself is sufficient to draw an

inference that the appellant intended to cause such bodily

injury as was sufficient to cause death. We are of the view that

the appellant could only be attributed with the knowledge that it

was likely to cause an injury which was likely to cause the

death. It is in such circumstances that we are inclined to take

the view that the case on hand does not fall within clause

thirdly of
Section 300
of the IPC.
63.    In the aforesaid view of the matter and more particularly

bearing the principles of law explained aforesaid, the present

appeal is partly allowed. The conviction of the appellant under
57
Section 304
Part I of the
IPC
is altered to one under
Section 304
Part II of the
IPC
. For the altered conviction, the appellant is

sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of five

years.
………………………………..J.
                                    ( B.R. GAVAI )




                                    ….……………………………..J.
                                    ( J.B. PARDIWALA )
NEW DELHI;
JULY 20, 2023
58