[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Gurbachan Singh (Dead) Through Lrs. vs Gurcharan Singh (Dead) Through Lrs. . on 24 July, 2023
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Abhay S. Oka
1

                                                                   NON­REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 639
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS.10556­10558 OF 2010


             GURBACHAN SINGH (DEAD)                                  …APPELLANT(S)
             THROUGH LRS

                                                       VERSUS


             GURCHARAN SINGH (DEAD)                                 ...RESPONDENT(S)
             THROUGH LRS AND ORS.

                                           JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL, J.
Background
1. The present appeals stand filed against a judgment rendered

                            by the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Civil Regular

                            Second Appeal number 283 of 1984 dated 18th February,

                            20101 and in RA­RS­42­C of 2010 and Civil Misc. No.6287­C

                            of 2010 dated 28th May, 2010 by which the court in such

                            jurisdiction set aside the concurrent findings returned by the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2023.07.25
10:39:57 IST
Reason:
Additional District Judge, Jalandhar in Civil Appeal No.248 of
             1 Hereinafter referred to as “Impugned Judgment”
1
2
1981 dated 1st August, 1981 and by the Sub­Judge 1 st Class,

       Jullundur ( now Jalandhar ) in Civil Suit No.186 of 1981 dated

       24th September, 1981.
2. The crux of these appeals lies in a property dispute wherein

       one of the two brothers namely, Faqir Singh had allegedly sold

       off the portion of property belonging to him that his brother

       Gurbachan Singh and he inherited from their father namely

       Suchet Singh who died intestate in the year 1942. Gurcharan

       Singh (Respondent herein/plaintiff) bought a piece of land

       belonging to Faqir Singh measuring 4 marlas vide sale deed

       dated 19th December, 19782 for a consideration of ₹ 6000.

       Thereafter, he was put in possession of such land however, it

       was forcibly taken by the Appellant Gurbachan Singh who

       stated that since Faqir Singh did not have any exclusive title

       or possession over the suit property, he could not purport to

       sell the same.
3. The      Respondent           (Gurcharan     Singh)   filed   a   suit   for

       possession over such disputed property before the Sub­

       Judge 1st Class, Jullundur ( now Jalandhar ) , who, having

       considered the evidence led, framed certain issues and
2 Hereinafter referred to as “disputed property”
2
3
returned findings in favour of the Appellant (Gurbachan

  Singh) herein. On 1st appeal, the learned Additional District

  Judge upheld the judgement rendered by the court below on

  two grounds viz. that there is no document on record to

  prove that the disputed property had been given to Faqir

  Singh in a family partition; and that if Suchet Singh had

  indeed affected partition 50 or 60 years ago, then there

  should have been an entry in the revenue record to that

  effect, however, no such entry is to be found.
Impugned Judgement
4. The learned single Judge framed the following questions of

  law (not substantial questions of law) for his consideration­

  whether the findings recorded by both the courts below by

  relying upon cogent evidence in the shape of admissions

  made by witnesses of the Respondents, can be termed to be

  perverse given the set of circumstances or not? And, whether

  a person, who is concededly the owner on the basis of valid

  the executed sale deed and having become co­sharer by virtue

  of the same, is entitled to protect his possession, if it is
3
4
established that he is in settled possession of a specific area

  or not?
5. Referring to the testimonies of DW­1, DW­3 and DW­4 the

  learned judge noted a categorical admission that Suchet Singh

  had partitioned the property during his lifetime. It was also

  noticed that the abovenamed witnesses testified to the

  Respondents herein having carried out construction on the

  property purchased by him, the implication thereof being that

  after the execution of the sale deed, possession also rested

  with him. In view of the said facts the judge held that the

  judgements of the courts below were result of “complete

  misreading of the evidence” and that the Appellant was

  entitled to the possession of the specific portion sold to him,

  thereby setting aside the concurrent findings of the courts

  below.
The Instant Appeals
6. The judgement rendered in the regular 2 nd appeal has been

  impugned before us on the ground that the High Court has

  transgressed the scope of second appeal; that the purchaser

  of a co­share does not have a right to possession [this ground
4
5
is urged on the basis of 3 judgement rendered by this court in
Jai Singh v. Gurmej Singh3
,
Ramdas v. Sitabai
4and
Shyam

      Sunder v. Ram Kumar5
] and, that the High Court had erred in

      its appreciation of evidence, particularly on the aspects of

      possession, the disputed property being an integral part of the

      Appellant herein’s house and that of the Respondents herein

      having raised construction on the disputed property.


   Our View
7. The parameters of an appeal under
Section 100
, CPC passing

      muster are well established. The section itself dictates that

      such an appeal shall only be maintainable when the case

      involves a substantial question of law or that the appellate

      decree has been passed ex parte. the latter, obviously is not

      the case. This court has, in a multitude of decisions,

      expounded on what may be termed as a substantial question

      of law to satisfy the requirements of
section 100
.
In
Nazir

      Mohamed v. J. Kamala6
( 2­ Judge Bench), it was observed:­




3 (2009) 15 SCC 747
4 (2009) SCC 444
5 (2001) 8 SCC 24
6 (2020) 19 SCC 57
5
6
“27.
In HeroVinoth v. Seshammal [HeroVinoth v. S
eshammal, (2006) 5 SCC 545] , this Court referred
to and relied upon
Chunilal V. Mehta
and Sons
Ltd. [Chunilal V. Mehta & Sons Ltd. v. Century
Spg. & Mfg. Co. Ltd., AIR 1962 SC 1314] and other
judgments and summarised the tests to find out
whether a given set of questions of law were mere
questions of law or substantial questions of law.
The relevant paragraphs of the judgment of this
Court in
Hero Vinoth [Hero Vinoth v. Seshammal
,
(2006) 5 SCC 545] are set out hereinbelow : (SCC
p. 554, para 21)


“21. The phrase “substantial question of law”, as
occurring in the amended
Section 100
CPC is not
defined in the Code. The word substantial, as
qualifying “question of law”, means— of having
substance, essential, real, of sound worth,
important or considerable. It is to be understood
as something in contradistinction with—technical,
of no substance or consequence, or academic
merely. However, it is clear that the legislature has
chosen not to qualify the scope of “substantial
question of law” by suffixing the words “of general
importance” as has been done in many other
provisions such as
Section 109
of the Code or
Article 133(1)(a)
of the Constitution. The
substantial question of law on which a second
appeal shall be heard need not necessarily be a
substantial question of law of general importance.
In
Guran Ditta v. Ram Ditta [Guran Ditta
v. Ram
Ditta, 1928 SCC OnLine PC 31 : (1927­28) 55 IA
235 : AIR 1928 PC 172] the phrase “substantial
question of law” as it was employed in the last
clause of the then existing
Section 100
CPC (since
omitted by the
Amendment Act, 1973
) came up for
consideration and their Lordships held that it did
not mean a substantial question of general
importance but a substantial question of law
which was involved in the case.
In
Chunilal
case [Chunilal V. Mehta & Sons Ltd. v. Century
Spg. & Mfg. Co. Ltd., AIR 1962 SC 1314] the
Constitution Bench expressed agreement with the
following view taken by a Full Bench of the Madras
6
7
High Court in
Rimmalapudi Subba Rao v. Noony
       Veeraju [Rimmalapudi      Subba      Rao
v. Noony
       Veeraju, 1951 SCC OnLine Mad 100 : AIR 1951
       Mad 969] : (
Chunilal
case [Chunilal V. Mehta &
       Sons Ltd. v. Century Spg. & Mfg. Co. Ltd., AIR
       1962 SC 1314] , AIR p. 1318, para 5)


       ‘5. … when a question of law is fairly arguable,
       where there is room for difference of opinion on it
       or where the Court thought it necessary to deal
       with that question at some length and discuss
       alternative views, then the question would be a
       substantial question of law. On the other hand if
       the question was practically covered by the
       decision of the highest court or if the general
       principles to be applied in determining the
       question are well settled and the only question was
       of applying those principles to the particular facts
       of the case it would not be a substantial question
       of law.’
28. To be “substantial”, a question of law must be
       debatable, not previously settled by the law of the
       land or any binding precedent, and must have a
       material bearing on the decision of the case
       and/or the rights of the parties before it, if
       answered either way.”

                                   (Emphasis supplied)
8. However, the formulation or lack thereof of the Court having

  framed substantial questions of law is not one of relevance to

  the instant dispute and therefore does not come to the aid of

  the Appellant herein. This case arises out of a dispute in

  Punjab and therefore, the rigors of section 100 do not apply. It

  has been held by this court that in appeals arising out of the
7
8
state of Punjab or the State of Haryana, courts are not

      required to frame substantial questions of law as per
section

      100
of CPC.
9. The Constitution bench in Pankajakshi (Dead) through
LRs

      v. Chandrika7
had held
Kulwant Kaur v. Gurdial Singh Mann
8

      which held
section 41
of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 to be

      repugnant to
section 100
, CPC to be bad in law, thereby

      implying that section 41 of the Punjab Court Act holds as good

      law. It was held as under:­


             “25.
We are afraid that this judgment in
Kulwant
             Kaur
case [
Kulwant Kaur v. Gurdial Singh Mann
,
             (2001) 4 SCC 262] does not state the law correctly
             on both propositions. First and foremost, when
Section 97(1)
of the Code of Civil Procedure
             (Amendment) Act, 1976 speaks of any amendment
             made or any provision inserted in the principal Act
             by virtue of a State Legislature or a High Court,
             the said section refers only to amendments made
             and/or provisions inserted in
the Code of Civil
             Procedure
itself and not elsewhere. This is clear
             from the expression “principal Act” occurring in
             Section 97(1). What Section 97(1) really does is to
             state that where a State Legislature makes an
             amendment in
the Code of Civil Procedure
, which
             amendment will apply only within the four corners
             of the State, being made under Schedule VII List III
             Entry 13 to the Constitution of India, such
             amendment shall stand repealed if it is
             inconsistent with the provisions of the principal

7 (2016) 6 SCC 157
8 (2001) 4 SCC 262
8
9
Act as amended by the Parliamentary enactment
            contained in the 1976 Amendment to
the Code of
            Civil Procedure
. This is further made clear by the
            reference in Section 97(1) to a High Court. The
            expression “any provision inserted in the principal
            Act” by a High Court has reference to
Section 122
of the Code of Civil Procedure by which High
            Courts may make rules regulating their own
            procedure, and the procedure of civil courts
            subject to their superintendence, and may by such
            rules annul, alter, or add to any of the rules
            contained in the First Schedule to
the Code of Civil
            Procedure
.”
10. Recently, a Bench of three learned Judges in
Satyender v.

      Saroj9
while dealing with a property dispute arising out of the

      State of Haryana, held as under:­



            “16. We may also add here that we are presently
            concerned with the laws in the State of Haryana.
            All the same, the laws as applicable in Punjab in
            the year 1918, were also applicable to the present
            territory of Haryana since it was then a part of the
            State of Punjab. Later on, the creation of the new
            State of Haryana, under the provision given in
            Section 88 of the Punjab Re­organization Act,
            1966, the laws applicable in the erstwhile State of
            Punjab continued to be applicable in the new State
            of Haryana. Furthermore, State of Haryana
            formally adopted the laws of the erstwhile State of
            Punjab, under Section 89 of the Punjab Re­
Organisation Act, 1966
. Therefore, in the State of
            Haryana a court in second appeal is not required
            to formulate a substantial question of law, as what
            is applicable in Haryana is
Section 41
of the
            Punjab Courts Act, 1918 and not
Section 100
of
            CPC. Consequently, it was not necessary for the

9 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1026
9
10
High Court to formulate a substantial question of
          law.”
11.   In view of the above discussion, it is clear to this court that

      the judgement of the learned single Judge sitting in second

      appellate jurisdiction cannot be faulted for not having framed

      substantial questions of law under
section 100
, CPC.
12.   With reference to
Ramdas
(supra) and
Gurmej Singh
(supra)

      it is contended that Faqir Singh as a co­owner sold a part of

      his share in an undivided property and therefore the

      purchaser only acquires such share but not the right to

      possess. It is only after such a joint holding is partitioned and

      a right of exclusive possession arises.
With reference to
Shyam Sunder
(supra) it is submitted that a co­sharer has a

      right to substitute himself in place of a stranger so as to

      prevent such a person from entering into family property.
13. The principles of law cited herein may be undoubtedly good

      law, but, however, in the considered view of this court, they

      do not hold in the case put forward by the Appellant. A

      perusal of the witness statements of DW­3 as duly recorded

      by the High Court, (the court also relies on the cross­
10
11
examination portions of DW­4 although the same do not form

   part of the record before this court.) shows that father of the

   Appellant had indeed partitioned the property during his

   lifetime. In such situation selling a part of his share in an

   undivided property, is a question that does not arise. Reliance

   on
Shyam Sunder
(supra) does not support the case of the

   Appellant as there is nothing on record to reflect any effort

   having been made by him to substitute himself in place of the

   Respondents in buying the 4 marlas of land from Faqir Singh

   in order to keep a stranger, namely Gurcharan Singh from

   entering into family­owned property. Had the Appellant made

   any such effort and the same would be reflected from record,

   then it could have been argued that he has a right to exclude

   the Respondents.
14. As already noted above, another ground of objection taken by

   the Appellant is the fact of the impugned judgement entering

   into a reappreciation of evidence. While it is true that

   ordinarily, in second appeal, the court must not disturb facts

   established by the lower court or the first appellate court.

   However, it is also equally well recognised that this rule is not

   an absolute one or in other words, it is not a rule set in stone.
11
12
In
Nazir Mohamed
(supra) this Court has recognised three

         conditions in which a court in such jurisdiction, may disturb

         findings of fact. They are: ­



                “ (i) the courts below have ignored material
                evidence or acted on no evidence; (ii) the courts
                have drawn wrong inferences from proved facts by
                applying the law erroneously; or (iii) the courts
                have wrongly cast the burden of proof. A decision
                based on no evidence, does not refer only to cases
                where there is a total dearth of evidence, but also
                refers to case, where the evidence, taken as a
                whole, is not reasonably capable of supporting the
                finding.”
15.      A     Bench     of   three        learned   Judges,   recently   in

         Balasubramanian and Anr. v. M. Arockiasamy (Dead)

         Through LRs.10, had referred to, with approval judgement

         rendered in
Ramathal v. Maruthathal & Ors11
(two­Judge

         Bench) wherein it was observed that the restraint in

         interfering with questions of fact under the jurisdiction of

         second appeal, is not an absolute rule. Where the court is of

         the view that the conclusions drawn by the court below do not

         have a basis in the evidence led or it is of the view that the



10 (2021) 12 SCC 529
11 (2018) 18 SCC 303
12
13
appreciation of evidence “suffers from material irregularity”

  the court will be justified in interfering with such findings.
16. A perusal of the impugned judgement as also the cross­

  examination portion of the statement of DW­3 suggests that

  both the courts below had ignored material evidence on the

  aspect of property having been divided by the father of the

  Appellant herein. The Appellant has himself admitted to

  having sold one plot in favour of Atma Singh, claiming himself

  to be the exclusive owner of such property. A material

  contradiction then arises between the statement and one

  made earlier where he denies the property ever having been

  partitioned by his father in favour of himself and his brother.

  Nothing on record reflects the vires of the transaction ever

  having been challenged therefore the earlier part, described

  above, by nature of it being self­contradictory, stands falsified.

  DW­3 has also, on oath testified to the factum of partition of

  the property by father of the Appellant, Suchet Singh.

  Although in the later part of his testimony he has tried to go

  back on his earlier statement and states that it was incorrect

  that the father of the Appellant had effected partition within

  his lifetime however, a conjoint reading of the statement of
13
14
DW­1 in regards to selling a portion of his property to Atma

      Singh as well as the examination in chief portion of the

      testimony of DW 3 suggests that, Suchet Singh had indeed

      partitioned the property.        Hence, findings returned by the

      High Court in the impugned judgment cannot be faulted.
17.    In view of the above discussion, the appeals against the

      impugned judgement fail. The judgement and orders of the

      High Court, impugned are upheld and the appeals are

      dismissed as lacking on merit.
18.    Interlocutory applications, if any, shall stand disposed of in

      the above terms. No order as to costs.
…….………………J.
                                                   (ABHAY S. OKA)




                                                  ……..…………..…J.
                                                  (SANJAY KAROL)
      Dated : 24th July, 2023;
Place : New Delhi.
14