[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
No. 15138812Y L/Nk Gursewak Singh vs Union Of India on 27 July, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023 INSC 648


                                                                            REPORTABLE


                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1791 OF 2023


                            No.15138812Y L/Nk Gursewak Singh                  ... Appellant


                                                        versus


                            Union of India & Anr.                         ... Respondents


                                                   JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.   The appellant who was at the relevant time Lance Naik
                            in the Indian Army was convicted by the Court Martial for the
                            offence punishable under
Section 302
of the IPC (for short,
                            ‘
IPC
’) read with
Section 69
of the Army Act, 1950 (for short,
                            ‘the
Army Act
’). The Court Martial sentenced the appellant to
                            suffer imprisonment for life. The Court Martial also dismissed
                            the appellant from service. Thereafter, the appellant filed pre­
Signature Not Verified
confirmation and additional pre­confirmation petitions which
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.07.27
16:49:11 IST
Reason:
were rejected by the Major General Officer Commanding by
                            his order dated 28th September 2005.           Thereafter, the
Criminal Appeal No.1791 of 2023                                                 Page 1 of 10
appellant filed a petition to the Chief of the Army Staff who
        rejected the same by his order dated 12th June 2006.
        Thereafter, the appellant filed a Petition under
Article 226
read with
Article 227
of the Constitution of India and
Section
        482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short ‘
CrPC
’)
        before the Hon’ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana. The
        High Court transferred the matter to the Armed Forces
        Tribunal, Chandigarh.        By the impugned judgment, the
        Armed Forces Tribunal, Chandigarh dismissed the Petition
        and confirmed the conviction and sentence of the appellant.
        Against the impugned order of the Tribunal, the Appellant
        again filed a Writ Petition before the Hon’ble High Court of
        Punjab and Haryana and by order dated 10.10.2018, the High
        Court while dismissing the Writ Petition granted liberty to the
        appellant to avail remedy under
Section 30
of the Armed
        Forces Tribunal Act, 2007.
2.      On 4th December 2004, the appellant and deceased
        (Lance Naik Kala Singh) were posted for duty with the 13
        Field Regiment at Ferozepur Cantonment. On the date of the
        incident, the appellant and the deceased were a part of the
        guard headed by Guard Commander Naik Amrik Singh (PW­
13). Gunner Gurtej Singh (PW­14) was a sentry who was also
        a part of the guard.
3.      It is alleged that on the night of 4 th December 2004, the
        deceased brought a bottle of country liquor. The appellant,
        the deceased and the Guard Commander Naik Amrik Singh
Criminal Appeal No.1791 of 2023                                          Page 2 of 10
consumed liquor.          Thereafter, there was an altercation
        between the appellant and the deceased on the issue of inter­
        se seniority. At that time, the Guard commander intervened.
        The deceased replaced gunner Gurtej Singh (PW­14) for guard
        duty outside the guard room. Thereafter, the appellant went
        out when there were heated arguments between the appellant
        and the deceased again on the issue of seniority.         At that
        time, the appellant snatched the rifle from the hands of the
        deceased and fired one bullet at the deceased. The appellant
        accompanied others for taking the deceased to a hospital
        where he was declared dead. The appellant was arrested on
        the same day.
SUBMISSIONS
4.      The learned counsel for the appellant has taken us
        through the notes of evidence and findings recorded by the
        Court Martial as well as by the Armed Forces Tribunal (for
        short, ‘the Tribunal’). His basic contention is that the case will
        be governed by exception 4 to
Section 300
of IPC. He
        submitted that the incident was an outcome of a sudden fight
        and the appellant acted in a heat of passion. He submitted
        that only one bullet was fired by the appellant though there
        were more bullets in the rifle at that time. His submission is
        that the appellant has not taken any undue advantage and
        has not acted in a cruel manner. The learned counsel has
        taken us through the evidence of the material prosecution
        witnesses and in particular the evidence of PW­13 Naik Amrik
Criminal Appeal No.1791 of 2023                                          Page 3 of 10
Singh and PW­14 Gunner Gurtej Singh. He would, therefore,
        submit that this was a case of an offence punishable under
        Section 304 (Part II) of
IPC
. He pointed out that the appellant
        had undergone incarceration for a period of about 9 years and
        3 months.
5.      Learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent
        pointed out that exception 4 to Section 300 will not apply in
        this case, as it cannot be said that there was a sudden fight.
        He submitted that the appellant has acted in a cruel manner.
        He submitted that the conduct of the appellant has to be
        judged in the light of the fact that he was on duty as a guard
        and was a member of a disciplined force. He would submit
        that no indulgence can be shown to the appellant.
6.      The learned counsel appearing for the appellant relied
        upon decisions of this Court in the case of
Prakash Chand
        v. State of H.P.1
and
Sukhdev Singh v. Delhi State (Govt.
        of NCT of Delhi
)2.
OUR VIEW
7.      Hawaldar Malkiat Singh is PW­3 who stated that the
        appellant was not possessing any weapon. PW­8 Naib
        Subedar Chandrika Prasad deposed that after receiving a call
        from the operator he rushed to the place of the incident as he
        was informed that a sentry has been shot. He instructed the
        nursing assistant to move quickly and he, along with the
        1 (2004) 11 SCC 381
        2 (2003) 7 SCC 441
Criminal Appeal No.1791 of 2023                                       Page 4 of 10
nursing assistant, reached the spot in an ambulance.         He
        questioned the appellant. At that time, the appellant told him
        that an altercation had taken place and he had fired one
        round.       The witness stated in the cross­examination that
        while replying to him, the accused may have used the word
        “galti” meaning thereby that he fired a bullet by mistake.
8.      PW­13 Naik Amrik Singh was posted as a guard
        commander along with the appellant and deceased. He stated
        that as the appellant was the senior most, he treated him as
        second guard commander. He submitted that he, along with
        PW­14 Gunner Gurtej Singh and the appellant, were having
        dinner. At that time, the deceased stood on duty outside the
        guard room with a weapon and ammunition.          He described
        that there was an altercation between the appellant and the
        deceased on the issue of seniority. According to his version,
        when he was sitting in the guard room, he heard a sound of a
        gunshot. When he looked outside, the appellant was holding
        a rifle. According to him, the appellant informed him that he
        had shot the deceased. PW­13 sought help. He tried to give a
        ring to headquarters but the telephone was engaged. He told
        PW­14 to shout for help from nearby posts. PW­13 further
        stated that he along with the appellant, lifted the deceased
        and after reaching the roadside, they laid the deceased on the
        ground. By that time ambulance reached the place. He stated
        that Naib Subedar Chandrika Prasad (PW­8), a nursing
        assistant and the appellant put the deceased into an
        ambulance and all of them took the deceased to hospital. We
Criminal Appeal No.1791 of 2023                                       Page 5 of 10
may note here that the learned prosecution counsel sought
        permission to declare PW­13 as a hostile witness. However,
        the Court Martial rejected the request of the prosecution
        counsel.      PW­13 stated that the rifle used by the appellant
        was lying in the snake pit. There was an empty magazine and
        a filled magazine.        There were 19 rounds in the filled
        magazine.         The witness admitted that he, along with the
        deceased and the appellant, consumed liquor. But he claimed
        that it was one and half hours before the incident.      In the
        cross­examination, the witness admitted that it was the
        deceased who brought the liquor bottle without consulting
        him. He admitted that the appellant and the deceased were
        friends before the incident. He stated that the appellant told
        him that he had committed a mistake and he had fired a
        bullet at the deceased. While answering the court question,
        the witness stated that he had not seen the appellant firing
        from the rifle. He saw the appellant immediately after hearing
        the sound of firing.
9.      PW­14 Gunner Gurtej Singh stated that he was having
        dinner on 4th December 2004 at about 2015 hrs with PW 13
        in the guard room. After hearing the sound of a gunshot, he
        got up and saw the appellant holding a rifle and standing
        near the entrance of the guard room.        He stated that the
        appellant took out the magazine from the rifle and threw it on
        a side. Thereafter, he made the rifle safe by cocking the rifle.
        He threw the rifle into a snake pit. He stated that when the
        appellant was questioned by him, he responded by stating
Criminal Appeal No.1791 of 2023                                        Page 6 of 10
that he had committed a mistake. He stated that earlier he
        had heard the appellant asking the deceased to bring water
        for him. The deceased refused to get water by saying that he
        was senior to the appellant.
10.     What emerges from the evidence is that the appellant,
        the deceased and PW­13 Naik Amrik Singh had consumed
        liquor at the time of dinner. There was a heated exchange of
        words between the appellant and the deceased on the issue of
        seniority. In fact, PW­13 stated in his examination­in­chief
        that the appellant was senior most after him and therefore,
        the appellant was designated as second guard commander.
        He stated that he treated the appellant to be senior.
11.     The appellant did not have a weapon at that time and he
        used the weapon of the deceased. Out of 20 rounds in the
        magazine of the rifle, he fired only one bullet. Moreover, after
        the incident, the appellant did not run away and he along
        with PW ­13 lifted the deceased and laid him by the side of
        the road. He frankly disclosed his version of the incident to
        PWs 13 and 14. The appellant along with two other army
        men, lifted the deceased for putting him in the ambulance
        and he accompanied the deceased to the hospital.          These
        facts brought on record show that there was no pre­
        meditation on the part of the appellant. Both the appellant
        and the deceased had consumed liquor.        There was a fight
        between him and the deceased over the issue of seniority. In
        fact, when the appellant told the deceased to bring water for
Criminal Appeal No.1791 of 2023                                        Page 7 of 10
him, the deceased refused to do so on the ground that he was
        senior to the appellant.    In a disciplined force like Army, the
        seniority has all the importance.      Therefore, there is every
        possibility that the dispute over seniority resulted in the
        appellant doing the act in a heat of passion. It appears that
        in the heat of passion, the appellant snatched a rifle held by
        the deceased and fired only one bullet. If there was any pre­
        meditation on the part of the appellant or if he had any
        intention to kill the deceased, he would have fired more
        bullets at the deceased. Hence, there was no intention on his
        part to kill the deceased. Whether the appellant had done a
        cruel act or not, has to be appreciated after considering three
        facts. Firstly, the appellant was a soldier on guard duty,
        secondly, the appellant and the deceased had a fight over the
        seniority and thirdly, though there were 20 rounds in the rifle
        of the deceased, he fired only one round. There was a sudden
        fight over seniority when the appellant and the deceased had
        consumed liquor.          There was no premeditation.        The
        appellant, in the facts of the case, cannot be said to have
        acted in such a cruel manner which will deprive him of the
        benefit of exception 4 to
Section 300
of IPC. The term cruel
        manner is a relative term. Exception 4 applies when a man
        kills another. By ordinary standards, this itself is a cruel act.
        The appellant fired only one bullet which proved to be fatal.
        He did not fire more bullets though available. He did not run
        away and he helped others to take the deceased to a hospital.
        If we assign a meaning to the word ‘cruel’ used in exception 4
Criminal Appeal No.1791 of 2023                                         Page 8 of 10
which is used in common parlance, in no case exception 4
        can be applied. Therefore, in our view, exception 4 to Section
        300 was applicable in this case. Therefore, the appellant is
        guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The
        appellant snatched the rifle from the hands of the deceased
        and fired one bullet at the deceased. This act was done with
        the intention of causing such bodily injury to the deceased as
        was likely to cause death. Therefore, the first part of
Section
        304
of IPC will apply in this case.    Under the first part of
Section 304
of IPC, an accused can be punished with
        imprisonment for life or with imprisonment for a term which
        may extend to 10 years.
12.     Prosecution examined PW­5 Naik Parwinder Singh. In
        the cross­examination, he stated that he knew the appellant
        since June 2003 and was good in terms of discipline.        He
        stated that the appellant did not misbehave with the deceased
        earlier. PW­10 Lt.Col Purty admitted that the accused had a
        ‘nice reputation’. The conduct of the appellant will be a
        mitigating factor for determining the sentence.    It is not in
        dispute that the appellant has undergone incarceration for a
        period of 9 years and approximately 3 months.       Taking an
        overall view of the evidence on record, the sentence already
        undergone by the appellant will be an appropriate sentence in
        the facts of the case.
13.     Therefore, the appeal is partly allowed. The conviction
        of the appellant for the offence punishable under Section 302
Criminal Appeal No.1791 of 2023                                       Page 9 of 10
of
IPC
is altered to the one under Part 1 of
Section 304
of IPC.
The appellant is sentenced to undergo imprisonment for the
        term which he has already undergone.        The appellant was
        enlarged on bail by this Court on 8 th April 2020. The bail
        bonds of the appellant shall stand cancelled.
…………………….J.
                                                    (Abhay S. Oka)



                                                    …………………….J.
                                                    (Sanjay Karol)
        New Delhi;
July 27, 2023.
Criminal Appeal No.1791 of 2023                                       Page 10 of 10