[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Abdul Ansar vs The State Of Kerala on 5 July, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
,
Abhay S. Oka
NON­REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1751 OF 2023
                                (Arising out of SLP (Criminal) No. 2161 of 2023)


                         Abdul Ansar                                      … Appellant

                                                           v.

                         State of Kerala                               ... Respondent


                                                  JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   The question which arises in this appeal is whether the
                         conviction of the appellant for the offence punishable under
Section 308
of the Indian Penal Code (
IPC
) can be sustained.
RELEVANT FACTUAL ASPECTS
3.   The present appellant is accused No. 2.     The accused
                         no.1 was the driver of a stage carriage bus. The appellant–
                         accused No.2 was the conductor, and accused No. 3 was the
                         cleaner.   PW­1 Josia (injured) was at the relevant time
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
studying in 8th standard. She along with her younger sister
Date: 2023.07.05
16:37:54 IST
Reason:
Jovan, PW­7, were waiting at the Karithambu bus stop for
                         boarding a bus for going to their school.    According to the
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) No.2161 of 2023                                 Page 1 of 10
prosecution case, after the bus reached the said bus stop,
         PW­7 Jovan boarded the bus followed by two other girls.
         There was a rush for boarding the bus.     When PW­1 Josia
         tried to board the bus by putting her one leg on the footboard
         of the bus, accused no.3 pushed her down with his hands
         while he was standing on the footboard of the bus. The girl
         fell down on the road and came under the left rear wheel of
         the bus. She sustained serious injuries including fracture of
         pelvis. The allegation against the appellant was that without
         waiting for the PW­1 to board the bus, he rang the bell as a
         result of which accused No.1 started the bus.             The
         prosecution applied offences punishable under
Sections 279
and
308
read with
Section 34
of IPC. Apart from PW­1 and
         PW­7, PW­2 Sister Elsamma, a teacher was an important
         witness. She was a teacher working in the same school where
         PW­1 and PW­7 were studying. She was standing at the same
         bus stop when the incident occurred and therefore, she is an
         eyewitness to the incident.
4.      The learned Additional Sessions Judge acquitted the
         driver – accused No. 1. However, he convicted the appellant
         and accused No. 3 for the offence punishable under
Section
         308
read with
Section 34
of IPC. He sentenced both of them to
         suffer rigorous imprisonment for four years with a fine of
         Rs.5,000/­ each. In default of payment of the fine, a sentence
         of rigorous imprisonment for six months was imposed. Out of
         the fine amount, a sum of Rs.7,500/­ was ordered to be paid
         to the victim of the offence. By the impugned judgment, the
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) No.2161 of 2023                           Page 2 of 10
appeal preferred by the appellant and accused no. 3 was
         decided.        The High Court acquitted accused No. 3. While
         confirming the conviction of the appellant under
Section 308
of IPC, the sentence was brought down to one year by
         directing him to pay a fine of Rs.50,000/­. The High Court
         noted that the incident was of the year 2005 and a period of
         17 years had lapsed from the date of the incident.
RIVAL SUBMISSIONS
5.      The     learned       counsel    appearing   for   the   appellant
         submitted that the offence of attempt to commit culpable
         homicide not amounting to murder was not established on
         the evidence.         He submitted that accused no.3, the cleaner
         was standing on the footboard of the bus. He pointed out that
         the allegation against him was that while PW­1 was
         attempting to board the bus, he not only did not help her but
         virtually pushed her out of the bus.             He submitted that all
         that is alleged against the appellant is that he rang the bell
         which was a signal to the driver to start the vehicle and
         accused No.1 started the bus as a result of which PW­1 fell
         down and sustained serious injuries. He submitted that as
         accused no.3 has been acquitted by the High Court, the
         conviction of the appellant cannot be sustained.                       He
         submitted that the incident occurred on 18 th August 2005
         which is more than 17 and half years old. The appellant has
         undergone incarceration for a period of 36 days.                  He was
         throughout on bail.
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) No.2161 of 2023                                       Page 3 of 10
6.      The learned counsel appearing for the respondent State
         pointed out that it was the duty of the appellant as a
         conductor to ensure that all the passengers safely board the
         bus at the bus stop and the further duty of the appellant was
         to close the door of the bus and thereafter, ring the bell for
         giving a signal to the driver to start the bus. He submitted
         that the appellant had knowledge that at the bus stop, many
         students were waiting to board the bus to reach their schools.
         Therefore, knowledge on his part can be inferred that by his
         act of ringing the bell without taking precautions, death can
         be caused of a passenger who is trying to board the bus. He
         pointed out the injuries sustained by PW­1.        He submitted
         that the injuries were very serious, though fortunately, PW­1
         survived. He would, therefore, submit that the offence under
Section 308
was established.
OUR VIEW
7.      We have perused the evidence of PW­1. Her version in
         the examination­in­chief reads thus:
“Jovan (CW7­my sister) and I were waiting
                      at Karithambu bus stop for going to school.
                      Bus named Ponmankal had arrived. As it
                      was packed, I told Jovan that we will get in
                      the next bus. Jovan told that she had
                      special class and that we will board this
                      bus. We board the bus in line. Jovan
                      boarded the bus. Jovan’s bus fare was with
                      me. Jovan was studying in 7th standard.
                      After Jovan, 2 other elder girls boarded the
                      bus. Cleaner was standing inside the bus. I
                      stepped my one leg inside the bus and
                      boarded it. By that time the bus moved. I
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) No.2161 of 2023                            Page 4 of 10
asked the cleaner to hold me. Cleaner
                      came to hold me but did not get hold of
                      me. By then, I tripped and fell outside. I
                      fell beneath the bus. I was unconscious.”

                                                    (emphasis supplied)
8.      In the cross­examination, PW­1 stated that if her
         younger sister (PW­7) had not boarded the bus, she would
         not have boarded the bus. As the bus ticket of her sister (PW­
7) was with PW­1, she attempted to board the bus.                PW­2
         Sister Elsamma was standing at the same bus stop at the
         time of the incident.             She stated that though some of the
         students of her school boarded the bus, she decided not to
         board the bus as it was overcrowded. She stated that while
         PW­1 was attempting to board the bus, the bell rang and the
         bus started moving as a result of which she fell down from
         the footboard. PW­7 partly did not support the prosecution.
         PW­7 stated that PW­1 had suggested her to take the next
         bus. However, she insisted on boarding the said bus as she
         had to attend special classes.            She stated that while PW­1
         was attempting to board the bus, the conductor rang the
         bell.
9.      Prosecution placed reliance on the Kerala Motor Vehicle
         Rules, 1989 (for short, “the Kerala Rules”) which are framed
         under the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
. Under Rule 89, the
         conduct, duties and functions of conductors have been laid
         down. Clause (o) of Rule 89 relied upon by the Prosecution
         lays down that it is the duty of the conductor not to interfere
         with persons mounting and preparing to mount upon any
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) No.2161 of 2023                                  Page 5 of 10
other vehicle. Clause (o) is obviously not applicable to this
         case.
10.     It is borne out from the evidence of PW­2 Sister
         Elsamma that the bus was completely packed and therefore,
         she did not board the same. Even PW­1 stated that the bus
         was packed.           According to her, as PW­7 had to attend a
         special class, she boarded the bus. PW­1 tried to board the
         bus as PW­7’s bus ticket was with her. Both PW­2 and PW­7
         stated that the bell rang when PW­1 was attempting to board
         the bus. After having perused their cross­examination, we
         find that there is no reason to disbelieve the said version.
         Thus, the appellant gave a signal to the driver to start the
         bus even before PW­1 could properly board the bus.
11.     Under Section 308, an attempt to commit culpable
         homicide not amounting to murder has been made an
         offence.      Therefore, we will have to examine whether there
         was any attempt on the part of the appellant to commit
         culpable homicide.
12.     It is not the prosecution’s case that the appellant had
         any intention to cause the death of PW­1 or intention to
         cause such bodily injury to her as is likely to cause her
         death. The question is whether the appellant had knowledge
         that he, by virtue of the act of ringing the bell, was likely to
         cause death. It is not possible to say that the appellant while
         ringing the bell, had knowledge that his act is likely to cause
         the death of PW­1. The bus was over crowded. The cleaner
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) No.2161 of 2023                             Page 6 of 10
was standing near the footboard. Therefore, in the absence of
         intention and knowledge as contemplated by
Section 299
of
         IPC, the offence of attempt to commit culpable homicide not
         amounting to murder was not made out. This is not a case
         where if the appellant’s act would have resulted into the
         death of PW­1, he would be guilty of culpable homicide, not
         amounting to murder.
13.     By applying principles incorporated in sub­section (2)
         of
Section 222
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for
         short, “
CrPC
”), the Court can consider whether the appellant
         has committed any other offence which is a minor offence in
         comparison to the offence for which he is tried.
14.     Now, we turn to
Section 338
of IPC, which reads thus:
“338. Causing grievous hurt by act
                         endangering life or personal safety of
                         others.—Whoever causes grievous hurt to
                         any person by doing any act so rashly or
                         negligently as to endanger human life, or
                         the personal safety of others, shall be
                         punished with imprisonment of either
                         description for a term which may extend
                         to two years, or with fine which may
                         extend to one thousand rupees, or with
                         both.”

         At that relevant time, the bus was overcrowded. There were
         a number of passengers waiting at the bus stop. Therefore, it
         was the duty of the appellant as a conductor to take care of
         the passengers. Hence, before he rang the bell and gave a
         signal to the driver to start the bus, he ought to have verified
         whether all passengers had safely boarded the bus. He could
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) No.2161 of 2023                             Page 7 of 10
have ascertained this from accused no.3 – cleaner who was
         standing near the door of the bus. However, he did not take
         that precaution and care which he was under an obligation
         to take. Therefore, the appellant acted rashly and negligently
         as he did not perform his duty of being careful.                         The
         appellant knew that at the relevant bus stop, a large number
         of students were waiting to take the bus to reach their school
         and therefore, the appellant ought to have verified whether
         all the passengers had properly boarded the bus before giving
         the signal to the driver. However, he did not verify whether
         the passengers had properly boarded the bus. Therefore, he
         is guilty of negligence as he failed to perform his duty. In
         fact, this was an act of recklessness on his part. The fact is
         that due to the negligence on the part of the appellant,
         human life was endangered.                     Grievous hurt was caused to
         PW­1 as she suffered fracture of pelvis.
15.       In the circumstances, we are of the view that the
         appellant       is    guilty     of      the   commission   of   an   offence
         punishable under
Section 338
of IPC. There will not be any
         prejudice caused to him as the appellant had sufficient
         notice of allegations of negligence against him during the
         trial. Hence, omission to frame charge under
Section 338
of
         IPC will not be fatal.                For the offence punishable under
Section 338
of IPC, the period of imprisonment can extend to
         two years.         As noted earlier, the incident is of 2005. So far,
         the appellant has undergone the sentence for only 36 days.
         In our view, considering the fact that the incident is of the
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) No.2161 of 2023                                          Page 8 of 10
year 2005 and other factual aspects, a sentence of simple
         imprisonment           for    six    months   will   be   an   appropriate
         punishment in the facts of the case. As per the directions of
         the High Court, a sum of Rs.50,000/­ had been deposited by
         the appellant. Looking at the serious injuries sustained by
         PW­1 at the young age of 13 years, she must be adequately
         compensated.           The High Court had imposed a fine of Rs.
         50,000/­ which amount has been deposited. In addition to
         the sum of Rs.50,000/­already deposited, we propose to
         direct the appellant to deposit an additional amount of
         Rs.25,000/­.
16.     Hence, impugned judgments are modified insofar as the
         appellant–accused No.2 is concerned. Instead of
Section 308
of IPC, he is held guilty of an offence punishable under
Section 338
of the IPC. The appellant shall undergo simple
         imprisonment for a period of six months. He is entitled to
         claim a set­off for the period of incarceration already
         undergone.
17.     The appellant shall pay a total amount of Rs.75,000/­
         out of which a sum of Rs.50,000/­ has already been
         deposited.        Out of the said amount, a sum of Rs.45,000/­
         shall be paid over to the victim – PW­1 as compensation. The
         remaining amount of Rs.5,000/­ will go to the State
         Government. The appellant is directed to pay an additional
         amount of Rs.25,000/­ by way of deposit in the Trial Court
         within a period of two months from today. The said amount
         shall also be paid to PW­1 as compensation. In default of the
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) No.2161 of 2023                                       Page 9 of 10
payment of the said amount, the appellant shall undergo
         simple imprisonment for one month. Accordingly, the appeal
         is partly allowed in the above terms. We direct the appellant
         to surrender within a period of four weeks from today before
         the Trial Court to enable the Trial Court to send him to
         prison for undergoing the remaining sentence. A copy of this
         judgment shall be forwarded to the Trial Court.
……..….……………J.
                                                   (Abhay S. Oka)



                                                   ……...………………J.
                                                   (Rajesh Bindal)
         New Delhi;
July 5, 2023.
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) No.2161 of 2023                          Page 10 of 10