[Cites
2
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Ramesh Chand vs Management Of Delhi Transport ... on 5 July, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
,
Abhay S. Oka
NON­REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4208 OF 2023
                                   (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 7137/2016)



                         Ramesh Chand                                        … Appellant


                                                       versus


                         Management of Delhi Transport
                         Corporation                                       … Respondent




                                                     JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS

                              Leave granted.
1.   The appellant was employed as a conductor on 22nd
                         June 1985 by the respondent – Delhi Transport Corporation.
                         The appellant was served with a charge sheet on 8 th
Signature Not Verified
September 1992 alleging that while discharging duties as a
                         conductor on a particular route, he collected a sum of Rs.4/­
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.07.05
16:37:52 IST
Reason:
from two passengers, but failed to issue tickets to them. After


         Civil Appeal @ S.L.P. (C) No.7137 of 2016
Page 1 of 8
enquiry, the respondent passed an order of removal of the
         appellant from service with effect from 14th June 1996.
2.      The respondent raised an Industrial Dispute before the
         Labour Court and challenged the enquiry and consequent
         order of removal. The Labour Court, after hearing the parties,
         came to the conclusion that the enquiry was illegal.
         Therefore, the Labour Court permitted the respondent to
         adduce evidence. By the award dated 17 th March 2009, the
         Labour Court came to the conclusion that the charge against
         the appellant was not established by the respondent.
         Accordingly, by the said award, the Labour Court passed an
         order of reinstatement of the appellant in service. The Labour
         Court was of the view that the appellant has not discharged
         the burden of proving that he was not gainfully employed
         from the date of removal from service. Therefore, the Labour
         Court denied back wages.
3.      The respondent accepted the Award of the Labour
         Court. Being aggrieved by the denial of the back wages, the
         appellant filed a writ petition before the learned Single Judge
         of Delhi High Court. The writ petition was dismissed. Being
         aggrieved by the dismissal of the writ petition, the appellant
         filed an appeal before the Division Bench of the Delhi High
         Court.       By the impugned judgment dated 11th December
         2015, the denial of back wages has been upheld by the
         Division Bench.
Civil Appeal @ S.L.P. (C) No.7137 of 2016
Page 2 of 8
4.      Notice was issued by this Court on 18 th March 2016.
We may note here that in terms of the award of the Labour
         Court which was not challenged by the respondent, the
         appellant was reinstated in service with effect from 23 rd July
         2009. He superannuated on 31st March 2020.
SUBMISSIONS
5.      The learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant
         urged that even in the statement of claim filed before the
         Labour Court, the appellant had specifically pleaded that he
         was unemployed from the date of his removal from service.
         He submitted that before the Labour Court, the appellant was
         subjected to cross­examination on this aspect by the advocate
         for the respondent. He would, therefore, submit that in the
         facts of the case, the appellant discharged the burden on him
         by proving that he did not have any employment after his
         removal from service by the respondent. He submitted that
         there is no evidence to the contrary and therefore, the
         appellant is entitled to full back wages.
6.      Learned counsel appearing for the respondent pointed
         out that before the Labour Court, on 18th July 2008, an
         affidavit was filed by the appellant in which there was an
         assertion that the appellant was unemployed from the date of
         his termination and was not able to secure any employment.
         However, the said affidavit was withdrawn and a fresh
         affidavit was filed in which no such specific assertion was
Civil Appeal @ S.L.P. (C) No.7137 of 2016
Page 3 of 8
incorporated. The learned counsel would, therefore, submit
         that the appellant has not discharged the burden on him of
         making out of a case that he was unemployed from the date of
         termination of service.            As directed by this Court, he has
         placed on record documents showing retiral dues paid to the
         appellant and a statement incorporating the salary which he
         could have drawn from the date of his termination till the date
         of his reinstatement.
OUR VIEW
7.      The only question before us is whether the Labour Court
         was justified in denying relief of back wages.
In the case of
National Gandhi Museum v. Sudhir Sharma1
, this Court
         held that the fact whether an employee after dismissal from
         service was gainfully employed is something which is within
         his special knowledge. Considering the principle incorporated
         in
Section 106
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, the initial
         burden is on the employee to come out with the case that he
         was not gainfully employed after the order of termination. It is
         a negative burden. However, in what manner the employee
         can discharge the said burden will depend upon on peculiar
         facts and circumstances of each case. It all depends on the
         pleadings and evidence on record. Since, it is a negative
         burden, in a given case, an assertion on oath by the employee
         that he was unemployed, may be sufficient compliance in the
         absence of any positive material brought on record by the
         employer.
1 (2021) 12 SCC 439
Civil Appeal @ S.L.P. (C) No.7137 of 2016
Page 4 of 8
8.      Now, coming to the facts of the case, we find that in the
         statement of claim filed by the appellant before the Labour
         Court on 8th August 1997, which is duly signed and verified
         by him, a specific contention was raised that he was still
         unemployed and has been rendered jobless. Therefore, a
         contention was raised in paragraph 9 of the statement that
         the appellant was entitled to back wages. Therefore, at least
         as on 8th August 1997, there is a specific case made out by
         the appellant that he was not gainfully employed.            The
         appellant filed an affidavit on 18th July 2008 before the
         Labour Court in which he contended that he was unemployed
         from the date of termination and was facing acute financial
         hardship. However, the said affidavit was withdrawn and a
         fresh affidavit of evidence was filed by the appellant on 4 th
         September 2008 in which a specific assertion regarding the
         failure to get employment was not incorporated. However, he
         was cross­examined on this aspect before the Labour Court
         by the advocate for the management by giving a suggestion
         that the appellant was earning a sufficient amount to support
         his family. However, the appellant denied the correctness of
         the said suggestion. Therefore, in the statement of claim filed
         thirteen months after termination, a specific assertion was
         made by the appellant that he was unemployed. Neither any
         material has been placed by the respondent on record to show
         that the appellant had a source of income nor anything



Civil Appeal @ S.L.P. (C) No.7137 of 2016
Page 5 of 8
material has been elicited by the respondent while cross­
         examining the respondent.
9.      The law is very well settled.               Even if Court passes an
         order of reinstatement in service, an order of payment of back
         wages is not automatic.                   It all depends on the facts and
         circumstances of the case. It is true that affidavit filed by the
         appellant on 18th July 2008 before the Labour Court making a
         categorical statement on oath that he was not employed from
         the date of termination was withdrawn and in the fresh
         affidavit filed by way of evidence, such a specific contention
         was not raised.           But there are two factors in favour of the
         appellant. In the statement of claim, it is specifically asserted
         that till August 1997 when the statement of claim was filed,
         the appellant found it difficult to get employment and in fact
         he was unemployed.                  The second aspect is that there is a
         cross­examination of the appellant on this issue by the
         Advocate for the respondent and in the cross­examination,
         the appellant denied that he had a sufficient source of income
         to look after his family. However, considering the conduct of
         the appellant of withdrawing the affidavit filed earlier and not
         raising the contention of unemployment in the fresh affidavit,
         the appellant cannot be granted the benefit of back wages for
         the     entire      period         from    the   date      of   termination   till
         reinstatement. It is not possible to accept that for the entire
         period of thirteen years, the appellant had no source of
         income. However, the respondent has not come out with the
         case that from the date of his removal from service, the

Civil Appeal @ S.L.P. (C) No.7137 of 2016
Page 6 of 8
appellant had another source of income. Thus, the appellant
         discharged the burden on him by establishing that he was
         unemployed at least till August 1997.            From the chart
         submitted on record by the learned counsel appearing for the
         respondent, we find that the gross salary of the appellant on
         the date of reinstatement was Rs.18,830/­. On the date of
         removal, his salary was approximately Rs.4,000/­ per month.
10.     We are of the view that considering the facts of the case,
         it will be appropriate if a sum of Rs.3 lakhs is ordered to be
         paid to the appellant in lieu of back wages. To that extent, the
         appeal must succeed.
11.     Accordingly, the award of the Labour Court dated 17 th
         March 2009 and impugned judgments of the High Courts are
         modified. We direct the respondent to pay a sum of Rs.3 lakhs
         to the appellant as back wages within a period of two months
         from today. The appellant shall provide his account details
         and a copy of a cancelled cheque of his account to the
         advocate for the respondent. The amount shall be transferred
         by the respondent to the bank account of the appellant within
         a stipulated time of two months. In the event of failure of the
         appellant to furnish details of his bank account and a copy of
         the cancelled cheque to the advocate for the respondent
         within a period of one month from today, it will be open to the
         respondent to deposit the amount with the Labour Court.
         The Labour Court shall permit the appellant to withdraw the
         amount. In the event the respondent fails to pay or deposit


Civil Appeal @ S.L.P. (C) No.7137 of 2016
Page 7 of 8
the sum of Rs.3 lakhs within two months from today, the said
         amount will carry interest at the rate of 9% per annum from
         the date of reinstatement in service. The appeal is partly
         allowed on the above terms.
…………………….J.
                                                          (Abhay S. Oka)



                                                          …………………….J.
                                                          (Rajesh Bindal)

         New Delhi;
July 5, 2023.
Civil Appeal @ S.L.P. (C) No.7137 of 2016
Page 8 of 8