[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Chennupati Kranthi Kumar vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh on 25 July, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023 INSC 645


                                                                          NON­REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        Criminal Appeal Nos.1601–1602 of 2023


                            Chennupati Kranthi Kumar                            … Appellant


                                                          versus


                            The State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors.               … Respondents


                                                        JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.       Though the dispute involved in these appeals concerns
                            the return of the passport of the appellant, it is an outcome of
                            a    matrimonial    dispute   between   the   appellant   and   4 th
                            respondent who is his wife. With a view to understand the
                            controversy, a brief reference to factual aspects will be
                            necessary.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
2.       The appellant is accused no.1 in a prosecution for
                            offences punishable under Sections 498­A, 403 and 406 of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
the
Indian Penal Code
, 1860 (for short, ‘
IPC
’) and
Sections 3
Anita Malhotra

                            and 4 of the
Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961
(for short, ‘the 1961
   Date: 2023.07.25
   18:14:22 IST
   Reason:
Act’).    During the course of the investigation into the said
Criminal Appeal Nos.1601­1602 of 2023                                              Page 1 of 10
offences, the Police issued a notice under
Section 91
of the
       Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘
Cr.P.C
.’) calling
       upon the appellant to produce his passport. Accordingly, the
       appellant submitted his passport to the concerned police
       station, which in turn, handed over the original passport to
       the 3rd respondent – Regional Passport Office at Hyderabad.
       There was a correspondence exchanged between the 3 rd
       respondent and the appellant. The 3 rd respondent issued a
       letter dated 11th February 2021 informing the appellant to get
       permission from the competent Court for the release of his
       passport.
3.     The appellant is working in a company in USA.                 He
       came to India on a leave to perform the first death
       anniversary rituals of his father.          While he was in India, a
       complaint was filed by the 4th respondent–wife against the
       appellant      and     other     family   members   for   the   offences
       punishable under Sections 498­A, 403 and 406 of
IPC
and
Sections 3
and
4
of the 1961 Act.              Prior to that, on 19th
       January 2021, the 3rd respondent issued a notice to the
       appellant, in which it was recorded that the Police authorities
       have forwarded his original passport to him.              In the same
       notice, it was alleged that the appellant was in possession of
       the passport of 4th respondent. The appellant was called upon
       to return the passport to the 4th respondent.
Criminal Appeal Nos.1601­1602 of 2023                                             Page 2 of 10
4.     The appellant made an application to the Court of the
       learned II Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate–cum–
       Mahila Magistrate, Vijayawada for issuing a direction to the
       3rd respondent to return the passport. The appellant pleaded
       that he has a fundamental right to travel abroad conferred by
Article 21
of the Constitution of India. He pointed out in the
       application that he needs to go back to USA to attend his job.
       The application was opposed by the 4 th respondent on various
       grounds. On 14th June 2022, the application was dismissed
       by the learned II Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate­
       cum­Mahila Magistrate.           Being aggrieved by the said order,
       the appellant filed a petition under Section 482 of Cr. P.C
       before the High Court. By the impugned judgment and order,
       the High Court of Andhra Pradesh directed the 3 rd respondent
       to return the passport of the appellant to facilitate his travel
       abroad, subject to the following conditions:
a. The appellant shall deposit a sum of ₹10 lakhs by
                 way of a Fixed Deposit Receipt in the name of the
                 4th respondent; and

              b. The appellant shall submit the original passports
                 of the 4th respondent and his minor son.
The appellant was aggrieved by the condition of producing the
       passports of his son (who is a citizen of USA) and his wife – 4 th
       respondent. The appellant applied for the modification of the
       said order insofar as it directed him to return the passports of
Criminal Appeal Nos.1601­1602 of 2023                                        Page 3 of 10
his wife and minor son. The contention of the appellant was
       that the passport of his son was lost in July 2021 and that
       the appellant has complied with the necessary procedure to
       get a new passport issued.          He also contended that the
       appellant was not in possession of the passport of the 4 th
       respondent.          He, however, agreed to comply with the
       condition for depositing the sum of ₹10 lakhs by way of Fixed
       Deposit Receipt in the name of the 4 th respondent–wife. Even
       the said application was rejected by the High Court. Both the
       aforesaid orders have been challenged in these appeals.
SUBMISSIONS
5.     The learned counsel appearing for the appellant relied
       upon a decision of this Court in the case of
Suresh Nanda v.
       Central Bureau of Investigation1
by submitting that there
       is no power vesting in the Police to impound a passport. He
       further submitted that the power to impound passport vests
       only in the Passport Authority under the
Passports Act, 1967
(for short, ‘the
PP Act
’).       He submitted that in fact, the
       appellant’s passport was never impounded and therefore, it
       must be returned to him unconditionally.
6.     The learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for
       the 3rd respondent – Regional Passport Office submitted that a
       duplicate passport cannot be issued under the provisions of
       the
PP Act
and Rules framed thereunder.            However, 4 th


       1 (2008) 3 SCC 674
Criminal Appeal Nos.1601­1602 of 2023                                     Page 4 of 10
respondent can apply for the reissue of passport provided she
       establishes that her passport has been lost. On a query made
       by the Court, he accepted that there was no order of
       impounding the appellant’s passport made in accordance with
Section 10 (3)
of the PP Act.
7.     The learned counsel appearing for the 4 th respondent –
       wife submitted that the stand taken by the appellant that the
       passport of the 4th respondent–wife was never with him is
       completely false. Therefore, the direction issued by the High
       Court was perfectly justified. He urged that the rights of the
       4th respondent cannot be allowed to be defeated.        He also
       pointed out the conduct of the appellant which according to
       him was objectionable. His submission is that the appellant
       has indulged in the suppression of facts.
OUR VIEW
8.     A relevant decision of this Court on the issue involved is
       in the case of Suresh Nanda1. In
the said decision
, it was
       held that the power under
Section 104
of Cr.P.C. cannot be
       invoked to impound a passport.         The reason is that the
       provisions of the
PP Act
which deal with the specific subject of
       impounding passports shall prevail over
Section 104
of
       Cr.P.C. Moreover, it was held that under
Section 102 (1)
of
       Cr.P.C., the Police have the power to seize the passport but
       there is no power to impound the same. It was held that even
       if the power of seizure of a passport is exercised under Section
       102, the Police cannot withhold the said document and the
Criminal Appeal Nos.1601­1602 of 2023                                      Page 5 of 10
same must be forwarded to the Passport Authority.                    It is,
       thereafter, for the Passport Authority to decide whether the
       passport needs to be impounded.
9.      It is an accepted position that the Police took custody of
       the appellant’s passport in the exercise of powers under
Section 91
of Cr.P.C. and handed over the same to the 3 rd
       respondent.        Sub­Section (1) of
Section 91
of Cr.P.C. reads
       thus:
“91. Summons to produce document or
                   other thing:­

                   (1) Whenever any Court or any officer in
                   charge of a police station considers that the
                   production of any document or other thing
                   is necessary or desirable for the purposes of
                   any investigation, inquiry, trial or other
                   proceeding under this Code by or before
                   such Court or officer, such Court may issue
                   a summons, or such officer a written order,
                   to the person in whose possession or power
                   such document or thing is believed to be,
                   requiring him to attend and produce it, or to
                   produce it, at the time and place stated in
                   the summons or order.
(2) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
(3) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..”

       We fail to understand why the passport of the appellant was
       required for the purpose of the pending criminal case.
Therefore, the exercise of calling upon the appellant to submit
       his passport was not legal.                   Thereafter, the passport was
       never impounded in exercise of power under
Section 10
of the
Criminal Appeal Nos.1601­1602 of 2023                                                Page 6 of 10
PP Act
. There is nothing on record to show that the passport
       was seized under
Section 102
of Cr.P.C. As there was neither
       a seizure of the passport nor impounding thereof, the
       appellant was entitled to return of the passport.
10.    Paragraph 13 of the impugned judgment and order
       reads thus:
“13. Therefore, in the peculiar facts and
                   circumstances of the case and keeping in
                   view the interest of both the parties, this
                   Court deems it appropriate to set aside the
                   Order under Revision and direct the release
                   of Passport of the petitioner to facilitate his
                   travel to abroad subject to the condition of
                   the petitioner depositing a sum of
                   Rs.10,00,000/­ by way of F.D.R., in favour
                   of the 4th respondent/de facto complainant
                   along with the Original Passports of the 4th
                   respondent/de facto complainant and her
                   son before the learned II Additional Chief
                   Metropolitan          Magistrate­cum­Mahila
                   Magistrate, Vijayawada, within a period of
                   four (4) weeks from the date of receipt of a
                   copy of this Order. Further, the petitioner
                   shall file an Undertaking­Affidavit that he
                   would return to India within a period of six
                   months and cooperate for expeditious
                   disposal of the above said C.C. In the event,
                   the petitioner fails to return back, the
                   F.D.R., shall stand forfeited in favour of the
                   4th respondent/de facto complainant.”

              As there was neither a seizure nor impounding of the
       passport,      it   was     unauthorisedly   retained   by    the   3 rd
       respondent. In fact, the High Court directed the return of the
       passport subject to a deposit of a sum of ₹10 lakhs by way of
Criminal Appeal Nos.1601­1602 of 2023                                             Page 7 of 10
Fixed Deposit Receipt in the name of the 4 th respondent. As
       the High Court permitted the appellant to travel abroad, this
       condition was imposed to ensure that the appellant comes
       back as per his undertaking to attend the trial.           But, the
       direction to the appellant to return the passports of the
       appellant’s son and wife was not supported by law. Therefore,
       the High Court ought to have directed the 3 rd respondent to
       return the passport. We may note here that the appellant is
       not aggrieved by the direction to make a fixed deposit of ₹10
       lakhs.
11.    The direction to return the passports of his wife and son
       as a condition for the release of the appellant’s passport was
       completely illegal.        As regards the passport of the son, it is
       taken care of as the appellant has followed the prescribed
       procedure in USA regarding lost passports. The condition of
       returning the passport of the 4th respondent could not have
       been imposed at all as the act of the Passport Officer of
       retaining the appellant’s passport was completely illegal.
       Therefore, the said respondent can make an application in a
       prescribed form to the competent regional officer for the
       reissue of the passport.         If the validity of the passport has
       expired and the period provided for renewal thereof has
       expired, she can apply for a fresh passport.              If the 4 th
       respondent wants some documents from the appellant only
       for the purposes of filing an application for the reissue of the
       passport or for grant of a fresh passport, the appellant shall
       cooperate by doing the needful.
Criminal Appeal Nos.1601­1602 of 2023                                          Page 8 of 10
12.    Accordingly, the appeals succeed and we pass the
       following order:
a. The condition imposed on the appellant by the
                    impugned order of returning the passports of the 4th
                    respondent and of the son is set aside;
b. It will be open for the 4 th respondent to apply to the
                    concerned Regional Passport Office in prescribed
                    format for the reissue of her passport or for grant of
                    a fresh passport. The concerned Regional Passport
                    Office shall process the said application on the
                    footing that her passport has been lost.      The 4 th
                    respondent shall not be called upon to produce the
                    proof of loss of passport.     Filing a report to the
                    Police about the loss of the passport shall be
                    sufficient.     The application shall be processed as
                    expeditiously as possible;
c. The appellant shall render all possible cooperation
                    to the 4th respondent for getting the passport by
                    providing documents, if any, required as per the
                    Passports Rules, 1980;
d. Rest of the order stands confirmed; and
Criminal Appeal Nos.1601­1602 of 2023                                        Page 9 of 10
e. The appeals are partly allowed on the above terms.
There will be no order as to costs.
………………………..J.
                                                    (Abhay S. Oka)



                                                    ………………………..J.
                                                    (Rajesh Bindal)
       New Delhi;
July 25, 2023.
Criminal Appeal Nos.1601­1602 of 2023                               Page 10 of 10