[Cites
16
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Uggarsain vs The State Of Haryana on 3 July, 2023
Author:
S. Ravindra Bhat
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
1

                                                                             REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 1378-1379 OF 2023

          UGGARSAIN                                                      … APPELLANT(S)
                                                             VERSUS


          THE STATE OF HARYANA & ORS.                                    … RESPONDENT(S)

                                                           JUDGMENT
S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.
1.             These appeals, by special leave, arise from the judgment and orders 1
          passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana2, converting the decision of
          conviction given by the trial court from
Section 302
of the Indian Penal Code,
          1860 (hereafter “
IPC
”) to Section 304-Part II
IPC
. These appeals have been
          preferred by the informant/complainant.
2.             The prosecution alleged that on the eve of Holika Dahan, i.e.,
          07.03.2012, Krishan (A-1) abused Subhash (the deceased). On the next day,
          Brahmjit, son of Krishan (A6), inflicted danda blows upon Subhash at about
          10.00/11.00 AM. Due to this, at about 3.00 PM, when Pawan, Uggarsain and
          Subhash (deceased) were sitting in front of their house, Brahmjit came near
          their house and started abusing them, which aggravated the situation.
          Thereafter, all the accused, namely Raju, son of Krishan (A2), Krishan, Parveen
          (A3), Sunder- son of Amit (A4), Sunder-son of Rajpal (A8), Nar Singh (A-7),
          Sandeep (A-5) and others reached the spot, with weapons. Raju inflicted blow
Signature Not Verified
on the right shoulder of Sita Ram (PW1). Krishan inflicted a blow at the back of
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
Date: 2023.07.05
14:00:38 IST
Reason:
1              Dated 27.08.2019 and 03.09.2019.
2              In Criminal Appeal bearing No. 249 DB of 2016
2
Sita Ram with an iron pipe and Brahmjit inflicted a farsa blow on the right of
Sita Ram’s head. Sunder was armed with a rod; Nar Singh and Sandeep were
carrying farsas with them. They caused injuries on Pawan, Uggarsain and
Subhash. The injured were taken to hospital.
3.    On 09.03.2012, on the receipt of intimation, the police registered the case
under
Sections 147
,
148
,
149
and
323
IPC. Subash, who was gravely wounded,
having received multiple injuries, was removed to the hospital; later, a surgery
too was performed on him. However, he did not survive and passed away on
12.3.2012. Thereupon,
Section 302
IPC was added in the FIR, on 13.3.2012.
Postmortem was conducted, and the doctor (PW5- Dr. Kunal Khanna) recorded
in the post-mortem report that the death was caused by injuries sustained by the
deceased on the head and its attendant complications. The police arrested the
accused. Later, weapons were recovered on the basis of disclosure statements
made by them. On the statement of PW1-Sita Ram, the prosecution moved an
application under
section 319
of the Criminal Procedure Code (hereafter
“
Cr.P.C
.”) for summoning an additional accused, namely Sunder.
4.    All the eight accused persons were charged with and tried for offences
punishable under
Sections 148
,
323
and
302
read with
section 149
IPC. The
prosecution    examined     twenty-two     witnesses    and     recorded    their
deposition. PW.3- Dr. Sant Lal Beniwal did medico-legal examination of Sita
Ram (PW1), Uggarsain (PW2) and Pawan. He recorded different injuries
caused on the complainants’ bodies and stated that the probable duration of
injuries was within six hours by blunt weapon. PW8- Dr. Pradeep Kumar stated
that Subash (deceased) had received only one injury. PW4- Dharmender Singh
prepared the site plan. The defence examined two witnesses. DW1-Bikram
Singh deposed that he was authorized to produce, and accordingly brought a
computerized attendance register stating that on 8.3.2012 (the day of the
incident), one accused, i.e., Parveen Parmar had performed his duties as a
3
security guard from 7.00 AM to 7.00 PM. DW2- Dr. Naresh Kumar, who had
medico legally examined the accused Krishan and Brahmjit and recorded a
fracture of the right clavicle bone of Krishan and a nasal bone fracture of
Brahmjit, also deposed in favour of the defence.
5.     The trial court held that all the accused persons reaching the spot together
armed with weapons and their attack on the victims, including the deceased
exhibited the intention of an unlawful assembly, to inflict deadly injuries. The
nature of injuries found on the deceased indicated common intention of the
assembly extended to causing death, which in fact, occurred. The trial court
held that the prosecution’s inability to explain the injuries on the accused did
not absolve them of their role in the attack and causing the death of Subhash,
because the evidence relied on was credible. The evidence of two witnesses
consistently supported the prosecution case in their statements before the police
as well as in court. Their testimonies were corroborated by medical evidence.
The trial court3 convicted all the accused as charged and sentenced them to
rigorous imprisonment for life under
Section 302
r/w
Section 149
IPC and one-
year’s rigorous imprisonment under
Section 148
IPC; six months rigorous
imprisonment for the offence under
Section 323
read with
Section 149
IPC.
6.     The accused appealed to the High Court, which by the impugned
judgment, partly allowed their pleas and converted their convictions under
Section 302
read with 149
IPC
to
Section 304
Part II read with
Section 149
IPC.
It, however, affirmed the convictions under
Section 148
and
Section 323
read
with
Section 149
IPC. The High Court observed that the lack of explanation of
injuries received by Krishan and Bharmjit undermined the prosecution story and
that Subash, the deceased, had received only one injury, according to PW.8- Dr.
Pardeep Kumar. Finally, the High Court held that the case fell under Exception
4 to
Section 300
IPC, as tempers were running high between the parties, and a

3       Judgment dated 11.02.2016 and order dated 17.02.2016, in Sessions Trials No. 160 of
30.07.2012, 275 of 04.12.2012 and 114 of 15.04.2013.
4
sudden fight occurred when the complainant party reached in front of Krishan’s
house, which meant that the accused did not act in a pre-meditated manner.
Aggrieved, the informant Uggarsain appealed to this court, against the
conversion of conviction and corresponding reduction of sentence.
7.    During the hearing, this court indicated that these appeals would be
confined to the extent of appropriateness of sentences undergone by different
accused persons for causing the same offence. The different periods undergone
by convicts are: Krishan had undergone 09 years, 05 months and 04 days of
imprisonment with remissions; Raju underwent 03 years, 01 month and 01 day
of imprisonment; Parveen had suffered 01 year, 11 months and 27 days of
imprisonment; Sunder s/o Amit Lal had undergone 02 years and 05 days of
imprisonment; Sandeep had undergone 01 year, 11 months and 12 days of
imprisonment; Brahamjit had undergone 08 years, 11 months and 19 days of
imprisonment (including remissions); Nar Singh had undergone 01 year and 04
months of imprisonment and Sunder s/o Rajpal had undergone 11 months and
16 days of imprisonment.
8.    The appellants argued that the High Court was wrong in inferring that the
injuries were caused due to a sudden fight. Counsel highlighted that the accused
who   were    convicted    concurrently,    had   deliberately   gone   near   the
informant/victims’ house to cause deadly injuries- in fact, one of the informant
parties died as a consequence. Having regard to the established facts, the object
of the assembly was for use of such force, which resulted in death. Therefore,
the sentencing in the present case had to be fit and appropriate, and the
impugned judgment gravely erred in adopting the standard of sentence
undergone, which resulted in widely different and disparate results. At one end
of the spectrum, one of the accused (Sundar s/o Rajpal) suffered incarceration
for a little over 11 months, whereas Krishan had undergone 09 years, 05 months
and 04 days. The appellant informants urged that this court should adopt a
5
somewhat uniform sentencing standard when the role of each accused was
practically indistinguishable.
9.    On behalf of the accused, it was pointed out that the High Court had, in
fact, gone by the salutary principles indicated by this court, in that the relative
ages of the accused, their family circumstances, the length of time they spent in
custody, as well as the length of time that had elapsed since the commission of
the crime, all were considered.
10.   This court has, time and again, stated that the principle of proportionality
should guide the sentencing process.
In
Ahmed Hussein Vali Mohammed Saiyed
v. State of Gujarat,4
it was held that the sentence should “deter the criminal
from achieving the avowed object to (sic break the) law,” and the endeavour
should be to impose an “appropriate sentence.” The court also held that
imposing “meagre sentences” “merely on account of lapse of time” would be
counterproductive.
Likewise, in
Jameel v. State of U. P.,5
while advocating that
sentencing should be fact dependent exercises, the court also emphasised that
“the law should adopt the corrective machinery or deterrence based on factual
matrix. By deft modulation, sentencing process be stern where it should be, and
tempered with mercy where it warrants to be. The facts and given
circumstances in each case, the nature of the crime, the manner in which it was
planned and committed, the motive for commission of the crime, the conduct of
the accused, the nature of weapons used and all other attending circumstances
are relevant facts which would enter into the area of consideration.”
11.   Again, in
Guru Basavaraj v. State of Karnataka,6
the court stressed that
it “is the duty of the court to see that appropriate sentence is imposed regard
being had to the commission of the crime and its impact on the social order”


4      2009 [8] SCR 719
5      2009 [15] SCR 712
6      2012 [8] SCR 189
6
and that sentencing includes “adequate punishment”.
In
B.G. Goswami v. Delhi
Administration7
, the court considered the issue of punishment and observed that
punishment is designed to protect society by deterring potential offenders as
well as prevent the guilty party from repeating the offence; it is also designed to
reform the offender and reclaim him as a law-abiding citizen for the good of the
society as a whole. Reformatory, deterrent and punitive aspects of punishment
thus play their due part in judicial thinking while determining the question of
awarding appropriate sentences.
12.
In
Shyam Sunder v Puran & Anr8
, the accused-appellant was convicted
under
Section 304
Part I
IPC
. The appellate court reduced the sentence to the
term of imprisonment already undergone, i.e., six months. However, it enhanced
the fine. This court ruled that sentence awarded was inadequate. Proceeding
further, it opined that: - “... The court in fixing the punishment for any particular
crime should take into consideration the nature of the offence, the
circumstances in which it was committed, the degree of deliberation shown by
the offender. The measure of punishment should be proportionate to the gravity
of the offence. The sentence imposed by the High Court appears to be so grossly
and entirely inadequate as to involve a failure of justice. We are of opinion that
to meet the ends of justice, the sentence has to be enhanced...”. This court
enhanced the sentence to one of rigorous imprisonment for a period of five
years.
This court has emphasized, in that sentencing depends on the facts, and
the adequacy is determined by factors such as “the nature of crime, the manner
in which it is committed, the propensity shown and the brutality reflected”
[Ravda Sashikala v State of Andhra Pradesh 9].
Other decisions, like: State of




7      1974 (1) SCR 222
8      1990 Suppl [1] SCR 662
9      2017 [2] SCR 379
7
M.P. v. Bablu10; Raj Kumar 11and
State of Punjab v. Saurabh Bakshi12
too, have
stressed the significance and importance of imposing appropriate, “adequate” or
“proportionate” punishments.
13.   In the present case, the High Court noted the respective ages of the
accused-i.e., Krishan (61 years); Raju (40 years); Parveen (32 years); Sundar
(39 years); Sandeep (25 years); Nar Singh (41 years) and Sunder s/o Rajpal (36
years). The court noted that Bramhajit had served in the army. Apart from these,
the court noted the relative family circumstances: the number of children each
accused had. It then adopted a uniform rule, i.e., the period of sentence
undergone by the accused, as the appropriate sentence.
14.   As noted earlier, all the accused were found concurrently guilty under
Section 148
IPC; they were armed with different kinds of implements and
weapons, that were capable of inflicting deadly injuries. The postmortem report
of Subhash revealed at least six serious head injuries, including fracture and
haemorrhage in different places. Pawan, Uggarsain and Sita Ram, others from
the complainant party also concededly suffered injuries. Though the High Court
was of the opinion that no explanation was given by the prosecution about the
injuries on the accused, their nature does not seem to have been serious. At any
rate, the court did not find that sufficient reason to upset the sentence under
Section 149
read with
Section 304
II
IPC
.
15.   The sentencing in this case, to put it mildly, is inexplicable (if not
downright bizarre). On the one hand, Krishan underwent sentence for 9 years 4
months- at the other end of the spectrum, Sunder s/o Rajpal underwent only 11
months. No rationale appears from the reasoning of the High Court for this
wide disparity. It is not as though the court took note of the role ascribed to the


10     2014 [9] S.C.R. 467
11     2013 (5) SCR 979
12     2015 (3) SCR 590
8
accused (such a course was not possible, given the nature of the evidence). If it
were assumed that the age of the accused played a role, then Krishan, at 61
years- who served 9 years and Brahmajit, who had served in the army, and was
detained for over 8 years got the stiffest sentence. On the other end of the scale,
younger persons were left relatively unscathed, having served between 3 years
and 11 months.
16.   The impugned judgment, in this court’s opinion, fell into error in not
considering the gravity of the offence. Having held all the accused criminally
liable, under
Section 304
Part II read with
Section 149
IPC and also not having
found any distinguishing feature in the form of separate roles played by each of
them, the imposition of the “sentence undergone” criteria, amounted to an
aberration, and the sentencing is for that reason, flawed. This court is, therefore,
of the view that given the totality of circumstances (which includes the fact that
the accused have been at large for the past four years), the appropriate sentence
would be five years rigorous imprisonment. However, at the same time, the
court is cognizant of the fact Krishan and Bramhajit served more than that
period. Therefore, the impugned judgment, as far as they are concerned, is left
undisturbed. Consequently, the sentence of Raju, Parveen, Sunder s/o Amit Lal,
Sandeep, Nar Singh, and Sunder s/o Rajpal is hereby modified; they are hereby
sentenced to undergo Rigorous Imprisonment for five years. They shall
surrender and serve the rest of their sentences within six weeks from today.
17.   The appeals are partly allowed, in the above terms. No costs.
.....................................................J.
                                                [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]
9
.....................................................J.
                     [DIPANKAR DATTA]

NEW DELHI
JULY 03, 2023.