[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Alok Kumar on 9 September, 2025
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
NON-REPORTABLE
 2025 INSC 1091


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                CIVIL APPEAL NO………..………………OF 2025
                         (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 17844 OF 2023)




                    UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                           …APPELLANT(S)



                                                   VERSUS

                    ALOK KUMAR                                    …RESPONDENT(S)



                                               JUDGMENT
VIJAY BISHNOI, J.
Leave granted.
2. This appeal arises from the judgment and order dated
Signature Not Verified    06.02.2023 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Patna
Digitally signed by
Gulshan Kumar Arora
Date: 2025.09.09
in Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No. 12755 of 2021 (“impugned
17:42:47 IST
Reason:
1
judgment”) by which the High Court allowed the Writ Petition

   filed by the Respondent herein.
FACTUAL MATRIX
3. The Railway Recruitment Board (“RRB”) established in

   various parts of India is the authority conducting recruitment

   for various Group ‘C’ non-gazetted posts of technical and non-

   technical categories in the Railways including the post of a

   Senior Section Engineer (“SSE”).            The recruitment of the

   Group ‘C’ non-gazetted posts is governed by the Master

   Circular No.29 dated 28.06.1991 (“Master Circular”). The

   relevant provisions of the Master Circular are reproduced

   hereunder:
“2. The initial period of training, wherever prescribed for non-
    gazetted direct recruits in various categories of Group ‘C’ posts,
    is an important pre-requisite to be successfully completed, before
    a trainee is absorbed in the post for which he has been
    recruited. It is, therefore, not desirable to curtail the initial
    period of training. […]
                                    xxx
3. The qualifying examination at the end of initial training of
    directly recruited non-gazetted staff through the Railway
    Service Commissions (now Railway Recruitment Board) must
    necessarily be a written test.
3.1. The candidates should be warned, at the time of their
    recruitment that their retention in service will be dependent on
    their successfully completing the training and passing the
2
requisite test”                           [Emphasis Supplied]




  Clause 5 of the Master Circular says that the duration of

training period and the syllabus for the various categories of

Group ‘C’ staff are provided in Chapter I, Section B of the

Indian   Railway     Establishment       Manual,      1989     (“Railway

Manual”). In the said Railway Manual, the duration of

training period has been mentioned for each category of

Group ‘C’ posts and for the post of SSE, the duration of

training is provided as one year, i.e. 52 weeks. Further, Para

103 of Chapter I, Section B of the Railway Manual provides

definitions of, inter alia, an “apprentice” or a “trainee” as

well as the term “direct recruitment” which read as under:
“(iv) An “apprentice” or a “trainee” means a person undergoing
  training with a view to employment in railway service, who draws
  pay, leave salary, subsistence allowance or stipend during such
  training but is not employed in or against a substantive vacancy in
  the cadre of a branch of deptt. On satisfactory completion of his
  training he is eligible for appointment of probation in a substantive
  vacancy but no guarantee of such appointment is given.
(v) “Direct recruitment” means the recruitment to the Group ‘C’
  service of any person not already in the service of the railways or
  any person in railway service who may be permitted to apply for
  appointment subject to possession of requisite qualifications along
  with outsiders according to the procedure laid down for
  recruitment.”
3
In the Railway Manual, it has also been specified that

   the training period for any specific post is to be decided by

   Zonal Railways and pursuant to that, the Ministry of Railways

   vide RBE No.11/2010 dated 15.01.2010 published the

   Revised Training Module.
4. The   Centralized    Employment      Notice   No.02/2014      dated

   20.09.2014 (“Employment Notice”) was issued by the RRB,

   Muzaffarpur     inviting   applications   from    eligible    Indian

   Nationals for, inter alia, the post of SSE, whereby the suitable

   candidates were to be recruited by way of a written

   examination     conducted     by    the   RRB.     In   the     said

   advertisement, it was specifically mentioned that the selected

   candidates will have to undergo training wherever prescribed

   for the posts. The said condition is reproduced hereunder:
“1.10. Selected candidates will have to undergo training
      wherever training is prescribed for the post.”
5. Pursuant to the aforesaid Employment Notice, the Respondent

   appeared in the written examination along with other
4
candidates    and    on    being       successful,   he    was     offered

   provisional appointment vide letter dated 14.09.2016 in

   Group ‘C’ category for the post of Apprentice/Trainee SSE

   (Electrical/Drawing) against the direct recruitment quota and

   the Respondent was allotted to the Construction Organization

   in the East Central Railway, Mahendrughat, Patna. The said

   provisional appointment letter issued to the Respondent

   clarified that he would be eligible for retention in service

   subject to successful completion of training and if his

   performance in the field of training during the probation

   period was found to be unsatisfactory, his services were liable

   to be terminated. The said condition specified in the

   provisional appointment letter issued to the Respondent is

   reproduced hereunder:
“ii. You will be on probation for a period of 02 (two) years. If your
      performance in the field of training during probation period is
      found unsatisfactory, your service is liable to be terminated.”
                                                                [Emphasis
      Supplied]
6. It is not in dispute that the Respondent has completed 46

   weeks of training out of the 52-week training prescribed for

   SSEs. On 06.11.2017, the Respondent, along with two other
5
trainees, who were deputed to the Construction Organization,

was sent to the Zonal Rail Training Institute, Muzaffarpur

(“ZRTI”) for a three-week training in General and Subsidiary

Rules (“G&SR”) from 07.11.2017 to 27.11.2017. After the

completion    of   the    said    training,   an    examination       was

conducted and as per the result of the same , which was

published on 26.12.2017, the Respondent had failed to clear

the said examination. It is pertinent to note that the other two

trainees,   who    were    sent    for   training     along    with    the

Respondent, had cleared the examination with 31 other

trainees. As per the various Circulars issued by the

Appellants from time to time, any trainees belonging to

General     and    OBC    categories,    who   fail    to     clear   such

examination in the first chance, can be given a second chance

subject to non-payment of stipend. The Respondent, being an

OBC category trainee, requested the Chief Administrative

Officer (Construction), East Central Railway, Mahendrughat,

Patna, to allow him to undertake a second attempt to clear

the G&SR training without payment of stipend.                         The

authority concerned allowed the Respondent to undergo a
6
second round of training from 06.03.2018 to 26.03.2018. It is

   evident from the result published on 26.04.2018 that the

   Respondent yet again failed to clear the examination held at

   the end of the G&SR training course.
7. Consequently, his services were terminated vide Office Order

   No. NG/06/2019 dated 04.01.2019 issued by the Senior

   Personnel   Officer   (Construction),    East   Central    Railway,

   Mahendrughat, Patna. Further, vide letter dated 26.02.2019,

   the Respondent was also directed to refund the stipend

   amount of Rs.1,53,354/-, which was disbursed to him for the

   second training attempt due to administrative inadvertence,

   even when, while allowing the second attempt to the

   Respondent to clear the G&SR training, it was specified that

   he would not be able to draw any stipend.
8. Being aggrieved with the termination order dated 04.01.2019

   and the order for recovery of stipend dated 26.02.2019, the

   Respondent approached the Central Administrative Tribunal,

   Patna   Bench   (“CAT,    Patna”)   by    way    of   an   Original

   Application No. 50/479/2019 (“OA”) mainly on the ground
7
that four other apprentices/trainees namely, Rohit Raj,

    Narendra Meena, Navneet Kumar and Nawal Kishore Jaiswal,

    who were selected along with him, had been granted

    permanent posting after completion of only 46 weeks of

    training, without undergoing G&SR training at ZRTI, unlike

    the Respondent. The CAT, Patna vide order dated 30.07.2019

    dismissed the said OA and upheld the order of termination of

    the Respondent dated 04.01.2019 with an observation that

    the Appellants/Department may sympathetically consider any

    request made by the Respondent herein for waiver of

    repayment of stipend already paid to him while undergoing

    training for the G&SR course for the second time.


8.1 The CAT, Patna rejected the Respondent’s allegations of

    discrimination amongst similarly placed persons, observing

    that two other trainees, apart from the Respondent, who had

    been allotted to the Construction Organization, were also sent

    for training at ZRTI. Accordingly, it could not be accepted that

    the Respondent alone was chosen for a special punitive

    training.
8
8.2 Taking note of the fact that all the candidates except one

    passed the requisite exam in the first attempt and in the

    second attempt, all the candidates except two cleared the

    exam, the CAT, Patna concluded that the training/test was

    not particularly taxing and that by no stretch of imagination,

    could it be inferred that the Respondent was sent for this

    training with any prior intention to make him fail.


8.3 Further, the Tribunal observed that the Respondent had tried

    to mislead it by repeatedly mentioning the completion of

    “Field    Training”      as      a       mandatory      requirement      for

    appointment,     while     the       provisional      appointment      letter

    referred to the Respondent’s performance in the “Field of

    Training” during the probation period.
9. The Respondent filed CWJC No.19255 of 2019 before the High

    Court, challenging Order dated 30.07.2019. However, the said

    case     was   dismissed      as     withdrawn        vide   order    dated

    17.09.2019 with liberty to make a representation before the

    Railway    Board   as    requested         by   the    Counsel   for     the

    Respondent.
9
10. Thereafter, the Respondent moved Review Application No.

    50/51/2019 before the CAT, Patna, seeking recalling of the

    Order dated 30.07.2019. This application also came to be

    dismissed vide order dated 25.10.2019 on the ground of there

    being no error apparent on the face of the record or mistake

    of fact in the decision. Further, the Miscellaneous Application

    No. 50/422/2019 filed by the Respondent was also rejected

    on similar grounds vide order dated 30.01.2020.
11. Aggrieved by the foregoing, the Respondent filed CWJC No.

    12755 of 2021 before the High Court assailing orders dated

    30.07.2019, 25.10.2019 and 30.01.2020 passed by the CAT,

    Patna. The High Court framed the following issue:
“2. Core issue is that whether the petitioner is required to pass
        any prescribed departmental examination for the post of Senior
        Section Engineer or not?”
12. The Appellants herein were directed by the High Court on

    23.01.2023 to furnish a personal affidavit as regards the

    existence   of    any     mandate        for    such     examination.
Consequently, the Appellants filed a personal affidavit dated
10
02.02.2023, wherein they relied on the Master Circular. Upon

   consideration of the same, the High Court vide impugned

   judgment came to the conclusion that the Appellants had not

   prescribed any departmental examination for the purpose of

   conferring permanent status against the post of SSE. As a

   result, the Writ Petition was allowed and termination orders

   dated 04.01.2019 and 26.02.2019 were set aside. The OA filed

   by the Respondent stood allowed with the further direction to

   the Appellants to extend all service and monetary benefits

   which were due to the Respondent within a period of four

   months from the date of receipt of this order.

SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS
13. Assailing the impugned judgment, Ms. Poornima Singh,

   learned Counsel appearing for the Appellants, has argued

   that the recruitment of the Group ‘C’ non-gazetted posts is

   governed by the Master Circular and in Clause 2 of the said

   Circular, it is clearly specified that the initial period of

   training, wherever prescribed for the various categories of

   Group   ‘C’   posts,   is   an   important   prerequisite   to   be

   successfully fulfilled before absorption of a trainee in the post
11
for which he/she has been recruited. Further, Clause 3

specifies that the qualifying examination at the end of the

initial training of the directly recruited non-gazetted staff

must necessarily be a written test. Clause 3.1 says that the

candidates should be warned at the time of their recruitment

that their retention in service will be dependent upon them

successfully completing the training and passing the requisite

test.
It was further submitted that the Railways vide RBE No.

11/2010 dated 15.01.2010 had published the Revised

Training Module for the 52-week training programme. The

said 52-week training encompassed 8 different modules, and

the candidates had to go for each and every module for a

specific period/weeks. In the event that a candidate failed to

clear the training in any module in the first attempt, he/she

could be provided a second attempt without stipend if the

candidate belongs to General and OBC categories. In cases of

candidates belonging to SC/ST categories, a second attempt

can be provided with stipend and such candidates are also

entitled to a third chance to clear the training without
12
stipend. It was further submitted by the learned Counsel that

     in the Employment Notice as well, it had been clarified that

     the selected candidates will have to undergo training wherever

     training has been prescribed for the posts and in the

     provisional appointment letter issued to the Respondent,

     again, it was clarified that during the probation period of two

     years, if his performance in the field of training was found

     unsatisfactory, his services were liable to be terminated.


13.1 Ms. Singh has argued that from a combined reading of the

    provisions of the Master Circular, the Employment Notice and

    the provisional appointment letter, it is apparent that after

    completion of training, every selected candidate is required to

    undertake an examination to ascertain whether he/she has

    successfully completed the training or not. The learned Counsel

    has contended that it is not in dispute that the Respondent had

    failed to clear the G&SR training despite being provided two

    chances, and therefore, there was no illegality in terminating

    his services as per the provisions of the Master Circular

    governing the field. It has further been argued that in the

    impugned judgment, the High Court has failed to appreciate
13
the said position and erred in allowing the Writ Petition filed by

    the Respondent.
14. The learned Counsel for the Appellants has further argued that

    the learned Single Judge has erred in observing that the

    Appellants have not prescribed any “departmental examination”

    for the purpose of giving permanent status against the post of

    SSE. It was argued that as a matter of fact, no such

    “departmental examinations” are conducted for the trainees

    and only the “training examinations” are being conducted and

    the same is evident from the results which have been published

    after conducting such “training examination”, wherein the

    Respondent appeared twice but failed. It was argued that the

    said results were placed on record before the Writ Court in the

    counter-affidavit to the Writ Petition, but the learned Single

    Judge had failed to take note of the same and recorded an

    erroneous finding that the Appellants had not prescribed any

    “departmental     examination”     for       the    purpose     of   giving

    permanent status against the post of SSE. The learned Counsel

    has also submitted that it is a well-known fact that the

    “departmental     examinations”        are   only   held   in   cases    of
14
promotion     and       not      in      the   cases       of    direct

    recruitment/appointment.
15. The learned Counsel for the Appellants has further submitted

    that there is no illegality in the action of the Appellants in

    issuing   the recovery    notice for the stipend amount of

    Rs.1,53,354/- because while giving a second chance to the

    Respondent to clear the G&SR training, it was clarified that the

    Respondent will not be entitled to any stipend but the same

    was   paid   to   him   during     the    second    training    due   to

    administrative inadvertence.
15.1 The learned Counsel for the Appellants has finally contended

    that the CAT, Patna, after examining each and every aspect of

    the matter, had rightly dismissed the OA filed on behalf of the

    Respondent, and the High Court had illegally interfered with

    the order of the CAT, Patna. It was, therefore, prayed that the

    impugned judgment be set aside and the Writ Petition filed by

    the   Respondent    before the         High Court    may   kindly     be

    dismissed.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
15
16. Per contra, Mr. Amit Sharma, the learned Counsel appearing

    for the Respondent, has submitted that the High Court had

    not   committed     any    illegality    in    passing     the    impugned

    judgment in the facts and circumstances of this case.


    The learned Counsel has contended that the Appellants

    illegally terminated the services of the Respondent, despite

    him having successfully completed 46 weeks of training. It was

    argued that although he had failed to clear the G&SR training,

    but the fact remained that four other candidates, who were

    selected with the Respondent, were never sent to undergo the

    G&SR training       and    were directly          appointed only         after

    completion of 46 weeks of training. It was further argued that

    the   termination       order    dated        04.01.2019     was     highly

    discriminatory, arbitrary and violative of
Articles 14
and
16
of

    the Constitution and had rightly been set aside by the High

    Court.
17. The   learned     Counsel       has     further   submitted       that    the

     termination    order     dated       04.01.2019      was        passed    in

     contravention of the terms and conditions of the Revised
16
Training Module dated 15.01.2010, wherein it was nowhere

    mentioned that the initial training was to be followed by any

    “departmental examination” and that any candidate who

    failed to clear such examination would be rendered ineligible

    for   retention   in   service.   Mr.   Sharma   has   vehemently

    contended that the Respondent wrongly placed reliance on

    the Master Circular, which was applicable only to those non-

    gazetted direct recruits in various categories of Group ‘C’

    posts, for whom no specific training module existed. It was

    therefore contended that there was no merit in the challenge

    of the Appellants to the impugned judgment passed by the

    High Court and hence, no grounds for interference have been

    made out.
ANALYSIS
18. Heard the learned Counsels for both the parties. The

    undisputed facts culled out from the available material on

    record are:
18.1 The Master Circular governing the recruitment to non-
gazetted Group ‘C’ posts in the Railways clearly provides that
17
completion of the initial period of training for the non-
gazetted direct recruits in various categories of Group ‘C’

      posts is an important prerequisite for the absorption of a

      trainee in the post for which he/she has been recruited. It

      further provides that at the end of the initial training of a

      directly recruited non-gazetted trainee, there must be a

      written test and the recruited candidates should be warned

      that their retention will be dependent on them successfully

      completing the training and passing the requisite test.


18.2 The instruction no. 1.10 of the Employment Notice, under

     which the Respondent had applied, clearly provided that the

     selected candidates will have to undergo training wherever it

     had been prescribed for the concerned post.
18.3 Further, even in the provisional appointment letter issued to

     the Respondent, it was specifically stipulated that if his

     performance in the field of training during probation was

     found unsatisfactory, his services were liable to be terminated.
18.4 The Respondent had completed 46 weeks of training and

     thereafter, he was sent to undergo the G&SR training of three

     weeks,   initially   from   07.11.2017   to   27.11.2017.   After
18
completion   of   the   said   training,   an   examination   was

     conducted, however, he failed to clear the said examination.

18.5 On his request, the Respondent was again sent for the G&SR

     training from 06.03.2018 to 26.03.2018 with a condition that

     he will not get any stipend for undertaking the G&SR training

     for the second time. After completion of the said training, the

     Respondent appeared in the examination but again failed to

     clear the said examination.
18.6 The Respondent was not the only one sent for the G&SR

     training, rather several other candidates were also sent for the

     said training both when the first time and the second time the

     Respondent appeared for the G&SR training. All candidates

     except the Respondent passed the examination when the

     Respondent appeared for the first time in the said G&SR

     training. When the Respondent appeared in the examination

     after availing the second chance to undergo the G&SR

     training, as many as 34 trainees appeared along with the

     Respondent and out of which, 31 cleared the examination

     except the Respondent and two other trainees.
19
18.7 When the Respondent failed to clear G&SR training in two

     attempts, the Appellants terminated his service vide order

     dated   04.01.2019   and    directed    him   vide    order   dated

     26.02.2019 to refund the stipend amount of Rs.1,53,354/-,

     which was disbursed to the Respondent while undergoing the

     G&SR training for the second time.
19. If we go through the above facts, it is clear that the condition

     of appearing in the written training test for every candidate

     provisionally   appointed   as     an   SSE   after   clearing   the

     recruitment examination conducted by the RRB is provided in

     the procedure governing the recruitment of directly recruited

     non-gazetted Group ‘C’ posts. The learned Counsel for the

     Respondent has failed to point out any other rule, circular or

     provision of law which governs the subject of recruitment of

     persons to non-gazetted Group ‘C’ posts. When the procedure

     for recruitment of SSEs issued through the Master Circular

     specifically provides for a written test after completion of the

     initial training period, the High Court has erred in recording

     a finding that no departmental examination is prescribed for

     the purpose of conferring permanent status against the post
20
of SSE. The learned Counsel for the Appellants has rightly

    pointed out that departmental examinations are conducted

    only for the purpose of promotions and not for the purpose of

    recruitment/appointment.
20. We do not find any merit in the submission of the learned

    Counsel for the Respondent that the Master Circular is not

    applicable in the case of recruitment to the post of an SSE.

    The reliance of the learned Counsel for the Respondent on

    RBE No. 11/2010 dated 15.01.2010, whereby the Revised

    Training Module for the 52-week training programme was

    published, is also misplaced. As observed earlier, in the

    Railway Manual, it has been specifically provided that the

    training period for any specific post is to be decided by the

    Zonal Railways and pursuant to the said provision, this

    Revised Training Module dated 15.01.2010 was issued. In any

    manner, this Revised Training Module cannot supersede the

    Master Circular, wherein it was specifically provided that

    every candidate has to pass the written test after completion

    of their initial training. Otherwise also, it is difficult to

    comprehend how, in the absence of any test at the end of the
21
initial training period, it can be possible to ascertain whether

    a candidate has acquired sufficient training or not.
21. The provisional appointment of the Respondent as a Trainee

    SSE was, in fact, only a recruitment and his permanent

    appointment in service on the post of an SSE was subject to

    the successful completion of his training. A three-Judge

    Bench of this Court in
Prafulla Kumar Swain v. Prakash

    Chandra Misra
, reported in (1993) Supp (3) SCC 181, has

    defined the meaning of the words “recruitment” and

    “appointment” as under:
“29. At this stage, we will proceed to decide as to the meaning
      and effect of the words “recruitment” and “appointment”. The
      term “recruitment” connotes and clearly signifies enlistment,
      acceptance, selection or approval for appointment. Certainly,
      this is not actual appointment or posting in service. In
      contradistinction the word “appointment” means an actual act
      of posting a person to a particular office.
30. Recruitment is just an initial process. That may lead to
      eventual appointment in the service. But, that cannot
      tantamount        to       an         appointment.      […]”
      [Emphasis Supplied]



         The judgment in
Prafulla Kumar Swain
(supra) has

    also been followed by this Court in Ashok Ram Parhad v.
State of Maharashtra, reported in (2023) 18 SCC 768.
22
22. The other contention of the learned Counsel for the

   Respondent that the four trainees namely, Rohit Raj,

   Narendra Meena, Navneet Kumar and Nawal Kishore Jaiswal,

   were permanently appointed only after 46 weeks of training

   and had not completed the 52-week training period is also

   incorrect. In the counter affidavit to this SLP, the Respondent

   has stated that he sought an information from the Appellants

   under the RTI in respect of three trainee SSEs, namely Rohit

   Raj, Navneet Kumar and Narendra Meena, and he got the

   information that those trainees were not sent for the training

   at ZRTI, despite the fact that those three trainees had only

   completed 46 weeks of training and not the entire 52-week

   training period. The Respondent has further stated in the

   counter affidavit that the Respondent was forced to undergo

   the G&SR training, however, the said three trainees were not.

   However, from the information supplied by the Appellants in

   response to the RTI filed by the Respondent, it is more than

   clear that all the three trainees, regarding whom the

   Respondent had sought information through RTI, had
23
completed   the   52-week    training   period   before   being

      permanently appointed to the post of SSE.
23. In light of the above discussion, we are of the firm view that

      when the Respondent had failed to clear the G&SR training

      twice and as such, had failed to successfully complete the 52-

      week initial training programme, the Appellants have not

      committed any illegality in terminating the services of the

      Respondent, pursuant to the procedure prescribed for the

      purpose of permanent appointment of SSEs. Resultantly, the

      impugned judgment passed by the High Court is set aside

      and the Writ Petition filed by the Respondent is dismissed.
24.    It is also to be noted that although while sending the

      Respondent for the second time to clear the G&SR training, it

      was clarified that he would not be entitled to any stipend, yet

      as per the Appellants, the same was paid to the Respondent

      due to administrative inadvertence. Be that as it may be, it is

      not the case of the Appellants that the stipend amount was

      paid to the Respondent due to misrepresentation or fraud,

      and therefore, we are of the view that in the peculiar

      circumstances of this case, the said demand raised by the
24
Appellants against the Respondent for the recovery of the

    stipend cannot be justified. The same is, therefore, rejected.
25. With these observations, the present appeal is disposed of.
26. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
……………………………J.
                                            (J.K. MAHESHWARI)




                                            …………………………. J.
(VIJAY BISHNOI)


  NEW DELHI,
  Dated: 09th SEPTEMBER, 2025
25