[Cites
62
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Coal India Ltd vs M/S Rahul Industries . And Ors on 12 September, 2025
2025 INSC 1103                                                         REPORTABLE

                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11793 OF 2025
                            (Arising from SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012)




             COAL INDIA LTD. AND ORS.                             ...APPELLANT(S)


                                            Versus


             M/S RAHUL INDUSTRIES AND ORS.                     ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                            WITH


                                      T.C.(C) No. 10/2016
                                      T.C.(C) No. 9/2016
                                      T.C.(C) No. 11/2016
                                      T.C.(C) No. 27/2016
                                      T.C.(C) No. 28/2016
                                      T.C.(C) No. 26/2016
                                      T.C.(C) No. 33/2016
                                      T.C.(C) No. 35/2016
                                      T.C.(C) No. 36/2016
                                      T.C.(C) No. 34/2016
                                      T.C.(C) No. 39/2016
                                      T.C.(C) No. 37/2016
                                      T.C.(C) No. 40/2016
   Signature Not Verified             T.C.(C) No. 41/2016
   Digitally signed by
   VISHAL ANAND
   Date: 2025.09.12
   16:31:08 IST
   Reason:




                                       JUDGMENT
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following

parts:
INDEX

A.        FACTUAL MATRIX ............................................................................. 3
B.        SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES................................................... 21
(a) Submissions of the appellant in its petition under
Article 136
, I.A.
         No. 1 of 2015 and additional affidavits ............................................... 21
(b) Written submissions of the respondents ............................................. 26
C.        ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION ..................................................... 31
D.        ANALYSIS ............................................................................................ 31
(i) Analysis of the observations of this Court in Ashoka Smokeless
         (supra)..................................................................................................... 32
         a. Objective of the e-auction system ...................................................... 32
          b. Submissions of the petitioners in Ashoka Smokeless (supra) ........... 33
          c. Reasonableness of dual pricing of coal .............................................. 34
          d. E-auction system is unconstitutional .................................................. 43
          e. Coal companies empowered to notify price of coal ........................... 48
          f. Conclusions reached in Ashoka Smokeless (supra) .......................... 53
(ii) Analysis of the observations of this Court in Pallavi Refractories
          (supra)..................................................................................................... 55
(iii)The general rule as regards the scope of enquiry by courts into the
          economic policy of the State ................................................................. 65
(iv) Objective of the Interim Coal Policy subserved the
          ‘common good’ ...................................................................................... 76
(v) Balancing between the respondents’ fundamental rights and the
         interests of the public at large.............................................................. 82
         a. Applicability of the Proportionality test vis-à-vis the Reasonable
            classification test ................................................................................. 82
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                                                             Page 1 of 127
b. Applicability of the rational nexus test to the case on hand ............... 91
(vi) Determination of the issues framed .................................................... 96
            Whether the appellant had the authority to notify the Interim Coal
            Policy, in terms of the dictum of this Court in Ashoka Smokeless
            (supra)? ............................................................................................... 96
            Whether the increase of 20% over and above the notified price
            introduced in the Interim Coal Policy for the linked consumers of the
            non-core sector was valid in terms of
Article 14?
.............................. 98
            Whether the respondents are entitled to refund of the 20% additional
            cost? .................................................................................................. 101

E.        CONCLUSION ................................................................................... 126
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                                                            Page 2 of 127
1.   Leave granted in Special Leave Petition (C) No. 21888 of 2012.
2.   Since the issues raised in the captioned appeal and the transferred cases are

     the same, those were taken up for hearing analogously and are being

     disposed by this common judgment and order.
3.   This appeal arises from the Judgment and Order passed by the High Court

     at Calcutta dated 04.04.2012, in A.P.O. No. 10 of 2011 (the “impugned

     judgment”), by which the division bench of the High Court dismissed the

     appeal filed by the appellant herein and thereby affirmed the order passed

     by a learned Single Judge dated 25.11.2010 in the Writ Petition No. 44 of

     2007, holding that the appellant herein had no authority to frame and notify

     the Interim Coal Policy dated 15.12.2006 and thereby collect an excess of

     20% amount over and above the notified price of coal from the linked

     consumers falling in the non-core sector, in light of this Court’s dictum in
Ashoka Smokeless Coal India (P) Ltd. v. Union of India
, reported in (2007)
2 SCC 640.
A.   FACTUAL MATRIX
4.   The appellant herein is a public sector undertaking involved in the mining,

     production and marketing of coal and its products. It falls under the

     administrative control of the Ministry of Coal, Government of India. The
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 3 of 127
respondents herein (original writ petitioners) are private limited companies

     engaged in the business of manufacturing of smokeless fuel for which coal

     is the raw material.
5.   The respondents had challenged the Interim Coal Policy notified by the

     appellant on 15.12.2006, increasing the notified price of coal by 20% for the

     non-core linked sector. The Interim Coal Policy was introduced after this

     Court struck down the e-auction methodology of pricing in
Ashoka

     Smokeless
(supra).
6.   For a better understanding of the pivotal issue involved in the case in hand,

     we find it apposite to provide a background of the coal sector.
7.   The coal sector was primarily a private sector entity post-independence till

     the early 1970s. In 1972-73, the industry was nationalized in terms of the
Coking Coal Mines (Nationalization) Act, 1972
(the “Act, 1972”) and the
Coal Mines (Nationalization) Act, 1973
(the “Act, 1973”), whereby all

     privately held coal assets were acquired by the Government of India.

     Thereafter, a state-owned enterprise Coal India Limited (CIL), the appellant

     herein, was formed to manage almost all of India’s coal mining operations.

     To this effect, the Central Government issued appropriate notifications by

     and under which, the coal mines both in terms of the Act, 1972 and the Act,

     1973 were vested in the public sector undertakings, namely the appellant
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 4 of 127
herein and its various subsidiaries. Even after the rapid liberalization phase

     in the early 1990s, the appellant stayed a largely government owned entity

     and the coal sector retained its monopolistic characteristic.
8.   After the nationalization of the sector, the consumers of coal were broadly

     categorized into two sectors – core and non-core sectors. The classification

     was solely based on their role in the economic development of the country.

     The core sector consumers include the vital sectors imperative for the

     economic and industrial development of the country like the power, steel,

     cement, defence, fertilizer, railways, paper, aluminium, export, etc. These

     sectors occupy more than 95% share of the consumer base for coal. All other

     remaining industries or consumers comprise the non-core sector like the

     manufacturers of smokeless fuel or briquettes, glass manufacturers, etc.
9.   Historically, the Government of India did not allow the market forces to

     shape the prices of coal whereby the sellers could negotiate prices and

     volumes with independent buyers. Instead, the coal in India was distributed

     through a linkage system by way of which individual coal consumers were

     linked with particular mines.
10. The power of price fixation by way of notification by the Central

     Government flowed from the pre-independence era enactment of the

     Colliery Control Order, 1945 (the “CCO, 1945”) under the Defence of India
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 5 of 127
Rules.
Section 4
of the CCO, 1945 empowered the Central Government to

     notify the sale price of coal or fix a maximum or minimum price threshold

     for the same, subject to which the coal was to be sold by the colliery owners.

     Similarly,
Section 8
of the CCO, 1945 empowered the Central Government

     to also regulate the disposal of coal stocks of any colliery including the

     quantity to be sold and to whom the coal stocks were to be sold to.
11. The linkage committees were composed of stakeholders from a variety of

     areas, including the appellant, railways and the erstwhile planning

     commission, etc. Initially, the linkage system was extended only to the core

     sector, however, after noticing huge demand of coal by the non-core sector,

     the same was introduced for the consumers falling under the said category.

     It is noted that a “linkage” did not vest any right in the linked unit to claim

     coal from a particular company, coalfield or source. The system was

     introduced for logistical ease, and “linkage” acted only as a clearance to the

     linked coal company (either the appellant or one of its subsidiaries) to supply

     coal to a unit subject to availability of the commodity as well as regulatory

     directives given in respect of such unit or linked coal mine.
12. It is pertinent to note that the classification of core and non-core sectors as

     well as the linkage system is now dispensed with after the introduction of

     the New Coal Distribution Policy, 2007. However, for the purpose of
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 6 of 127
answering the issues arising in this litigation, it is necessary for us to bear in

     mind the modalities of the aforesaid mechanisms.
13. After about two decades of following the linkage system, it was observed in

     1998 that linkages were being granted by the authorities indiscriminately

     without due regard to the availability of coal, transport capacity and actual

     consumption. This led to a mismatch with the demand being several times

     higher than the actual availability. The appellant, therefore, introduced the

     Open Sales Scheme for the class of consumers not covered by the linkage

     scheme with a view to curb the purchase of coal in the black market.

     However, even the said scheme was unable to ensure adequate supply in

     comparison to the demand received for the commodity.
14. A partial deregulation of coal came to be done by the Central Government

     by enactment of the Colliery Control Order, 2000 (the “CCO, 2000”) on

     01.01.2000 under
Section 3
of the Act, 1955 (the “Act, 1955”). Though the

     CCO, 2000 replaced the CCO, 1945, yet it preserved the Central

     Government’s power to categorise classes, grades and sizes of coal and to

     regulate the disposal of coal stocks of any colliery by issuing directions.

     However, the enactment made a significant departure from the CCO, 1945

     and deregulated the price fixation mechanism adopted under the CCO, 1945

     and the Central Government was no longer the authority to notify prices for
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                                Page 7 of 127
various grades and sizes of coal. After the CCO, 2000 came into force, it

     was the appellant that issued the notified price of coal for both core and non-

     core sectors. Thereafter, in 2001, the appellant further decentralized the

     process of notification of prices and authorized its subsidiaries to decide

     their own policy of sale of coal to the non-core sector.
15. When it was noticed that the schemes of linkage, sponsorship or open sales

     scheme were unable to meet the demand which was majorly artificial and

     man-made, a new policy of e-auction scheme was introduced in 2003-04 to

     liberalize the sector as well as to provide a pragmatic and transparent system

     of distribution of coal to the non-core sector. The e-auction system made

     coal accessible for the consumers in the non-core sector at a market price for

     the variety of coal that they required as per the quantity earmarked for them

     by the Government.
16. The e-auction scheme was introduced to increase the accessibility of coal to

     the consumers however, it was observed that the prices of the same, as

     determined by the market rates, were significantly higher than the prices

     notified by the appellant and its subsidiaries. This affected the linked

     consumers of the non-core sector disproportionately. Therefore, the e-

     auction system was challenged before several High Courts and was

     ultimately challenged before this Court in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra)
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 8 of 127
wherein the system of sale by way of e-auction was struck down on

     01.12.2006. This Court also directed for the formation of a committee

     comprising of the Secretary, Ministry of Coal and technical experts, with a

     view to evolve a viable policy for sale of coal.
17. The said expert committee gave its recommendations on the coal policy of

     the country pursuant to which, the New Coal Distribution Policy was

     introduced in October, 2007.
In the meantime, the appellant notified an

     Interim Coal Policy on 15.12.2006 to govern the period between 01.12.2006

     and October 2007 as no policy was in place for this period and this Court in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) remained silent on this aspect. In the Interim

     Coal Policy, the appellant issued the price of coal for the linked consumers

     of the non-core sector at a rate 20% higher than the price notified on

     15.06.2004 i.e., before the e-auction system was brought into place, and at a

     rate 30% higher than the previously notified price for the non-linked

     consumers of the non-core sector.
18. It is pertinent to note that coal was omitted from the list of essential

     commodities under the
Essential Commodities (Amendment) Act, 2006
on

     26.12.2006 and was therefore, no longer subject to the restrictions envisaged

     by the Act, 1955.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 9 of 127
19. Aggrieved by the price increase, an association of 22 manufacturers of

     smokeless fuel and soft coke filed a writ petition bearing no. 44 of 2007

     before the High Court at Calcutta on 12.01.2007 challenging the Interim

     Coal Policy on the following grounds:
i)     The Interim Coal Policy was in contravention of this Court’s dictum

            in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) as the procedure prescribed in the

            judgment for formulating a policy for the sale of coal was not

            followed by the appellant. This Court in
the said judgment
directed

            the formation of an expert technical committee to decide on a viable

            policy, and the appellant did not have any authority to notify an

            interim measure in this regard.
ii)    The natural corollary of this Court’s judgment in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) was that the regime of notified prices existing prior to the e-
auction system would be revived. Thus, the Interim Coal Policy had

            no legal sanctity.
iii)   The 20% hike in price of coal for the linked non-core sector

            consumers was a measure of profit-making for the appellant and in

            light of the Act, 1972 and Act, 1973 respectively, the Central

            Government as well as the coal companies were duty bound to act as

            a welfare state and not as a profit earning concern.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 10 of 127
iv)    The coal companies including the appellant herein, were under a

            constitutional mandate to fix fair and reasonable prices under
Article

            298
of the Constitution, to subserve the common good, especially

            because coal was an essential commodity listed in the Act, 1955.

            However, the Interim Coal Policy neither subserved the common

            good nor ensured equitable distribution of resources as mandated by
Article 39(b)
of the Constitution.
v)     The 20% price increase merely permitted the appellant to enhance its

            profit margins at the cost of linked consumers of the non-core sector

            which constituted about 1% of the entire consumer base of coal.
vi)    The price increase of 20% was not based on any market study or

            consumer pattern. The hike overlooked the effects on the end

            consumers of the coal. The action of the appellant in notifying the

            Interim Coal Policy, without conducting a study of the impact of the

            sudden increase of price was liable to be struck down on the

            touchstone of
Article 14
for being arbitrary and unreasonable.
vii)   The appellant failed to assign any cogent reasons in the Interim Coal

            Policy for the price increase of 20% only for the linked consumers of

            the non-core sector as no such measure was adopted in respect of the

            linked consumers of the core sector. There was no rational basis for

            such classification between the consumers of the core and non-core
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                           Page 11 of 127
sectors, therefore, such classification was arbitrary, discriminatory

               and in violation of
Article 14
of the Constitution.
viii) Linkage was granted to the respondents herein to share the burden of

               the coal companies in manufacturing and supplying smokeless fuel

               and were, as a consequence of such linkage, being charged the same

               notified price as for the core sector industries. The appellant could not

               have discriminated between the core and non-core linked consumers

               after providing the same benefit to both for a significant period of

               time. Therefore, the action of the appellant was hit by promissory

               estoppel.
20. A learned Single Judge of the High Court allowed the writ petition filed by

     the respondents herein and set aside the Interim Coal Policy. The learned

     Single Judge framed the following questions to answer the issues raised by

     the respondents:
i.      Whether the appellant and its subsidiaries were competent to

                  notify the Interim Coal Policy?
ii.     Whether the price increase of 20% over and above the price

                  notified in 2004 was a reasonable exercise of power for the

                  purpose of price fixation?
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                                 Page 12 of 127
iii. Whether this Court’s dictum in
Pallavi Refractories v. Singareni

                Collieries Co. Ltd.
, reported in (2005) 2 SCC 227, was applicable

                to the present litigation?
21. The aforesaid questions were answered by the learned Single Judge as

     follows:
a)    On the first issue, the learned Single Judge observed that this Court in

           its judgment in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) had issued clear directions

           for the constitution of a committee comprising of the Secretary,

           Ministry of Coal and other technical experts for the purpose of

           evolving a viable policy for sale of coal. In terms of this direction, the

           appellant herein could not have imposed a price different from the one

           prevailing before the e-auction system without adhering to the

           deliberations of the expert committee.
It was observed that this Court

           did not necessarily imply that for the interim period, price fixation

           was supposed to be done by the appellant unilaterally and without

           following the principles
laid down in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra).
Therefore, the Interim Coal Policy could not have been framed by the

           appellant alone.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 13 of 127
b)    It was held that the only price that could have been charged for the

           coal distributed by the appellant and its subsidiaries, was the one

           notified on 16.06.2004 i.e., prior to the e-auction system.
c)    The learned Single Judge, while addressing himself on the second

           issue, observed that the reasonableness of the 20% price increase was

           in question because the appellant stated that such an increase was

           necessary to neutralize the overall increase in the input costs by

           23.84% to make the operation, maintenance and development of the

           appellant company and its coal mines sustainable. It was the

           appellant’s assertions that by charging an increased price from the

           linked consumers of the non-core sector, it could mitigate 1.2% of the

           overall increase of 23.84% in the input costs. The respondents herein

           had impugned the increase in prices by contending that the same

           would lead to an appreciable increase in the cost of the end product

           causing undue hardship to the small consumers which was

           impermissible in terms of the Act, 1955. The learned Single Judge

           was of the view that the appellant had introduced the Interim Coal

           Policy with a view to earn profits which was impermissible in terms

           of this Court’s decision in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) and that the

           appellant’s attempt to compensate its input costs at the expense of

           only 6% of the consumer base of coal was unreasonable. It was held
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 14 of 127
that the appellant had failed to strike a balance between its financial

           interests, the interests of the respondents herein and the ultimate

           consumers of the end product, that is the rural population.
d)    On the third issue of whether the decision rendered in
Pallavi

           Refractories
(supra) was applicable to the present case, the single

           judge held that though the observations therein permitted dual pricing

           and allowed for classification between the core sector and unlinked

           non-core sector, yet the same was not an issue in the present set of

           facts and the decision was distinguishable on this count itself.
e)    The learned Single Judge also ordered a refund of the additional 20%

           paid by the respondents herein along with interest @ 10% per annum

           in case of delay in payment of the same.
22. Aggrieved by the judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge,

     the appellant preferred a writ appeal before the Division Bench of the High

     Court. The Division Bench dismissed the appeal and passed the impugned

     judgment on the following counts:
a)    The 20% price hike by the appellant was not in consonance with the

           principles enunciated in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra).
It was observed

           that this Court in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) had held that the coal

           companies had a duty to fix the price of essential commodities in a
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 15 of 127
manner that would subserve the common good in terms of the

           constitutional scheme adumbrated under
Articles 14
and
39(b)
respectively. The appellant herein and its subsidiaries could not have

           taken any steps that would defeat constitutional obligations. The

           introduction of the e-auction system was not in conformity with the

           constitutional goal of equitable distribution of essential natural

           resources as the object of the said system was to obtain the maximum

           price of coal with a view to earn profits. Thus, the e-auction system

           was declared to be ultra vires and invalid.
b)    The Division Bench also observed that
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra)

           had directed the Central Government for the constitution of an expert

           committee comprising of the Secretary, Ministry of Coal and

           technical experts with a view to evolve a viable policy for the

           distribution of coal, especially to the manufacturers of hard coke and

           smokeless fuel. However, it was clarified that the Central Government

           in collaboration with the coal companies would be at liberty to evolve

           a policy that would meet the requirements of public interest vis-à-vis

           the interest of consumers of coal. The judgment expressly stated that

           the Central Government along with the coal companies would be

           entitled to lay down such norms as may be found fit and proper.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                          Page 16 of 127
c)    However, it was observed that
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) did not

           empower the appellants to formulate an interim sales policy till a

           viable policy was evolved by the formation of the committee.
d)    It was further held that the 20% price hike was not supported by any

           rationale or legal basis as the same was a measure taken by the

           appellant to protect its financial interests. Such justification could not

           have been the sole basis for introducing the Interim Coal Policy as the

           object of nationalization of the coal companies was not to enable them

           to earn profit but to expand the object of a welfare State.
e)    The Division Bench rejected the appellant’s contention that the

           increase in price was to mitigate the increase of 23.84% in input costs

           of the appellant to the extent of 1.2%. It was held that such

           justification had not been established before the court by way of

           documentary evidence and the appellants had not pleaded anywhere

           that they were suffering losses. It was concluded that the 20% increase

           over and above the previously notified prices was done by the

           appellant only with a view to protect its financial interests and make

           profits at the cost of the welfare of the State.
f)    It was further held that coal was deleted from the list of goods

           mentioned under the Act, 1955 with effect from 24.12.2006 whereas

           the Interim Coal Policy was notified on 15.12.2006. Therefore, the
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 17 of 127
Interim Coal Policy was passed when the coal was governed by the

           Act, 1955 and the price fixation of the same was supposed to be done

           keeping in mind the welfare of the consumers.
g)    As regards the judgment delivered in
Pallavi Refractories
(supra), the

           division bench was of the opinion that though differential pricing for

           the core and non-core sector was permissible, yet it had no application

           in the case on hand.
This is because charging an additional 20% over

           and above the notified price upon the non-core sector community for

           the distribution of an essential commodity like coal did not find any

           support from the spirit and ratio of the decision in
Pallavi Refractories
(supra).
h)    It was further held that the appellant’s reliance on
Duncan Industries

           Ltd. v. Union of India
, reported in (2006) 3 SCC 129 was misplaced

           as judicial review could be extended to pricing policy if it was found

           that such policy did not reflect any reasonable basis and justification.
i)    The division bench relied on the Patna High Court’s judgment in
Maa

           Mundeshwari Carbon Pvt. Ltd. v. Central Coalfields Ltd.
reported in

           2010 SCC OnLine Pat 2674 wherein it was held that the 20%

           increase in price of coal for the linked non-core sector consumers by

           virtue of the Interim Coal Policy was arbitrary and discriminatory, as

           the same was introduced without any observation and authorization
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 18 of 127
by this Court in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra). Therefore, realization of

           excess price only from linked consumers of the non-core sector was

           equivalent to creation of a class within a class, which was not

           permissible.
j)    As regards the question of refund of the 20% additional amount

           charged by the appellant to the respondents, the bench relied upon

           Patna High Court’s judgment in
Maa Mundeshwari
(supra) and this

           Court’s order in
Domco Smokeless Fuels Pvt. Ltd. v. Bharat Coking

           Coal Ltd.
, reported in 2010 SCC OnLine Jhar 847 to say that

           charging a 20% increase over and above the notified price was illegal

           and liable to be refunded to the parties (the respondents herein).
The

           bench also relied upon this Court’s judgment in
Eastern Coalfields

           Ltd. v. Tetulia Coke Plant (P) Ltd.
, reported in (2011) 14 SCC 624

           wherein the refund of an extra 20% over and above the notified price

           was upheld.
k)    The appellant had also contended that the refund of the impugned

           amount would unjustly enrich the respondents as they had not proved

           in any way that they had not transferred the burden of this increment

           to the consumers and were operating at a loss during the time period

           for which the Interim Coal Policy was notified. The Division Bench

           declined to accept such contention on the ground that the burden was
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                          Page 19 of 127
upon the appellants to prove that the respondents were benefitted by

           the doctrine of unjust enrichment by establishing that the price burden

           was passed to the end consumers of the product manufactured by the

           respondents.
23.
In such circumstances
referred to above
, the appellants are here before this

     Court with their present appeals.
24. This Court vide its order dated 09.08.2012, had issued notice confined to the

     plea of unjust enrichment thereby confining the lis to the issue of refund.

     The appellant filed an application for the modification of the said order by

     way of the I.A. No. 1 of 2015 and prayed that the order dated 09.08.2012 be

     modified to include the question of validity of the Interim Coal Policy. The

     appellant submitted in the said I.A. that modification of the order was

     necessary as the legal contours of the controversy on hand came to be settled

     by a Constitution Bench of this Court while answering the presidential

     reference in Natural Resources Allocation, In re, Special Reference No. 1

     of 2012, reported in (2012) 10 SCC 1. This Court vide the orders dated

     12.10.2015 and 24.09.2024 respectively directed for the listing of the said

     I.A. along with the main matter. Therefore, the I.A. No. 1 of 2015 shall also

     stand decided by this judgment.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                           Page 20 of 127
B.   SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
(a) Submissions of the appellant in its petition under
Article 136
, I.A. No.
            1 of 2015 and additional affidavits
25. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant addressed himself

     on the following four issues:
i.     Price fixation is a legislative act and the courts are not empowered to

             replace the economic policy introduced by the Government or the coal

             controller as the same is in the domain of the executive.
ii.    The appellant company was empowered to introduce the Interim Coal

             Policy.
iii. The differential pricing adopted for linked industries of the core and

             non-core sector was an instance of reasonable classification with a

             legitimate objective.
iv. The respondents herein are not entitled to a refund of the 20% increase

             in prices notified by the Interim Coal Policy as the same will amount

             to unjust enrichment.
26. At the outset, it was submitted that the impugned judgment of the High Court

     fell in error by not considering the dictum of this Court in
Union of India v.

     Cynamide India Ltd.
reported in (
1987) 2 SCC 720 and Shri Sitaram Sugar

     Co. Ltd. v. Union of India
reported in (1990) 3 SCC 223 wherein it was

     held that price fixation is neither the function nor forte of the courts. The
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                                Page 21 of 127
courts ought not to interfere in policy decisions as well as the fixation of

     rates. The courts are empowered to make a limited inquiry into the question

     whether the considerations that underlie a policy decision are relevant or not.

     In this respect, the courts have to only examine whether the price determined

     was with due regard to the provisions of the relevant statute, regulations or

     guidelines enacted.
27. In continuation to this argument, the appellant also submitted in its I.A. No.

     1 of 2015 that the judgment of this Court in the presidential reference

     Natural Resources Allocation, In re, Special Reference No. 1 of 2012,

     reported in (2012) 10 SCC 1, settles the contours of law on the issue of the

     extent to which the courts can make an inquiry into an economic policy

     decision of the executive. It was submitted that it is incumbent upon the

     courts to respect the mandate and wisdom of the executive branch of the

     government as regards the formulation of economic policies and therefore,

     not endeavour to evaluate the efficacy of one policy compared to another.

     The courts are empowered to look into a policy decision only if the same

     perpetuates hostile discrimination against a particular section of society or

     when it is not backed by a social or welfare purpose.
28. Further, the power of judicial review stands exhausted once the courts come

     to the conclusion that the authority fixing the prices determined the same on
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 22 of 127
a rational basis. Thereafter, no re-evaluation of the prices and the

     considerations underlying it is possible even if the prices are found to be

     demonstrably injurious to some manufacturers and producers.
29. As regards the question whether the appellant company was authorized to

     fix the interim price of coal, it was submitted that the coal ceased to be a

     controlled commodity by virtue of the CCO, 2000. As a result, the appellant

     was empowered thereunder to fix the price of coal and it could not be

     precluded from fixing appropriate prices including, dual pricing, if deemed

     necessary. Therefore, a writ of mandamus could not be issued to the

     appellant to charge lesser prices or adopt a uniform price for all classes of

     industries/consumers.
30. It is the case of the appellant that a number of economic factors such as the

     financial health of the PSU, operational costs and the relative importance of

     certain industries in the larger national interest, go into the decision of price

     fixation. Therefore, there is no bar on the appellant to adopt dual prices and

     charge a higher price from the non-core sector.
31. The learned counsel also submitted that merely because an industrial

     company was completely owned by the Government cannot mean that it can

     be deprived of the right to conduct its functions in a commercially expedient

     manner.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 23 of 127
32. As regards the issue of whether the different prices adopted for the core and

     non-core sector industries were correct in the eyes of the law, it was

     submitted that such dual pricing was an instance of reasonable classification

     bearing a rational nexus to the objective sought to be achieved.
33. We were informed that the core sector industries constituted nearly 90% of

     the total consumer base of the appellant company and other coal companies.

     These industries catered to the public at large by providing goods and

     services essential to the common man in everyday use viz. electricity, steel,

     cement industries, etc. Coal, being an essential raw material for these

     industries, constitutes a significant amount of the costs incurred in

     production activities of these core-sector industries. Therefore, any increase

     in the price of coal for the core sector would surely lead to a cascading effect

     on a huge section of the population of the country. On the other hand, since

     the goods manufactured by the non-core sector industries which constituted

     a small percentage of the consumer base of the appellant, were not for

     everyday use, the impact of increased cost would not be felt as acutely by

     the end consumers of such goods.
34. It was submitted that it was while keeping the inherent difference between

     the two sectors in consideration, that the appellant company made a policy
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 24 of 127
decision to keep price levels intact for the core sector industries and to

     increase the notified prices for the linked non-core sector industries by 20%.
35. The learned counsel submitted that the objective of dual pricing was to

     ensure that the core sector industries are not unduly burdened with higher

     prices but at the same time, the appellant company also receives adequate

     return for its products in order to cover the mounting financial deficit. The

     appellant has submitted that the object of increasing the price of coal for the

     non-core linked sector by 20% was to mitigate the increase in operational

     costs so as to maintain an adequate supply of coal in the market.
36. On the question of whether a refund of the additional 20% amount charged

     over and above the notified prices could be granted to the linked industries

     of the non-core sector, it was submitted by the appellant that such

     entitlement to refund arises only in the event the respondents prove that they

     have not passed the burden of the increased price onto the consumers. The

     subsidiaries of CIL who are also the appellants herein placed reliance on this

     Court’s judgments in
Union of India v. Solar Pesticides (P) Ltd.
, reported

     in (
2000) 2 SCC 705 and Union of India v. ITC Ltd.
, reported in 1993 Supp

     (4) SCC 326 to submit that when a refund is claimed from the State, the

     burden of proof is on the person claiming the refund to establish that they
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 25 of 127
have paid the amount in question to the State but the loss or impact caused

     by the same has not been transferred to a third party (consumers in this case).
37. If an order for refund is granted without examining and establishing the

     same, it would amount to unjust enrichment of the respondents. The learned

     counsel submitted that the plea of unjust enrichment is required to be kept

     in mind especially in the present case, as the respondents have failed to

     disclose the selling price of the smokeless fuel after the Interim Coal Policy

     was introduced.
38. The appellant submitted that it is a public sector undertaking and a

     government company which has graduated to the status of State as

     understood under
Article 12
of the Constitution. The monies that it deals

     with is public money, not to be used for the profit motive of the select few

     in the company but rather to be used for the social and welfare purpose for

     which the PSU was established. Having regard to the fact that the money to

     be refunded is public money, the plea of unjust enrichment cannot be

     rejected on perfunctory grounds.
(b) Written submissions of the respondents
39. The learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted

     that the Interim Coal Policy was introduced on 15.12.2006 and remained
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 26 of 127
operational till 31.03.2008. In the said policy, the appellant had fixed the

     price for the linked industries of the non-core sector at 120% of the notified

     prices to the extent of their Maximum Permissible Quantity (MPQ) for

     linked units and allocations for NCCF and State agencies.
40. It was submitted that the policy was formulated by the appellant company

     in teeth of the directions issued by this Court in paragraphs 190 and 193 of
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra). It was directed by the Court that the Central

     Government should constitute an expert committee with Secretary, Ministry

     of Coal at its helm along with technical experts and coal companies to evolve

     a viable policy for distribution of coal. Therefore, the appellant had no

     authority to issue the Interim Coal Policy.
41. Further, the sole objective behind formulating the Interim Coal Policy was

     to illegally recoup the amounts refunded by the appellant to the smokeless

     fuel industries in compliance of the directions of this Court in
Ashoka

     Smokeless
(supra),
Tetulia Coke
(supra),
SJ Coke Industries Private Ltd v

     Central Coalfields Ltd.
, reported in (
2015) 8 SCC 72 and Horra Coke

     Industries v. Central Coalfields Limited & Ors.
bearing Civil Appeal No.

     9615/2024.
42. As regards the prayer for modification of the order dated 09.08.2012

     wherein a limited notice was issued confined only to the question of unjust
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 27 of 127
enrichment, it was submitted by the learned senior counsel that the I.A. No.

     1 of 2015 was solely based on the dictum of this Court in the presidential

     reference Natural Resources Allocation (supra). It was submitted that the

     appellant had misread the said judgment.
The presidential reference, instead

     of diluting the opinion of this Court in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra), further

     strengthens the proposition that coal, as a natural resource, need not

     necessarily be sold only by auction. There can be other methods for sale of

     coal.
43. Additionally, the learned senior counsel submitted that the judgment

     rendered in the presidential reference had no relevance to the issue of

     validity of the Interim Coal Policy. Therefore, the observations in Natural

     Resources Allocation (supra) cannot be treated as a valid ground to reopen

     the challenge to the Interim Coal Policy, in respect of the legality thereof.
44.
In this regard, the learned senior counsel placed reliance on this Court’s

     judgment in
Biswajit Das v. CBI
, reported in 2025 SCC OnLine SC 124

     wherein it was observed that when a limited notice is issued by a bench on

     an appeal/petition, more often than not, the view taken is tentative. There

     could be occasions when the claim of the party succeeding before the court

     below is demonstrated to be untenable because of a patent infirmity in the

     findings recorded in the impugned judgment, or a glaring error in the
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 28 of 127
procedure followed having the effect of vitiating the proceedings is shown

     to exist, at any subsequent stage of the proceedings, which might have been

     overlooked by the Bench when it issued limited notice.
45. Therefore, for the order issuing limited notice to be modified, it was

     incumbent on the appellant company to show that there was a ‘patent

     infirmity’ in the impugned judgment or a ‘glaring error’ that would warrant

     re-opening of the whole conspectus of issues. This was not shown by the

     appellant. In such circumstances, the I.A. No. 1 of 2015 deserves to be

     dismissed.
46. As regards the question whether the doctrine of unjust enrichment was

     applicable to the case on hand or not, it was submitted that this Court has

     consistently held that the doctrine of unjust enrichment will not apply in

     cases relating to refund of excess price illegally collected in a contract for

     sale of goods. This has been distinguished from cases where a refund is

     sought on account of illegal collection of tax, excise, custom duty etc. in this

     Court’s judgments in
Tetulia Coke
(supra),
SJ Coke
(supra),
Horra Coke
(supra) and
Maa Mundeshwari
(supra).
47. The respondents also placed reliance on this Court’s judgment in
Domco

     Smokeless Fuels (P) Ltd. v. State of Jharkhand
, reported in 2024 SCC

     OnLine SC 181 to submit that though the coal companies had taken the
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 29 of 127
argument during the hearing of the said matter that the benefit of refund

     should be denied to the petitioner therein on account of the pendency of the

     present case, yet the Court rejected the said plea. Therefore, the question of

     refund stood determined in terms of
the said judgment
.
48. It was submitted that the coal companies had also not taken the plea of unjust

     enrichment when contesting the refund sought for in respect of the excess

     price collected under the e-auction policy. The entirety of the excess price

     therein has already been refunded. Thus, the question of refund of excess

     monies collected under the Interim Coal Policy ought to be treated at parity.
49. Without prejudice to the aforesaid arguments, it was submitted by the

     respondents that they had not enhanced the sale price of their goods to

     include the interim increase of 20% over the notified price and therefore,

     had not passed on the burden of the additional cost onto the end consumers.

     In this regard, the respondents had filed additional documents on record

     including CA certifications therefor.
50. Accordingly, the learned senior counsel prayed that the petition by the

     appellant be dismissed by holding that the respondents are entitled for refund

     of the excess price collected under the Interim Coal Policy along with an

     interest of 10% per annum thereupon.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 30 of 127
C.   ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
51. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone

     through the materials on record, the following questions fall for our

     consideration:
i.    Whether the appellant had the authority to notify the Interim Coal

           Policy, in terms of the dictum of this Court in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra)?
ii.   Whether the increase of 20% over and above the notified price

           introduced in the Interim Coal Policy for the linked consumers of the

           non-core sector was valid in terms of
Article 14?
iii. If the answer to the second question is in the negative, then whether the

           respondents are entitled to refund of the 20% additional cost?



D.   ANALYSIS
52. Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either side, we must

     look into few judgments of this Court to better understand the legal backdrop

     in which the present dispute has arisen.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 31 of 127
(i)   Analysis of the observations of this Court in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra)
53. This Court in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) was faced with the question

     whether the e-auction system introduced by the appellant and other coal

     companies for the consumers of the non-core sector, was valid on the

     touchstone of
Article 14
of the Constitution.
a. Objective of the e-auction system
54. It was argued by the coal companies that the linkage system operating with

     the notified price mechanism was being manipulated for procurement of coal

     by consumers who were not in requirement of the same. Such coal was then

     being sold in the open market in black at a significant premium because of

     an artificial gap between the demand and supply. Therefore, the e-auction

     scheme was introduced purportedly to meet the liberalisation policy of the

     Central Government in respect of the import of coal and to provide a

     pragmatic and transparent system of distribution of coal. The objective of

     the said scheme is reproduced below:
“Objectives
             The present system of sale of coal to non-core sector
             consumers needs to be made more pragmatic and transparent
             by accommodating the following changes:
(a) A consumer having requirement of specified quality of
                 coal from a particular colliery/source and siding/pilot
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                         Page 32 of 127
should have an access to buy coal by paying the market
                 determined price for the same.
(b) This approach would enable the non-core sector
                 consumers to receive coal of their choice, on payment of
                 market price, determined through auction confined to
                 non-core sector consumers.”
55. Certain consumers of the non-core sector were exempted from paying the

     price of coal at the weighted average of the e-auction price. These included

     tiny units and the National Cooperative Consumers’ Federation (NCCF)

     who were to be supplied coal at the floor price of 20% above the notified

     price. A similar benefit was extended to the agencies of the Central and State

     Governments.
b. Submissions of the petitioners in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra)
56. The petitioners therein had submitted that the introduction of the e-auction

     system was an arbitrary exercise of power of price fixation for the following

     reasons:
a) The e-auction system was not in consonance with
Article 14
read with
Article 39(b).
Coal, being an essential commodity as well as raw material

        for several manufacturing units, was required to be distributed at a fair

        and reasonable price. Fixation of an arbitrary price of a scarce commodity

        like coal would give rise to unhealthy competition amongst various
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 33 of 127
manufacturers, which would be contrary to the object and spirit of
Article

        39(b)
of the Constitution as the end consumers would be highly

        prejudiced.
b) The classification between NCCF and other non-core sector consumers

        was unreasonable, hence, the dual pricing done in this regard could not

        be said to be a proper exercise of price fixation.
c) The price decided through the e-auction system was an artificially

        inflated price and the same had caused uncertainty as a result of which,

        the manufacturers were unable to fix a price for their products.
d) The coal companies, being “State” within the meaning of
Article 12
of

        the Constitution, could not have resorted to high profiteering at the cost

        of the public at large. The government companies could not be permitted

        to forsake their public duty and their dealings with the consumers must

        be fair and non-discriminatory.
c. Reasonableness of dual pricing of coal
57. As regards the issue of reasonableness of dual pricing, this Court observed

     that though dual pricing, having regard to a distinct classification between

     core sector and non-core sector, would be permissible in terms the dictum

     in
Pallavi Refractories
(supra), yet the State, when it is involved in the

     distribution of a commodity which would attract
Article 39(b)
, would stand
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                           Page 34 of 127
on a different footing. This is because the Central Government as well as the

     coal companies were visualised not as profit-earning concerns but as an

     extended arm of a welfare State.
The Act, 1972
and the Act, 1973

     respectively, mandated the coal companies to harmonise the business

     potential of the country to benefit the public at large and therefore, a

     constitutional obligation was placed on them to fix a reasonable price for

     coal.
The relevant paragraphs of
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) are extracted

     below:
“89. While fixing the price of an essential commodity like
              coal, the capacity to bid of small manufacturers may also be
              taken into account. The court exercising a power of judicial
              review in a given situation may determine the question on the
              basis of the material brought on record. (See Gujarat Ambuja
              Cement Ltd. [(1998) 8 SCC 208] )
90. However, dual pricing having regard to a distinct
              classification between a core sector and non-core sector is
              permissible. (See Pallavi Refractories [(2005) 2 SCC 227] .)
91. The State, however, while distributing its largesse at a
              price, if involved in distribution of a commodity, which would
              attract the provision of
Article 39(b)
of the Constitution of
              India, would stand on a different footing.
92. “Business” is a word of wide import. It, in the context of
              application of a statute governing a monopoly concern and
              also with an essential commodity, would indisputably stand
              on a different footing from the business concern or a private
              person. The Central Government as also the coal companies
              having regard to the provisions of the Nationalisation Acts
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 35 of 127
must be visualised not as profit-earning concerns but as an
             extended arm of a welfare State. They are expected to
             harmonise the business potential of a country to benefit the
             common man. The power of the Central Government to carry
             on trade or business activities emanates from the
             constitutional provisions contained in
Article 298
of the
             Constitution of India. The coal companies, therefore, were
             under a constitutional obligation to fix a reasonable price.
They must differentiate themselves from the private sectors
             which thrive only on a profit motive. As public sector
             undertakings, the coal companies, thus, would have a duty to
             fix the price of an essential commodity in such a manner so
             as to subserve the common good. Although the provisions of
Section 3(2)(c)
of the Essential Commodities Act are not
             attracted in relation to coal in view of the deregulation of
             price by the Central Government under the 2000 Order, the
             reasonable attributes for the purpose of fixing the price of
             coal should be borne in mind.
93. While fixing such price, ordinarily the State acts in the
             same manner as a public utility would conduct itself in this
             regard. This Court in ONGC v. Assn. of Natural Gas
             Consuming Industries of Gujarat [1990 Supp SCC 397]
             opined that the price fixed should be the minimum possible
             as the customer or consumer must have the commodity for his
             survival and cannot afford more than the minimum. Therein
             this Court further noticed: (SCC p. 430, para 34)
                “34. In another article on ‘The Public Sector in India’,
                quoted in Issues in Public Enterprise by Shri K.R. Gupta,
                Dr. Rao is quoted as saying (at p. 84):
‘… the pricing policy should be such as to promote the
                  growth of national income and the rate of this growth …
                  public enterprises must make profits and the larger the
                  share of public enterprises in all enterprises, the greater
                  is their need for making profits. Profits constitute the
                  surplus available for savings and investment on the one
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 36 of 127
hand and contribution to national social welfare
                  programme on the other; and if public enterprises do
                  not make profits the national surplus available for
                  stepping up the rate of investment and the increase of
                  social welfare will suffer a corresponding reduction; ….
                  Hence the need for giving up the irrational belief that
                  public enterprise should, by definition, be run on a no-
                  profit basis.’ ”
94. In dealing with the fixation of tariff under the
Electricity
             (Supply) Act, 1948
, this Court in Hindustan Zinc Ltd. [(1991)
             3 SCC 299] opined that the tariff cannot be fixed in such a
             manner by the Board while acting as a private trader and
             shedding its public utility character. It was observed: (SCC
             p. 319, para 26)
                “In other words, if the profit is made not merely for the
                sake of profit, but for the purpose of better discharge of its
                obligations by the Board, it cannot be said that the public
                enterprise has acted beyond its authority.”
95.
In
Dr. P. Nalla Thampy Thera v. Union of India
[(1983)
             4 SCC 598] this Court observed: (SCC p. 609, para 25)
                “25. We have said earlier that the Railways are a public
                utility service run on monopoly basis. Since it is a public
                utility, there is no justification to run it merely as a
                commercial venture with a view to making profits. We do
                not know—at any rate it does not fall for consideration
                here—if a monopoly based public utility should ever be a
                commercial venture geared to support the general revenue
                of the State but there is not an iota of hesitation in us to say
                that the common man's mode of transport closely
                connected with the free play of his fundamental right
                should not be.”
96. In S.N. Govinda Prabhu and Bros. [(1986) 4 SCC 198]
             this Court observed that profit is not to be shunned but that
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                                Page 37 of 127
service and not profit should inform actions of a Board. It
             was further observed: (SCC p. 208, para 5)
               “We do not think that either the character of Electricity
               Board as a Public Utility Undertaking or the provisions of
               the
Electricity Supply Act
preclude the Board from
               managing its affairs on sound commercial lines though not
               with a profit-thirst.”
97. As regards limitation of judicial review of price fixation
             after referring to the decision of the Constitution Bench of
             this Court in
Shri Sitaram Sugar Co. Ltd. v. Union of
             India
[(1990) 3 SCC 223] this Court in ONGC v. Assn. of
             Natural Gas Consuming Industries of Gujarat [1990 Supp
             SCC 397] observed: (SCC p. 431, para 36)
                “It is, however, not necessary here to enter into a
                discussion of this and the earlier cases because those cases
                were primarily concerned with the question whether the
                price fixation had been made in consonance with the
                requirements of the relevant legislation fixing prices of
                essential commodities in the interests of the general public
                and also because ONGC does not deny that, as a State
                instrumentality, its price fixation should be based on
                relevant material and should be fair and reasonable. None
                of these decisions hold that the cost plus method is the only
                relevant method for fixation of prices. On the contrary,
                there are indications in some judgments to indicate that
                not a minimum but a reasonable profit margin is
                permissible. Even in relation to a public utility undertaking
                like the State Electricity Boards where the duty not to make
                undue profits by abusing its monopoly position is clear….”
98. The action on the part of the State even in the matter of
                fixation of price of an essential commodity, thus, must be
                viewed from different angles, some of which we shall
                advert to hereinafter.”
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 38 of 127
58. This Court also relied upon
Sanjeev Coke Mfg. Co. v. Bharat Coking Coal

     Ltd.
, reported in (1983) 1 SCC 147 to observe that the nationalisation of

     coking coal mines and coke oven plants was done with a view to secure the

     object of
Article 39(b)
of the Constitution that is, to ensure that the

     ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so

     distributed as best to subserve the common good. Though it was recognised

     by this Court that an action which was not in consonance with Part IV of the

     Constitution cannot be held to be ultra vires on only that count, yet there

     was no doubt that the principles contained therein would form a relevant

     consideration for determining a question regarding price fixation of an

     essential commodity. It was held that when the State exercises its power of

     price fixation in relation to an essential commodity, it has to see that the

     ultimate consumers obtain such commodity at a fair price. It was recognised

     that the principle of distributive justice enshrined in
Article 39(b)
acted as

     an interpretative guide for construing fundamental rights and statutory rights

     of a citizen.
The relevant portion of the judgment in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) is reproduced below:
“109. It may be true that prices are required to be fixed
             having regard to the market forces. Demand and supply is a
             relevant factor as regards fixation of the price. In a market
             governed by free economy where competition is the
             buzzword, producers may fix their own price. It is, however,
             difficult to give effect to the constitutional obligations of a
             State and the principles leading to a free economy at the same
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 39 of 127
time. A level playing field is the key factor for invoking the
             new economy. Such a level playing field can be achieved
             when there are a number of suppliers and when there are
             competitors in the market enabling the consumer to exercise
             choices for the purpose of procurement of goods. If the policy
             of the open market is to be achieved the benefit of the
             consumer must be kept uppermost in mind by the State.
110. Can the consumer be expected to derive any such benefit
             from a monopoly concern? Would a situation of this nature
             lead to a hybrid situation where a coal company is allowed
             to fix its own price which may not be a fair price? These are
             some of the questions which were required to be kept in mind
             by the coal companies before formulating a policy of fixing
             price of an essential commodity.
111. The State when it exercises its power of price fixation in
             relation to an essential commodity, has a different role to
             play. Object of such price fixation is to see that the ultimate
             consumers obtain the essential commodity at a fair price and
             for achieving the said purpose the profit margin of the
             manufacturer/producer may be kept at a bare minimum. The
             question as to how such fair price is to be determined stricto
             sensu does not arise in this case, as would appear from the
             discussions made hereinafter, as here the Central
             Government has not fixed any price. It left the matter to the
             coal companies. The coal companies in taking recourse to e-
auction also did not fix a price. They only took recourse to a
             methodology by which the price of coal became variable. Its
             only object was to see that maximum possible price of coal is
             obtained. The appellants do not question the right of the coal
             companies to fix the price of coal. Such prices had been fixed
             on earlier occasions also wherefor legally or otherwise the
             Central Government used to give its nod of approval. The
             process of price fixation by the Central Government in
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 40 of 127
exercise of its powers under the 1945 Order continued from
             1996 to 2004.
112. Does e-auction ultimately lead to fixation of a price?
             The answer to the said question that must be rendered is a
             big emphatic “No”, as by reason thereof even the coal
             companies would not know what would be the price of
             different varieties of coal. The issue must be determined from
             the perspective as to whether the coal companies can be
             allowed to say that despite their monopolistic character and
             they being “State” can fix a price which would otherwise be
             unfair or unreasonable.
113. The State or a public sector undertaking plays an
             important role in the society. It is expected of them that they
             would act fairly and reasonably in all fields; even as a
             landlord of a tenanted premises or in any other capacity.
             (See
Baburao Shantaram More v. Bombay Housing
             Board
[(1953) 2 SCC 845 : AIR 1954 SC 153 : 1954 SCR
             572] SCR at p. 577,
Dwarkadas Marfatia & Sons v. Board of
             Trustees of the Port of Bombay
[(1989) 3 SCC 293 : (1989)
             2 SCR 751] SCR at pp. 760, 762 and
Pathumma v. State of
             Kerala
[(1978) 2 SCC 1 : (1978) 2 SCR 537] SCR at p. 545.)
114. E-auction is not a mode to fix price. It is only a mode to
             obtain maximum price. In other words, deriving the optimum
             benefit by sale of coal is the goal. While doing so the State
             does not have to follow the principles of fixation of price. It
             is not required to apply its mind as to its effect. It treats coal
             like any other commodity. It treats itself like a private trader.
             A distinction must be borne in mind when a State intends to
             part with a privilege or a largesse as a competitor in the
             market and when it is expected to fulfil its constitutional goal
             enshrined under
Article 39(b)
of the Constitution.”
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                               Page 41 of 127
59. Having discussed the constitutional requirement of reasonable pricing of

     essential commodities like coal, this Court in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra)

     observed that:
a)   First, coal was an essential commodity in terms of
Section 3(1)
of the

          Act, 1955. This occasioned the introduction of the Colliery Control

          Orders for regulating the price fixation of the said commodity. The

          Colliery Control Orders read with
Article 39(b)
of the Constitution

          placed a constitutional as well as a statutory mandate on the coal

          companies to distribute coal equitably and at a fair price.
b)   Secondly, the coal companies, being “State” under
Article 12
of the

          Constitution, could not be actuated purely by a profit motive in fixing

          the price of coal. However, it was also observed that it could not be the

          law that the public sector undertakings must suffer loss while selling

          essential commodities. The principle adumbrated under
Article 39(b)
read with
Article 14
is that the essential commodities ought to be made

          available to the public at a fair price.
c)   Thirdly, while fixing a fair and reasonable price in terms of the Act,

          1955, it was imperative that the price was actually fixed. Therefore, it

          was vital that the price of coal was actually fixed and not kept variable.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                               Page 42 of 127
d. E-auction system is unconstitutional
60. This Court was apprised of several advantages and disadvantages of the e-
auction system by the parties, however, it was held that such enumerations

     of the merits/demerits of the system may not be decisive, as the courts were

     concerned only with the constitutionality of the new price fixation process.

     Thus, what was in contention was not the e-auction system itself but rather

     how the system would operate. A perusal of this Court’s dictum in
Ashoka

     Smokeless
(supra) indicates that the price fixation mechanism for an

     essential commodity must be based on a determinable criteria or basis and

     must be such so as to allow consumers or manufacturers an opportunity to

     take an informed decision as regards the purchase strategy or business

     policy. The relevant paragraphs of the judgment are reproduced below:
“141. It is accepted that coal is a scarce commodity and the
             government companies are not in a position to supply coal as
             per demand of the same, which may be enormous, despite the
             fact that a certain level of import of coal is also permitted.
142. However, the advantages of e-auction per se or
             disadvantages thereof may not be decisive as this Court is
             concerned with the constitutionality thereof. It has not been
             denied or disputed that by reason of e-auction price of coal
             is not fixed. The concept of price fixation is that all persons
             who are in requirement of the commodity should know the
             basis or criteria thereof. If a price is fixed, they would be able
             to lay down their own business policy in such a manner so
             that they can have a level playing field in the market of
             competition and such competition is not only between the
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                               Page 43 of 127
persons whose end-product is similar or otherwise based on
             coal but who produce other products not based completely on
             coal. Variability in the price of coal would affect all who have
             to depend on coal e.g. we may notice that hard coke is
             considered to be vital in the manufacturing process of steel.
If the price of coal is not fixed, the price of hard coke cannot
             be fixed, which may give rise to uncertainty in the price of
             steel or smokeless coal which caters to the needs of the small
             consumers both for domestic use also for use in the small
             hotels and/or use in rural areas. It was, therefore, necessary
             that the price of coal be made known. The contention of the
             coal companies is that having regard to the availability of
             LPG, smokeless coal is no longer in use. Ex facie, the said
             plea is unacceptable.
143. Moreover, even fixation of price of LPG in turn would
             depend upon the fixation of oil products in other countries.
             The Central Government, it is well known, having regard to
             the effect that may be caused to the people in general, takes
             all precautions before fixing the price thereof. The Central
             Government has never increased the LPG price exorbitantly.
144. While adopting a policy decision as regards the mode of
             determining the price of coal, either fixed or variable, the
             coal companies were bound to keep in mind social and
             economic aspect of the matter. They could not take any step
             which would defeat the constitutional goal. (See
Mahabir
             Auto Stores v. Indian Oil Corpn.
[(1990) 3 SCC 752] )
145. Even while fixation of tariff for the supply of electric
             energy in terms of the provisions of
Section 49
of the
             Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, only a reasonable profit is
             contemplated and not profiteering. (See S.N. Govinda
             Prabhu [(1986) 4 SCC 198] and ONGC [1990 Supp SCC
             397] .)
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 44 of 127
---xxx---
163. E-auction is not a policy decision of the Central
             Government. Such a policy decision on the part of the
             executive of the Central Government must be strictly
             construed in terms of
Article 77
of the Constitution of India.
             Its exercise of such powers has nothing to do with the price
             fixation by a policy. The State while exercising its power
             under the
Essential Commodities Act
, fixes the price keeping
             in mind several factors, in particular the larger interest of the
             people. Price fixation of an essential commodity, therefore,
             is determined on the touchstone of public interest. While
             doing so the State is expected to follow a rational and fair
             procedure and for the said purpose may collect data, obtain
             public opinion, and may appoint an Expert Committee.
164. In the facts and circumstances of the case, however, the
             approach of the coal companies, who according to the Union
             of India had been given a free hand to determine its price for
             coal, is only earning profit. It has been accepted that three
             subsidiary companies and Coal India Ltd. who were sick
             companies, like Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. (BCCL), have
             started e-auction. It has succeeded in its attempt to a great
             extent as the said coal companies are no longer sick
             companies. They have proceeded only to safeguard their own
             interests, as dealer and not as a State. Recourse to e-auction
             had been taken primarily by way of a profit motive. No public
             opinion was sought for and no Expert Committee was
             appointed. The statutory and constitutional duties had not
             been kept in view. Conveniently, while making the said policy
             decision, the coal companies did not remind themselves that
             as they are instrumentalities of the State, they are bound to
             adhere to the Directive Principles of the State Policy and the
             prime object for which the Nationalisation Acts were
             enacted.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 45 of 127
165. Good governance and good corporate governance are
             distinct and separate. Whereas good governance would mean
             protection of the weaker sections of the people; so far as good
             corporate governance is concerned, the same may not be of
             much relevance. Even the coal companies in taking recourse
             to e-auction did not give effect to the concept of corporate
             social responsibility.
166. What would be profiteering has been noticed in
T.M.A.
             Pai Foundation v. State of Karnataka
[(2002) 8 SCC 481]
             ;
Islamic      Academy        of      Education v. State      of
             Karnataka
[(2003) 6 SCC 697] and P.A. Inamdar v. State of
             Maharashtra [(2005) 6 SCC 537] . In these decisions, it has
             been held that although education is an industry, and those
             who impart education do so as a part of their fundamental
             right in terms of
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution of India,
             profiteering should not be taken recourse to.
167. In fact the decisions of this Court on price fixation also
             point out that although a reasonable profit may be
             permissible, profiteering would not be.”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
61. What is discernible from the aforesaid is that the e-auction policy was held

     to be violative of
Articles 14
and
39(b)
respectively, on the ground that the

     coal companies had abdicated their responsibility of price fixation to a

     process that used market forces of demand and supply to arrive at the most

     profitable price. Such a system introduced an element of variability for an

     essential commodity like coal which was used regularly by smokeless fuel

     manufacturers and rural consumers. This Court observed that the lack of
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 46 of 127
determinability in coal prices would be contrary to the provisions of the Act,

     1955 read with
Article 39(b).
Since such variability was not accompanied

     by an objective that would subserve the common good and was only being

     introduced by the coal companies with the intention to earn profits, this

     Court was of the view that such a mechanism of price fixation was arbitrary

     and not in consonance with
Article 14
of the Constitution.
62. While holding the e-auction system to be untenable on the touchstone of the

     constitutional values enshrined in
Article 39(b)
, this Court, by placing

     reliance on Kerala SEB v. S.N. Govinda Prabhu and Bros.
reported in

     (1986) 4
SCC 198 and Sitaram Sugar
(supra), clarified with a view to

     obviate any confusion, that a prohibition on profiteering cannot be taken to

     mean that even reasonable profits are not allowed. Further, it was observed

     that it cannot be the law that public sector undertakings must suffer losses

     or distribute subsidies to make an essential commodity available to the

     public at the least price possible. A perusal of this Court’s dictum in the

     aforesaid judgments indicates that what is envisaged by the principles

     contained in
Articles 14
and
39(b)
read with the provisions of the Act, 1955

     is that the consumers should be able to purchase a commodity at a fair price

     and not at the least possible price fixed at the cost of the financial health of

     a PSU.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 47 of 127
e. Coal companies empowered to notify the price of coal
63. This Court, in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) laid down the contours of the

     powers delineated in favour of the Central Government and the coal

     companies in respect of regulation of supply of coal and regulation of price

     thereof respectively. It was held that any action of the Central Government

     was required to be within the four corners of the CCO, 2000. Since, the

     CCO, 2000 had deregulated the power to fix price and delegated the same

     to the coal companies, the Central Government could not have introduced

     the e-auction policy which was essentially a policy for price determination

     of coal in the garb of supply regulation thereof.
64. In order to understand the distinct regulatory powers of the Central

     Government and the coal companies, we find it apposite to refer to Clauses

     4 and 8 of the CCO, 1945 respectively as well as Clause 6 of the CCO, 2000.
Relevant clauses under Corresponding clauses              Remarks
           CCO, 1945             in CCO, 2000

      Clause 4:                              –             The omission of the
                                                           power to regulate
      “4.      The      Central                            price of coal from
      Government may by                                    the powers assigned
      notification    in    the                            to     the    Central
      official Gazette, fix the                            Government in the
      sale price at which, or                              CCO,       2000     is
      the maximum or the                                   indicative of the fact
      minimum sale price or                                that though coal was
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                          Page 48 of 127
both, subject to which                                      still an essential
      coal may be sold by                                         commodity, yet the
      colliery owners and any                                     operations       and
      such notification may fix                                   decisions pertaining
      different prices –                                          thereto were sought
                                                                  to be delegated to
      i) for different grades                                     the coal companies
          and sizes of coal and                                   so as to ensure that
      ii) for          different                                  pricing of coal is
          collieries.”                                            based on ground
                                                                  realities of mining
                                                                  and production of
                                                                  coal.

                                                                  Therefore,        the
                                                                  power to regulate
                                                                  prices of coal ceased
                                                                  to remain with the
                                                                  Central Government
                                                                  and vested in the
                                                                  coal companies after
                                                                  the enactment of the
                                                                  CCO, 2000.

      Clause 8:                     Clause 6:                     As regards the
                                                                  power to regulate
      “8.      The       Central    “6.     Directions       to   the supply and
      Government may from           regulate the disposal of      disposal of coal
      time to time, issue such      coal stocks.–          The    stocks, the Central
      direction as it thinks fit    Central       Government      Government
      to any colliery owner         may, from time to time,       retained the same
      regulating the disposal       issue such directions as      under CCO, 2000
      of his stocks of coal or of   it may deem fit to any        albeit in an altered
      the expected output of        owner of a colliery           manner.
      coal in the colliery          regulating the disposal
      during      any     period    of stocks of coal or of the
      including direction as to     expected output of coal
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                                 Page 49 of 127
the class, grade, size and in the colliery during
      quantity of coal which any period.”
      may be disposed of and
      person or class or
      description of persons to
      whom coal shall or shall
      not be disposed of, the
      order of priority to be
      observed      in      such
      disposal      and       the
      stacking of coal on
      Government account.”
65. This Court, cognizant of the changes introduced in the CCO, 2000, observed

     that the Central Government had no say in the introduction of the e-auction

     system as the same was a measure of price regulation. The relevant

     paragraphs of
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) are reproduced below:
“168. The coal companies evolve price fixation but
             admittedly, they have been doing so at the instance of the
             Central Government. The Central Government seeks to
             exercise its statutory power. Such a power, however, is
             confined to four corners of the 2000 Order. When there is no
             control over price, the Central Government is forbidden to
             issue any direction which will have an impact thereover.
---xxx---
170. In relation to fixation of price or other related matters,
             the Central Government, therefore, had no say. Under the
             Colliery Control Order, 2000, the power of the Central
             Government is merely to regulate supply and not to regulate
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 50 of 127
price, the price of coal, it will bear to state, having been
             deregulated.
171. Supply and/or disposal of coal which would come within
             the purview of the Colliery Control Order, 2000, would, thus,
             take within its sweep only: to whom the supply would be
             made, what would be the quantity, the mode, period or the
             source of supply. Such a power to issue directions would not
             include fixation of price. E-auction is not related to policy for
             supply of coal. It is essentially the price therefor. The Central
             Government in that view of the matter, either directly or
             indirectly, while purportedly exercising its power under
             clause 6 read with clause 9 of the Colliery Control Order
             could not have issued any direction in the garb of disposal of
             coal by way of e-auction. The Central Government itself says
             that it allowed the coal companies to fix their own price; if
             that be so in terms of the statute it could not issue any
             direction which would have direct or indirect impact on price
             of coal. It, as indicated hereinbefore, directed that 10 lakhs
             MT coal be sold through e-auction; but while doing so stricto
             sensu, its power and control to regulate supply of coal could
             not be exercised in that sense. Apart from the fact that it also
             does not satisfy the attributes of supply, as noticed
             hereinbefore, the supply of coal itself has not been brought
             within the purview thereof. Furthermore no notification has
             been issued by the Central Government regulating supply of
             coal.”
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)
66. It is in the aforesaid context that the conclusion drawn by this Court in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) must be construed. It was concluded therein that

     an expert committee should be constituted by the Union of India with the
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 51 of 127
Secretary, Ministry of Coal at its helm, to evolve a viable policy for

     distribution of coal. However, it was also clarified in the same breath that

     the Central Government along with the coal companies would be at liberty

     to evolve a policy that would balance public interest and the interest of coal

     consumers. The relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced below:
“190. With a view to evolve a viable policy, a committee
             should be constituted by the Union of India with the Secretary
             of Coal being the Chairman. In such a committee, a technical
             expert in coal should also be associated as most of the
             projects involve consumers of coal, particularly
             manufacturers of hard coke and smokeless fuel. In our
             opinion, it may not be difficult to find out, having regard to
             the technologies used therein as regards the ratio of the input
             vis-à-vis the output, with a balance and 10% margin. On the
             basis of such finding alone, apart from the requirements of
             five years, supply should form the basis of MPQ. We may,
             however, hasten to add that the Central Government in
             collaboration with the coal companies would be at liberty to
             evolve a policy which would meet the requirements of public
             interest vis-à-vis the interest of consumers of coal. They
             would be entitled to lay down such norms as may be found fit
             and proper. They would be entitled to fix appropriate norms
             therefor. In the event, any industrial unit is found to violate
             the norms, it should be stringently dealt with.”

                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
67. What is forthcoming from the above exposition is that the coal companies

     were not barred from evolving a policy that, in their opinion, would meet

     the requirements of public interest but at the same time, would balance the
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 52 of 127
interest of consumers of coal. Though the recommendations provided by the

     expert committee in respect of the maximum permissible quantity of coal

     for which sale could be made to a particular consumer, were required to be

     followed, yet the other aspects of the supply of coal including price thereof

     were to be decided as per the statutory mandate prescribed in the CCO, 2000.

     Thus, the coal companies were still empowered to regulate the pricing of

     coal in terms of the CCO, 2000.
f. Conclusions reached in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra)
68. A comprehensive reading of the decision rendered by this Court in
Ashoka

     Smokeless
(supra) indicates the following:
i.   Though dual pricing is permissible in terms of this Court’s dictum in
Pallavi Refractories
(supra), yet the principles of price fixation of

            essential commodities are required to be kept in mind to ensure that

            the constitutional and statutory goals enshrined in
Article 39(b)
and

            Act, 1955 respectively, are met.
ii.   It was clarified that the concept of distributive justice contained in
Article 39(b)
and the Act, 1955 placed an obligation on the State to

            ensure a fair price for the consumers. Such fair price cannot be taken

            to mean the least possible price without due regard for operational and

            production costs incurred by the State or the PSUs. While the State
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 53 of 127
and its authorities cannot be actuated by profit motive, they are not

            barred from earning reasonable profit.
iii.   While exercising the power of price fixation, the State and its

            authorities must fix the price in such a manner that the consumers are

            able to plan their purchase strategy or business policy. The State

            cannot abdicate the responsibility of price fixation in favour of a

            mechanism that is actuated by profit motive and does not subserve the

            common good. The e-auction system was considered to be arbitrary

            for the reason that it made the prices of coal determinable on the basis

            of market forces so as to enable the State to receive the maximum

            possible price of coal and, introduced variability in the said prices,

            thereby hindering the consumers from evolving a suitable business

            policy.
iv.    The e-auction system, though introduced as a mechanism to regulate

            the supply of coal, was in actuality a regulation of the price of coal.
Thus, it could not have been introduced by the Central Government

            in light of the de-regulation of prices effected by the CCO, 2000. The

            expert committee was to be formed with a view to evolve a viable

            policy for distribution of coal, more particularly the supply aspect.
This Court was, however, circumspect in precluding the coal

            companies from regulating the price of coal.
In our considered view,
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 54 of 127
the dictum in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) can, in no way, be taken to

            mean that this Court disempowered the coal companies from

            regulating the price of coal by way of a judicial pronouncement, in

            contravention to the statutory scheme of CCO, 2000.
(ii)   Analysis of the observations of this Court in
Pallavi Refractories
(supra)
69. This Court’s decision in
Pallavi Refractories
(supra) pre-dates the judgment

     rendered in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra). It is, however, relevant for the

     purposes of understanding the pricing distinctions made by the coal

     companies between the core and non-core sector consumers.
70. The limited issue before this Court in
Pallavi Refractories
(supra) was the

     challenge posed to the differential prices notified by the appellant herein for

     the consumers of core and non-core sectors respectively.
71. The Government of India, by its notification dated 22.03.1996 issued under

     Clause 3(2) of the CCO, 1945 deregulated the price and distribution of non-

     coking coal of Grades ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ respectively. It was also clarified by

     the Central Government that the Board of the appellant company herein

     would determine the economic price to be charged for the coal produced

     from time to time. Thereafter, the appellant herein issued the price
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 55 of 127
notification dated 13.03.1997 wherein it was provided that the unlinked

     consumers and industries of the non-core sector were required to pay 20%

     additional price over and above the prices previously notified.
72. The petitioners therein had contended that the levy of an additional amount

     only on the unlinked consumers of the non-core sector was discriminatory

     and violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution as the differentiation between

     linked and unlinked industries for the purpose of pricing was irrational and

     did not constitute intelligible differentia. It was also averred that such

     substantial price variation under the guise of an additional levy amounted to

     dual pricing which was arbitrary and excessive.
73. The High Court of Andhra Pradesh rejected these arguments and found no

     infirmity in the differential pricing adopted by the coal companies on the

     ground that the extent of bulk consumption of coal by the core/linked sector

     industries called for special treatment. It was observed that the core sector

     consumers were afforded the benefit of lower prices due to their intrinsic

     importance in nation-building activities and provision of services in the

     capacity of public utilities. Therefore, any substantial increase in the price

     of coal would have a ripple effect and adversely impact the end consumers’

     purchasing power, especially for goods and services that are consumed in

     bulk all over the country viz. electricity, cement, etc. On the other hand, since
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 56 of 127
consumption of coal by the non-core sector was minimal as compared to the

     core sector industries, it would not result in an appreciable increase in the

     cost of the goods and services manufactured by the unlinked industries in

     the non-core sector. Thus, dual pricing could not be said to be irrational and

     hence, arbitrary.
74. Resultantly, this Court, at the instance of the aggrieved writ petitioners, was

     faced with the controversy of whether the dual price fixation by classifying

     customers into core sector/linked sector and non-core sector/unlinked sector

     industries was irrational and was an instance of hostile discrimination.
75. This Court prefaced its judgment with the observations given in
Cynamide

     India
(supra) and
Sitaram Sugar
(supra) wherein it was held that price

     fixation is neither the function nor the forte of courts and that the courts

     should not be concerned with pricing policy and rates fixed. The only

     situation in which the courts can enquire into the price fixation process and

     the result thereof is when the legislature has laid down the pricing policy and

     prescribed the factors that should guide the determination of the price of a

     commodity.
The relevant paragraphs of the judgment in
Pallavi Refractories
(supra) is reproduced below:
“13. This Court in
Union of India v. Cynamide India
             Ltd.
[(1987) 2 SCC 720 : AIR 1987 SC 1802] has held that
             price fixation is generally a legislative activity. It may
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 57 of 127
occasionally assume an administrative or quasi-judicial
             character when it relates to acquisition or requisition of
             goods or property from individuals and it becomes necessary
             to fix the price separately in relation to such individuals. Such
             situations may arise when the owner of the goods is
             compelled to sell goods to the Government or its nominee and
             the price is to be determined according to the statutory
             guidelines
laid down by
the legislature. In such situations, the
             determination of price may acquire a quasi-judicial
             character but, otherwise, price fixation is generally a
             legislative activity. After observing thus, the Court held that
             price fixation is neither the function nor the forte of the court.
             The court is neither concerned with the policy nor with the
             rates. But in appropriate proceedings it may enquire into the
             question, whether relevant considerations have gone in and
             irrelevant considerations kept out while determining the
             price. In case the legislature has laid down the pricing policy
             and prescribed the factors which should guide the
             determination of the price then the court will, if necessary,
             enquire into the question whether policy and factors were
             present to the mind of the authorities specifying the price. The
             assembling of raw materials and mechanics of price fixation
             are the concern of the executive and it should be left to the
             executive to do so and the courts would not revaluate the
             consideration even if the prices are demonstrably injurious
             to some manufacturers and producers. The court will
             however examine if there is any hostile discrimination. It was
             observed as under: (SCC p. 734, para 4)
                  “4. We start with the observation, ‘price fixation is
                  neither the function nor the forte of the court’. We
                  concern ourselves neither with the policy nor with the
                  rates. But we do not totally deny ourselves the jurisdiction
                  to enquire into the question, in appropriate proceedings,
                  whether relevant considerations have gone in and
                  irrelevant considerations kept out of the determination of
                  the price. For example, if the legislature has decreed the
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                               Page 58 of 127
pricing policy and prescribed the factors which should
                 guide the determination of the price, we will, if necessary,
                 enquire into the question whether the policy and the
                 factors are present to the mind of the authorities
                 specifying the price. But our examination will stop there.
                 We will go no further. We will not deluge ourselves with
                 more facts and figures. The assembling of the raw
                 materials and the mechanics of price fixation are the
                 concern of the executive and we leave it to them. And, we
                 will not re-evaluate the considerations even if the prices
                 are demonstrably injurious to some manufacturers or
                 producers. The court will, of course, examine if there is
                 any hostile discrimination. That is a different ‘cup of tea’
                 altogether.”
                                                       (emphasis supplied)
14. A Constitution Bench of this Court in
Shri Sitaram Sugar
             Co. Ltd. v. Union of India
[(1990) 3 SCC 223 : AIR 1990 SC
             1277] (in paras 57 & 58) has held that in judicial review the
             court is not concerned with the matters of economic policy.
The court does not substitute its judgment for that of the
             legislature or its agent as to the matters within the province
             of either. The legislature while delegating the powers to its
             agent may empower the agent to make findings of fact which
             are conclusive provided, such findings satisfy the test of
             reasonableness. In all such cases, the judicial enquiry is
             confined to the question whether the findings of facts are
             reasonably based on evidence and whether such findings are
             consistent with the laws of the land. The court only examines
             whether the prices determined were with due regard to the
             provisions of the statute and whether extraneous matters
             have been excluded while making such determination. It was
             further observed that price fixation is not within the province
             of the courts. Judicial function in respect of such matters
             stands exhausted once it is found that the authority
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 59 of 127
empowered to fix the price has reached the conclusion on a
             rational basis.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
76. What has been conveyed by this Court in so many words is that the matters

     of economic policy and price fixation are in the domain of executive action

     and the courts ought not to interfere in such decision-making unless it is

     shown that such policy does not conform to pre-existing legislative mandate

     or causes hostile discrimination.
77.
In
Pallavi Refractories
(supra), the petitioners had argued that dual pricing

     caused hostile discrimination to the detriment of the non-core/unlinked

     sector. Therefore, this Court examined whether the imposition of the 20%

     additional price on the non-core/unlinked sector was discriminatory in terms

     of
Article 14
of the Constitution. It was observed therein that:
a)   First, the core sector industries constituted nearly 90% of the entire

          consumer base of the appellant company herein and their usage of coal

          was of paramount importance to nation-building activities. Since, the

          industries belonging to the core sector produced and provided essential

          goods and services, any increase in the price of coal which was used as

          a raw material or energy source for such industries would lead to a

          cascading effect on every category of consumer. An increase in price

          of coal which in itself was an essential commodity at that point of time
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                               Page 60 of 127
would result in higher prices for majority of goods and services and

          thus, increase the basic cost of living for a large section of the

          population. On the other hand, increasing the price of coal for industries

          in the non-core/unlinked sector that were involved in the production of

          goods such as paint, lime, etc. would not result in an adverse cost

          impact on the end consumers, as such products are not of everyday

          concern for the common man.
b)   Secondly, the consumption of coal in the core sector industries such as

          electricity, cement, steel, etc. was quite high whereas, in the case of

          unlinked industries, the coal consumption was minimal. Therefore, an

          increase in the price of coal for the unlinked/non-core sector would not

          result in any appreciable increase in the cost of products manufactured

          by the industries therein.
c)   Thirdly, the avowed objective of dual pricing was to ensure that the

          appellant company herein could get an adequate return for its products

          and cover its financial deficit without placing an undue burden of price

          increase on a large section of the public.
d)   Lastly, it could not be said that dual pricing was an exercise inherently

          at loggerheads with any law. The only test to ensure that there was no

          arbitrariness or unfair discriminatory practices at play, was to see
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 61 of 127
whether such dual price fixation was based on reasonable classification

          in terms of
Article 14
of the Constitution.
The relevant paragraphs of the judgment in
Pallavi Refractories
(supra) are

     reproduced below:
“17. Core sector industries are of intrinsic importance to the
             economy of the country. They are given assured supply of
             coal by the Standing Linkage Committee which is a
             committee formed as per the guidelines of the Ministry of
             Coal, Government of India. The core sector industries
             consume nearly 90% of the entire production of the
             respondent Company. In fact, the power sector consumes
             nearly 75% and the other industries consume nearly 15% of
             the entire production and only 10% or less is being drawn by
             other medium/small-scale industries. As per the averments
             made in the counter-affidavit, for electricity, which is being
             generated by the power sector, the quantity of coal consumed
             amounts to 75% of the product cost. To generate one unit of
             electricity, 0.5 kg to 1 kg quantity of coal is consumed. In case
             of cement, steel and fertilisers, the percentage of cost of coal
             in the entire cost of production is ranging from 15% to 25%.
             Keeping in view the several factors, the Board of Directors
             after due deliberations felt that the core sector industries are
             of intrinsic importance to the building of the nation and to the
             common man in general. It was thought fit to keep the price
             increase at particular levels for the core industries and
             charge a bit extra from other industries. This was a policy
             decision taken by the respondent Company with regard to
             price fixation. Any increase in prices for the core sector
             industries will automatically affect market economy. Taking
             an instance, increase in the price of coal, to the Electricity
             Board, will have a serious impact on every institution or an
             individual consuming electricity. Electricity has become an
             essential commodity and is required for running industry,
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 62 of 127
commercial activity, locomotives, agriculture and for
             domestic use. Every category of consumer shall have to pay
             more resulting in cascading effect of increasing the price of
             every commodity. This is not the case of industries like paints,
             lime, etc. which are used once in a while. By any increase in
             the price of coal supply to them, the common man would not
             be affected much. Even otherwise, the increase in the price is
             passed on the consumers by the appellants. Their end product
             does not have a national bearing. The products of these
             industries are not of everyday concern for the common man.
18. The primary consideration for placing the seven
             industries in the core sector is their intrinsic importance to
             the economy of the country and the role which they play in
             the nation-building activities. The same consideration will
             hold good for charging lesser price from them. The
             requirement of coal in the core sector is on the higher side
             either for captive power generation or for other uses for the
             manufacturing operations. Any substantial increase in the
             price of coal shall have a substantial effect on the cost of
             finished products of vital importance and the cost of services
             to the public. Counsel for the respondent has submitted
             before us that 70% of the cement manufactured by the
             country is utilised by the Central or State Governments for
             the construction of projects, bridges, roads, etc. Any increase
             in the price of coal supplied to the core industries would
             result in the increase of cost of essential commodities such as
             electricity, cement, and steel. The consumption of coal is
             quite high and is a major input of these industries. In the case
             of non-linked industries the coal consumption is minimal and
             the increase in the price will not result in any appreciable
             increase in the cost of products manufactured by non-linked
             sector industries.
19. Keeping in view the intrinsic importance of the core
             sector consumers and their importance in the nation-building
             activities and the extent of consumption of coal either for
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 63 of 127
captive power generation or for use in manufacturing
             operations legitimately calls for a special treatment as far as
             these industries are concerned. For charging lesser prices or
             evolving a dual price policy, it cannot be said that equals are
             treated unequally or that the classification does not rest on
             rational basis. The objective of dual pricing purportedly is to
             ensure that core sector industries or customers are not
             unduly burdened with price increase while at the same time
             the respondent gets adequate return for its products so as to
             cover the financial deficit. There is no such law that a
             particular commodity cannot have a dual fixation of price.
Dual fixation of price based on reasonable classification
             from different types of customers has met with approval from
             the courts. Monopolistic organisations like Electricity
             Boards and Petroleum Corporations are having dual price
             fixation. It is a common feature that Electricity Boards which
             generate power sell the power at different rates to different
             types of customers such as domestic, agricultural and
             industrial consumers. Even different types of industries are
             charged different rates.
20. Keeping in view the law
laid down by
this Court in
Union
             of India v. Cynamide India Ltd.
[(1987) 2 SCC 720 :
AIR
             1987 SC 1802] and Shri Sitaram Sugar Co. Ltd. v. Union of
             India
[(1990) 3 SCC 223 : AIR 1990 SC 1277] in our opinion,
             the High Court did not fall into an error in upholding clause
             10 of the price notification dated 14-3-1997. The High Court
             rightly came to the conclusion that clause 10 of the price
             notification did not violate the equality clause of
Article 14
of
             the Constitution. By evolving the dual price policy and
             charging lesser price from the core sector industries the
             respondent has not treated equals as unequals; nor could it
             be said that the classification made was not rational.”
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 64 of 127
78. On a plain reading of the observations of this Court in
Pallavi Refractories
(supra), it is limpid that the classification of the consumer base of the

     appellant company herein, into core and non-core sector industries, was not

     an instance of treating equals unequally. Therefore, the plea of hostile

     discrimination by the petitioners therein was of no avail to them.
(iii)   The general rule as regards the scope of enquiry by courts into

             the economic policy of the State
79. Having discussed the observations and findings rendered in
Ashoka

     Smokeless
(supra) and
Pallavi Refractories
(supra) in detail, we now

     consider it apposite to address ourselves on the issue whether the courts are

     empowered to enquire into the economic policy of the State.
80. The appellant, in I.A. No. 1 of 2015, has submitted that the validity of the

     Interim Coal Policy must be answered by this Court in view of the judgment

     delivered in the presidential reference, Natural Resources Allocation

     (supra). In the said reference, the President invoked the advisory jurisdiction

     of this Court under
Article 143
of the Constitution seeking to clarify inter

     alia, what would be the permissible scope of interference by courts with

     policymaking by the Government, including the disposal of natural

     resources. This Court, while answering the issue, made certain observations
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 65 of 127
in respect of
Articles 14
and
39(b)
respectively. The relevant paragraphs

     containing such observations are reproduced below:
“107. From a scrutiny of the trend of decisions it is clearly
             perceivable that the action of the State, whether it relates to
             distribution of largesse, grant of contracts or allotment of
             land, is to be tested on the touchstone of
Article 14
of the
             Constitution. A law may not be struck down for being
             arbitrary without the pointing out of a constitutional infirmity
             as McDowell case [(1996) 3 SCC 709] has said. Therefore,
             a State action has to be tested for constitutional infirmities
             qua
Article 14
of the Constitution. The action has to be fair,
             reasonable,      non-discriminatory,      transparent,      non-
             capricious, unbiased, without favouritism or nepotism, in
             pursuit of promotion of healthy competition and equitable
             treatment. It should conform to the norms which are rational,
             informed with reasons and guided by public interest, etc. All
             these principles are inherent in the fundamental conception
             of
Article 14.
This is the mandate of
Article 14
of the
             Constitution of India.
---xxx---
116. The learned counsel for CPIL argued that revenue
             maximisation during the sale or alienation of a natural
             resource for commercial exploitation is the only way of
             achieving public good since the revenue collected can be
             channelised to welfare policies and controlling the
             burgeoning deficit. According to the learned counsel, since
             the best way to maximise revenue is through the route of
             auction, it becomes a constitutional principle even under
Article 39(b).
However, we are not persuaded to hold so.
Auctions may be the best way of maximising revenue but
             revenue maximisation may not always be the best way to
             subserve public good. “Common good” is the sole guiding
             factor under
Article 39(b)
for distribution of natural
             resources. It is the touchstone of testing whether any policy
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 66 of 127
subserves the “common good” and if it does, irrespective of
             the means adopted, it is clearly in accordance with the
             principle enshrined in
Article 39(b).
118.
In
Bennett Coleman & Co. v. Union of India
[(1972) 2
             SCC 788] , it has been held by this Court that : (SCC p. 845,
             para 162)
                 “162. … The only norm which the Constitution furnishes
                 for distribution of the material resources of the
                 community is the elastic norm of the common good.”
             Thus “common good” is a norm in
Article 39(b)
whose
             applicability was considered by this Court on the facts of the
             case. Even
in that case
, this Court did not evolve economic
             criteria of its own to achieve the goal of “common good” in
Article 39(b)
, which is part of the directive principles.
119. The norm of “common good” has to be understood and
             appreciated in a holistic manner. It is obvious that the
             manner in which the common good is best subserved is not a
             matter that can be measured by any constitutional
             yardstick—it would depend on the economic and political
             philosophy of the Government. Revenue maximisation is not
             the only way in which the common good can be subserved.
             Where revenue maximisation is the object of a policy, being
             considered qua that resource at that point of time to be the
             best way to subserve the common good, auction would be one
             of the preferable methods, though not the only method. Where
             revenue maximisation is not the object of a policy of
             distribution, the question of auction would not arise. Revenue
             considerations may assume secondary consideration to
             developmental considerations.”
                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
81. What can be discerned from the aforesaid exposition of law is that the State

     is bound by
Article 39(b)
to ensure that common good is subserved
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                           Page 67 of 127
whenever it distributes or allots natural resources including coal. Further,

     such distribution must be in conformity to the principles of fairness,

     reasonableness and non-arbitrariness in terms of
Article 14
of the

     Constitution. The principles expounded in the aforesaid are in consonance

     with the law settled in
Pallavi Refractories
(supra) and
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra).
82. We find it apposite to note that while discussing the concept of ‘common

     good’ as per
Article 39(b)
, this Court observed that there cannot be a

     constitutional yardstick for ensuring the same. Rather, it is the economic and

     political philosophy of the Government that would enable the courts to

     determine whether an executive action was fulfilling the objective of

     subserving the common good in terms of the economic and political

     philosophy of the Government. At this stage, we may, with a view to obviate

     any confusion, reiterate the dictum of this Court in
Cynamide India
(supra)

     and
Sitaram Sugar
(supra) that as a general rule, the courts ought not to

     interfere with the prices fixed by the State provided that such prices are

     determined in conformity with the principles enshrined in
Articles 14
and
39(b).
83. This Court in Natural Resources Allocation (supra), observed that the

     alienation of natural resources is the prerogative of the executive as it
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 68 of 127
involves making intricate economic choices for which the courts do not have

     the necessary expertise. Therefore, the courts should not endeavour to

     determine whether an instance of distribution of natural resources is

     economically or factually reasonable. The domain of the courts is limited to

     adjudging the reasonability of an economic policy decision to situations

     when such action is patently unreasonable in terms of the Constitution

     and/or the statute or regulations that are enacted to guide executive action in

     that regard.
“146. To summarise in the context of the present Reference,
             it needs to be emphasised that this Court cannot conduct a
             comparative study of the various methods of distribution of
             natural resources and suggest the most efficacious mode, if
             there is one universal efficacious method in the first place. It
             respects the mandate and wisdom of the executive for such
             matters. The methodology pertaining to disposal of natural
             resources is clearly an economic policy. It entails intricate
             economic choices and the Court lacks the necessary expertise
             to make them. As has been repeatedly said, it cannot, and
             shall not, be the endeavour of this Court to evaluate the
             efficacy of auction vis-à-vis other methods of disposal of
             natural resources. The Court cannot mandate one method to
             be followed in all facts and circumstances. Therefore,
             auction, an economic choice of disposal of natural resources,
             is not a constitutional mandate. We may, however, hasten to
             add that the Court can test the legality and constitutionality
             of these methods. When questioned, the courts are entitled to
             analyse the legal validity of different means of distribution
             and give a constitutional answer as to which methods are
             ultra vires and intra vires the provisions of the Constitution.
             Nevertheless, it cannot and will not compare which policy is
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 69 of 127
fairer than the other, but, if a policy or law is patently unfair
             to the extent that it falls foul of the fairness requirement of
Article 14
of the Constitution, the Court would not hesitate in
             striking it down.
---xxx---
149. Regard being had to the aforesaid precepts, we have
             opined that auction as a mode cannot be conferred the status
             of a constitutional principle. Alienation of natural resources
             is a policy decision, and the means adopted for the same are
             thus, executive prerogatives. However, when such a policy
             decision is not backed by a social or welfare purpose, and
             precious and scarce natural resources are alienated for
             commercial pursuits of profit maximising private
             entrepreneurs, adoption of means other than those that are
             competitive and maximise revenue may be arbitrary and face
             the wrath of
Article 14
of the Constitution. Hence, rather than
             prescribing or proscribing a method, we believe, a judicial
             scrutiny of methods of disposal of natural resources should
             depend on the facts and circumstances of each case, in
             consonance with the principles which we have culled out
             above. Failing which, the Court, in exercise of power of
             judicial review, shall term the executive action as arbitrary,
             unfair, unreasonable and capricious due to its antimony with
Article 14
of the Constitution.”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
84. This Court in
Balco Employees’ Union v. Union of India
reported in (2002)

     2 SCC 333 observed that the courts are not empowered to consider the

     merits of different economic policies and adjudge the relative efficacy

     thereof. Further, the courts must be circumspect in disturbing the

     conclusions reached by the executive in formulating an economic policy or
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 70 of 127
fixing of prices unless and until there is an illegality in the decision-making

     process itself. The relevant observations are reproduced below:
“93. Wisdom and advisability of economic policies are
             ordinarily not amenable to judicial review unless it can be
             demonstrated that the policy is contrary to any statutory
             provision or the Constitution. In other words, it is not for the
             Courts to consider relative merits of different economic
             policies and consider whether a wiser or better one can be
             evolved. For testing the correctness of a policy, the
             appropriate forum is the Parliament and not the Courts.
---xxx---
98. In the case of a policy decision on economic matters, the
             Courts should be very circumspect in conducting any enquiry
             or investigation and must be most reluctant to impugn the
             judgement of the experts who may have arrived at a
             conclusion unless the Court is satisfied that there is illegality
             in the decision itself.”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
85.
In a recent decision,
Kirloskar Ferrous Industries Ltd. v. Union of India
,

     reported in (2025) 1 SCC 695, a three-judge bench of this Court wherein

     one of us (J.B. Pardiwala J.) was a part of the bench, observed that the courts

     should exercise caution while adjudicating issues pertaining to economic

     policies formulated by the executive. The realm of the courts’ exercise of

     judicial review is circumscribed to ensuring that such policies do not

     infringe upon citizens’ rights or exceed the authority granted by law. The

     courts cannot extend their role to evaluating the wisdom of a particular
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 71 of 127
policy decision and the conclusions arrived at based on the same as such a

     task has been enjoined upon the legislature and executive wings of the State

     in terms of the scheme of governance envisaged by the Constitution. The

     relevant paragraphs of
the said judgment
are reproduced below:
“56. Policy decisions often require the expertise of
             professionals and specialists in fields such as economics,
             public health, national security, and environmental science.
             These domains involve specialised knowledge that Judges, as
             generalists in legal matters, may lack. For instance, in
             economic policy, the executive may decide on trade tariffs or
             subsidies based on extensive data and projections that aim to
             balance domestic industry support with global trade
             commitments. The courts, lacking the same level of economic
             expertise and without the authority to make trade-offs among
             competing policy objectives, are typically not equipped to
             second-guess these kinds of decisions.
57. While courts have the power of judicial review to ensure
             that executive actions and legislative enactments comply with
             the Constitution, this power is not absolute. Judicial review
             is meant to act as a safeguard against actions that overstep
             legal boundaries or infringe on fundamental rights, but it
             does not entail a comprehensive re-evaluation of the policy's
             wisdom. The judicial review of policy decisions is limited to
             assessing the legality of the decision-making process rather
             than the substantive merits of the policy itself. For example,
             if a government policy infringes on fundamental rights or
             discriminates against a particular group, the courts have a
             duty to strike down such policies. However, in the absence of
             constitutional or legal violations, the courts should respect
             the policy choices made by the executive or legislature.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                           Page 72 of 127
58. The duty of the court in policy-related cases is primarily
             to determine whether the policy falls within the scope of the
             authority granted to the relevant body. If the policy decision
             is within the executive's legal authority and has been made
             following proper procedures, the courts should defer to the
             expertise and discretion of the policy-makers, even if the
             policy appears unwise or imprudent. This restraint ensures
             that the courts do not impose its own perspective on policy
             matters that are rightly the responsibility of other branches.
59. Economic and social policies often involve significant
             redistribution of resources, prioritisation of interests, and
             balancing of public needs, which requires careful
             consideration by those with specialised knowledge and broad
             perspectives. In the realm of economic policy, for instance,
             questions regarding the allocation of subsidies, fiscal
             deficits, or budget allocations are best managed by the
             executive, which has access to economic data and is
             accountable to the public for its financial management.
Judicial interference in such areas risks creating disruptions
             in the economic balance that policy-makers are trying to
             achieve.
60. The courts should assume that policy-makers act in good
             faith unless there is clear evidence to the contrary. As long
             as the policy does not contravene the Constitution or violate
             statutory provisions, it is not the role of the courts to question
             the wisdom or fairness of such policy.
61. While judicial restraint is essential in respecting the
             boundaries of each branch of Government, it does not mean
             that courts abdicate their responsibility to protect
             constitutional rights. The courts must still intervene if a
             policy infringes on fundamental rights, discriminates
             unfairly, or breaches statutory provisions. The role of the
             court in such instances is to protect individuals and groups
             from unlawful actions while maintaining the overall integrity
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                               Page 73 of 127
of the policy-making process. This balance ensures that while
              courts do not interfere in matters of policy wisdom, they
              remain vigilant guardians of constitutional rights.”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
86. The aforesaid exposition of law leaves no manner of doubt in our minds that

     the brightline rule as regards the adjudicating of a policy decision by the

     Government, especially an economic one, is that the courts must exercise

     judicial restraint and only consider the legality of the decision-making

     process in terms of the provisions of the Constitution and relevant statutes.

     In respect of price fixation of a natural resource, coal in the case on hand,

     the courts must confine themselves to the question whether the basis adopted

     for reaching a particular price is reasonable or not.
87. For the reasons in the aforesaid, we are inclined to decide the I.A. No. 1 of

     2015 in favour of the appellant company and proceed to consider the validity

     of the Interim Coal Policy. Additionally, we may refer to a recent judgment

     of this Court in
Biswajit Das
(supra) with profit. It was held therein that

     even in a matter wherein notice was issued on a limited question, this Court

     is not denuded of the jurisdiction to decide the whole conspectus of legal

     and valid points. The relevant paragraph of
the said judgment
is extracted

     below:
“16. We may now summarize the principles in view of the
              precedents noticed above. When a limited notice is issued by
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 74 of 127
a bench on an appeal/petition, more often than not, the view
             taken is tentative. There could be occasions when the claim
             of the party succeeding before the court below is
             demonstrated to be untenable because of a patent infirmity in
             the findings recorded in the impugned judgment, or a glaring
             error in the procedure followed having the effect of vitiating
             the proceedings is shown to exist, at any subsequent stage of
             the proceedings, which might have been overlooked by the
             Bench when it issued limited notice. Justice could be a real
             casualty if the same or the subsequent Bench, in all situations
             of limited notice having been issued initially, is held to be
             denuded of its jurisdiction to rule on the merits of the
             contentions relatable to points not referred to in the notice
             issuing order. As it is, since exercise of jurisdiction under
Article 136
is discretionary, notices on appeals/petitions are
             not frequently issued by this Court. Nonetheless, if in a given
             case, notice is issued which is limited on terms but the party
             approaching the Court is otherwise persuasive in pointing
             out that the case does involve a substantial question of law
             deserving consideration and the Bench is so satisfied, we see
             no reason why the case may not be heard on such or other
             points. In such a case, the jurisdiction to decide all legal and
             valid points, as raised, does always exist and would not get
             diminished or curtailed by a limited notice issuing order.
             However, whether or not to exercise the power of enlarging
             the scope of the petition/appeal is essentially a matter in the
             realm of discretion of the Bench and the discretion is
             available to be exercised when a satisfaction is reached that
             the justice of the case so demands. If this position is not
             accepted, Order LV Rule 6 of the Supreme Court Rules,
             2013 read with
Article 142
of the Constitution will lose much
             of its significance.”
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 75 of 127
(iv)   Objective of the Interim Coal Policy subserved the ‘common

            good’
88. Before we proceed further, we deem it fit to reiterate the dictum of the

     decisions of this Court referred to hereinabove in respect of the

     constitutional requisite that a policy decision or price fixation exercise must

     have an underlying objective that subserves the common good as per
Articles 14
and
39(b)
respectively. At this stage, it is imperative to identify

     the objective underlying the decision of the appellant herein to levy 20%

     additional amount over and above the price notified prior to the introduction

     of the e-auction system.
89. The appellant had submitted before the learned Single Judge of the High

     Court that the need to impose 20% additional amount over and above the

     notified price for the linked non-core sector industries, arose due to the

     increase in operational costs of the coal companies to the tune of 23.84%. It

     appears from the case from the appellant’s pleadings that though the

     company was not running in losses considering that there had been a huge

     investment in the coal industry, yet the fixation of price 20% higher than the

     previously notified price was still necessary so as to ensure the sustainable

     operation, maintenance and development of the coal mines and production

     framework. It is pertinent to note that the impugned price hike for the linked
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 76 of 127
non-core sector industries mitigated the increase in operational costs only to

     the extent of 1.2%.
90. This conspectus of facts makes it necessary for us to look into the

     proposition of whether financial sustainability of operations of a PSU can be

     a reasonable basis for a price increase for a specific class of consumers. This

     Court in
Shree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. v. Union of India
, reported in (
1974)

     1 SCC 468 and Prag Ice & Oil Mills v. Union of India
, reported in (1978)

     3 SCC 459 had the occasion to address the issue of whether the price control

     measures adopted by the Government were in conflict with the fundamental

     rights i.e.,
Articles 19(1)(f)
and
19(1)(g)
respectively of the cotton textile

     mills and mustard oil producers respectively.
We wish to clarify at the outset

     that the nature of price control was different in the
Meenakshi Mills
(supra)

     and
Prag Ice
(supra) from the nature of price increase in the case on hand.

     However, in our considered opinion, the principles expounded in these

     judgments are of common application. It was observed by this Court therein

     as follows:
a)   First, the dominant purpose of the Act, 1955, more particularly
Section

          3
thereof is to ensure equitable distribution of an essential commodity

          at fair price. The object of equitable distribution includes within its fold

          not only fair prices but also maintenance or increase of supplies of an
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 77 of 127
essential commodity. Such purpose would be defeated if a producer’s

          profit or return are kept in the forefront. Therefore, price regulation

          should not be actuated by profit motive unless and until the objective

          of a particular policy clearly stipulates so. The relevant paragraph of
Prag Ice
(supra) is reproduced below:
“39. We may also mention that the view we have taken of
               the dominant purpose of
Section 3(1)
of the Act is in
               accordance with the following elucidation of its purpose
               in
Meenakshi Mills
case: (SCC p. 490, para 65)
                  “The question of fair price to the consumer with
                  reference to the dominant object and purpose of the
                  legislation claiming equitable distribution and
                  availability at fair price is completely lost sight of if
                  profit and the producer's return are kept in the forefront.
                  The maintenance or increase of supplies of the
                  commodity or the equitable distribution and availability
                  at fair prices are the fundamental purposes of the Act.””
                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
b)   Secondly, price control or fixation cannot be with a motive to safeguard

          the interests of industries engaged in the production of the essential

          commodity. Such price regulation must be based on economic factors

          with fair prices and availability of the commodity for the end

          consumers as the predominant considerations. The reasonableness of

          the exercise of price regulation cannot be determined on the grounds

          that a section of the population engaged in the industry, trade or
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 78 of 127
commerce of such essential commodity are facing losses. The relevant

          portion of the judgment in
Prag Ice
(supra) is reproduced below:
“64. This discussion will not be complete without reference
               to the decision of a Constitution Bench of this Court
               in
Shree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. v. Union of India
[(1974) 1
               SCC 468 : (1974) 2 SCR 398] . The question which arose
in that case
was as regards the validity of a notification
               fixing fair prices of cotton yarn. It was contended on behalf
               of the petitioners therein that the price fixed was arbitrary
               because the fluctuation in the price of cotton was not taken
               into consideration, the price of raw materials, the liability
               for wages and the necessity for ensuring reasonable profit
               to the trader are not taken into accounts; and above
               everything else, the industry was not ensured a reasonable
               return on its investment. These contentions were rejected
               by this Court on the ground that, just as the industry cannot
               complain of rise and fall of prices due to economic factors
               in an open market, it cannot similarly complain of some
               increase in or reduction of prices as a result of a
               notification issued under
Section 3(1)
of the Essential
               Commodities Act because, such increase or reduction is
               also based on economic factors. Dealing with the
               contention that a reasonable profit must be assured to the
               manufacturers, the Court held that ensuring a fair price to
               the consumer was the dominant object and purpose of the
Essential Commodities Act
and that object would be
               completely lost sight of, if the producer's profit was kept in
               the forefront. Ray, C.J., speaking for the Court, observed:
(SCC p. 490, para 66)
                  “In determining the reasonableness of a restriction
                  imposed by law in the field of industry, trade or
                  commerce, it has to be remembered that the mere fact
                  that some of those who are engaged in these are alleging
                  loss after the imposition of law will not render the law
                  unreasonable. By its very nature, industry or trade or
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 79 of 127
commerce goes through periods of prosperity and
                  adversity on account of economic and sometimes social
                  and political factors. In a largely free economy when
                  controls have to be introduced to ensure availability of
                  consumer goods like foodstuff, cloth and the like at a fair
                  price, it is an impracticable proposition to require the
                  Government to go through the exercise like that of a
                  Commission to fix the prices.”
               Another passage from the judgment of the learned Chief
               Justice which has an important bearing on the instant case
               is to the following effect: (SCC p. 491 para 67)
                  “When available stocks go underground and the
                  Government has to step into control distribution and
                  availability in public interest, fixing of price cannot be
                  only empirical. Market prices at a time when the goods
                  did not go underground and were freely available, the
                  general rise in prices, the capacity of the consumer
                  specially in case of consumer goods like foodstuff, cloth
                  etc. the amount of loss which the industry is able to
                  absorb after having made huge profits in prosperous
                  years, all these enter into the calculation of a fair price
                  in an emergency created by artificial shortages.””
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)
91. The requirement of equitable distribution and the consequent necessity of

     fair pricing and sustainable availability of a commodity is echoed in the

     judgments discussed in the aforesaid. However, could it be said that ‘fair

     pricing’ by itself, excludes reasonable profits for the producer? In other

     words, are the two mutually exclusive? The answer in our opinion must be

     an emphatic ‘No’. This Court has painstakingly clarified that only the

     executive actions that are actuated solely by profit motive at the cost of the
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 80 of 127
public, fall foul of the constitutional and statutory principles enshrined in
Articles 14
and
39(b)
as well as the Act, 1955 [See: Natural Resources

     Allocation (supra)].
92. A conjoint reading of the observations of this Court in
Meenakshi Mills
(supra) and Natural Resources Allocation (supra) indicates that reasonable

     profits when necessary to subserve the ‘common good’ including

     maintenance of or increase in supply of an essential commodity, do not

     infringe on the rights of the citizens.
93. In the case on hand, the appellant company had submitted that the 20%

     increase in prices for the linked consumers of the non-core sector was

     reasonable for the sustainable operation, maintenance and development of

     the coal mines in light of the increase in operational costs of the appellant

     company. Further, it is imperative to consider the Interim Coal Policy in the

     context in which it was introduced. Though the e-auction system was held

     to be a price regulation mechanism in the garb of a supply regulation, yet it

     cannot be denied that one of the objectives of the said policy was to ensure

     supply to a common man and curb the black market sale of coal. While we

     are in agreement with the decision in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) that the e-
auction system was in contravention of
Articles 14
and
39(b)
respectively

     for want of reasonableness, we find it apposite to consider the situation
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                           Page 81 of 127
prevailing at the relevant point of time that necessitated the introduction of

     such a system. Once this Court struck down the e-auction system, the

     objective of maintenance of supply of coal remained unfulfilled and it

     became all the more important for the appellant company to ensure adequate

     production of coal.
94. In such view of the matter, we are of the considered opinion that the 20%

     increase over and above the notified prices was associated with the objective

     of maintaining the supply of coal and ensuring its availability in the market

     for all categories of consumers. Thus, it cannot be said that the action of the

     appellant in notifying price for the linked consumers of the non-core sector

     with an increase of 20% in the Interim Coal Policy, was actuated solely by

     a profit motive.
(v)    Balancing between the respondents’ fundamental rights and the

            interests of the public at large

     a.    Applicability of the Proportionality test vis-à-vis the Reasonable
           classification test
95.
In
Modern Dental College & Research Centre v. State of M.P.
, (2016) 7

     SCC 353, this Court laid down the four-pronged test of proportionality to

     balance between the fundamental rights of a class of citizens and the
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 82 of 127
interests of the general public. The relevant paragraph of
the said judgment
is reproduced below:
“60. […] Thus, while examining as to whether the impugned
             provisions of the statute and rules amount to reasonable
             restrictions and are brought out in the interest of the general
             public, the exercise that is required to be undertaken is the
             balancing of fundamental right to carry on occupation on the
             one hand and the restrictions imposed on the other hand. This
             is what is known as “doctrine of proportionality”.
             Jurisprudentially, “proportionality” can be defined as the set
             of rules determining the necessary and sufficient conditions
             for limitation of a constitutionally protected right by a law to
             be constitutionally permissible. According to Aharon Barak
             (former Chief Justice, Supreme Court of Israel), there are
             four sub-components of proportionality which need to be
             satisfied [ Aharon Barak, Proportionality : Constitutional
             Rights and Their Limitation (Cambridge University Press
             2012).], a limitation of a constitutional right will be
             constitutionally permissible if:
(i) it is designated for a proper purpose;
(ii) the measures undertaken to effectuate such a limitation
             are rationally connected to the fulfilment of that purpose;
(iii) the measures undertaken are necessary in that there are
             no alternative measures that may similarly achieve that same
             purpose with a lesser degree of limitation; and finally
(iv) there needs to be a proper relation (“proportionality
             stricto sensu” or “balancing”) between the importance of
             achieving the proper purpose and the social importance of
             preventing the limitation on the constitutional right.”
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 83 of 127
96. A perusal of the dictum in
Modern Dental
(supra) shows that for an action

     which is in contravention to a fundamental right(s), to be constitutional and

     proper, it must fulfil the test of proportionality. In balancing the rights and

     interests of two sections of the population, the courts must be mindful of the

     four sub-components of ‘proportionality’:
(i)   The action must be for a proper purpose that is, it should serve a

           legitimate aim;
(ii) Such action must have a rational nexus with the fulfilment of such aim

           or object;
(iii) Such action must be a ‘necessity’ insofar as it should be the best

           available measure with no other alternatives that may achieve the same

           purpose with a lesser degree of restrictions; and
(iv) The action should not have a disproportionate impact and the benefits

           must be balanced against the harm caused by the restrictive measure.
97. However, the employment of the test of proportionality is not to be done

     mechanically, rather, it has to be seen by the courts whether a legislative or

     executive action is of such a nature that it warrants the applicability of the

     said test.
In this regard, we may refer to this Court’s judgment in
State of

     T.N. v. National South Indian River Interlinking Agriculturist Assn.
,

     reported in (2021) 15 SCC 534 wherein the provision of loan waivers to
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 84 of 127
small and marginal farmers in the State of Tamil Nadu on the basis of land

     holding size was challenged as being violative of
Article 14.
It was observed

     therein that while non-classification arbitrariness is tested based on the

     proportionality test, classification arbitrariness is supposed to be tested on

     the basis of the rational nexus test. In other words, in case of the former, the

     courts must examine whether the means employed to achieve the stated

     objective are proportional to the same and are not arbitrarily excessive.

     Whereas, in the latter situation, it is sufficient for the courts to test if the

     means share a ‘nexus’ with the avowed objective. The relevant portions of
the said judgment
are reproduced below:
“20. The purpose of providing a waiver of agricultural loans
             for farmers is to uplift the distressed farmers, who have been
             facing the brunt of the erratic weather conditions, low
             produce, and fall in the prices because of the market
             conditions. The objective of promoting the welfare of the
             farmers as a class to secure economic and social justice is
             well recognised by
Article 38.
It needs to be determined if the
             classification based on the extent of landholding has a
             rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved.
21. One of us (Dr D.Y. Chandrachud, J.) in Navtej Singh
             Johar v. Union of India [Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of
             India, (2018) 10 SCC 1 : (2019) 1 SCC (Cri) 1] accentuated
             the inadequacies of the two-pronged test which seeks to
             elevate form over substance. The over-emphasis on the
             “objective” of the law, instead of its “effect”—particularly
             when the objective is ostensible—was observed not to further
             the true meaning of the equality clauses under the Indian
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 85 of 127
Constitution. The traditional two-pronged classification test
             needs to be expanded for the Courts to undertake a
             substantive review of
Article 14
violations, away from the
             formalistic tendency that the twin test leans towards. Within
             the broad parameters of the two-pronged test, we find it
             imperative to undertake a much more substantive review by
             focusing on the multi axle operation of equality and non-
discrimination.
---xxx---
29. The determination of whether the classification is under-
             inclusive is closely related to the test that is undertaken by
             the Court while determining the relationship of the means to
             the end. This Court follows the two-pronged test to determine
             if there has been a violation of
Article 14.
The test requires
             the Court to determine if there is a rational nexus with the
             object sought to be achieved. P.N. Bhagwati, J. (as the
             learned Chief Justice then was) in E.P. Royappa v. State of
             T.N. [E.P. Royappa v. State of T.N., (1974) 4 SCC 3 : 1974
             SCC (L&S) 165] held that arbitrariness of State action is
             sufficient to constitute a violation of
Article 14.
Thus, it came
             to be recognised that the equality doctrine as envisaged in
             the Constitution not only guarantees against comparative
             unreasonableness          but        also       non-comparative
             unreasonableness. [See Tarunabh Khaitan, “Equality :
Legislative Review under Article 14” in Sujit Choudhry,
             Madhav Khosla, Pratap Bhanu Mehta (Eds.), The Oxford
             Handbook of the Indian Constitution (Oxford University
             Press, 2016).] This Court in Modern Dental College &
             Research Centre v. State of M.P. [Modern Dental College &
             Research Centre v. State of M.P., (2016) 7 SCC 353 : 7 SCEC
             1] , invoked the proportionality test while testing the validity
             of the statute and rules that sought to regulate admission, fees
             and provided reservations for postgraduate courses in
             private      educational       institutions.     In Subramanian
             Swamy v. Union of India [Subramanian Swamy v. Union of
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 86 of 127
India, (2016) 7 SCC 221 : (2016) 3 SCC (Cri) 1] , the Court
             used the proportionality test to determine if the offence of
             criminal defamation prescribed under Sections 499 and
             500IPC violates the freedom of speech and expression under
             Section 19(1)(a). In K.S. Puttaswamy (Privacy-9J.) v. Union
             of India [K.S. Puttaswamy (Privacy-9J.) v. Union of India,
             (2017) 10 SCC 1] , a nine-Judge Bench of this Court held that
             the right to privacy is a fundamental right. The
             proportionality standard was used in the context of
             determining the limits that could be imposed on the right to
             privacy. The Constitution Bench then dealt with the
             proportionality test in K.S. Puttaswamy (Aadhaar-
5J.) v. Union of India [K.S. Puttaswamy (Aadhaar-
5J.) v. Union of India, (2019) 1 SCC 1] , to determine if the
             Aadhar scheme violated the right to privacy of an individual.
             Our Courts have used the proportionality standard to
             determine non-classificatory arbitrariness, and have used the
             twin test to determine if the classification is arbitrary.
---xxx---
32. While non-classification arbitrariness is tested based on
             the proportionality test, where the means are required to be
             proportional to the object, classification arbitrariness is
             tested on the rational nexus test, where it is sufficient if the
             means share a “nexus” with the object. The degree of proof
             under the test would impact the judgment of this Court on
             whether the law is under-inclusive or over-inclusive. A
             statute is “under-inclusive” if it fails to regulate all actors
             who are part of the problem. It is “over-inclusive” if it
             regulates actors who are not a part of the problem that the
             statute seeks to address. The determination of under-
             inclusiveness and over-inclusiveness, and degree of
             deference to it is dependent on the relationship prong
             (“rational nexus” or “proportional”) of the test.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 87 of 127
33. The nexus test, unlike the proportionality test, is not
             tailored to narrow down the means or to find the best means
             to achieve the object. It is sufficient if the means have a
             “rational nexus” to the object. Therefore, the courts show a
             greater degree of deference to cases where the rational nexus
             test is applied. A greater degree of deference is shown to
             classification because the legislature can classify based on
             the degrees of harm to further the principle of substantive
             equality, and such classification does not require
             mathematical precision. The Indian courts do not apply the
             proportionality standard to classificatory provisions. Though
             the two-Judge Bench in
Anuj Garg [Anuj Garg v. Hotel Assn.
             of India
, (2008) 3 SCC 1] articulated the proportionality
             standard for protective discrimination on the grounds in
Article 15;
and Malhotra, J. in
Navtej Singh Johar [Navtej
             Singh Johar v. Union of India
, (2018) 10 SCC 1 : (2019) 1
             SCC (Cri) 1] held that less deference must be allowed when
             the classification is based on the “innate and core trait” of
             an individual, this is not the case to delve into it. Since the
             classification in the impugned scheme is based neither on the
             grounds in
Article 15
nor on the “innate and core trait” of
             an individual, it cannot be struck down on the alleged
             grounds of under-inclusiveness and over-inclusiveness.”
                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
98. What is discernible from the judgment in
River Interlinking
(supra) is that

     in situations where a legislative or executive action has prescribed a

     restriction on fundamental rights, the courts are required to bear in mind the

     following observations:
a)   First, the instances of both classificatory and non-classificatory

          arbitrariness infringe on the equality mandate of the Constitution
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 88 of 127
enshrined in
Article 14
though the tests to determine the same may be

          different. However, non-classificatory arbitrariness is tested on a

          stricter anvil of legitimacy as it has the potential to disrupt the rights of

          a larger section of the population.
b)   Secondly, when the restriction is placed on the public at large without

          establishing the intelligible differentia between sections of the society

          on whom such restriction may be applicable, it would be a non-
classificatory limitation. Where a challenge is posed to such kinds of

          restrictions on fundamental rights of the people, the courts are required

          to employ the proportionality test and ensure that the measures adopted

          to implement such restrictions are not disproportionate or excessive in

          achieving the objective or aim identified.
c)   Thirdly, in a case where the legislative or executive restricts the

          fundamental rights of a specific class of persons, it would be an

          instance of classificatory limitation. To examine whether such

          restriction is in contravention of the constitutional mandate of equality,

          the courts are required to ensure that the classification is made on

          reasonable grounds and use the rational nexus test in order to determine

          whether the said restriction is an appropriate measure to achieve the

          objective identified.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                               Page 89 of 127
d)   Fourthly, it was recognised by this Court that the twin test or the

          rational nexus test may suffer from the problem of elevating form over

          substance if it concerns itself only with the aspect of ‘rational nexus’

          between the classification and the avowed objective. It was held that

          the rational nexus test must take into account the legitimacy of the

          objective sought to be achieved and determine if the same affects the

          classes of persons whose rights would be impeded in a manner that may

          fall foul of the reasonableness requirement of
Article 14.
What has been

          conveyed by this Court in so many words is that the objective identified

          by the legislature or executive cannot be taken at face value without

          any examination of the effects of the same, similar to the requirement

          of the first sub-component of the proportionality test.
e)   Lastly, the degree of scrutiny into the legitimacy of the objectives

          sought to be achieved by a restrictive measure would differ on the basis

          of the nature of the restriction and the test being used to examine the

          issue of arbitrariness. This Court, speaking through D.Y Chandrachud,

          J., described the tests of ‘proportionality’ and ‘rational nexus’ as those

          that determine the relationship between the measure being

          implemented and the objective sought to be achieved. When utilising

          the proportionality test, the degree of scrutiny of the perceived effects

          of the identified objective would be greater than the probing required
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 90 of 127
when the rational nexus test is employed. This is because the courts

          show a greater degree of deference to classification. This is because the

          legislature or executive can classify based on the degrees of harm to

          further the principle of substantive equality, and such classification

          does not require mathematical precision.
99. From a perusal of the observations of this Court in
River Interlinking
(supra) read with the judgments rendered in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) and
Pallavi Refractories
(supra) respectively, it is as clear as a noon day that we

     are required to employ only the rational nexus test while answering the issue

     whether the Interim Coal Policy created a reasonable classification between

     the linked consumers of the core and non-core sectors.


     b.   Applicability of the rational nexus test to the case on hand
100. The respondents herein have argued that the distinction between the linked

     consumers of the core and non-core sectors for the purpose of pricing of coal

     cannot be termed as a reasonable classification on the anvil of
Article 14.
It

     was the submission of the respondents who are linked industries of non-core

     sector that they were at par with the linked industries of the core sector. A

     single, fixed notified price was levied upon both till the time e-auction

     system was brought into existence. Though a different price might have been

     charged from the non-linked consumers of the non-core sector, yet the linked
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 91 of 127
consumers/industries of the non-core sector and the core-sector industries

     were considered to be part of the same class for the purpose of pricing of

     coal. Therefore, the Interim Coal Policy could not have discriminated

     against the linked non-core sector industries without any rational basis or

     objective.
101. The aforesaid submission is not appealing to us for the reason that the

     respondents have not clarified the modalities of how the linked consumers

     of the core and non-core sectors can be treated on the same footing. Except

     for the solitary ground that the notified prices for the two classes of

     industries have ordinarily remained the same, no other submission was

     canvassed in this regard. In such a view of the matter, we are compelled to

     deduce that the respondents considered the linkage system to be the common

     thread between the two classes of consumers and on the strength of the same,

     contended that they should be treated similarly to the linked core sector

     industries.
102. We are, however, not inclined to accept the allegations of discriminatory

     pricing made by the respondents on the ground that all linked

     industries/consumers must be treated alike. The linkage system as described

     in the aforesaid was a purely administrative decision and had no

     constitutional or statutory backing. It was introduced by the Government and
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                          Page 92 of 127
the appellant company to ensure a steady supply of coal reserves to the core

     sector and to certain industries or manufacturers of the non-core sector. The

     factum of linkage vested no right in a particular industry, manufacturer or

     consumer to receive a definite quantity of coal from a specific mine or

     company. “Linkage” acted only as a clearance to the linked coal company

     (either the appellant or one of its subsidiaries) to supply coal to a unit, subject

     to the availability of the commodity as well as regulatory directives given in

     respect of such unit or linked coal mine. Therefore, such system was a purely

     policy decision with logistical ease as its sole objective. Such policy was

     subject to the discretion of the Government and could be reversed at any

     point in time. It is noteworthy that the said system was in fact rolled back by

     the Government upon the introduction of the new Coal Distribution Policy,

     2007. Thus, the factum of linkage cannot serve as the basis for treating the

     industries of the core and non-core sectors alike.
103.
In such view of the matter, we are of the considered opinion that the dictum

     of this Court in
Pallavi Refractories
(supra) is squarely applicable to the

     case in hand and we need not reiterate our observations as regards the

     distinctions drawn between the core and non-core sector industries which

     have been recorded in Paragraphs 77 and 78 respectively of this judgment.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                                Page 93 of 127
104. Further, we do not find any force in the submission of the respondent that

     the 20% price increase for the linked non-core sector industries was actuated

     by profit motive. The respondents had relied on
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra)

     to argue that pricing measures taken with the motive of profiteering were

     not permissible under
Article 14
of the Constitution.
However, the reliance

     on
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) is of no avail to them as the measure

     impugned therein was the price determination mechanism and not the prices

     itself. It was held that by adopting the e-auction process, the State had not

     only abdicated its duty to ensure fair pricing but also brought into existence

     a measure that ensured maximum possible price available for the coal

     companies.
105. We are in agreement with the respondents to the limited extent that the

     natural corollary of the e-auction system being struck down was that the

     notified price system was brought back into existence. In other words, the

     striking down of the e-auction system left a vacuum in respect of the process

     by which prices were to be determined. This vacuum was occupied by the

     notified price system at least till the time a viable policy was being evolved

     by the committee formed in compliance with
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra).

     However, we must stop here.
We cannot proceed to agree with the

     respondents that the effect of the judgment in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra)

     was that the notified prices of 2004 replaced the e-auction prices. This Court
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 94 of 127
is not empowered to stipulate either explicitly or implicitly, specific prices

     of a particular commodity as such a decision is purely an economic one and

     therefore, the prerogative of the legislature or the executive.
106.
In such circumstances
referred to above
, we must see if the objective of the

     20% price increase was legitimate or not. We have already discussed in the

     aforesaid parts of this judgment that reasonable profits for the purpose of

     ensuring maintenance or increase of supply of a commodity are considered

     to be an object subserving the common good. According to the appellant,

     the object of the Interim Coal Policy was to ensure sustainable operation,

     maintenance and development of the coal mines. We find the said objective

     to be legitimate in light of the increase in operational costs of the appellant

     company, and one that subserves the ‘common good’ of maintaining an

     adequate supply of coal in the market.
107. In view of the aforesaid reasons, we observe that the Interim Coal Policy

     made a reasonable classification between the linked industries of the core

     and non-core sectors and was introduced with the legitimate aim of ensuring

     an adequate supply of coal in the market by reinforcing the financial

     capabilities of the appellant company to sustainably operate and invest in

     the production of coal. Therefore, it can be no gainsaying that the Interim
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 95 of 127
Coal Policy fulfilled the test of reasonable classification and hence, was not

     contrary to
Article 14
to this extent.
(vi)    Determination of the issues framed
108. Having discussed the historical backdrop in which the Interim Coal Policy

     was introduced and the constitutional and legal principles necessary to

     address the issues arising in the matter on hand, we now proceed to decide

     the questions framed in the foregoing.
▪      Whether the appellant had the authority to notify the Interim Coal

            Policy, in terms of the dictum of this Court in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra)?
109.
In
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra), it was held that the e-auction system, despite

     having the aim of regulating the supply of coal, was in effect a price

     regulation mechanism that enabled the coal companies to obtain the

     maximum possible price for coal based on the market forces. This Court,

     inter alia, held that the e-auction policy was illegal as the Central

     Government was not empowered to regulate the prices of coal in view of the

     deregulation of prices by virtue of the CCO, 2000. The said control order

     brought the regulation of prices into the realm of the powers enjoyed by the

     coal companies.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 96 of 127
110. The respondents have only relied on the direction to the Central Government

     and the coal companies in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) to constitute an expert

     committee to evolve a viable policy for distribution of coal, to argue that the

     appellant was not empowered to decide interim prices till the time such a

     committee gave its recommendations.
We find no force in the said

     submission as the dictum in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) is limpid insofar as

     the powers of the Central Government and coal companies respectively are

     concerned. Nowhere in the judgment was any restriction placed on the

     appellant company to notify prices. Even the direction for creation of an

     expert committee was made to provide suggestions in respect of a viable

     supply policy primarily. In continuation, the Court also granted liberty to the

     Central Government along with the coal companies to evolve a viable

     policy.
This is evident from paragraphs 190 and 193 respectively of
Ashoka

     Smokeless
(supra).
111. We may also look at this issue from one another angle. If we are to accept

     the respondents’ contention that the appellant was not empowered to notify

     interim prices in light of the direction of this Court to constitute an expert

     committee, it would amount to this Court replacing the intention of the

     legislature and executive to deregulate prices by way of the CCO, 2000 with

     a policy decision of its own. In our considered opinion, it could not have

     been the intention of this Court to override a statutory enactment as the same
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 97 of 127
would tantamount to an egregious case of breaching the doctrine of

     separation of powers. It is a settled position of law that the courts are not

     expected to substitute themselves with the appropriate decision-making

     authority while finding fault with a specific process or policy along with the

     reasons assigned [See:
South Indian Bank Ltd. v. Naveen Mathew Philip
,

     reported in (2023) 17 SCC 311].
112. Thus, we have no qualms observing that this Court placed no restriction on

     the appellant’s powers to regulate prices through the process of price

     notification as the same was already governed by the CCO, 2000 and the

     appellant was competent to notify interim prices by way of the Interim Coal

     Policy.
▪    Whether the increase of 20% over and above the notified price

          introduced in the Interim Coal Policy for the linked consumers of the

          non-core sector was valid in terms of
Article 14?
113. This issue has been discussed by us at length in the earlier parts of this

     judgment. We summarise our conclusions in this regard as follows:
a)   We affirm the classification made by this Court between the core sector

          and non-core sector in
Pallavi Refractories
(supra).
b)   The respondents’ submission that the factum of linkage put the linked

          non-core sector industries on the same footing as the core sector
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 98 of 127
industries is of no avail. The linkage system was merely an

          administrative policy introduced for logistical ease and steady supply.
It did not vest any rights of receipt of coal in the linked industries and

          was dependent on the availability of coal and therefore, could not be a

          criteria for treating industries of the core and non-core sector at par.
c)   A perusal of the objective of increasing the notified prices for the linked

          non-core sector consumers by 20% indicated that the appellant’s action

          was not actuated by profit motive. It was a considered policy decision

          to ensure fair prices for the majority of the end consumers but not at

          the cost of the appellant’s financial capability to maintain an adequate

          supply of coal. This Court in
Sitaram Sugar
(supra) had observed that

          not minimum but reasonable profits were permissible provided that

          such profits were associated with the objective of subserving the

          common good. The avowed object of the 20% price increase was to

          mitigate the increase in operational costs of the appellant company such

          that it was able to sustainably operate, maintain and develop the coal

          mines. In our view, these activities were essential to the maintenance

          of an adequate supply of coal in the market and thus were in conformity

          with the constitutional requirement of ‘common good’ enshrined in
Article 39(b).
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 99 of 127
d)   Since the challenge to the increase in interim price was on the ground

          of classificatory arbitrariness, the application of the proportionality test

          was not mandated and only the test of rational nexus was sufficient to

          reach a conclusion on whether the policy was arbitrary and

          discriminatory. Consequently, we need not probe into the necessity and

          effect of the restrictive pricing promulgated by the appellant in as much

          depth as would be required by the test of proportionality. We are of the

          considered view that the increase of 20% in the notified prices for the

          non-core linked sector which mitigated the increase in operational costs

          to the extent of 1.2% of the total increase, was a measure that fulfilled

          the objective of sustainable operation, maintenance and development

          of coal mines by the appellant without engaging in excessive

          profiteering.
e)   The respondents’ reliance on
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) in this regard

          is misplaced as the classification in
the said judgment
was held to be

          unreasonable because different pricing processes were adopted for the

          core and non-core sectors. The notified price system in which a fixed

          price was prescribed, was continued for the core sector, however, the

          non-core sector was subjected to the e-auction system in which the

          price remained variable thereby making it difficult for the non-core

          sector industries to form viable business strategies. It was found that
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 100 of 127
such drastic difference between the treatment of the two classes bore

          no rational nexus with the objective of regulating the supply of coal.
While we are in agreement with the application of the test of reasonable

          classification in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra), it is not lost upon us that

          the factual backdrop of the said matter and the case on hand are very

          different.
Therefore, Ashoka Smokeless
(supra) does not have any

          applicability to the instant set of facts for the purposes of employing

          the test of reasonable classification or rational nexus.


     ▪    Whether the respondents are entitled to refund of the 20% additional

          cost?
114. Since, we have answered the questions on the issue of validity of the Interim

     Coal Policy in affirmative, the issue of whether the respondents are entitled

     to receive a refund of the 20% additional cost is now moot. However, we

     find it apposite to observe that even if we would have found the Interim Coal

     Policy to be invalid, we would have declined to order for refund of the 20%

     additional amount to the respondents herein.
115. It is the case of the appellant company that the respondents herein would be

     unjustly enriched if the refund of 20% additional amount is granted to them

     as the respondents have not placed on record any evidence of whether they

     bore the adverse cost impact or passed the same onto the end consumers of
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 101 of 127
their products. On the other hand, the respondents have vociferously argued

     that such contention could not have been taken by the appellant during the

     stage of appeal.
116. The respondents have also have relied on a plethora of judgments to argue

     that the appellant was liable to refund the 20% additional amount. However,

     most of these decisions pertain to the refund of the excess price levied by

     the appellant under the e-auction system, which was granted by various High

     Courts and this Court.
In
Eastern Coalfields Limited v. Tetulia Coke Plant

     Private Limited and Ors.
, reported in (2011) 14 SCC 624, this Court

     observed the following:
a)   The writ petition bearing Writ Petition No. 1279 of 2005 was filed by

          several industries including Ashoka Smokeless Coal India (P) Ltd. to

          challenge the legality of the e-auction system introduced by the Union

          of India and adopted by the appellant herein.
b)   During the pendency of the said writ petition in the High Court as well

          as some other writ petitions involving the same issue, the same were

          transferred to this Court. Before finally disposing of the matter in
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra), this Court had the occasion to decide the

          interim application filed by the petitioners therein praying for a stay on

          the payment of the price differential between the notified prices as they
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 102 of 127
stood in 2004 and the prices determined by the e-auction process

          whenever they drew coal from the coal companies.
c)   This Court was pleased to partially allow the same vide the interim

          order dated 12.12.2005 wherein the petitioners were directed to pay

          33.33% of the total price differential and furnish security/bank

          guarantee for the remaining 66.66%. This was done to ensure that no

          permanent harm was caused to the appellant herein provided that the e-
auction system was found to be constitutional and legal. It was also

          observed that in case the writ petition is decided by this Court in favour

          of the petitioners therein then the appellant herein would be liable to

          refund the said 33.33% amount forthwith. The relevant paragraph of

          the judgment in
Domco Smokeless
(supra) that states the said

          directions provided in the order dated 12.12.2005 is reproduced

          hereinbelow:
“15. Learned senior counsel representing the appellant
               drew our attention to the order dated 12th December, 2005
               passed by this Court in a matter involving same
               controversy in the case of
Ashoka Smokeless Coal
               Industries(P) Ltd. v. Union of India
, to be specific, para 8
               wherein following observations/directions were passed:—
                  “8. It is pointed out that in respect of some entities, coal
                  was being supplied at the notified price enhanced by
                  20% thereof and this would be a guide for fixing the
                  percentage of the excess price to be paid by the
                  petitioners. It is pointed out that enhancement of the
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 103 of 127
notified price only by 20% was in respect of very small
                  consumers and in respect of Central and State Agencies
                  and that cannot form the basis for supply of coal to the
                  petitioners herein having a coal linkage with the coal
                  companies. Taking note of the circumstances as a whole
                  we feel that it would be just and proper to direct the
                  petitioner companies/firms, having coal linkage, to pay
                  in addition to the notified price, 33 1/3% of the
                  enhanced price, each time they claim supply of coal to
                  them based on the linkage and by furnishing security for
                  the balance 66 2/3% of the enhanced price with an
                  undertaking filed in this Court that the said part of the
                  price will also be paid within 6 weeks of the decision of
                  this Court in the writ petitions in case the writ petitions
                  are decided against the petitioners. To protect the
                  interest of the petitioners and to ensure that no
                  permanent harm is caused to them we also think it
                  proper to record the undertaking given on behalf of
                  Coal India Ltd. and its subsidiaries that in case this
                  Court upholds the challenge made by the petitioners and
                  allows the writ petitions filed by them, the enhanced
                  price of 33 1/3% now to be paid by the petitioners will
                  be refunded to the petitioners within 6 weeks of the
                  judgment of this Court with interest thereon at 12% per
                  annum from the date of payment till the date of return to
                  the petitioner concerned.””
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
d)   This Court took up the matter relating to the legality of e-auction

          system for final hearing and disposed of the matter in
Ashoka

          Smokeless
(supra) by declaring the e-auction system unconstitutional

          on 01.12.2006. Therefore, on this date, the liability of the appellant to

          refund the 33% amount of the price differential materialised. However,
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 104 of 127
it is apparent from the several writ petitions filed all across the country

          that the appellant had not done so promptly and it was only after the

          intervention of the courts that the appellant refunded the said amount.
e)   In
Tetulia Coke
(supra), this Court held that the principle of unjust

          enrichment raised by the appellant had no application to the case of

          refund of 33.33% amount on two accounts:
o    First, the coal company had not raised the argument of unjust

               enrichment before the court of first instance, that is the single

               judge of the High Court. Further, the said argument was not even

               pleaded in the memorandum of appeal before this Court and was

               introduced only at the argument stage.
o    Secondly, the refund prayed for was for excess price paid by the

               petitioners therein and not in the nature of a tax or duty refund.
Therefore, principally, a plea of unjust enrichment could not be

               held to be maintainable. It was also held that the plea of unjust

               enrichment could not override the requirement of law to refund

               monies to the parties from whom the excess amount has been

               realised if it is found that the law, in consequence of which such

               monies were collected, is invalid.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 105 of 127
117. For the aforesaid reasons, this Court in
Tetulia Coke
(supra) granted the

     request for refund of the 33% amount collected in excess during the

     operation of the e-auction system. A similar line of reasoning was followed

     in several other judgments referred to by the respondent before this Court,

     to argue that the refund of 20% additional price collected by virtue of the

     Interim Coal Policy ought to be granted.
118.
In this regard, the respondents relied on a judgment of the High Court at

     Patna in
Maa Mundeshwari Carbon (P) Ltd. v. Central Coalfields Ltd.
,

     reported in 2010 SCC OnLine Pat 2674 wherein it was held that there was

     no cogent or valid explanation for charging the 20% excess amount over and

     above the prices notified in 2004, for the period prior to the introduction of

     the New Coal Distribution Policy. It was further observed that the 20% price

     hike was an innovation on part of the appellant herein to illegally

     compensate themselves for the outlay which they had to make by refunding

     33.33% of the price differential paid by the private industries during the e-

     auction era.
119. We find ourselves not in agreement with the reasoning assigned by the High

     Court in
Maa Mundeshwari
(supra) as the same was not substantiated by

     the single judge therein.
In our opinion, the single judge mechanically stated

     that there was a lack of valid explanation without properly considering the
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                           Page 106 of 127
objective of the Interim Coal Policy, the context in which it was introduced

     and the dictum of this Court in
Ashoka Smokless
(supra) and
Pallavi

     Refractories
(supra). It is due to a superficial study of the policy objectives

     and its effects that perhaps the argument of mala fide off-setting of

     compensation impressed upon the bench.
Therefore, the respondents’

     reliance on
Maa Mundeshwari
(supra) is of no avail to them in the case on

     hand.
120.
In
Domco Smokeless
(supra), this Court was seized with the issue of

     whether the coal company therein was in contempt of the High Court’s order

     dated 22.09.2008 in Writ Petition (C) No. 3040 of 2005 which directed the

     coal company to refund the excess price charged during the period running

     from January, 2005 till October, 2007. It was also the case of the petitioner

     therein that the refund for the period between 01.01.2007 to March 2008

     remained pending. It is pertinent to note that this period comprises the

     interim period before the introduction of the New Coal Distribution Policy

     for which the Interim Coal Policy was applicable.
121. The factual and legal findings in
Domco Smokeless
(supra) are summarised

     as follows for better exposition of law:
a)   Admittedly, the Writ Petition (C) No. 3040 of 2005 was filed by the

          petitioner therein to pray for grant of refund of the excess price
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 107 of 127
collected by the M/s. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. under the e-auction

          policy, in terms of the interim order dated 12.12.2005 in
Ashoka

          Smokeless
(supra).
The relevant findings in the said order are

          reproduced in paragraph 15 of
Domco Smokeless
(supra) and

          paragraph 116(c) of this judgment.
b)   In the Writ Petition (C) No. 3040 of 2005, the petitioner therein filed

          the Interlocutory Application No. 4 of 2008 seeking a direction to

          refund the excess price paid over and above the notified price for the

          period between January, 2005 to October, 2007 along with 12% interest

          per annum. It is worth noting that this period includes the interim period

          after the striking down of the e-auction system on 01.12.2006 and prior

          to the introduction of the New Coal Distribution Policy (finally brought

          into effect from March 2008).
c)   Interestingly, the single judge of the High Court of Jharkhand allowed

          the Interlocutory Application No. 4 of 2008 vide the order dated

          22.08.2008, without going into the merits of the validity of the Interim

          Coal Policy and relied only on the undertaking provided by the learned

          Solicitor General of India in
Somal Pipes (P) Ltd. v. Coal India Ltd.
,

          reported in (2009) 16 SCC 721 wherein this Court vide the order dated

          30.10.2007 directed for refund on the basis of the said undertaking of

          the Solicitor General. A perusal of the order dated 30.10.2007 indicates
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 108 of 127
that no period was stipulated by this Court while directing for refund,

          nor was any period mentioned by the Solicitor General according to the

          undertaking as recorded by the Court therein.
The order dated

          30.10.2007 in
Somal Pipes
(supra) is reproduced below:
“1. Let the amount deposited by Coal India Ltd. be invested
               on a short-term fixed deposit for sixty days.
2. It is stated by the learned Solicitor General that Mr A.P.
               Singh, General Manager (Sales), CCL, has not been able
               to appear in Court today as his father has expired. His
               personal appearance is exempted. The learned Solicitor
               General appearing on behalf of the alleged contemnors
               tenders an unqualified apology on their behalf. The
               learned Solicitor General does not press the other IAs. He
               also does not press the other contentions raised in the
               affidavits of the respective alleged contemnors. It is
               submitted by the learned Solicitor General that the amount
               paid by the petitioners, in excess of the notified price shall
               be refunded to them upon verification of the documents
               which may be submitted in that behalf.
3. We, while accepting the apology tendered by the alleged
               contemnors, direct as under:
(i) The petitioners shall furnish all documents to the
                    learned Advocates-on-Record of the respondents,
                    showing the actual payments made to any of the
                    subsidiaries of Coal India Ltd. and the difference
                    between the amount paid and the amount notified by
                    12-11-2007.
(ii) The documents furnished by the petitioners shall be
                    verified by the officers of the coal companies
                    concerned within four weeks thereafter.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 109 of 127
(iii) In case of any difference, the learned counsel would
                    deliberate upon the matter so as to enable them to
                    come out with an accepted solution.
(iv) The bank guarantee furnished by the petitioners shall
                    stand discharged.
In view of the aforementioned directions, personal
               appearance of the alleged contemnors is dispensed with till
               further orders.
4. Post this matter for further orders, if any, on 8-1-2008.”
                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
d)   Despite the absence of the period for which the undertaking was

          provided, the single judge proceeded to grant refund to the petitioner in

          Writ Petition (C) No. 3040 of 2005 for the period covered by the

          Interim Coal Policy. When M/s Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. did not make

          payments towards the refund granted in the order dated 22.08.2008, the

          petitioner therein filed the Cont. Case (Civil) No. 247 of 2010 before

          the High Court.
e)   While adjudicating the said contempt case, the High Court of

          Jharkhand vide order dated 29.05.2010 directed the coal companies to

          refund the excess amount charged during the period mentioned in the

          order dated 22.08.2008 including the period covered by the Interim

          Coal Policy on the ground that a similar issue was addressed by the

          High Court at Patna in
Maa Mundeshwari
(supra) by granting refund

          of the 20% excess price collected by the coal companies.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                           Page 110 of 127
f)   The order dated 29.05.2010 was challenged by the concerned coal

          company before this Court in SLP (Civil) No. 21019 of 2010 with the

          cause title M/s. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. v. M/s. Domco Smokeless

          Fuels Pvt. Ltd. In the order dated 09.09.2010, this Court gave a short

          order wherein it found fit to not interfere with the proceedings before

          the High Court. The said order is reproduced below:
“In the order passed, the High Court had held that in the
               facts and circumstances of the present case, a prima facie
               case was made out for initiation of the contempt
               proceeding but instead of proceeding further, the High
               Court thought it appropriate to issue a direction to the
               petitioners herein to refund the amount collected in excess
               of the notified price together with interest. Having heard
               the learned counsel appearing for the parties and in the
               peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case, we
               do not find any reason to interfere with the impugned order
               and dispose of the Special Leave Petition without
               expressing any opinion on the merit of the case. The
               Special Leave Petition, is accordingly, dismissed.”
g)   Shortly thereafter, the petitioners therein filed another Cont. Case

          (Civil) No. 403 of 2011 to remedy the non-compliance by the coal

          companies of the orders dated 22.08.2008 and 29.05.2010. This

          contempt case was dismissed by the High Court. As a result, the

          petitioners filed an appeal before this Court in
Domco Smokeless
(supra).
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                         Page 111 of 127
h)   This Court noted that for the period between 12.12.2005 to 01.12.2006,

          the excess amount had been refunded by the coal companies and only

          the issue as regards the interest payable on the refunded amount

          survived in respect of the said period.
i)   As regards the question of refund for the remaining period till March

          2008, the learned Bench in
Domco Smokeless
(supra) was not inclined

          to agree with the submission canvassed by the coal companies that the

          validity of the 20% increase over and above the notified price was

          under challenge before a different Bench of this Court in SLP (Civil)

          No. 21888 of 2012. It was held that the claim of the petitioner therein

          for refund of excess amounts charged during the period between

          01.01.2007 and March 2008 stood concluded with the rejection of the

          SLP (Civil) No. 21019 of 2010 as the issue inter se the parties came to

          be decided by this Court’s order dated 09.09.2010.
j)   We find ourselves to be in agreement with the findings of the learned

          Bench in respect of the dispute regarding the interest component.

          Therefore, we need not go into the discussion as regards the percentage

          of interest to be charged.
122. However, with all due deference and humility at our command, we find it

     difficult to agree with the grant of refund for the period covering the Interim
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 112 of 127
Coal Policy because another court that is, another bench was already in

     seisin of the larger question regarding validity of the said policy and had

     passed the order dated 09.08.2012 in favour of the appellants herein wherein

     a stay had been granted in respect of the directions of the High Court for

     payment of refund.
123. As regards the argument of unjust enrichment raised by the appellant herein,

     we are conscious of the fact that this Court in
Tetulia Coke
(supra),
SJ Coke
(supra) and
Horra Coke
(supra) respectively has rejected the same on the

     basis of the reasons provided in
Tetulia Coke
(supra) which have been

     discussed in paragraph 116(e) of this judgment. However, a bare perusal of

     the factual background in which the argument of unjust enrichment was

     rejected in the aforesaid decisions indicates that there is a significant

     difference between the circumstances prevailing in those cases and the case

     in hand.
124.
In
Tetulia Coke
(supra),
SJ Coke
(supra) and
Horra Coke
(supra) and other

     similar judgments, the petitioners therein were demanding a refund of the

     33.33% of the excess amount paid by them for drawing coal under the e-

     auction system.
However, it is worth noting that this excess amount was not

     paid by them to the coal companies in the normal course of transaction,

     rather it was paid in compliance of the direction of this Court in its interim
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                           Page 113 of 127
order dated 12.12.2005 during the pendency of
Ashoka Smokeless
(supra)

     along with an undertaking that the remaining 66.66% amount would be paid

     by them in the event the e-auction system was held to be constitutional. In

     such circumstances, we are of the opinion that the possibility of passing on

     the adverse cost impact to the consumers from the date on which coal was

     purchased by the e-auction process, seems unlikely, though not impossible.
125. On the other hand, the excess amount to the tune of 20% of the notified price

     has been paid by the respondents herein to the coal companies in the normal

     course of transaction and from the date on which they purchased coal under

     the Interim Coal Policy. Since the cost impact was in the nature of normal

     course of business, it is most likely that the respondents might have passed

     the same onto the end consumers. Such apprehension could have very well

     been addressed by the respondents by providing verified documents of sales

     made during the time period in which the Interim Coal Policy was in

     existence. However, the same was not done for reasons best known to them.

     In such a case, we do not find the appellant’s apprehensions of unjust

     enrichment to be misplaced.
126. This Court in
Tetulia Coke
(supra),
SJ Coke
(supra) and
Horra Coke
(supra) respectively also rejected the argument of unjust enrichment on the

     ground that it was not raised before the court of first instance and was not
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                          Page 114 of 127
pleaded even in the memorandum of appeal. This reasoning has been used

     by the respondents herein to argue that the plea of unjust enrichment was

     taken at a belated stage even in the case at hand and therefore, deserves to

     be dismissed.
127. However, we do not agree with the respondents’ submission in this regard.
We are in fact dismayed to see that the division bench of the High Court

     dealt with the issue of refund at great length but chose to dismiss the plea of

     unjust enrichment raised by the appellant with absolutely no reasoning,

     despite the fact that both the submissions were made by the parties at a

     belated stage, that is during the stage of appeal. If we are to agree with the

     reasons of rejection of a plea given in
Tetulia Coke
(supra),
SJ Coke
(supra)

     and
Horra Coke
(supra) to only dismiss the belated plea of unjust

     enrichment, then analogously, we must also reject the request of refund

     made by the respondents herein. If we reject only one out of the two

     submissions made belatedly, then it would be a travesty of procedural

     justice. Considering that we are already in seisin of the issue of refund, we

     find ourselves compelled to give the argument of unjust enrichment equal

     weightage.
128.
In this regard, we may refer to the judgment delivered in
Mafatlal Industries

     Ltd. v. Union of India
, reported in (1997) 5 SCC 536 wherein the concept
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 115 of 127
of ‘unjust enrichment’ in relation to transactions between the State and

     private parties or levies imposed by the State, was discussed by this Court.
129. The High Court, while dealing with
Mafatlal
(supra) made no observations

     as regards the applicability of the concept of unjust enrichment and

     dismissed the argument of the appellant in a mechanical and non-speaking

     manner. Therefore, we find it apposite to refer to the same in great detail to

     determine whether the plea of unjust enrichment holds any water.
130. The observations made in paragraph 83 and 308 of
Mafatlal
(supra) are

     summarized below:
a)   The general principle of unjust enrichment requires a three-pronged

          determination: first, that a party has been enriched upon receipt of a

          benefit; secondly, such enrichment is at the expense of the other party;
and lastly, that the retention of enrichment is unjust. Only when these

          three requisites are satisfied that a case for restitution of benefit is made

          out.
b)   In the context of a refund, the party who is seeking the refund has to

          establish that it has not passed on the burden of the duty or similarly,

          the adverse cost impact to a third party. The burden of proof in this

          regard is necessarily on the person demanding the refund. If it is
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 116 of 127
established that the burden of a levy or an adverse cost impact was

          already transferred to a third party, then the refund cannot be granted.
c)   It was recognized that if the burden of a duty is passed onto a third

          party, then the monies in possession of the State which are sought to be

          reclaimed by the person seeking refund, do not belong to either the

          State or such person asking for refund. It is the third party who is

          suffering the loss caused by the burden of duty or adverse cost impact.

          However, it may not always be possible to restore such third parties to

          the position in which they were prior to the shifting of burden on them.
d)   In such cases also, it cannot be said that the State, by retaining the

          monies and not refunding the same to the person seeking refund, is

          getting enriched unjustly. It was held by this Court that the concept of

          unjust enrichment is not applicable on the State which is in position

          of parens patrea. In the event that the monies in question are unable to

          be restored to the third party that actually suffered the loss, it would be

          better for the State to retain the same even if it does not belong to it.

          This is because the State is obligated to use such monies for public

          purposes as against the party seeking refund, for whom such monies

          would only be a windfall. Therefore, in no circumstance was it possible

          to prefer the party seeking refund over the State for the purpose of

          retaining the monies lawfully belonging to a third party.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 117 of 127
The relevant portion of the judgment in
Mafatlal
(supra) is reproduced

     below:
“83. We are also of the respectful opinion that Kanhaiya
              Lal [1959 SCR 1350 : AIR 1959 SC 135 : (1958) 9 STC 747]
              is not right in saying that the defence of spending away the
              amount of tax collected under an unconstitutional law is not
              a good defence to a claim for refund. We think it is, subject
              to this rider : Where the petitioner-plaintiff alleges and
              establishes that he has not passed on the burden of the duty
              to others, his claim for refund may not be refused. In other
              words, if he is not able to allege and establish that he has not
              passed on the burden to others, his claim for refund will be
              rejected whether such a claim is made in a suit or a writ
              petition. It is a case of balancing public interest vis-à-vis
              private interest. Where the petitioner-plaintiff has not himself
              suffered any loss or prejudice (having passed on the burden
              of the duty to others), there is no justice or equity in refunding
              the tax (collected without the authority of law) to him merely
              because he paid it to the State. It would be a windfall to him.
              As against it, by refusing refund, the monies would continue
              to be with the State and available for public purposes. The
              money really belongs to a third party — neither to the
              petitioner/plaintiff nor to the State — and to such third party
              it must go. But where it cannot be so done, it is better that it
              is retained by the State. By any standard of reasonableness,
              it is difficult to prefer the petitioner-plaintiff over the State.
              Taxes are necessary for running the State and for various
              public purposes and this is the view taken in all jurisdictions.
              It has also been emphasised by this Court in D.
              Cawasji [(1975) 1 SCC 636 : 1975 SCC (Tax) 172 : (1975) 2
              SCR 511] wherein Mathew, J. not only pointed out the
              irrational and unjust consequences flowing from the holding
              in Bhailal Bhai [(1964) 6 SCR 261 : AIR 1964 SC 1006 :
(1964) 15 STC 450] and Aluminium Industries [(1965) 16
              STC 689 : 1965 Ker LT 517 (SC)] but also pointed out the
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                               Page 118 of 127
adverse impact on public interest resulting from the holding
             that expending the taxes collected by the State is not a valid
             defence. (See paras 48 and 49). This would not be a case of
             unjust enrichment of the State, as suggested by the
             petitioners-appellants. The very idea of “unjust enrichment”
             is inappropriate in the case of the State, which is in position
             of parens patrea, as held in
Charan Lal Sahu v. Union of
             India
[(1990) 1 SCC 613] (SCC at p. 649). And even if such
             a concept is tenable, even then, it should be noticed that the
             State is not being enriched at the expense of the petitioner-
plaintiff but at someone else's expense who is not the
             petitioner-plaintiff. As rightly explained by Saikia, J.
             in
Mahabir Kishore v. State of M.P.
[(1989) 4 SCC 1, 8 (para
11) : (1989) 3 SCR 596] , “the principle of unjust enrichment
             requires — first that the defendant has been ‘enriched’ by the
             receipt of a ‘benefit’; secondly, that this enrichment is ‘at the
             expense of the plaintiff’; and thirdly, that the retention of the
             enrichment be unjust. This justifies restitution.” We agree
             with the holding in Air Canada [(1989) 59 DLR (4th) 161,
             Can SC] (quoting Professor George C. Palmer) that in such
             a case, “it seems preferable to leave the enrichment with the
             tax authority instead of putting the judicial machinery in
             motion for the purpose of shifting the same enrichment to the
             taxpayer”. […]”
---xxx---
308. It is open to the court to deny the equitable remedy of
             refund (restitution) in such cases. The attempt of persons who
             have passed on the liability in claiming refund is only to strike
             at a bargain — to make a fortune at the expense of
             innumerable unidentifiable consumers. Such persons have
             suffered no loss. On the other hand, if the State is allowed to
             retain the amount, it will be available to the community at
             large and could be made use of for public purposes. On this
             basis as well, the denial of refund or restitution is valid. There
             is nothing abhorrent or against public policy if refund or
             restitution is withheld in such a situation. It should also be
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                              Page 119 of 127
stated that in cases of indirect levy of tax which was passed
               on, this Court has negatived the claim for refund in a few
               cases, mentioned in para 300 (supra) […].
(Emphasis supplied)
131. What is discernible from the aforesaid exposition of law is that where there

     is an apprehension that the party who is seeking refund may have passed the

     adverse cost impact or burden of loss onto a third party, then in such cases,

     no refund ought to be granted. In such cases, the onus is on the State to retain

     such monies and use the same for public purposes in its role as parens

     patrea.
132. However, before we reach a conclusion as regards the plea of unjust

     enrichment, we must satisfy ourselves whether the understanding of the said

     plea in
Tetulia Coke
(supra),
SJ Coke
(supra) and
Horra Coke
(supra)

     respectively is correct or not.
It was held in
Tetulia Coke
(supra) that the

     plea of unjust enrichment was not maintainable in cases of refund of excess

     price charged and that the same was applicable only in cases where the

     refund sought was of a wrongful levy of tax, duty or cess.
133. With all humility at our command, we disagree with the aforesaid reason.
While we are conscious of the fact that the question of unjust enrichment

     due to refund was discussed in
Mafatlal
(supra) in the context of the levy of

     a duty, yet such difference of fact does not incapacitate the courts from
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 120 of 127
applying the principles expounded in
the said judgment
to other cases of

     retaining of monies by the State.
134. The principles of unjust enrichment are of general application and it is

     incumbent upon the courts to not to allow someone a benefit that is not due

     to them. This is evident from the this Court’s judgment in
State of M.P. v.

     Vyankatlal
, reported in (1985) 2 SCC 544, wherein the State of Madhya

     Pradesh had fixed the supply price of sugar higher than the ex-factory price.

     The difference between the two prices was supposed to be routed to the

     Madhya Bharat Government Sugar Fund with the purported purpose of

     augmenting the production of sugar. The refund of such difference between

     the two prices was claimed by sugar factories on the ground that the recovery

     of additional price was done to augment general revenues of the State and

     that the State had no legislative competence to fix additional prices for the

     purposes of a Sugar Fund. This Court agreed with the sugar factories and

     held the fixation of the additional price to be invalid. However, on the

     question of refund, it was observed by the Court that since the burden of the

     additional price was shifted to the end consumer, no refund was required to

     be granted to the sugar factories.
The relevant paragraphs of
the said judgment
are reproduced below:
“14. The principles
laid down in
the aforesaid cases were
             based on the specific provisions in those Acts but the same
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                          Page 121 of 127
principles can safely be applied to the facts of the present
             case inasmuch as in the present case also the respondents
             had not to pay the amount from their coffers. The burden of
             paying the amount in question was transferred by the
             respondents to the purchasers and, therefore, they were not
             entitled to get a refund. Only the persons on whom lay the
             ultimate burden to pay the amount would be entitled to get a
             refund of the same. The amount deposited towards the Fund
             was to be utilised for the development of sugarcane. If it is
             not possible to identify the persons on whom had the burden
             been placed for payment towards the Fund, the amount of the
             Fund can be utilised by the Government for the purpose for
             which the Fund was created, namely, development of
             sugarcane. There is no question of refunding the amount to
             the respondents who had not eventually paid the amount
             towards the Fund. Doing so would virtually amount to allow
             the respondents unjust enrichment.”
                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
135. In the case on hand, the respondents did not provide any evidence,

     declaration or undertaking that they had not passed the burden of loss onto

     the end consumers before either the learned Single Judge or the Division

     Bench of the High Court. It is only at the stage of second appeal that they

     have sought to rebut the burden of proof in this regard despite raising the

     said plea before the Division Bench. It is trite law that generally, parties are

     not allowed to introduce new documents in a second appeal because at this

     stage, the focus is on questions of law rather than on new evidence. While

     we do not approve of the conduct of the respondents in not adducing relevant

     evidence before the High Court when they first prayed for the relief of
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                            Page 122 of 127
refund, yet we may exercise our discretion and allow such additional

     documents for the purpose of properly addressing this issue.
136. The appellant company in its rejoinder, has further submitted that the

     additional documents brought on the record do not show the complete set of

     accounts with all relevant bills for the period annexed thereto. It is the case

     of the appellant that even the incomplete documents so submitted are not

     valid as the bills enclosed have not been certified by any authorised person

     and they do not carry printed serial numbers to justify their genuineness.
137. Upon a perusal of the additional documents provided by the respondents, we

     find that the CA certificates have been provided only in respect of the

     respondent nos. 1, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14 and 16. As regards the bills attached,

     they have been provided only by respondent nos. 11 and 13, that too only

     nine and ten bills respectively. In our considered opinion, we cannot rely

     upon CA certificates of the balance sheets from the relevant period of time

     unless the same are bolstered by complete and irrefutable evidence. The

     burden of proof for showing that the excess amount has not been passed onto

     the end consumers, could have been satisfied only when the respondents

     brought on the record, a detailed description of all the transactions against

     which they wanted refund. Such demand ought to have been supported by

     the bills of all the transactions for which refund was sought.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                             Page 123 of 127
138. When adjudicating questions of refunds to be made by the State or its

     instrumentalities, we must bear in mind that such refund will be granted

     from public money. Therefore, the relief of refund must be provided only

     when the same is corroborated by complete and irrefutable evidence. In the

     present case, only eight out of twenty-three respondents have placed

     additional documents before us. Unfortunately, such documents are also

     incomplete and do not evoke confidence in their veracity. In such

     circumstances, we are unable to place reliance on the additional documents

     put forth by the respondents.
139. Therefore, in view of the dictum of this Court in
Mafatlal
(supra), we find

     merit in the submission canvassed by the appellant company.
140. We may, with a view to obviate any confusion, also reiterate that since the

     refund in terms of this Court’s judgments in
Tetulia Coke
(supra),
SJ Coke
(supra) and
Horra Coke
(supra) is not applicable to the case at hand, there

     is no occasion for us to deal with the issue of interest to be charged

     thereupon.
Therefore, we do not touch upon the observations made by this

     Court in
Domco
(supra) at this point in that respect.
141. Before we part with the judgment, we must address a short but important

     fact brought to our notice by the respondents. It was brought to our attention

     that the learned Solicitor General had given an undertaking to this Court
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                           Page 124 of 127
when it was hearing the matter in
Somal Pipes
(supra) wherein he had stated

     that the refund of the excess amount charged for sale of coal prior to the

     notification of prices on 12.11.2007 would be granted provided that the

     parties seeking refund furnished the documents required by the appellant

     company for verification of purchase. As the period during which the

     Interim Coal Policy was in existence, that is 15.12.2006 to 31.03.2008, was

     included in such undertaking, the respondents herein have requested for

     refund.
142. We are of the view that such undertaking would hold good in the scenario

     where the validity of the Interim Coal Policy was not brought into dispute.

     Once the respondents herein filed the writ petition impugning the interim

     price determined by the appellant, the whole policy became sub-judice and

     the question of refund became contingent on the result of the litigation. Due

     to these developments, the undertaking of the learned Solicitor General

     paled into insignificance for the period between 15.12.2006 to 31.03.2008.

     Such undertaking, therefore, vests no right in the respondents to receive

     refund.
143. In such view of the matter, we are of the considered opinion that no refund

     could have been granted to the respondents herein even if we had declared
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                          Page 125 of 127
the Interim Coal Policy to be invalid. However, the said question is now

     moot.
E.   CONCLUSION
144. For all the foregoing reasons, we have reached the conclusion that the High

     Court committed an egregious error in passing the impugned judgment. We

     are left with no other option but to set aside the impugned judgment and

     order dated 04.04.2012 passed by the High Court. In the result, the appeal

     succeeds and is hereby allowed.
145. We find that the question of validity of the Interim Coal Policy was

     important to be addressed, therefore, we allow the I.A. No. 1 of 2015.
146. For the reasons discussed in the foregoing, we find the Interim Coal Policy

     to be valid. As a consequence, the request of refund by the respondents’ is

     dismissed.
147. The transfer cases tagged herewith are disposed of in terms of this judgment.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                          Page 126 of 127
148. Pending application(s), if any, are disposed of.
…………………………………J.
                                                    (J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                              ………………………………….J.
                                                   (R. MAHADEVAN)

New Delhi.
12th September, 2025.
SLP (C) No. 21888 of 2012                                  Page 127 of 127