[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shyam Lal vs Shriram General Insurance Co Ltd on 4 September, 2025
2025 INSC 1078
                                                                                  Reportable

                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                   Civil Appeal Nos. 5177-81 of 2022
                                  Shyam Lal
                                                                                  …Appellant
                                                                  Versus
                                  Shriram General
                                  Insurance Co. Ltd. and Others.
                                                                               …Respondents
                                                                JUDGMENT
K. VINOD CHANDRAN, J.
The owner of the utility vehicle involved in an

                                  accident, which gave rise to 5 claim petitions, has filed

                                  the instant appeal challenging the order of “pay and

                                  recover” issued by the High Court in the appeal filed by

                                  the Insurance Company. The High Court found that the

                                  utility vehicle was not entitled to carry passengers by

                                  reason of the specific restriction in the policy which is

                                  evident from “Limitation as to Use”. The contention was

                                  that the 4 passengers excluding the driver who were
Signature Not Verified
entitled to travel in the utility vehicle, are only
Digitally signed by
babita pandey
Date: 2025.09.06
12:32:12 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 9
Civil Appeal Nos. 5177-81 of 2022
      employees who come under the purview of Workmen’s
Compensation Act, 1923
.
2.         The learned Counsel for the appellant-owner took

      us through the Certificate of Registration (Annexure P1),

      the contract carriage permit (Annexure P2) and the

      package policy (Annexure P3) which indicated the

      seating capacity including the driver to be 4+1. It is

      argued that the limitation as to use insofar as carriage of

      goods applies only to a goods vehicle and not an utility

      vehicle which can carry both passengers and goods.

      There is no ground for ordering “pay and recovery” in the

      facts and circumstances of the case, especially when the

      Insurance Company had not taken a defence that the

      vehicle was insured as a goods vehicle. The claimants

      are the legal representatives of the deceased who were

      either travelling in the vehicle or standing/walking at the

      accident site.
3.         The learned Counsel for the Insurance Company,

      however, contended that there could be no plea of goods
Page 2 of 9
Civil Appeal Nos. 5177-81 of 2022
      being carried in the vehicle because one of the deceased

      was a student and the others; a catering employee, a

      painter, an employee in the postal department and an

      unemployed man. The restriction squarely applies, and

      the passengers cannot be said to be validly covered

      under the policy. It is also argued that even if the

      passengers are said to be owners of goods or his

      representative, there could not have been more than four

      passengers in the vehicle, when the claim petitions were

      numbering five. There was also an allegation of nine

      deaths having occurred in the accident, which clearly

      indicates overloading.
4.         The appeal was filed only on the ground of the

      limitation in the policy. The Tribunal found the

      negligence and rashness in the driving of the utility

      vehicle and the vehicle is covered by a valid package

      policy        issued          by   the   Insurance   Company    are

      established. Having gone through the records, we see

      that the certificate of registration indicates the class of the
Page 3 of 9
Civil Appeal Nos. 5177-81 of 2022
      offending vehicle to be an Utility Van which has a seating

      capacity of 5, including the driver. The permit issued as

      a contract carriage, also allows 5 passengers to be

      carried in the vehicle. A ‘contract carriage’ as defined

      under
Section 2(7)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 means

      a motor vehicle which carries a passenger or passengers

      for hire or reward and is engaged under an express or

      implied          contract     and   includes   a   motor    cab

      notwithstanding that separate fares are charged for its

      passengers. This is in clear distinction with a ‘goods

      carriage’ defined under
Section 2(14)
of the Act which is

      a vehicle constructed or adapted or used solely for the

      carriage of goods.
5.         The package policy produced shows the make &

      model as seen from the Certificate of Registration

      indicating the vehicle to be manufactured by Mahindra &

      Mahindra, a Bolero Camper Utility DC, 2WD, BS2. The

      utility vehicle obviously is for carriage of passengers and

      goods; the passengers not being necessarily the owners
Page 4 of 9
Civil Appeal Nos. 5177-81 of 2022
      of the goods as seen from the seating capacity of 4+1

      including the driver specified also in the insurance

      policy. In the above circumstances, it cannot be said that

      the vehicle was insured as a goods vehicle, which is not

      specified in the policy and hence ‘the limitation as to the

      use only of carriage of goods’ does not apply; the utility

      vehicle being the vehicle registered with a seating

      capacity of 5 passengers including the driver, and the

      permit issued being one of a contract carriage also

      indicating 5 passengers including the driver to be

      carried within it.
6.         In this context, we have also gone through the

      evidence of the Branch Manager in charge of the

      Insurance Company which is produced as Annexure

      No.P6. In chief examination, it was stated that though the

      seating capacity is shown as 4+1 including the driver, the

      premium was taken only for the owner driver and no

      separate amounts were charged for the passengers;

      which is contrary to the recitals in the document. In cross
Page 5 of 9
Civil Appeal Nos. 5177-81 of 2022
      examination, the witness admitted that the insurance of

      any vehicle is issued after perusing the records of the

      vehicle like, registration certificate, fitness and permit

      validity. It was admitted that the insurance policy was

      issued to the owner, in accordance with the rules and

      looking at the registration certificate, wherein the

      category of the vehicle is registered as “Utility Van”. The

      witness further admitted that the seating capacity in the

      policy is also written as 4+1 and that there is no recital in

      the policy document regarding the premium for

      passengers having not been charged. It has also been

      deposed, which is again a clear admission, that the utility

      van is a vehicle in which half portion is used for carrying

      of goods and half portion in front is used for carrying

      passengers. Hence, there can be no restriction insofar as

      the ‘limitation as to use’ as found in the policy which

      applies only to goods vehicles while the present vehicle

      as per the certificate of registration is a utility vehicle and

      the permit issued is of a contract carriage. The package
Page 6 of 9
Civil Appeal Nos. 5177-81 of 2022
      policy was issued by the Insurance Company after

      looking at the certificate of registration and the permit

      issued and it has been clearly specified that the vehicle

      is entitled to carry 4+1 passengers in addition to the

      goods.         The       Insurance   Company   in   the    above

      circumstance, cannot wriggle out of its liability to

      indemnify the owner.
7.         The contention regarding 5 persons having filed

      claim petitions, indicating more than 4 persons having

      been carried in the vehicle, though is attractive has no

      significance on the facts as revealed from the order of the

      Tribunal. The Tribunal, on the basis of the evidence led,

      clearly found that in addition to the passengers carried in

      the vehicle, some pedestrians were also dragged down

      by the vehicle when the accident occurred. The

      eyewitness, PW2 who saw the accident clearly stated that

      just prior to the accident, he saw the vehicle coming with

      4 passengers in it. There was no challenge to the said

      evidence in the cross examination by the Insurance
Page 7 of 9
Civil Appeal Nos. 5177-81 of 2022
      Company. The vehicle having fallen down the gorge,

      with the passengers as also the pedestrians, one of the

      claim petitions is of a pedestrian, which is not clearly

      demarcated for reason of the 5 persons having been

      extricated at the accident site from and around the

      vehicle. We find absolutely no reason to sustain the order

      of the High Court directing pay and recovery. The

      liability is on the Insurance Company and that has to be

      satisfied fully by the Insurance Company.
8.         Before leaving the matter, we notice that insofar as

      one of the claim petitions, MACT Case No. 134 of 2014

      relatable to the compensation for the death of one

      Jagdish Prasad Gaur, there was a contention taken in the

      appeal filed before the High Court by the Insurance

      Company that no deduction towards 1/3rd of the amount

      determined as compensation for loss of income, as

      personal expenses has been made by the Tribunal. We

      did not have the benefit of going through the order of the

      Tribunal since the same was not produced before us.
Page 8 of 9
Civil Appeal Nos. 5177-81 of 2022
      However, in the fitness of things especially since just

      compensation is to be awarded, we are of the opinion

      that in computing the income at the time of disbursing the

      amount, the Tribunal shall ensure that 1/3rd deduction is

      made from the total loss of income computed before

      disbursing the amounts directed in MACT Case No. 134

      of 2014 relatable to Appeal No. 607 of 2016.
9.         The appeals hence stand allowed with the above

      reservation, setting aside the judgment of the High Court

      and restoring the order of the Tribunal with the

      modification to one of the awards as mentioned above.
10.        Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed

      of.
…….…………………….….. J.
(K. VINOD CHANDRAN)


                                     …….…………………….….. J.
(N. V. ANJARIA)

      NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 04, 2025.
Page 9 of 9
Civil Appeal Nos. 5177-81 of 2022