[Cites
29
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Tarun Sharma vs State Of Haryana on 1 September, 2025
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
2025 INSC 1139




                                                                                   REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
                                 (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No (s). 3965 of 2025)


                            TARUN SHARMA                                     ….APPELLANT(S)


                                                           VERSUS


                            STATE OF HARYANA                              ….RESPONDENT(S)



                                                     JUDGMENT
Mehta, J.
1.     Heard.
2.     Leave granted.
3.     This appeal by special leave takes exception to
                            the judgment dated 24th September, 2024 passed by
                            the Division Bench of High Court of Punjab and
                            Haryana1 in CRA-D-1161-DB-2013 whereby the
                            appeal preferred by the appellant under Section
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2025.09.23
15:38:14 IST
Reason:                  1 Hereinafter being referred to as the “High Court”.
1
374(2) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 19732 was
dismissed and the judgment and order dated 26th
August, 2013 passed by the Additional Sessions
Judge, Ambala3 in Sessions Case No. 11-SC of 2012
was affirmed.
4.     By the aforesaid judgment, the trial Court
convicted the accused-appellant for the offence
punishable under
Section 302
of the Indian Penal
Code, 18604 and sentenced him to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.5000/-,
in default, to further undergo simple imprisonment
for three months.
Brief Facts: -
5.     Succinctly stated, the case of the prosecution is
that on 1st April, 2012, an information was received
at the police station Mullana at around 05:30 PM
regarding admission of one Munish Kumar into
GMCH         Sector      32,     Chandigarh             in   an   injured
condition.            On receipt of this information, Sub-
Inspector,        Somnath         (PW-17),        along      with   Head
Constable, Dharam Pal (PW-11) proceeded to the said


2 For short, “
CrPC
”.
3 Hereinafter being referred to as the “trial Court”.
4 For short, “
IPC
”.
2
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
hospital where they were apprised that injured
Munish Kumar had been shifted to the PGI,
Chandigarh for treatment.         Accordingly, the police
officials proceeded to the PGI, Chandigarh and filed
an application (Exh. P-32) before the concerned
Medical Officer seeking opinion regarding the fitness
of Munish Kumar to give a statement. It is stated that
the Medical Officer recorded his opinion (Exh. P-33)
declaring the injured Munish Kumar to be fit for
making a statement. Thereupon, the Sub-Inspector,
Somnath (PW-17), proceeded to record the statement
of the injured Munish Kumar (Exh. P-34) wherein he
alleged inter alia as below: -
“He was a resident of Village Jahangirpur, P.S.
    Mullana and was doing a private job. On 31st March,
    2012, at about 10:00 PM, he and his brother Amit
    were returning to their village from Ambala by car.
    When they reached near Mullana, they were
    intercepted by a Scorpio car and an Alto car. Three
    persons alighted from one of the vehicles, two of
    whom were alleged to be Bittoo and Sanjay and the
    other person was connected to Krishna Transport
    who went by the name of Tarun Sharma. He did not
    know the identity of the other man. These persons
    broke into his car and launched an attack on him.
    Tarun Sharma inflicted a knife blow on the right side
    of his stomach whereas Sanjay inflicted a knife blow
    on his head. Bittoo and the other bearded person
    held him down. The assailants beat him up
    mercilessly. Amit was kept confined in the car. The
    assailants took away his mobile and the purse. Amit
    called his friends who got Munish admitted at the
3
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
     CHC, Mullana from where he was shifted to the
     Government Hospital, Ambala Cantt and then to
     General Hospital, Ambala City. Subsequently, he was
     referred to GMCH, Sector-32, Chandigarh and
     thereafter was referred to PGI Chandigarh.”
6.    The aforesaid statement of the injured Munish
Kumar was treated to be the first information report
of the incident and based thereupon, an FIR No. 58
dated 1st April, 2012 came to be registered at P.S.
Mullana for the offences punishable under
Sections
323
,
324
, 506 read with
Section 34
of the IPC.
7.    The investigation was undertaken by Sub-
Inspector, Somnath (PW-17). Munish Kumar expired
on 14th April, 2012, upon which offence punishable
under
Section 302
IPC was added to the case. Inquest
panchnama was drawn and thereafter, postmortem
was carried out on the dead body of the deceased and
statements of witnesses were recorded. The accused
Tarun Sharma (accused No.1/appellant herein),
Sandeep Sharma (accused No. 2), Balwinder Singh
(accused No. 3) and Deepak Bhardwaj (accused No.
4) were arrested.        It is alleged that, acting in
furtherance     of information/disclosure       statement
(Exh. P-24) dated 11th April, 2012, the accused-
appellant     proceeded     to    point   out   the   knife
4
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
purportedly used for causing injuries to Munish
Kumar. The said knife was recovered and seized vide
seizure memo (Exh. P-6).
8.       It is relevant to mention that, at a later stage of
investigation, the prosecution tried to claim that
Ashok Kumar (PW-2) was also present in the same
vehicle in which the deceased Munish Kumar was
travelling.
9.       Upon    conclusion       of   investigation,   Sub-
Inspector, Randhir Singh (PW-25), found Sanjay to be
innocent and hence he was not charge sheeted in the
case.
10. Chargesheet was filed against Tarun Sharma
(accused No. 1/appellant herein), Sandeep Sharma
(accused No. 2), Balwinder Singh (accused No. 3) and
Deepak Bhardwaj (accused No. 4) for the offences
punishable under
Sections 323
,
324
,
302
,
506
read
with
Section 34
of the IPC.
11. The case was committed and made over to the
Court of the Additional Sessions Judge, Ambala for
trial.     Charges were framed against the accused
persons for the offence punishable under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
IPC who pleaded not guilty and
claimed trial.
5
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
12. The prosecution examined 25 witnesses (as per
table below) and exhibited certain documents to
prove its case.
PW-1     Amit Bakshi (Brother of deceased
            Munish Kumar)
   PW-2     Ashok Kumar
   PW-3     Ved Prakash
   PW-4     Om Prakash
   PW-5     Narinder Singh
   PW-6     Head Constable Ram Saran
   PW-7     Sub-Inspector Yameen
   PW-8     Shashi Sharma
   PW-9     Dr. Vijay Vivek
  PW-10     Dr. Nand Kumar Jha
  PW-11     Head Constable Dharam Pal
  PW-12     Head Constable Dharamveer
  PW-13     Additional Sub-Inspector Baldev
            Singh
  PW-14     Additional Sub-Inspector Girdhari
            Lal
  PW-15     Head Constable Bahadur Singh
  PW-16     Head Constable Amit Kumar
  PW-17     Sub-Inspector Somnath [Recording
officer of Dying Declaration (Exh.
P34)]
  PW-18     Dr. Amandeep Singh
  PW-19     Constable Gurmeet Singh
  PW-20     Sub-Inspector Balwant Singh
  PW-21     Kuldeep Singh
  PW-22     Additional Sub-Inspector Rajinder
            Singh
  PW-23     Head Constable Dhoom Singh
  PW-24     Sub-Inspector Rishi Kumar
  PW-25     Inspector Randhir Singh
13. The accused were questioned under
Section 313
CrPC      and   upon     being    confronted     with   the
6
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
circumstances       appearing     against   them   in   the
prosecution evidence, they denied the same and
claimed to be innocent. However, no evidence was
led in defence.
14. It may be stated here that the star prosecution
witnesses Amit Bakshi (PW-1), brother of the
deceased Munish Kumar, and Ashok Kumar (PW-2),
did not support the prosecution case and were
declared hostile.
15. Likewise, Ved Prakash (PW-3), Om Parkash
(PW-4) and Narinder Singh (PW-5) who were also
projected as eye-witnesses did not support the
prosecution case.
16. Dr. Vijay Vivek (PW-9) deposed that on 31st
March, 2012, he was serving as a Medical Officer at
the Community Health Centre, Mullana. At about
10:05 PM, injured Munish Kumar was brought to the
emergency ward by his relative with the complaint of
having been assaulted on Devi Mandir Road. On
examination, the injured Munish Kumar was found
to be drowsy due to probable alcohol consumption,
and smell of alcohol was also present in his breath.
The condition of the patient was serious, and he was
complaining of darkness before his eyes. His blood
7
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
pressure was found to be low. The doctor noticed two
clean lacerated wounds, one measuring 4 cm on the
right lateral side of the chest, and the other
measuring 3 cm on the lower lip, placed obliquely on
the left lateral side. Considering the serious condition
of the patient, he was referred to the General
Hospital, Ambala City for expert opinion and further
management.
17. Dr. Nand Kumar Jha (PW-10) deposed that on
1st April, 2012 at about 01:15 AM, injured Munish
Kumar was brought to the emergency ward by his
father, Sardari Lal, and was admitted in the casualty
ward of the Trauma Centre at the General Hospital,
Ambala City. He examined Munish Kumar and found
a stab wound 4 cm x 2 cm, obliquely placed on
posterior axillary line on the lower lateral side of right
chest, with oozing of blood. Two more injuries were
observed: one on the lower jaw, and another on the
posterior part of the parietal region, both with oozing
of blood. Munish Kumar was referred to GMCH,
Sector-32, Chandigarh for ultrasonography and
further management.
18. Head Constable Dharam Pal (PW-11) deposed
about the disclosure statement made by the accused-
8
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
appellant (Exh. P-24) leading to the recovery of a
knife seized vide seizure memo (Exh. P-6). Likewise,
the witness (PW-11) also stated about the recovery of
a Danda and other weapons at the instance of
Sandeep Sharma (accused No.2).
19. ASI Baldev Singh (PW-13) deposed about the
disclosure    statements      made   by   the    accused-
appellant and the recoveries made in pursuance
thereof.
20. We may note at this stage that though the
Investigating    Officer    claims   to   have    effected
recoveries of weapons at the instance of the accused,
the fact remains that the prosecution did not place
on record or prove any serological report for
connecting the recovered weapons with the deceased
based on blood group matching.
21. Since the eye-witnesses Amit Bakshi (PW-1) and
Ashok Kumar (PW-2) turned hostile, the substratum
of   the     prosecution      case    hinges     on    the
statement/dying declaration (Exh. P-34) of deceased
Munish     Kumar     purportedly     recorded    by   Sub-
Inspector, Somnath (PW-17).
22. In this backdrop, the evidence of Sub-Inspector,
Somnath (PW-17), is considered most relevant for
9
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
disposal of the appeal and hence, the relevant portion
of the same are extracted hereinbelow: -
“That on 31.3.2012, I was posted as SI Police
       Station Mullana. On that day, I received rukka
       from PGI Sector- 32, Chandigarh regarding
       admission of injured Munish Kumar. On this
       information I along with HC Dharampal reached
       in PGI, Chandigarh. I moved an application Ex
       P32 seeking opinion of the doctor as to
       whether the injured was fit to make
       statement or not and who vide his opinion Ex
       P33 declared injured fit to make statement.
       Amit Kumar brother of injured Munish Kumar
       was also present near Munish Kumar. In his
       presence Injured Munish Kumar volunteerly got
       recorded his statement which is Ex P34
       (Objected to). He signed this statement at point
       A. Thereafter, I made endorsement under neath
       his statement which is Ex P35 (objected to) and
       send the rukka through HC Dharampal to the
       police station for registration of the case. On the
       basis of which formal FIR E P36 was recorded by
       ASI Rishi Kumar. I identify his signature as I
       have seen him writing and signing during my
       official duties. He also made his endorsement Ex
       237 on the rukka.
On 11.4.2012, I arrested accused Tarun
       Kumar present in the court today. On my
       interrogation accused Tarun Kumar suffered a
       disclosure statement Ex P24 to the effect that the
       knife with which he had caused injuries to
       Munish Kumar, had been kept concealed by him
       in the drawer of the table lying in his shop and
       he could get the same recovered after
       demarcation. This disclosure statement was
       signed by accused as well as by HC Dharam Pal.
       Accused Tarun Sharma led the police party to his
       shop and after demarcation got recovered one
10
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
       knife (Chhuri) the sketch of the same Ex P7 was
       prepared and it was converted into a parcel and
       sealed with the seal of SN and it was taken into
       possession vide memo Ex P6. The sketch and
       recovered memo was attested by accused, Ved
       Parkash and HC Dharampal.”
                                   (Emphasis supplied)
23. In    cross-examination        the    witness    (PW-17)
stated as below: -
“I had received Telephonic Message from police
       post of GMCH, Sector-32, Chandigarh on
       31.3.2012 at about 1.30 PM. Prior to it no
       information was received from either CHC
       Mullana or Civil Hospital, Ambala. I had received
       these rukkas from the doctors of CHC Mullana
       and Civil Hospital Ambala again said only from
       CHC Mullana. I had never visited Civil Hospital,
       Ambala I did not receive or collect any medical
       report of deceased from Civil Hospital Ambala
       city. Information which was received in the night
       from GMCH, Chandigarh was recorded in DDR
       of Police Station, Mullana. I cannot produce DD
       entry which was recorded in this regarded I have
       seen court file the same is not available there
       also. It was not made Spart of charge sheet of the
       case.
It has come to my notice that Injured was
       referred to Civil Hospital, Ambala by the medical
       officer of CHC Muliana. I cannot tell at what
       time, by whom deceased was referred GMCH,
       Sector 32, Chandigarh and what time he
       reached there. I had received the police
       information with regard to this case from CH
       Ambala      City    during    the    course     of
11
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
       investigation on 1.4.2012 I had received this
       rukka 10.00/11.00 am from Police Post Civil
       Hospital Ambala City. I am not sure if I
       collected this rukka from Police Post Sector -
       7, Ambala City. Despite the information from
       GMCH, Sector-32 Chandigarh at 11.30 AM on
       31.3.2012 I did not proceed to that Hospital.
       None from the family of the deceased or any
       of his friend or relative met me till the time I
       proceeded to Chandigarh on 1.4.2012. From
       the information which was received by me on
       31:3.2012 at 11.30 PM. I came to know the name
       of injured, place of resident and also name of the
       person who had taken into hospital. Despite this
       fact I did not visit to the house of injured which
       is situated in village Jhahangirpur. Village
       Jhahangirpur falls within the jurisdiction of
       police Station Mullana.
I remained associated the investigation of this
       case for a period about one month. I have seen
       Ex.P4 which is the statement of Shri Ashok
       Bakshi. Statement of Ashok Bakshi was
       recorded on 22.6.2012. Ashok Bakshi was
       never brought or appear before me to make
       statement. This fact was not brought before
       me and Ashok Bakshi was in the car of Munish
       Baxshi. I cannot say Sh. Ashok Bakshi had
       stated in statement
u/s 161
Cr.P.C. that he
       was with Munish Bakshi in his car on
       31.3.2012 and he had not stated that Amit
       Bakshi was with him/them. I have seen hand
       written statement of Ashok Bakshi in the police
       file which is original statement and Ex P4 is the
       computerized copy of the same. Name of any of
       other accused except the name mentioned in the
       FIR was given to me by Amit Bakshi or Ashok
12
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
       Bakshi or any of the family members of Munish
       Bakshi. The involvement of Deepak or
       Balwinder Singh was not disclosed to me by
       any of the witness.”
                                  (Emphasis Supplied)
24. As is discernible from the above statement, the
witness (PW-17) was responsible for moving the
application (Exh. P-32) seeking opinion of the Medical
Jurist regarding the fitness of the injured Munish
Kumar to make a statement. Important it is to note
that neither the witness (PW-17) disclosed the name
of the doctor who issued the fitness certificate (Exh.
P-33) nor did he himself record his own satisfaction
regarding the fitness of the injured Munish Kumar
before recording the statement/dying declaration
(Exh. P-34).
25. Dr. Amandeep Singh (PW-18), along with Dr.
Kulbir Singh Bal and Dr. Sanjay, conducted post-
mortem examination on the body of deceased Munish
Kumar on 15th April, 2012 and issued the post
mortem report (Exh. P-43). On external examination,
a tracheotomy wound was found on the front of the
neck. There were also surgical wounds corresponding
to laparotomy, drainage, and chest tube insertion.
The doctors noted a stitched wound admeasuring 5
13
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
cm in length with 5 stitches, located on the right side
of the chest, about 28 cm below the axilla and 29 cm
to the right of the midline, placed obliquely. On
dissection, the track of the wound was found to
extend medially, cutting through the underlying
subcutaneous tissues and muscles, passing through
the intercostal space between the 8th and 9th ribs,
piercing the pleura, cutting through the diaphragm,
and ultimately injuring the right lobe of the liver on
its superolateral aspect. The doctors opined the
cause of death to be result of stab injury to the liver
and its consequences (haemorrhagic and septicaemic
shock).
26. The      other    witnesses   examined    by   the
prosecution were more or less formal and their
testimony does not have any bearing on the outcome
of the case and thus, we need not refer to their
evidence.
27. The trial Court held that the statement/dying
declaration of the injured Munish Kumar (Exh. P-34)
was recorded after due compliance of the procedural
protocol. The concerned Medical Officer recorded his
satisfaction (Exh. P-33) to the effect that injured
14
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
Munish Kumar was in a fit condition to make the
statement/dying declaration (Exh. P-34).
28. The trial Court found no plausible evidence
against Sandeep Sharma (accused No.2), Balwinder
@ Bittoo (accused No.3) and Deepak Bhardwaj
(accused No. 4), thereby acquitting them of the
charges, however, the appellant herein was held
guilty for the offence punishable under
Section 302
of the IPC vide judgment dated 26th August, 2013,
and was sentenced to imprisonment for life vide order
of sentencing of the even date.
29. The accused-appellant preferred an appeal
before the High Court. The matter was listed on 18th
September, 2024, for passing an order on an
application    seeking    release   of   the   registration
certificate of the seized Maruti Alto car for the
purpose of renewal. However, the High Court insisted
for hearing the appeal on that very date. Since the
engaged counsel was unavailable, the Division Bench
proceeded to appoint an amicus curiae to represent
the accused-appellant in the criminal appeal and
concluded the hearing and reserved the judgment on
18th September, 2024 itself.
15
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
30. The appointed amicus was neither furnished
with the case records from the lower Court nor
afforded reasonable time to prepare the matter or
consult with the accused-appellant. The appeal was
finally dismissed by the impugned judgment dated
24th September, 2024, which is the subject matter of
challenge in the present appeal.
Findings and Conclusion: -
31. We have heard and considered the submissions
advanced by learned senior counsel Shri Ajay Tewari
representing the accused-appellant and Shri Lokesh
Sinhal, Sr. AAG appearing for the State of Haryana
and have gone through the impugned judgments and
the materials placed on record.
32. Before dealing with the merits of this case, we
are compelled to address a matter of serious concern
regarding the approach adopted by the High Court in
dealing with the criminal appeal.
33. On 18th September, 2024, when the matter was
listed only for consideration of an application
regarding renewal of the registration certificate of the
Alto car seized during investigation, the High Court
on the very same day proceeded to take up the main
appeal itself for hearing on merits. Since the counsel
16
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
engaged by the accused-appellant was not available,
the Division Bench appointed an amicus curiae and,
without granting a reasonable opportunity to prepare
the matter, it proceeded to hear the appeal on merits
and reserved judgment on the very same day. This
approach of the High Court is particularly more
disturbing and unjustified in the present case where
the    accused      had     been   sentenced   to   life
imprisonment.
34. At the very outset, we must hold that the course
adopted by the High Court fell short of the standards
of fairness expected in the adjudication of a criminal
appeal. In the circumstances noted above, the High
Court ought to have acted pragmatically and
adjourned the matter to another date so as to secure
the presence of the accused-appellant’s counsel, or,
at the very least, it should have afforded the newly
appointed amicus a reasonable opportunity to
inspect the record, study the relevant documents,
and consult with the accused-appellant so as to
prepare the case effectively.
17
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
35.
In
Chaluvegowda v. State5
, a similar situation
arose wherein the amicus appointed by the High
Court on an earlier date was not available on date
fixed for hearing, Therefore, the Court appointed a
new amicus and on the very same day heard the
appeal and reserved the judgment. This Court set
aside the judgment and remitted the matter back to
the High Court for fresh hearing with the following
observations:
“19. The right to be represented by a lawyer
      must not be an empty formality. It must not
      be a sham or an eyewash. The appointment of
      an amicus curiae for the defence of an accused
      person must be in true letter and spirit, with
      due regard to the effective opportunity of
      hearing that is to be afforded to every accused
      person before being condemned. The due
      process of law incorporated in our constitutional
      system demands that a person not only be given
      an opportunity of being heard before being
      condemned, but also that such opportunity be
      fair, just and reasonable.
25. In our considered view, the appellant-
accused were not given an effective
      opportunity to defend themselves in a case as
      the one involved here, carrying the possibility
      of a substantial prison sentence. Therefore, we
      say, the procedure adopted by the High Court
      is not only contrary to the Rules as quoted
      above, and also contrary to the fair trial which
      is the first imperative of dispensation of
      justice. Therefore, it is difficult for us to sustain
      the impugned judgment and order [State v.
5 (2012) 13 SCC 538.
18
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
      Chaluvegowda, Criminal Appeal No. 777 of 1996,
      order dated 17-10-2001 (KAR)] passed by the High
      Court.”
                                 (Emphasis Supplied)
36.
In
Mohd. Sukur Ali v. State of Assam6
, the
counsel engaged by the accused was not present on
the date of hearing of the appeal, wherein this Court
observed the following:
“17. We reiterate that in the absence of a
      counsel, for whatever reasons, the case should
      not be decided forthwith against the accused
      but in such a situation the Court should
      appoint a counsel who is practising on the
      criminal side as amicus curiae and decide the
      case after fixing another date and hearing him.
      If on the next date of hearing the counsel, who
      ought to have appeared on the previous date but
      did not appear, now appears, but cannot show
      sufficient cause for his non-appearance on the
      earlier date, then he will be precluded from
      appearing and arguing the case on behalf of the
      accused. But, in such a situation, it is open to the
      accused to either engage another counsel or the
      Court may proceed with the hearing of the case by
      the counsel appointed as amicus curiae.”
                                  (Emphasis Supplied)
37. A 3-Judge Bench of this Court in
Anokhilal v.
State of Madhya Pradesh7
laid down the following




6 (2011) 4 SCC 729.
7 (2019) 20 SCC 196.
19
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
guidelines regarding appointment and assistance of
amicus curiae in criminal matters:
“31. Before we part, we must lay down certain
    norms so that the infirmities that we have noticed
    in the present matter are not repeated:
31.1. In all cases where there is a possibility of
    life sentence or death sentence, learned
    advocates who have put in minimum of 10
    years' practice at the Bar alone be considered
    to be appointed as Amicus Curiae or through
    legal services to represent an accused.
    31.2. In all matters dealt with by the High Court
    concerning confirmation of death sentence, Senior
    Advocates of the Court must first be considered to
    be appointed as Amicus Curiae.
31.3. Whenever any learned counsel is
    appointed as Amicus Curiae, some reasonable
    time may be provided to enable the counsel to
    prepare the matter. There cannot be any hard-
and-fast rule in that behalf. However, a
    minimum of seven days' time may normally be
    considered to be appropriate and adequate.
    31.4. Any learned counsel, who is appointed as
    Amicus Curiae on behalf of the accused must
    normally be granted to have meetings and
    discussion with the accused concerned. Such
    interactions may prove to be helpful as was
    noticed in
Imtiyaz Ramzan Khan [Imtiyaz Ramzan
    Khan v. State of Maharashtra
, (2018) 9 SCC 160 :
(2018) 3 SCC (Cri) 721]”
                                  (Emphasis Supplied)
38. Thus, what emerges from the precedents cited
above is that the hearing in a criminal trial or appeal
must be an effective hearing. This necessarily
presupposes not only the presence of counsel but
20
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
also the grant of adequate time and opportunity for
such counsel, whether engaged by the accused or
appointed as an amicus curiae, to properly prepare
and present the case. To appoint an amicus and
proceed to hear the matter on the very same day,
without affording sufficient time for preparation or
consultation, renders the safeguard of effective legal
representation      to    an      empty   formality   and
undermines the very essence of the right to fair trial
enshrined under
Article 21
of Constitution of India.
39. We thus sound a word of caution that in
criminal trials and appeals, especially those involving
punishment of life imprisonment or capital sentence,
the concerned Courts must not treat the appointment
of an amicus curiae as an empty formality. Such
counsel must be afforded sufficient time to peruse the
record, meet the accused, and prepare the defence
effectively. The principles of fair trial and effective
representation are not procedural gimmicks but
foundational guarantees of our criminal justice
system, which cannot be compromised or breached.
40. Looking to the long period of incarceration
suffered by the accused-appellant, rather than
remitting the matter for fresh consideration, we find
21
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
it expedient, in the interest of justice, to address the
case on its merits.
41. Suffice it to say that the entire case of the
prosecution rests purely on the statement/dying
declaration (Exh. P-34) of the deceased Munish
Kumar recorded by Sub-Inspector, Somnath (PW-17).
42. It is noteworthy that Amit Bakshi (PW-1),
brother of the deceased Munish Kumar who, as per
the statement/dying declaration (Exh. P-34) was also
present in the same car as the deceased Munish
Kumar at the time of incident, did not support the
prosecution case and was declared hostile by the
prosecution. Testimony of Amit Bakshi (PW-1) in his
examination-in-chief is important, and relevant part
is reproduced hereinbelow: -
“Munish Bakshi (Since deceased) was my real
       brother. He sustained injuries on 31.3.2012 at
       about 10:00 p.m. when myself and he were
       coming in the car. Munish fell unconscious. We
       could not identify the unknown persons who
       caused injuries to Munish in scuffle due to
       darkness. I also cannot tell in which vehicle
       they, had come and in which direction, those
       assailants had fled. I have seen the accused
       present in the court today, they had not
       caused any injuries to Munish. On 31.3.2012
       at about 10:00 p.m I removed my brother
       Munish in an unconscious condition to CHC
       Mullana and then to Govt. Hospital Ambala and
       from there Munish was taken into G.M.C.H.
22
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
       Sector 32, Chandigarh and from there he was
       shifted to PGI Chandigarh. Munish remained
       unconscious till his death. except for a short
       time but he was not in a position to speak
       though he was conscious. I disclosed to the
       doctors of Govt. Hospital Ambala and that of
       GMCH Sector 32, Chandigarh and as well as to
       the Deters of PGI Chandigarh that some
       unknown assailants had caused injuries to
       Munish.”
                                   (Emphasis Supplied)
43. From the deposition of (PW-1), it is clearly
discernible that due to darkness, neither the witness
(PW-1) nor injured Munish Kumar could identify the
assailants in the scuffle, nor could the witness (PW-
1) specify the details of the vehicles in which they had
come or the direction in which they fled. The witness
(PW-1) categorically stated that the accused present
in Court had not caused any injuries to Munish
Kumar at the relevant time. He further stated that
Munish Kumar fell unconscious immediately after
sustaining     injuries   and,    though   he    regained
consciousness for a short period, but was never in a
position to speak.
44. It is relevant to mention here that although the
Public Prosecutor declared Amit Bakshi (PW-1)
hostile and cross-examined him, there was no
attempt to dislodge his stand on the important aspect
23
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
that the incident took place in pitch darkness.
Furthermore, not a single question was put to the
witness (PW-1) regarding the categorical assertion
that     his    brother,     Munish      Kumar,      remained
unconscious almost for the entire period and was not
in a position to speak from the time of receiving the
injuries on 31st March, 2012 till he took his last
breath on 14th April, 2012.
45.
In
C. Muniappan v. State of T.N.8
, this Court
while summing up the earlier decisions, laid down
the following principles governing the admissibility or
reliability of the testimony of hostile witnesses: -
“81. It is settled legal proposition that:
“6. … the evidence of a prosecution witness
          cannot be rejected in toto merely because the
          prosecution chose to treat him as hostile and
          cross-examined him. The evidence of such
          witnesses cannot be treated as effaced or
          washed off the record altogether but the
          same can be accepted to the extent their
          version is found to be dependable on a careful
          scrutiny thereof.
82.
In
State of U.P. v. Ramesh Prasad Misra
[(1996)
       10 SCC 360 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 1278] this Court held
       that (at SCC p. 363, para 7) evidence of a hostile
       witness would not be totally rejected if spoken
       in favour of the prosecution or the accused but
       required to be subjected to close scrutiny and
       that portion of the evidence which is consistent
       with the case of the prosecution or defence can

8 (2010) 9 SCC 567.
24
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
     be relied upon. A similar view has been reiterated
     by this Court in
Balu Sonba Shinde v. State of
     Maharashtra
[(2002) 7 SCC 543: 2003 SCC (Cri)
     112], Gagan Kanojia v. State of Punjab [(2006) 13
     SCC 516.
83. Thus, the law can be summarised to the effect
     that the evidence of a hostile witness cannot be
     discarded as a whole, and relevant parts thereof
     which are admissible in law, can be used by the
     prosecution or the defence.”
                                    (Emphasis Supplied)
46. Recently, this Court in
K.P. Tamilmaran v.
State9
, once again clarified the position of law
regarding the evidentiary value of a hostile witness,
setting out the governing principles as under: -
“26. As a general rule, the testimony of a
     witness who has been cross-examined by the
     party which produced him/her will not stand
     totally discredited, and it is for the Court to
     consider what value should be attached to this
     testimony. After referring to a series of judgments
     on this point, the Court in Sat Paul held as follows:
“52. From the above conspectus, it emerges
       clear that even in a criminal prosecution
       when a witness is cross-examined and
       contradicted with the leave of the court,
       by the party calling him, his evidence
       cannot, as a matter of law, be treated as
       washed off the record altogether. It is for
       the Judge of fact to consider in each case
       whether as a result of such cross-
       examination and contradiction, the
       witness stands thoroughly discredited or
       can still be believed in regard to a part of

9 2025 SCC OnLine SC 958.
25
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
       his testimony. If the Judge finds that in
       the process, the credit of the witness has
       not been completely shaken, he may, after
       reading and considering the evidence of
       the witness, as a whole, with due caution
       and care, accept, in the light of the other
       evidence on the record, that part of his
       testimony which he finds to be
       creditworthy and act upon it. If in a given
       case, the whole of the testimony of the
       witness is impugned, and in the process, the
       witness stands squarely and totally
       discredited, the Judge should, as matter of
       prudence, discard his evidence in toto.
        ……………………………………………..
(Emphasis Provided)
27. An examination of the cases
referred above
shows that there can be no doubt about the fact
    that the evidence of a witness, who has been
    cross-examined by the side which produced
    him/her, cannot be totally discarded [Also see :
Neeraj Dutta v. State (NCT of Delhi
), (2023) 4 SCC
    731].”
                        ..………
33. The statements made by a witness in Court,
    including in cross-examination, either conducted
    by the opposite party or by the party who produced
    the witness, would come under the definition of
    ‘evidence’ under
Section 3
of the Evidence Act,
    since this evidence has come before the Court with
    its permission. Moreover, there is no specific bar
    under the
Evidence Act
which mandates that
    such evidence has to be discarded. Thus, it
    would form part of the entire evidence which
    the Court can examine while arriving at its
    decision, and it is for the Court to determine
    what value has to be given to that piece of
    evidence or how such evidence has to be used
    in a given case.
26
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
34. Viewed from a different perspective, the
    rejection of the entire testimony of a prosecution
    witness, who has been cross-examined by the
    prosecution, would not only harm the case of the
    prosecution but perhaps also of the defence in a
    given case. This is because as the law stands
    today, the benefit of the testimony of such
    witness can be taken by both the prosecution
    and the defence, allowing them to use it to build
    their case [See:
Paulmeli v. State of T.N.
, (2014) 13
    SCC 90, Ramesh Harijan v. State of U.P., (2012) 5
    SCC 777]. In any case, ultimately, it will be the
    cause of justice that will suffer if the testimony
    of such witness is totally discarded. It is,
    therefore, rightly left to the discretion of the
    Court to test the evidentiary value of such a
    testimony.
………..
36. It is though trite and much overstated but the
    maxim “falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus”, is not
    applicable to our criminal justice system. It is for
    the Court to distinguish the wheat from the
    chaff while dealing with the depositions of a
    hostile witness. Courts can rely upon that part
    of the deposition of a hostile witness which is
    corroborated by other evidence on record.
If part of the evidence of a hostile witness
    corroborates with other reliable evidence, then
    that part of the evidence is admissible. Once a
    prosecution witness has been declared hostile
    and then cross-examined by the prosecution,
    then it is for the Court to evaluate the veracity
    of the testimony. There can be several reasons for
    a witness to turn hostile and the court must also
    look into these factors while evaluating the
    evidence given by a hostile witness. It is an
    uncomfortable reality in our criminal Courts for a
    prosecution witness to turn hostile. But then the
    purpose of a Trial Court is to go to the truth of the
    matter. Whatever evidence is there before the Court
27
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
      must be examined, tested, corroborated (whenever
      necessary), before a verdict can be finally given.”
                                    (Emphasis Supplied)
47. Applying the aforesaid principles governing the
evidence of hostile witness to the facts of the present
case, we find that the testimony of Amit Bakshi (PW-
1), though declared hostile, cannot be discarded
altogether. His deposition must be assessed with care
to ascertain which portions, if any, can be separated
and relied upon. On a close reading, what stands out
is that Amit Bakshi (PW-1) categorically deposed that
the accused present in court had not caused any
injuries to the deceased Munish Kumar and that, due
to darkness, the assailants could not be identified.
This appears to be true because the incident took
place at 10:00 PM in the night. He further stated that
Munish Kumar became unconscious immediately
after sustaining injuries and remained so except for
a short period until his death, and was never in a
condition to speak. These portions of his testimony
are    consistent,     withstand      scrutiny,    and      are
corroborated by the evidence of the Medical Officers,
Dr. Vijay Vivek (PW-9) and Dr. Nand Kumar Jha (PW-
28
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
10), both of whom confirmed that Munish Kumar was
not in a position to speak.
48. Consequently, the testimony of Amit Bakshi
(PW-1) cannot be brushed aside merely because he
did not support the prosecution case in entirety. On
the   contrary,    the   acceptable   portions    of   his
deposition    directly   contradict   the   prosecution’s
theory regarding the statement/dying declaration
(Exh. P-34), and therefore must be given due weight.
49. Additionally, during the course of investigation,
the prosecution deviated from its original version by
portraying that Ashok Kumar (PW-2) was also
present in the vehicle driven by Munish Kumar.
However, this claim is belied by the statement/dying
declaration (Exh. P-34), which makes no reference
whatsoever regarding the presence of Ashok Kumar
(PW-2) in the vehicle. This discrepancy further
undermines the credibility of the prosecution case.
50. Now coming to the statement/dying declaration
(Exh. P-34) on which the entire case of prosecution
hinges. On a perusal of the record, and on going
through the impugned judgments of the High Court
and the trial Court, we find that the prosecution
made no effort whatsoever to disclose the identity of
29
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
the Doctor/Medical Officer who had appended the
fitness certificate (Exh. P-33) regarding the fit state of
the injured Munish Kumar to give the statement
(Exh. P-34). Consequently, the said Doctor was not
examined at the trial.
51. We feel that the trial Court acted with total
apathy and in a lackadaisical manner in ignoring this
vital aspect of the case.
Section 165
of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 (Section 168 of the Bharatiya
Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023) casts a duty on the Court
to remain cognizant and not to act as a mute
spectator in the course of trial. This was undeniably
a fit case wherein, the Presiding Officer of the trial
Court ought to have exercised the powers vested by
virtue of
Section 311
CrPC (Section 348 of the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023) to
ascertain the identity of the doctor concerned who
had purportedly issued the fitness certificate (Exh. P-
33) and should have examined him as a court witness
since the prosecution was not desirous to do so. The
failure of the trial Court in this regard represents not
only a procedural shortcoming but also an abdication
of the Court’s obligation to play a proactive role in
30
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
eliciting the truth and safeguarding the fairness of
the trial.
52. Furthermore, it is observed that not even a
single document relating to the treatment of injured
Munish Kumar at GMCH Sector-32, Chandigarh or
PGI, Chandigarh was produced on record and proved
by the prosecution. This is a serious omission which
compels us to draw an adverse inference against the
prosecution.
53. The Doctors who treated injured Munish Kumar
on the night of the incident i.e. Dr. Vijay Vivek (PW-
9) posted at CHC, Mullana and Dr. Nand Kumar Jha
(PW-10) working as a Medical Officer at Trauma
Centre GH, Ambala City, did not utter a word in their
testimony that the injured Munish Kumar was in a
condition to speak while he was admitted in either of
the two hospitals.
54. Thus, there is a serious lapse on the part of the
prosecution in failing to lead substantive evidence of
the concerned witness for proving the fitness
certificate (Exh. P-33), which was essential to satisfy
the Court regarding the condition of the injured
Munish Kumar to make a statement, as claimed by
Sub-Inspector,       Somnath      (PW-17).   The   non-
31
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
disclosure of the identity of the doctor who allegedly
issued the fitness certificate (Exh. P-33), coupled with
the failure to place on record the medical records
(Bed Head Ticket) of the deceased Munish Kumar
while he was alive and undergoing treatment casts a
grave doubt on the entire case of prosecution
regarding the alleged dying declaration (Exh. P-34).
55. A perusal of the statement/dying declaration
(Exh. P-34), further reinforces these doubts. Before
recording the said statement/dying declaration (Exh.
P-34)    the     recording   officer,   i.e.,   Sub-Inspector
Somnath (PW-17), neither noted nor recorded his
own satisfaction that the injured Munish Kumar was
in a fit condition to make a statement.
56. It has been consistently held by this Court in a
catena of decisions that the satisfaction of the person
recording the dying declaration is indispensable. A
Constitution Bench of this Court in
Laxman v. State
of Maharashtra10
, observed the following:
“3. …………Consequently, what evidential value or
     weight has to be attached to such statement
     necessarily   depends   on   the    facts and
     circumstances of each particular case. What is
     essentially required is that the person who
     records a dying declaration must be satisfied

10 (2002) 6 SCC 710.
32
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
       that the deceased was in a fit state of mind.
Where it is proved by the testimony of the
       Magistrate that the declarant was fit to make the
       statement even without examination by the doctor
       the declaration can be acted upon provided the
       court ultimately holds the same to be voluntary and
       truthful. A certification by the doctor is essentially
       a rule of caution and therefore the voluntary and
       truthful nature of the declaration can be
       established otherwise.”
                                       (Emphasis Supplied)
57. In the present case, the absence of satisfaction
recorded by the Sub-Inspector, Somnath (PW-17),
regarding the fitness of the injured Munish Kumar to
make a statement, casts a serious doubt on the
reliability of the statement/dying declaration (Exh. P-
34).
58. Moreover, while narrating the circumstances in
which the statement/dying declaration (Exh. P-34)
was recorded, the Sub-Inspector, Somnath (PW-17),
merely exhibited the statement/dying declaration
(Exh. P-34) and stated that injured Munish Kumar
had appended his signatures thereupon. Though he
identified the signatures of Munish Kumar, he failed
to     identify   the    signature      of   the   doctor       who
purportedly gave the fitness certificate (Exh. P-33).
The prosecution also did not make any attempt to get
the signature of Munish Kumar as appended on the
33
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
statement/dying declaration (Exh. P-34) verified
through his own brother Amit Bakshi (PW-1).
59. Furthermore, the statement/dying declaration
(Exh. P-34) does not mention the time at which the
same was recorded. This omission is a serious lapse,
as recording of time in a dying declaration is essential
so as to correlate the statement with the medical
condition of the injured at that point. Without it, the
Court cannot fairly assess whether the injured was in
a fit state of mind or whether the statement was
recorded contemporaneously or after undue delay.
The absence of this foundational detail, therefore,
casts a grave doubt on the authenticity of the dying
declaration and seriously erodes its evidentiary
worth.
60. The cumulative effect of these crucial infirmities
and loopholes, namely, the prosecution’s failure to
examine or even identify the certifying doctor, the
absence of contemporaneous treatment records of
the injured Munish Kumar, the omission by the
recording officer, Sub-Inspector, Somnath (PW-17) to
record his own satisfaction regarding the fitness of
the injured Munish Kumar and his failure to mention
the time at which statement/dying declaration (Exh.
34
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
P-34) was recorded, creates a grave doubt on the
veracity of the statement/dying declaration (Exh. P-
34). These grave doubts not only undermine the
authenticity of the statement/dying declaration (Exh.
P-34) but also render the same unreliable so as to
form the sole basis for sustaining the prosecution
case.
61. Furthermore, the statement/dying declaration
(Exh. P-34) mentions about the role of three more
assailants, namely, Bittoo, Sanjay, and one unknown
man, in addition to the accused-appellant. Specific
allegations were attributed against Sanjay in the
statement/dying declaration (Exh. P-34) alleging that
he was the one who inflicted the fatal knife injuries
on the head of the deponent Munish Kumar.
However, the Investigating Officer, Randhir Singh
(PW-25), found no evidence to substantiate this
allegation and consequently exonerated the said
Sanjay who was the main assailant as per the
statement/dying declaration (Exh. P-34). Bittoo, was
charge sheeted by stating that he was none other
than Balwinder (accused No. 3), but the trial Court
itself chose not to rely upon the statement/dying
declaration    (Exh.    P-34)     to   the   extent   of   his
35
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
participation in the case and acquitted him. Hence,
even the trial Court and the High Court have not
given full imprimatur to the version as set out in the
statement/dying declaration (Exh. P-34).
62. This Court in
Atbir v. Govt. (NCT of Delhi
)11,
relying upon its earlier judgments, laid down key
principles regarding convictions based upon dying
declaration, which are extracted hereinbelow:
“22. The analysis of the above decisions clearly
        shows that:
(i) Dying declaration can be the sole basis of
        conviction if it inspires the full confidence of the
        court.
(ii) The court should be satisfied that the
        deceased was in a fit state of mind at the time
        of making the statement and that it was not
        the result of tutoring, prompting or
        imagination.
(iii) Where the court is satisfied that the
        declaration is true and voluntary, it can base its
        conviction without any further corroboration.
(iv) It cannot be laid down as an absolute rule of
        law that the dying declaration cannot form the
        sole basis of conviction unless it is corroborated.
The rule requiring corroboration is merely a rule
        of prudence.
(v) Where the dying declaration is suspicious,
        it should not be acted upon without
        corroborative evidence.
(vi) A dying declaration which suffers from
        infirmity such as the deceased was
        unconscious and could never make any
        statement cannot form the basis of
        conviction.
11 (2010) 9 SCC 1.
36
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
(vii) Merely because a dying declaration does not
       contain all the details as to the occurrence, it is
       not to be rejected.
(viii) Even if it is a brief statement, it is not to be
       discarded.
(ix) When the eyewitness affirms that the
       deceased was not in a fit and conscious state
       to make the dying declaration, medical
       opinion cannot prevail.
(x) If after careful scrutiny, the court is satisfied
       that it is true and free from any effort to induce
       the deceased to make a false statement and if it
       is coherent and consistent, there shall be no
       legal impediment to make it the basis of
       conviction, even if there is no corroboration.”
                                        (Emphasis Supplied)
63. In wake of the discussion made hereinabove
and testing the evidence on the touchstone of the
principles
laid down by
this Court, the following
material infirmities are noticeable in the case of
prosecution:
(i)   It was categorically stated by Amit Bakshi
            (PW-1) and corroborated by the Doctors
            who treated Munish Kumar i.e. Dr. Vijay
            Vivek (PW-9) and Dr. Nand Kumar Jha (PW-
10)    that     Munish        Kumar         remained
            unconscious almost fully from the time of
            the assault on 31st March, 2012 until his
            death on 14th April, 2012, and was never in
            a condition to speak. Hence the fitness
37
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
          certificate (Exh. P-33) stating that Munish
          Kumar was fit to give a statement becomes
          doubtful.
(ii) The     prosecution    failed    to   identify   or
          examine the doctor who had issued the
          fitness certificate (Exh. P-33) certifying
          Munish Kumar fit to make a statement,
          which creates grave doubt about the
          authenticity of the fitness certificate (Exh.
P-33).     Furthermore, non-examination of
          the said doctor, deprived the defence an
          opportunity      to     discredit      the   fitness
          certificate (Exh. P-33).
(iii) No   contemporaneous           medical     record
          relating to the treatment of Munish Kumar
          at GMCH Sector-32, Chandigarh or PGI,
          Chandigarh       was produced          nor proved
          during trial, leaving the Court without
          corroborative material to assess the fitness
          of the injured Munish Kumar to make a
          statement.
(iv) The statement/dying declaration (Exh. P-
34) itself suffers from serious infirmities as
          it bears no time of recording, and the
38
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
          recording officer, Sub-Inspector, Somnath
          (PW-17),      failed     to   record      his    own
          satisfaction that the injured Munish Kumar
          was fit to make such statement.
(v) Even the prosecution and trial Court did not
          fully accept the version set out in the
          statement/dying declaration (Exh. P-34),
          inasmuch as one of the named assailants,
          Sanjay, was not charge sheeted, and
          another,     Bittoo     (accused   No.     3),   was
          acquitted by the trial Court.
(vi) Amit Bakshi (PW-1), who was present with
          Munish Kumar at the time of the incident,
          categorically deposed that the accused
          present in Court had not caused any
          injuries to Munish Kumar and further
          stated that the assailants could not be
          identified     due      to    darkness,     thereby
          significantly contradicting the version set
          out in the statement/dying declaration
          (Exh. P-34).
64. In light of the infirmities and loopholes noted by
us in the case of the prosecution, we are of the firm
39
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
opinion that neither could the prosecution prove the
faithful recording of the statement/dying declaration
(Exh. P-34) nor they could prove it to be an
unimpeachable document. Such a doubtful piece of
evidence cannot be made the foundation of conviction
of the accused-appellant.
65. Apart from the statement/dying declaration
(Exh. P-34), the trial Court as well as the High Court
laid emphasis on the recovery of the knife made in
furtherance of the disclosure statement (Exh. P-24)
of the accused-appellant. However, the evidentiary
value of this recovery is undermined by the fact that
the FSL report (Exh. P-1) did not indicate any blood
group on the said weapon, nor was any serological
report produced to establish that the blood allegedly
found on the knife matched with that of the deceased.
In the absence of such scientific corroboration linking
the recovered knife with the deceased Munish
Kumar,     the   recovery     remains   inconsequential.
Otherwise also mere recovery of a weapon, even if
stained by the same blood group as that of the
deceased cannot by itself establish the guilt of an
40
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
accused12,       particularly        where      the    prosecution’s
primary      evidence,       namely       the     statement/dying
declaration       (Exh.      P-34)      suffers       from       serious
infirmities.
66. In view of the serious lapses surrounding the
recording of the statement/dying declaration (Exh. P-
34),    coupled       with     the     material       contradictions
between its contents and the ocular testimony as well
as the inconsequential recovery of the knife which
stands        discredited        for      want        of     scientific
corroboration, the case of the prosecution has
miserably failed to establish the complicity of the
accused-appellant for the commission of the crime.
67. Resultantly, the impugned judgment of the High
Court dated 24th September, 2024 and the impugned
judgment and order of the trial Court dated 26th
August, 2013 do not stand to scrutiny and the same
are hereby set aside. The appellant is acquitted of the
charges. He is in custody and shall be released from
prison forthwith, if not wanted in any other case.
68. The appeal stands allowed accordingly.
12 See
Raja Naykar v. State of Chhattisgarh
, (2024) 3 SCC 481.
41
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025
69. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand
disposed of.
….……………………J.
                                  (VIKRAM NATH)


                                  ...…………………….J.
                                  (SANDEEP MEHTA)
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 01, 2025.
42
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 3810 OF 2025