[Cites
27
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shanti Devi (Since Deceased) Through ... vs Jagan Devi on 12 September, 2025
2025 INSC 1105                                           REPORTABLE
                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11795 OF 2025
                             (@SLP(C) No. 24821/2018)




          SHANTI DEVI (SINCE DECEASED)             …..APPELLANT(S)
          THROUGH LRS. GORAN




                                    VERSUS



          JAGAN DEVI & ORS.                        ..RESPONDENT(S)




                                JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.09.12
16:31:06 IST
Reason:
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High

     Court of Punjab & Haryana dated 22.02.2018 in the Regular Second

     Appeal No. 2930 of 1996 by which the second appeal filed by the

     appellant-herein (original defendant) against the judgment and decree

     dated 07.10.1996 arising from Civil Appeal No. 149 of 1991 passed by

     the First Appellate court, came to be dismissed.



FACTUAL MATRIX
3.   The facts giving rise to this appeal may be summarized as under.
4.   For the sake of convenience, the appellant-herein shall be referred to

     as the original defendant and the respondents-herein shall be referred

     to as the original plaintiffs.
5.   The plaintiffs instituted Civil Suit No. 782 of 1984 in the court of

     Senior Sub Judge, Gurgaon for permanent injunction restraining the

     defendant from interfering with their peaceful possession to the extent

     of one-third share in the agricultural land admeasuring 31 kanals 4

     marlas situated within the revenue estate of village Bisar Akbarpur,
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                   Page 1 of 35
Tehsil Nuh, District Gurgaon. In the alternative, the plaintiffs prayed

     that they be put in joint possession along with the defendant and the

     sale deed dated 14.06.1973 purported to have been executed by Ram

     Saran s/o Bhambar and the plaintiff in favor of the defendant be

     declared as fraudulent, concocted and thereby, void insofar as the

     share of the plaintiff is concerned.
6.   The plaint of Civil Suit No. 782 of 1984 reads thus:
“1. That the plaintiff is the lawful owner and in possession to the
      extent of 1/3rd share in agricultural land bearing Rect. No.40
      Killa No. 1/2 (2-0), 9/2 (2-12), 10 (8-0), 11 (8-0), 12/1 (2-12) 20
      (8-0), total measuring 31 Kanals 4 marlas, besides other lands
      situated in the revenue estate of Village Bisar Akbarpur Tehsil
      Nuh, Distt. Gurgaon. The fard jamabandi for the years 1973-74
      and 1978-79 are attached herein.
2. That the defendant wrongly claims herself to be the purchaser
      of the suit land referred to above from one Ram Saran s/o
      Bhambar on the basis of a fraudulent and concocted sale deed
      alleged to have been executed on 14.06.1973. The alleged sale
      deed dated 14.6.73 is total fraudulent, illegal and void and
      cannot defeat the legal rights and share of the plaintiff in the
      suit land on the following grounds:-
(a) That the plaintiff never executed on registered sale
            deed dated 14.6. 73 or of any other date in favor of the
            defendant and she is still the co-owner in possession to
            the extent of her share in the land.
(b) That it seems that the defendant must have got
            executed and registered the alleged sale deed in her favor
            by making some impersonation in collusion with the other
            vendor and witnesses and must have played a fraud on
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                      Page 2 of 35
the Sub-Registrar to derive wrongful gain for her personal
           benefit.
(c) That the plaintiff never got any sale consideration of the
           alleged sale deed and she came to know about this
           fraudulent transaction only when he came to the village
           mourn the death of Ram Saran and heard that her land is
           going to be sold by the defendant without any right in it.
(d) That the alleged sale deed if made by any other person
           by making impersonation or otherwise, the same does not
           effect the rights of the plaintiff in the land in suit.
3. That the plaintiff is owner in possession her 1/3rd share in
     the land and is entitled to file suit for permanent injunction
     against the defendant restraining her from interfering with the
     possession and ownership of the plaintiff in the suit land in any
     manner. In the alternative, if it is found and held that that
     defendant is in possession of the whole land then the plaintiff is
     entitled to a decree for joint possession to the extent of 1/3rd
     share in the land in suit.
4. That the cause of action for the suit arose on or about 4.2.1984
     when the plaintiff came to know about the fraudulent
     transaction and the defendant attempted to sell away to the
     property of the plaintiff and denied to admit the claim of the
     plaintiff. Hence this suit.
5. That the suit property is situated within the territorial
     jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court, hence this Hon'ble Court has
     got jurisdiction to try this suit.
6. That the value of the suit for the purpose of court fees and
     jurisdiction is assessed at Rs.200/- and for relief of possession
     is also Rs. 100/-. A court fees of Rs.25/- is paid.
7. That the plaintiff, therefore, prays that a decree for permanent
     injunction be passed in favor of the plaintiff and against the
     defendant to the effect that the plaintiff is co-owner in
     possession to the extent of 1/2 share (sic) (1/3 rd share) in the
     land in suit described in para no.1 of the plaint restraining the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                      Page 3 of 35
defendant from interfering or dealing with it in any manner. In
      the alternative a decree for joint possession be passed in favor
      of the plaintiff and against the defendant in respect of suit land
      mentioned in para 1 of the plaint declaring the alleged sale deed
      dated 14.6.73 to be fraudulent and void qua the share of the
      plaintiff. The costs of the suit be also awarded. Any such other
      relief which the Ld. Court may deem just and proper be also
      granted to the plaintiff.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
7.   The written statement filed on behalf of the defendant reads thus:
“Pre Objections
1. That the suit is not maintainable in the present form. The
      plaintiff has got no right, interest or title in the land in dispute or
      any part of it.
2. That the plaintiff has got no locus standi nor any cause of
      action to file the present suit.
3. That the suit for permanent injunction in the alternative for
      joint possession is not maintainable. It is mandatory to seek
      declaration
4. That the plaintiff is estopped from filing the present suit by
      acts, conduct, omission, acquiescence, latches and admission.
5. That the suit is barred by time.
On Merits
1. That Para no.1 of the plaint is wrong and denied. It is wrong
      and denied that the plaintiff is owner or in possession of the suit
      land to the extent of 1/3rd share or she has got any right,
      interest or title in the land in dispute or any part of it.
2. That para no.2 of the plaint alongwith its sub-paras 2(a.) to
(d) are wrong and denied. The plaintiff alongwith the brother
      Ram Saran sold the land in dispute in favour of the defendant
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                         Page 4 of 35
vide sale deed dated 14.6.1973 for sale consideration of
     Rs.15000/-. The contents of the sale deed were read over and
     explained to the plaintiff. She had appeared before the Sub
     Registrar and had admitted and acknowledged the contents of
     the sale deed. She was identified by Sehdev Sarpanch of village
     Kawari. It is wrong and denied that the sale deed dated
     14.6.1973 is totally fraudulent, illegal and ineffective, the rights
     of the plaintiff in the suit land on the grounds mentioned in sub-
     para 2(a) to 2(d) of the plaint or on another grounds.

     2(a) Para 2(a) of the plaint is wrong and denied. It is wrong and
     denied that the sale deed dated 14.6.1973 was not executed by
     the plaintiff in favour of the defendant. It is wrong and denied
     that she is still owner of the land in dispute or any part of it.
     Mutation on the basis of sale deed dated 14.6.1973 was also
     got sanctioned by the plaintiff in favour of the defendant.

     2(b) Para 2(b) of the plaint is wrong and denied. It is wrong and
     denied that the sale deed was got registered by false
     impersonation in collusion with Ram Saran, brother of the
     plaintiff or any other person. It is wrong and denied that any
     fraud was played on the Sub Registrar to derive wrongful gain
     for personal benefit. All these allegations are false to the positive
     knowledge of the plaintiff.
2(c) Para no.2(c) of the plaint is wrong and denied. It is wrong
     and denied that the plaintiff did not execute the sale deed or she
     did not receive the sale consideration. It is further wrong and
     denied that the sale deed was fraudulent transaction or she
     came to know about the same on the death of Ram Saran. All
     these allegations are false. It is unthinkable that her brother
     Ram Saran did not know the plaintiff.
2(d) Para no.2(d) of the plaint is wrong and denied. It is wrong
     and denied that the sale deed was not executed by the plaintiff
     or somebody else falsely impersonated in her place. It is wrong
     and denied that the plaintiff is owner or in possession of the land
     in dispute as alleged.
3. That para no.3 of the plaint is wrong and denied. It is wrong
     and denied that the plaintiff has got any right, interest or title in
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                      Page 5 of 35
the suit land or she is owner or in possession of the same or any
      part of it. It is further wrong and denied that she is entitled to
      sue for possession in the alternative.
4. That para no.4 of the plaint is wrong and denied. No cause of
      action ever accrued to the plaintiff. Cause of action if any is
      bogus, fictitious and imaginary one.
5&6. Paras no.5 and 6 of the plaint are legal.
7. That para no.7 of the plaint is wrong and denied. It is,
      therefore, humbly prayed that the suit of the plaintiff may kindly
      be dismissed with costs. Since the suit of the plaint is false,
      frivolous and vexatious, therefore, the plaintiff be burdened with
      special costs U/s 35-A
C.P.C
.”
8.   The Trial Court framed the following issues:
“1. Whether the sale deed dated 14.6.1973 is illegal, fraudulent
      and ineffective on the grounds mentioned in the para no.2 of the
      plaint? OPP
2. Whether the plaintiff is in joint possession of the suit
      property? OPP.
3. Whether the suit is not maintainable? OPD
4. Whether the plaintiff has no locus standi and cause of action
      to file the suit? OPD
5. Whether the plaintiff is estopped from filing the present suit
      by her own act and conduct? OPD.
6. Whether the suit is time barred? OPD
7. Relief.”
9.   All the above referred issues framed by the Trial Court came to be

     answered against the plaintiffs. The suit ultimately came to be

     dismissed vide the judgement and decree dated 14.10.1991.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                     Page 6 of 35
10. The plaintiffs being dissatisfied with the judgment and decree passed

    by the Trial Court preferred First Appeal before the district court. The

    First Appeal came to be registered as Civil Appeal No. 149 of 1991.

    The First Appeal came to be allowed. The suit of the plaintiffs came to

    be decreed. On the question of limitation, the First Appellate Court

    observed as thus:
“Lastly the question of limitation has been raised in the present
     proceedings. As per the defendant the present suit should have
     been filed within three years of the sanction of mutation. He
     mainly reliance on 1996 (
1) PLR 482 The State of Punjab Vs.
     Babu Singh
which lays down that illegal or void order have to be
     got set aside from the court of competent jurisdiction and
     limitation for the same is three years from the date of passing of
     the order. On the other hand, the counsel for plaintiff-appellant
     has relied upon
Article 65
in order to assert that the period of
     limitation shall be 12 years for getting the relief of possession
     from the date when the possession of the defendant would be
     deemed to be adverse to that of the plaintiff. Accordingly he
     argued that even if it is presumed that the defendant came into
     adverse possession from the date of execution of the present sale
     deed even then the plaintiff was entitled to get the relief of
     possession within the period of 12 years and the suit was filed
     within that period. Merely because it was filed after about 11
     years cannot deprive the plaintiff of the relief. The said
     arguments of the plaintiff appellant is convincing. She has
     claimed relief of joint possession. It has already been held that
     the transaction in question was void and Risali had never
     executed the sale deed in question. So under these
     circumstances the plaintiff could have maintained action to
     obtain possession of the property within the period of 12 years
     from the date of knowledge. So even if the knowledge party is
     ignored still the suit has been filed within 12 years from the date
     of sale and the same is maintainable.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                     Page 7 of 35
11. The defendants being dissatisfied with the judgment and decree

    passed by the First Appellate court preferred Second Appeal No. 2930

    of 1996 in the High Court.
12. The High Court vide its impugned judgment and order dismissed the

    appeal thereby affirming the judgment and order passed by the First

    Appellate court decreeing the suit in favour of the plaintiffs. However,

    insofar as the issue of limitation was concerned, the High Court

    differed with the First Appellate Court and came to the conclusion

    that it is
Article 59
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
and not
Article 63
that

    would be applicable to the facts of the matter.
13. The High court while dismissing the Second Appeal held as under:
“I have heard the learned counsel for the parties, appraised the
     judgments and decrees as well as record of both the Courts
     below and of the view that there is no force and merit in the
     submissions of Mr. Keshav Pratap Singh.
In my view, limitation would not come in the way of the plaintiff-
     respondents, for, the suit can be filed from the date of the
     knowledge as per the provisions of
Article 59
of the
Limitation
     Act
, which reads thus:-
59.       To cancel or           Three        When the facts
               set aside an           years        entitling     the
               instrument or                       plaintiff to have
               decree or for                       the instrument
               the rescission                      or         decree
               of a contract                       cancelled or set
                                                   aside or the
                                                   contract
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                    Page 8 of 35
rescinded first
                                                  becomes
                                                  known to him.
The defendant for the best known reasons has not examined any
     expert in his evidence to counter and rebut the testimony of PW4.
     Appellant-defendant Shanti Devi (since deceased) represented
     through legal representatives made a statement that she was
     present at the time of execution and registration of the sale deed
     and one Rasali was also present to whom she knew very well.
     Rasali had also put her thumb impressions on the sale deed in
     her presence but in cross-examination, she stated that she was
     not in a position to identify Rasali Devi. If at all, Rasali was
     known to Shanti Devi, she could have been very bold to identify
     Rasali. Endorsement made by Sub-Registrar showed that her
     husband Bagdawat had appeared on her behalf before the Sub
     Registrar and the aforementioned document did not carry the
     thumb impression/signatures of Shanti Devi. The other witness
     to the sale deed, i.e., Budhu, an attesting witness of the
     document was none else but the real brother of Shanti Devi,
     obviously he was expected to make a favourable deposition. He
     also admitted that sale deed was thumb marked by Shanti Devi,
     whereas, as noticed above, it was not Bagdawat, husband of
     Shanti Devi, for the reasons best known had not stepped into
     witness box. The second witness, Sahdev, Sarpanch had died
     before the statement of Budhu could be recorded. Shanti Devi
     admitted that Sahdev was well acquainted with his brother
     Budhu. Thus, defendant failed to prove that there was any
     impartial witness. Things do not end here. The plaintiffs had
     moved an application for directing the defendant to produce the
     original sale deed and answer was that the original had been
     misplaced. Defendant had admitted that prior to sale deed, there
     was an agreement to sell but the same has also not seen the light
     of day. On the contrary, expert compared the disputed thumb
     impressions found on the Special Power of Attorney Ex.P2 and
     thumb impressions put by Rasali on her statement recorded by
     the Court on 20.03.1984. Special Power of Attorney Ex.P2 had
     been proved through the testimony of PW3, who stated that
     executant had put her thumb impressions on the said document
     after it was read over and explained. The defendant failed to put
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                   Page 9 of 35
any cross-examination to the aforementioned witness. It is
     settled law that in case, statement made in examination-in-chief
     is not subjected to cross-examination, the same would be
     admitted.
The defendant in the evidence did not dispute that Rasali
     had not appeared before the Court on 20.03.1984. The
     handwriting expert also compared the thumb impressions on two
     affidavits executed by Rasali, i.e., on 27.02.1984 and
     28.02.1984. Both the affidavits were duly attested by Oath
     Commissioner and identified by K.S. Jain, Advocate. The expert
     also examined the thumb impressions on the plaint and
     vakalantnama to form an opinion that they were not of the same
     person, therefore, there was no occasion for the Lower Appellate
     Court to discard the report of expert. In my view, evidence
     brought on record by the plaintiffs un-clinchly proved that Rasali
     had never executed disputed sale deed.
There is another aspect of the matter, mutation Ex.DE was
     affected on the basis of the sale deed which also carried a
     presumption of truth under
Section 44
of Punjab Land Revenue
     Act, unless the same is rebutted. No evidence has been led to
     rebut the same. Even from perusal of Ex.D3, it was not proved
     that Rasali at the time of attestation and sanction was there.
     Defendant miserably failed to prove that document actually
     executed by Rasali. There is no force in the submission of Mr.
     Keshav Pratap Singh that improvement made by the defendant
     was in the knowledge of the plaintiffs, and therefore, suit was
     barred by law of limitation but fact of the matter is that no such
     improvement had been proved, therefore, the pleading was
     beyond evidence. The suit could not be said to be barred by law
     of limitation as relief of declaration qua joint possession was
     sought as every owner is owner of each and every inch of land
     until the same is partitioned.
As an upshot of my findings, I do not find any illegality and
     perversity in the findings under challenge which are based upon
     the appreciation of oral and documentary evidence, much less no
     substantial question of law arises for adjudication of the present
     appeal.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                   Page 10 of 35
No other argument has been raised. Resultantly, the appeal
     stands dismissed.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
14. In such circumstances
referred to above
, the legal heirs of the original

    defendant are here before us with the present appeal.
15. Upon a perusal of the facts of the case in hand, this Court vide order

    dated 03.02.2025, confined itself to the question whether the

    plaintiff’s suit was time-barred or not.
SUBMISSIONS       ON   BEHALF      OF    THE    APPELLANT/      ORIGINAL

DEFENDANT
16. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant vehemently

    submitted that the High court committed a serious error in dismissing

    the second appeal thereby affirming the judgment and decree passed

    by the First Appellate court in favor of the plaintiffs. The counsel

    would submit that the suit itself was barred by limitation as the same

    had been filed on 28.02.1984 i.e., after a delay of more than 11 years

    from the date of the execution of the sale deed dated 14.06.1973.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                  Page 11 of 35
17. It was argued that the Trial Court rightly dismissed the suit being

    barred by limitation. The First Appellate court wrongly invoked
Article

    65
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
to bring the suit within the period of

    limitation. According to the learned counsel, it is
Article 56
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
that governs the period of limitation in the

    present case. It was also argued that the original plaintiff, namely,

    Rasali failed to enter the witness box in the presence of the defendant.

    Moreover, Sibba s/o Lal Singh, in whose favour the plaintiff had

    executed a power of attorney to pursue the case, never entered the

    witness box.
18. In the last, the learned counsel appearing for the defendant submitted

    that heavy burden of proof is cast upon a person impugning the

    transaction to show that the same is sham or fraudulent one.

    According to the learned counsel a distinction should be borne in

    mind in regard to the nominal nature of the transaction which is no

    transaction in the eye of law at all and the nature and character of a

    transaction as reflected in a deed of conveyance. In other words,

    according to the learned counsel appearing for the defendant, the

    initial burden of proving the transaction as bogus or sham was on the

    plaintiffs and they could be said to have miserably failed to lead any
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                  Page 12 of 35
evidence in that regard. In such circumstances, the onus could not be

    said to have shifted upon the defendant to establish or prove the valid

    execution of the sale deed. The registered document and the

    registration of the sale deed reinforced the valid execution of the sale

    deed. He would submit that a registered document carries with it a

    presumption that it was validly executed. It is for the party challenging

    the genuineness of the transaction to rebut such presumption.
19. In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned counsel prayed

    that there being merit in his appeal, the same may be allowed and the

    impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court be set aside

    and the impugned judgment and order passed by the Trial Court

    dismissing the suit, be affirmed.
SUBMISSIONS      ON    BEHALF     OF    THE    RESPONDENTS/ORIGINAL

PLAINTIFFS
20. On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for the

    respondents-herein submitted that no error not to speak of any error

    of law could be said to have been committed by the High Court in

    passing the impugned judgment and order. It was argued that there

    are concurrent findings recorded by the First Appellate court and the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                  Page 13 of 35
High Court respectively that the plaintiff was not a party to the sale

    deed of 1973 i.e., the sale deed in question. In other words, the

    plaintiff had not put her thumb impression on the sale deed.
21. It was argued that it is settled law that when an instrument of sale of

    an immovable property is not executed by the owner, then such a sale

    deed is void ab initio and is considered a nullity qua the owner. In

    such a case, the owner is not required to seek cancellation of such an

    instrument or seek a declaration that such an instrument is void. This

    is the reason why the plaintiff had not sought the cancellation of the

    sale deed dated 14.06.1973 in the present case and therefore, there

    arises no question of application of
Article 59
of the
Schedule to the

    Limitation Act, 1963
. The counsel has placed reliance on several

    decisions to emphasize that when the instrument is void/void ab initio

    and not voidable, it would be
Article 65
which would apply to a suit

    for possession based on title filed by the plaintiffs.
22. In the last, it was argued that since the alleged possession of the

    defendant over the suit property can at best be considered to have

    been adverse to the plaintiff from the date of execution of the sale deed

    dated 14.06.1973, the suit having been filed on 28.02.1984, i.e.,
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                  Page 14 of 35
within 12 years of the execution of the impugned sale deed, cannot be

    said to be barred by limitation as per
Article 65.
23. In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned counsel prayed

    that there being no merit in this appeal the same may be dismissed.



ANALYSIS
24. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having

    gone through the materials on record, the only question that falls for

    our consideration is whether the High Court committed any error in

    passing the impugned judgment and order?
25. The crux of the issue seems to be whether it is
Article 65
or
Article 59
of the
Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963
, which would apply to the

    present facts in hand. The aforesaid Articles are reproduced as under:
59.   To cancel or set aside Three     When      the     facts
                an instrument or years           entitling the plaintiff
                decree or for the                to      have        the
                recission     of     a           instrument or decree
                contract                         cancelled      or    set
                                                 aside or the contract
                                                 rescinded          first
                                                 become known to
                                                 him.
65.   For possession of Twelve         When the possession
                immovable property years         of the defendant
                or    any    interest            becomes adverse to
                therein based on title           the plaintiff.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                   Page 15 of 35
26. The counsel for the plaintiff would submit that it is
Article 65
which

    must be applied to the present suit for possession since the sale deed

    dated 14.06.1973 was found to be fraudulent and therefore, void.

    Insofar as the question whether the aforesaid sale deed was void, the

    First Appellate Court observed as thus:
“[…] In my view, the evidence led by the plaintiff leaves no room
     for doubt that Smt. Rasali never executed the disputed sale
     deed. According the finding on issue no. 1 given by the trial court
     was incorrect and is reversed.
-xxx-
[…] But here, the said mutation was based on void transaction,
     as Smt. Risali had never executed the sale deed in question. So
     the question of estoppels against the plaintiff does not arise in
     the present proceedings.”
27. The High Court has also expressed its agreement with the aforesaid

    finding of the First Appellate Court and observed that:
“In my view, evidence brought on record by the plaintiffs un-
     clinchly proved that Rasali had never executed the disputed
     sale deed.”
28.
In
State of Maharashtra v. Pravin Jethalal Kamdar
reported in

    2000 SCC OnLine SC 522, this Court held that as far as void and

    non-est documents are concerned, it would be enough for the plaintiff

    to file a simpliciter suit for possession to which
Article 65
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
would apply. Therein,
Section 27(1)
of the Urban
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                   Page 16 of 35
Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976
which came into force w.e.f.

    17.02.1976 imposed a restriction on the transfer of any urban or

    urbanisable land with a building or part of such building, which was

    within the ceiling limit. In other words,
Section 27(1)
sought to affect

    the right of a person to dispose of his urban property within the ceiling

    limit.
Under the Act
, the competent authority of the State of

    Maharashtra had to grant permission if such a person wanted to sell

    the property to a prospective purchaser. However, when such a

    permission was asked for in the facts of the aforesaid case, the same

    was denied by the competent authority and it instead exercised the

    option to buy the same on behalf of the State vide its order dated

    26.05.1976. Pursuant to such order, a sale deed dated 23.08.1976

    was executed between the plaintiff and the State for the same sale

    consideration that would have been paid by the prospective

    purchaser.
Subsequently, the decision of this Court in
Bhim Singhji

    v. Union of India
reported in (1981) 1 SCC 186 held
Section 27(1)
,

    insofar as the restriction it placed as mentioned above, to be invalid.

    In this background, it was opined as follows:
i.   First, the contention of the State that it is
Article 58
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
that would apply, was rejected. It was held

           that the suit is primarily one for possession of property based
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                  Page 17 of 35
upon title. It was observed that owing to the decision in
Bhim

            Singhji
(supra), the order dated 26.05.1976 along with the sale

            deed dated 23.08.1976 became void ab intio and without

            jurisdiction. Therefore, it was not necessary for the plaintiff to

            claim any separate declaration that they are void. The plea

            about their invalidity could be raised in the course of any

            proceedings. Therefore, it is
Article 65
, which deals with a suit

            for possession based on title, that would apply from the date on

            the which the possession of the defendant State became

            adverse to the plaintiff.
ii.   Secondly, though the plaintiff sought a declaration that the

            order dated 26.05.1976 and the sale deed dated 23.08.1976

            were void, yet it was held that the same would be of no

            consequence insofar as the question of limitation is concerned.
The fact would still remain that the possession of the property

            was taken by the defendants via void documents. Therefore,

            such documents could be ignored and a suit for possession

            simpliciter for which the period of limitation prescribed under
Article 65
, i.e., 12 years, could be filed. In the course of such

            proceedings, it could be contended by the plaintiff that the

            documents are a nullity.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                    Page 18 of 35
The relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow:
“4.
Article 58
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
, prescribes limitation of
     three years from the date when the right to sue first accrues to
     obtain a declaration. Under
Article 65
, the period of limitation
     prescribed for filing a suit for possession of immovable property
     or any interest therein based on title is 12 years from the date
     when possession of the defendants becomes adverse to the
     plaintiff. The contention urged on behalf of the State Government
     was that
Article 58
of the
Limitation Act
was applicable as the
     plaintiff had sought declaration about the invalidity of the order
     dated 26-5-1976 and sale deed dated 23-8-1976 and that the
     period of limitation of three years had to be computed from 26-
     5-1976 and, therefore, the suit filed on 22-8-1988 was
     hopelessly barred by time. This contention was rejected by the
     High Court as also by the trial court. The contention urged on
     behalf of the plaintiff and which has been accepted is that the
     suit is basically for possession of the property based upon title
     and the sale deed dated 23-8-1976 and the order dated 26-5-
     1976 being void ab initio and without jurisdiction, a plea about
     its invalidity can be raised in any proceedings and it is not
     necessary to claim any declaration and thus
Article 65
which
     deals with suit for possession based on title would be applicable
     from the date, the possession of the defendant becomes adverse
     to the plaintiff. The High Court held that in view of the order and
     the sale deed being null and void and without jurisdiction, the
     same have no existence in the eye of the law and the plea about
     invalidity of these documents can be raised in any proceedings
     and no separate declaration is necessary to be sought. It held
     that the suit for possession would be governed by
Article 65
of
     the
Limitation Act, 1963
. It was further held that the suit is
     within time even from the date when the possession of the suit
     property was taken on the execution of the sale deed on 23-8-
     1976.
5. As already noticed, in
Bhim Singhji
case [(1981) 1 SCC 166]
Section 27(1)
insofar as it imposes a restriction on transfer of any
     urban or urbanisable land with a building or a portion of such
     building, which is within the ceiling area, has been held to be
     invalid. Thus, it has not been and cannot be disputed that the
     order dated 26-5-1976, was without jurisdiction and a nullity.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                    Page 19 of 35
Consequently, the sale deed executed pursuant to the said order
     would also be a nullity. It was not necessary to seek a
     declaration about the invalidity of the said order and the sale
     deed. The fact of the plaintiff having sought such a declaration
     is of no consequence. When possession has been taken by the
     appellants pursuant to void documents,
Article 65
of the
Limitation Act
will apply and the limitation to file the suit would
     be 12 years. When these documents are null and void, ignoring
     them a suit for possession simpliciter could be filed and in the
     course of the suit it could be contended that these documents are
     a nullity.
In
Ajudh Raj v. Moti
[(1991) 3 SCC 136] this Court said
     that if the order has been passed without jurisdiction, the same
     can be ignored as a nullity, that is, non-existent in the eye of the
     law and it is not necessary to set it aside; and such a suit will
     be governed by
Article 65
of the
Limitation Act
. The contention
     that the suit was time-barred has no merit. The suit has been
     rightly held to have been filed within the period prescribed by
     the
Limitation Act
.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
29. This Court in
Prem Singh v. Birbal
reported in (2006) 5 SCC 353,

    discussed the position of law as to when
Article 59
of the
Limitation

    Act, 1963
would apply and opined as follows:
i.   First, that
Article 59
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
would only

          encompass within its fold fraudulent transactions which are

          ‘voidable’ transactions and not those that are ‘void’. In other

          words,
Article 59
would apply only where an instrument is prima

          facie   valid   and   not   to   those   instruments    which     are

          presumptively invalid.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                     Page 20 of 35
ii.   Secondly, that when the document in question is void ab

           initio/or void, a decree for setting aside the same would not be

           necessary since such a transaction would be non-est in the eyes

           of law, owing to it being a nullity.
iii.   Thirdly, a fine distinction was drawn between fraudulent

           misrepresentation as regards the ‘character of the document’

           and fraudulent misrepresentation as regards the ‘contents of a

           document’. It is only in the former situation that the instrument

           would be void and, in the latter, it would remain voidable. To

           put it simply,
Article 59
would not govern the period of limitation

           in respect of a void transaction.
iv.    Lastly, that if a deed was executed by the plaintiff when he was

           a minor and it was thereby void, he had two options to file a suit

           to get the property conveyed thereunder i.e., he could either file

           the suit within 12 years of the deed or within 3 years of attaining

           majority.
The relevant observations are reproduced as under:
“13.
Article 59
of the
Limitation Act
applies specially when a
     relief is claimed on the ground of fraud or mistake. It only
     encompasses within its fold fraudulent transactions which
     are voidable transactions.
-xxx-
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                   Page 21 of 35
16. When a document is valid, no question arises of its
     cancellation. When a document is void ab initio, a decree for
     setting aside the same would not be necessary as the same is
     non est in the eye of the law, as it would be a nullity.
17. Once, however, a suit is filed by a plaintiff for cancellation of
     a transaction, it would be governed by
Article 59.
Even if
Article
     59
is not attracted, the residuary article would be.
18.
Article 59
would be attracted when coercion, undue
     influence, misappropriation or fraud which the plaintiff asserts
     is required to be proved.
Article 59
would apply to the case of
     such instruments. It would, therefore, apply where a document
     is prima facie valid. It would not apply only to instruments which
     are presumptively invalid. (See
Unni v. Kunchi Amma [ILR
(
1891) 14 Mad 26] and Sheo Shankar Gir v. Ram Shewak
     Chowdhri [ILR
(1897) 24 Cal 77] .)
-xxx-
21. Respondent 1 has not alleged that fraudulent
     misrepresentation was made to him as regards the character of
     the document. According to him, there had been a fraudulent
     misrepresentation as regards its contents.
22.
In
Ningawwa v. Byrappa
[(1968) 2 SCR 797 : AIR 1968 SC
     956] this Court held that the fraudulent misrepresentation as
     regards character of a document is void but fraudulent
     misrepresentation as regards contents of a document
     is voidable stating: (SCR p. 801 C-D)

           “The legal position will be different if there is a fraudulent
           misrepresentation not merely as to the contents of the
           document but as to its character. The authorities make a
           clear distinction between fraudulent misrepresentation as
           to the character of the document and fraudulent
           misrepresentation as to the contents thereof. With
           reference to the former, it has been held that the
           transaction is void, while in the case of the latter, it is
           merely voidable.”
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                     Page 22 of 35
In that case, a fraud was found to have been played and it was
     held that as the suit was instituted within a few days after the
     appellant therein came to know of the fraud practised on her, the
     same was void. It was, however, held: (SCR p. 803 B-E)

           “Article 91 of the
Limitation Act
provides that a suit to set
           aside an instrument not otherwise provided for (and no
           other provision of the Act applies to the circumstances of
           the case) shall be subject to a three years' limitation which
           begins to run when the facts entitling the plaintiff to have
           the instrument cancelled or set aside are known to him. In
           the present case, the trial court has found, upon
           examination of the evidence, that at the very time of the
           execution of the gift deed, Ext. 45 the appellant knew that
           her husband prevailed upon her to convey Surveys Plots
           Nos. 407/1 and 409/1 of Tadavalga village to him by
           undue influence. The finding of the trial court is based
           upon the admission of the appellant herself in the course
           of her evidence. In view of this finding of the trial court it
           is manifest that the suit of the appellant is barred under
Article 91
of the
Limitation Act
so far as Plots Nos. 407/1
           and 409/1 of Tadavalga village are concerned.”
-xxx-
28. If a deed was executed by the plaintiff when he was a minor
     and it was void, he had two options to file a suit to get the
     property purportedly conveyed thereunder. He could either file
     the suit within 12 years of the deed or within 3 years of attaining
     majority. Here, the plaintiff did not either sue within 12 years of
     the deed or within 3 years of attaining majority. Therefore, the
     suit was rightly held to be barred by limitation by the trial court.”

                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
30.
In the decision of this Court in
Hussain Ahmed Choudhury v.

    Habibur Rahman
reported in 2025 SCC OnLine SC 892, where one

    of us, J.B. Pardiwala J., was a member of the Bench, it was reiterated
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                     Page 23 of 35
that a person who is not a party to an instrument would not be obliged

    in law to seek its cancellation. The reason being that such an

    instrument would neither be likely to affect his title nor be binding on

    him. However, such a plaintiff must at least seek a declaration that

    the said instrument is not binding on him or that is invalid insofar as

    he   is   concerned.   The   relevant   observations    are    reproduced

    hereinbelow:
“30. As observed aforesaid, a plaintiff who is not a party to a
     decree or a document, is not obligated to sue for its cancellation.
     This is because such an instrument would neither be likely to
     affect the title of the plaintiff nor be binding on him. We have to
     our advantage two very old erudite judgments of the Madras
     High Court and one of the Privy Council on the subject.
31.
In
Unni v. Kunchi Amma
reported in 1890 SCC OnLine Mad
     5, the legal position has been thus explained:
“If a person not having authority to execute a deed or
           having such authority under certain circumstances which
           did not exist, executes a deed, it is not necessary for
           persons who are not bound by it, to sue to set it aside for
           it cannot be used against them. They may treat it as
           nonexistent and sue for their right as if it did not exist.”
                                       (Emphasis supplied in original)
32. The same principle has been distinctly
laid down by
the
     Privy Council in
Bijoy Gopal Mukerji v. Krishna Mahishi Debi
,
     reported in 1907 SCC OnLine PC 1, where the jural basis
     underlying such transactions was pointed out. In that case, the
     reversioner sued for a declaration that a lease granted by the
     widow of the last male owner was not binding on him and also
     for khas possession. It was objected that the omission to set
     aside the lease by a suit instituted within the time limit
     prescribed by
Article 91
of the Indian Limitation Act, 1877 was
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                      Page 24 of 35
fatal to the suit. The following observations which are equally
     applicable to the case at hand, are apposite:
“A Hindu widow is not a tenant for life, but is owner of her
            husband's property subject to certain restrictions on
            alienation and subject to its devolving upon her husband's
            heirs upon her death. But she may alienate it subject to
            certain conditions being complied with. Her alienation is
            not, therefore, absolutely void, but it is prima facie
            voidable at the election of the reversionary heir. He may
            think fit to affirm it, or he may at his pleasure treat it as a
            nullity without the intervention of any Court, and he shows
            his election to do the latter by commencing an action to
            recover possession of the property. There is, in fact,
            nothing for the Court either to set aside or cancel as a
            condition precedent to the right of action of the
            reversionary heir. It is true that the appellants prayed by
            their plaint for a declaration that the ijara was inoperative
            as against them, as leading up to their prayer for delivery
            to them of khas possession. But it was not necessary for
            them to do so, and they might have merely claimed
            possession, leaving it to the defendants to plead and (if
            they could) prove the circumstances, which they relied on,
            for showing that the ijara of any derivative dealings with
            the property were not in fact voidable, but were binding on
            the reversionary heirs.”
33. In fact, it is logically impossible for a person who is not a
     party to a document or to a decree to ask for its cancellation. This
     is clearly explained by Wadsworth, J., in the decision rendered
     in
Vellayya Konar (Died) v. Ramaswami Konar
, reported
     in 1939 SCC OnLine Mad 149, thus:
“When, the plaintiff seeks to establish a title in himself and
            cannot establish that title without removing an insuperable
            obstruction such as a decree to which he has been a party
            or a deed to which he has been a party, then quite clearly
            he must get that decree or deed cancelled or declared void
            ‘in toto’, and his suit is in substance a suit for the
            cancellation of the decree or deed even though it be framed
            as a suit for declaration. But when he is seeking to
            establish a title and finds himself threatened by a decree
            or a transaction between third parties, he Is not in a
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                      Page 25 of 35
position to get that decree or that deed cancelled ‘in toto’.
That is a thing which can only be done by parties to the
           decree or deed or their representatives. His proper remedy
           therefore in order to clear the way with a view to establish
           his title, is to get a declaration that the decree or deed is
           invalid so far as he himself is concerned and he must
           therefore sue for such a declaration and not for the
           cancellation of the decree or deed.”
                                         (Emphasis supplied in original)
34. Therefore, filing a suit for cancellation of a sale deed and
     seeking a declaration that a particular document is inoperative
     as against the plaintiff are two distinct, separate suits. The
     plaintiff in the present case, not being the executant of the sale
     deed dated 05.05.1997 executed in favour of the respondent no.
     1 (original defendant no. 14), was therefore, not obligated to sue
     for its cancellation under
Section 31
of the Act, 1963.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
31. As per the dictum in
Prem Singh
(supra), this Court, in order to

    ascertain whether
Article 65
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
would apply

    to the present factual scenario, has to first determine whether the

    fraud was alleged as regards the contents of the sale deed dated

    14.06.1973 or the character of such sale deed. Both the First

    Appellate Court as well as the High Court have arrived at the finding

    that the plaintiff had never executed the said sale deed in the first

    place as it was proved that it was not her thumb impression that was

    affixed therein. Therefore, this finding goes to the character of the sale

    deed and thereby, renders it void/void ab initio. Hence, as per this

    decision, there remained no reason for the plaintiff to seek for its
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                   Page 26 of 35
cancellation. The original sale deed also was not produced before the

    Trial Court by the defendants in order to rebut the doubt cast upon

    the veracity of the said sale deed. Consequently,
Article 59
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
would find no application to the case in hand.
32.
In
Hussain Ahmed Choudhury
(supra), it was clearly opined that a

    plaintiff who is not a party to the instrument in question need not

    seek its cancellation. We are not oblivious to the fact that in a

    situation where the plaintiff was not a party to the instrument
,
the

    said decision
laid down a requirement that a declaration must be

    sought to the effect that the said instrument was not binding on the

    plaintiff. However
,
the said decision
clarified that whether the plaintiff

    has sought such a declaration or not could be culled out from a

    holistic reading of the plaint along with the relief(s) sought. In cases

    where the character of the sale deed is assailed as being fraudulent,

    this requirement is implicitly satisfied since the very averment that

    the sale deed was fraudulent or a sham and bogus transaction by

    itself indicates that the plaintiff did not intend to be bound by it.

    Therefore, this requirement too, could be said to have been satisfied

    by the plaintiff in the present case.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                   Page 27 of 35
33. Further, as per
State of Maharashtra
(supra), it would be of no

    consequence even the plaintiff in one of his prayers, seeks a

    declaration that the sale deed is a nullity or invalid insofar as he is

    concerned, since such an instrument would anyway be void owing to

    it being fraudulent. Therefore, the period of limitation for a suit for

    possession based on title would continue to be governed by
Article 65.
In other words, the addition of such a prayer would not influence the

    period of limitation within which such a suit must be filed.
34. We may look at the matter from one another angle. Apart from the

    aspect of fraud, the decision of this Court in
Kewal Krishnan v.

    Rajesh Kumar and Others
reported in (2022) 18 SCC 489, while

    looking into whether the defendants had paid any sale consideration

    to the plaintiff while purchasing the plaintiff’s share in the property,

    held as follows:
i.   First, that the sale of an immovable property would have to be

          for a price and such a payment of price is essential, even if it is

          payable in the future. If a sale deed is executed without the

          payment of price, it is not a sale at all in the eyes of law,

          specifically under
Section 54
of the Transfer of Property Act,
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                   Page 28 of 35
1882. Such a sale without consideration would be void and would

           not affect the transfer of the immovable property.
ii.   Secondly, that, in the said case, the defendants could not rebut

           the allegation of the plaintiff that no sale consideration was paid

           as no evidence was adduced to indicate - (a) the actual payment

           of the price mentioned in the sale deeds and, (b) that the

           defendants had any earning capacity at the time of the

           transaction such that the sale consideration could have been

           paid. As such the sale deed being void for want of valid

           consideration, could not be said to have affected the one-half

           share of the plaintiff in the suit properties nor have conferred

           any right of title on the defendants. In fact, it was held that the

           sale deeds were a sham and must be ignored.
iii.   Lastly, it was reiterated that a document that is void need not

           be challenged by seeking a declaration as the said pleas can be

           set up and proved even in collateral proceedings.
The relevant observations are thus:
“18.
Section 54
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (for short
     “the
TP Act
”) reads thus:
“54. “Sale” defined.—“Sale” is a transfer of ownership
            in exchange for a price paid or promised or part-paid and
            part-promised.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                    Page 29 of 35
Sale how made.—Such transfer, in the case of tangible
           immovable property of the value of one hundred rupees
           and upwards, or in the case of a reversion or other
           intangible thing, can be made only by a registered
           instrument.
In the case of tangible immovable property of a value less
           than one hundred rupees, such transfer may be made
           either by a registered instrument or by delivery of the
           property.
Delivery of tangible immovable property takes place when
           the seller places the buyer, or such person as he directs,
           in possession of the property.
Contract for sale.—A contract for the sale of immovable
           property is a contract that a sale of such property shall
           take place on terms settled between the parties.
           It does not, of itself, create any interest in or charge on
           such property.”

     Hence, a sale of an immovable property has to be for a price. The
     price may be payable in future. It may be partly paid and the
     remaining part can be made payable in future. The payment of
     price is an essential part of a sale covered by
Section 54
of the
     TP Act. If a sale deed in respect of an immovable property is
     executed without payment of price and if it does not provide for
     the payment of price at a future date, it is not a sale at all in the
     eye of the law. It is of no legal effect. Therefore, such a sale will
     be void. It will not effect the transfer of the immovable property.
19. Now, coming back to the case in hand, both the sale deeds
     record that the consideration has been paid. That is the specific
     case of the respondents. It is the specific case made out in the
     plaints as originally filed that the sale deeds are void as the
     same are without consideration. It is pleaded that the same are
     sham as the purchasers who were minor sons and wife of
     Sudarshan Kumar had no earning capacity. No evidence was
     adduced by Sudarshan Kumar about the payment of the price
     mentioned in the sale deeds as well as the earning capacity at
     the relevant time, of his wife and minor sons. Hence, the sale
     deeds will have to be held as void being executed without
     consideration. Hence, the sale deeds did not affect in any
     manner one half-share of the appellant in the suit properties. In
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                     Page 30 of 35
fact, such a transaction made by Sudarshan Kumar of selling
     the suit properties on the basis of the power of attorney of the
     appellant to his own wife and minor sons is a sham transaction.
Thus, the sale deeds of 10-4-1981 will not confer any right, title
     and interest on Sudarshan Kumar's wife and children as the
     sale deeds will have to be ignored being void. It was not
     necessary for the appellant to specifically claim a declaration as
     regards the sale deeds by way of amendment to the plaint. The
     reason being that there were specific pleadings in the plaints as
     originally filed that the sale deeds were void. A document which
     is void need not be challenged by claiming a declaration as the
     said plea can be set up and proved even in collateral
     proceedings.
20. Hence, the issue of bar of limitation of the prayers for
     declaration incorporated by way of an amendment does not
     arise at all. The additional submissions made by the
     respondents on 16-11-2021 have no relevance at all.
21. As no title was transferred under the said sale deeds, the
     appellant continues to have undivided half-share in the suit
     properties. That is how the District Court passed the decree
     holding that the appellant is entitled to joint possession of the
     suit properties along with Sudarshan Kumar. Therefore, for the
     reasons recorded above, by setting aside the impugned
     judgment and order [
Rajesh Kumar v. Kewal Krishan
, 2015 SCC
     OnLine P&H 20782] of the High Court, the decree passed by the
     District Court deserves to be restored.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
35. As far as the facts of the present matter are concerned, the plaintiff

    specifically averred that she never obtained any sale consideration

    from the defendant. On this aspect, the plaint reads as follows:
“(c) That the plaintiff never got any sale consideration of the
     alleged sale deed and she came to know about this fraudulent
     transaction only when she came to the village mourn the death
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                  Page 31 of 35
of Ram Saran and heard that her land is going to be sold by the
     defendant without any right in it”
36. Admittedly, the sale consideration is Rs. 15,000/- as per the sale

    deed. The sale deed indicated that, out of the total sale consideration,

    the plaintiff and the other vendor i.e., Ram Saran, had already

    allegedly received Rs. 9000/- from the defendant and that the

    remaining amount of Rs. 6000/- would be received at the time of the

    execution of the sale deed, in front of the Registrar. The relevant

    portion of the sale deed reads thus:
“[…] now we with our own sweet will have sold the above land
    measuring 31 kanal 4 marla, along with all the rights to Smt. Shanti
    wife of Bagdawat son of Harnath, resident of Akbarpur, for Rs. 15000/-
    . Possession has been delivered to the vendee. Out of the total sale
    consideration, we have already received Rs. 9000/- from the vendee
    and remaining amount of Rs. 6000/- will be received in front of the Sub
    Registrar. Expenses of the stamp papers have been borne by the
    vendee itself […]”
37. The endorsement made by the Sub Registrar at the time of the

    execution of the sale deed, reads thus:
“That the contents of the sale deed have been read over and understood
    to Ram Saran 2/3rd share, Risali 1/3rd share, and Bhadgawat husband
    of vendee. They have verified the same and the vendors have received
    Rs. 6000/- from the husband of the vendee in the presence of the sub-
    registrar. Both the parties have been identified by Mahadev Singh
    Sarpanch, and witness no. 2 Budhu.[…]”
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                  Page 32 of 35
38. Concurrent findings of both the First Appellate Court and the High

    Court indicated that the husband of the defendant i.e., one Bagdawat,

    who had allegedly given the remaining sale consideration of Rs.

    6,000/- during the time of execution of the sale deed, had not stepped

    into the witness box. Furthermore, one of the attesting witnesses to

    the execution of the sale deed i.e., the Sarpanch had also died before

    his deposition could be recorded. One Budhu, who was the second

    attesting witness, was the brother of the defendant and both the

    Courts had doubted his testimony as being partial to the defendant.

    All in all, there was no witness who could substantiate the case of the

    defendant that there was part-payment of the sale consideration, i.e.,

    Rs. 6,000/- during the time of execution of the sale deed.

    Furthermore, no evidence was adduced by the defendant to prove that

    even the initial amount of Rs. 9,000/- which was purportedly paid

    before the execution of the sale deed was actually received by the

    plaintiff. Therefore, the averment of the plaintiff in the plaint, that she

    had not received the sale consideration, had not been otherwise

    proven as false. In such circumstances as well, i.e., in the absence of

    the sale consideration being tendered, the sale deed would be void and

    the plaintiff would not be required to seek its cancellation. Therefore,
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                    Page 33 of 35
Article 59
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
could not be said to be applicable

    to the present facts.
39. The First Appellate Court had rightly observed that the plaintiff had

    claimed the relief of joint possession. It had also arrived at the finding

    that the transaction in question was void. To put it simply, in the eyes

    of the law, the plaintiff could not be said to have executed the sale

    deed. Therefore, the plaintiff could indeed have maintained an action

    to obtain possession of the property on the basis of her title and filed

    the same within the period of 12 years from the date of knowledge that

    the possession of the defendant was adverse to that of the plaintiff.

    Even if the date of execution of the sale deed, i.e., 14.06.1973 is

    considered, the suit having been filed on 28.02.1984, i.e., almost 11

    years later, could be said to be well within limitation as stipulated

    under
Article 65.
40. In the overall view of the matter, we have reached the conclusion that

    the High Court could be said to have committed an error insofar as

    observing that it is
Article 59
and not
Article 65
of the
Schedule to the

    Limitation Act, 1963
, which would apply to the case in hand. However,

    irrespective of the question of which
Article of the Limitation Act, 1963
would be applicable to the suit instituted by the present plaintiff, the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                   Page 34 of 35
suit could be said to have been filed within limitation. Therefore, apart

    from clarifying the correct position of law, we find no infirmity in the

    ultimate conclusion that the High Court arrived at as far as the

    maintainability of the suit on the aspect of limitation is concerned.
41. Therefore, this appeal fails and is hereby, dismissed.
……………………………J.
                                                (J.B. PARDIWALA)



                                             ..………………………….J.
                                                 (R. MAHADEVAN)


New Delhi
12th September, 2025.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24821 of 2018                  Page 35 of 35