[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Abhimanue vs State Of Kerala on 22 September, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 1136                                                              NON-REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.4197-4199 OF 2025
                            [ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRIMINAL) NOS.5814-5816 OF 2025]


                            ABHIMANUE ETC. ETC.                            … APPELLANTS

                                                           VS.

                            STATE OF KERALA                                … RESPONDENT

                                                          WITH

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 4200-4201 OF 2025
                            [ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRIMINAL) NOS.7641-7642 OF 2025]


                            VISHNU ETC.                                     … APPELLANTS

                                                           VS.

                            STATE OF KERALA & ANR.                      … RESPONDENTS


                                                    JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
1.            Leave granted.
2.            Assailed in the present set of appeals is the judgment and order

                             dated 11th December, 20241 of the Kerala High Court, passed on a

                             batch of petitions2 filed by the State of Kerala praying for setting

                             aside of grant of bail (through separate orders) to a total of 10
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
rashmi dhyani pant        (ten) accused. Vide the impugned order, the High Court set aside
   Date: 2025.09.22
   16:39:27 IST
   Reason:
1 impugned order
                     2 Crl. M Nos. 4707, 4713, 4716, 4739, 4749, 4752, 4762, 4767 & 4798 of 2024
1
the orders granting bail to 5 (five) of the 10 (ten) accused, who

        are the appellants before us.
3.      A First Information Report3 under
Sections 143
,
147
,
148
,
149
,
324
and
302
, Indian Penal Code, 1860 4, was registered on 19th

        December, 2021, against unknown persons. It was alleged

        therein that such unknown persons committed the said offences

        under the leadership of one political activist of a particular

        political organization (not a party to these proceedings). Soon

        thereafter, the appellants were arrested. As per the narrative in

        the police report (charge-sheet) filed under
Section 173(2)
, Code

        of Criminal Procedure, 19735 dated 15th March, 2022, the accused

        are activists of a particular political organization who, allegedly,

        due to political enmity murdered the victim on 18 th December,

        2021. Accused 2-6 formed an unlawful assembly, followed the

        victim in a vehicle and collided with his scooter at 5:50 pm. The

        victim fell down whereupon he was brutally attacked; ultimately,

        he succumbed to his injuries at 11:30 pm. The accused were

        consequently charged with having committed offences under
Sections 120-B
,
109
,
115
,
143
,
147
,
148
,
149
,
324
and
302
, IPC

        and
Section 27(1)
of the Arms Act, 1959. We note that the

        appellants Abhimanue, Athul, Sanand, Vishnu and Dhaneesh

        figure as A-3, A-5, A-4, A-2 and A-6, respectively, in the charge-
sheet.
3 FIR No. 621/2021, PS Mannanchery, District Alappuzha, Kerala
     4
IPC
5 Cr. PC
2
4.   In December 2022, vide separate orders of various dates, after

     being in custody for nearly a year, the appellants and the co-

     accused were granted bail by the trial court. The State applied for

     cancellation of bail before the Additional Sessions Judge, who

     rejected the application on 5th April, 2024.
5.   Next, the State approached the High Court in May 2024 praying

     for setting aside of the orders granting bail to the accused

     persons.
6.   The High Court divided the accused into two categories – (i)

     conspirators and (ii) persons against whom the specific overt act

     of murder was alleged. The appellants belong to the second

     category. The High Court noted that bail was granted to the

     appellants by the Sessions Court in a mechanical manner,

     without referring to any “circumstance that should have been

     borne in mind while granting bail in a heinous crime as murder”.

     The High Court further noted that the Sessions Court granted bail,

     based on two factors. First, the accused had been in custody for

     more than a year, and secondly, there was no opposition from the

     Public Prosecutor. The possibility of influencing the witnesses or

     tampering with evidence was not borne in mind by the Sessions

     Court, whereas only a few weeks prior, their bail applications

     were rejected finding that they may influence the witnesses and

     tamper with evidence. The High Court found that there was no

     change of circumstances, and hence bail should not have been

     granted. The High Court also rejected the argument that bail
3
should not be cancelled, as the applications praying for

     cancellation were filed more than a year and a half after the grant

     of bail. Accordingly, the bail granted in favour of the appellants

     stood set aside by the High Court.
7.   Aggrieved by the impugned order revoking grant of bail, the

     appellants have now carried it to this Court in appeal.
8.   Mr. Soumya Chakraborty, learned senior counsel, submitted on

     behalf of the appellants that setting aside orders granting bail, on

     an application filed more than 18 (eighteen) months after such

     grant, was unjustified. Further, the appellants did not tamper

     evidence or influence witnesses, did not abscond, and did not

     violate any other bail condition while on bail; as such, setting

     aside of the orders granting bail was uncalled for and without

     justifiable reasons. He further submitted that the application for

     cancellation of bail, preferred by the State before the High Court,

     was not maintainable. Since an earlier application for cancellation

     had already been rejected by the Sessions Judge, the proper

     remedy of the State was to approach the High Court under

     Sections 401 and 482, Cr. PC, rather than by way of a fresh

     application for cancellation before the High Court. Lastly, as the

     State did not challenge the order of the Sessions Judge refusing

     to cancel the bail, the said order has attained finality and is now

     unassailable.
9.   The State filed a status report pursuant to an order of this Court.
Upon perusal of the report, apart from the antecedents of the
4
accused, it is seen that the accused were identified based on

      CCTV footage of the crime, which was recovered from a nearby

      house. Relying thereon, learned senior counsel Mr. Dinesh,

      representing the State, urged that the impugned order suffers

      from no infirmity and, thus, deserves to be upheld.
10.   It was also stated in the status report that Vishnu (A-2) had

      violated a condition of interim bail (granted by this Court vide

      order dated 28th May, 2025) by entering the district of Alappuzha

      on 30th July, 2025. Vishnu (A-2), along with Rajendra Prasad (A-1),

      allegedly assaulted and threatened (by knife) a person named

      Abhiram on the same day which led to registration of FIR No.

      1006/2025.
11.   Opposing the petitions, Mr. R. Basant, learned senior counsel

      appearing on behalf of the respondent no. 2 (widow of the

      victim), submitted that the Sessions Court failed to consider the

      severity of the allegations against the appellants and granted bail

      by a non-speaking order. On the other hand, the order impugned

      in these appeals is well-reasoned and this Court ought to be loath

      to interfere therewith. Out of the total 10 (ten) accused, the High

      Court set aside the orders granting bail of only 5 (five) accused,

      after considering all relevant factors. Distinguishing them from

      the conspirators, the appellants herein were classified in the

      category of the actual assailants in the gruesome murder.

      Specific overt acts attributable to each accused were discussed in

      detail by the High Court. Our attention was also drawn to the
5
several criminal antecedents of the appellants. A-2, along with a

      co-accused, allegedly committed offences even after the grant of

      interim protection by this Court on 30 th July, 2025. Moreover, it

      was submitted that the Sessions Court granted bail to the several

      accused upon hearing only the Public Prosecutor and not the

      Special Public Prosecutor, who was appointed for the case. Lastly,

      the High Court rightly held that delay in filing an application for

      revocation of bail is no ground for rejecting such an application.
12.   Mr. Chakraborty responded by stating that Vishnu entered into

      the district as he was required to attend the ongoing trial of the

      case on that date. As regards the commission of an offence by

      Vishnu, it was submitted that the purported victim (Abhiram) had

      denied the involvement of the accused persons in the offence by

      way of an affidavit filed before the High Court in proceedings

      instituted by Vishnu under Section 482, Cr. PC.
13.   Heard learned senior counsel appearing for the parties and

      perused the record.
14.   Before proceeding further, we consider it appropriate to begin our

      analysis by addressing one of the arguments raised by Mr.

      Chakraborty. He has challenged the very maintainability of the

      application filed before the High Court. According to him, once an

      application under Section 439(2), Cr. PC seeking cancellation of

      bail has been rejected by the Sessions Judge, a second

      application under the same provision cannot be filed directly

      before the High Court. Instead, the proper course would be either
6
to challenge the Sessions Judge’s order in a petition for revision,

         or to invoke the inherent powers of the High Court under Section

         482, Cr. PC.
15.      We are unable to agree with this argument. We note that, in the

         present case, the application before the High Court was filed

         under “Section 482 r/w 439 (2) of
Code of Criminal Procedure
”.

         That being the case, nothing prevented the High Court from

         exercising its inherent powers.
16.      We now propose to proceed with our discussion on the other

         aspects of the case.
17.      Law is well settled that cancellation of bail is distinct from

         revocation of an order granting bail. Bail may be cancelled when

         the accused violates any of the conditions imposed. On the other

         hand, an order granting bail can be revoked if such an order is

         found to be perverse or illegal.
In
P v. State of Madhya

         Pradesh6
, a three-judge Bench of this Court, after analyzing

         various previous decisions, discussed the distinction between the

         two. Relevant paragraphs of the decision are reproduced below:
21. Echoing the above principle, in
Ranjit Singh v. State of
            M.P. [Ranjit Singh
v. State of M.P., (2013) 16 SCC 797 : (2014) 6 SCC
            (Cri) 405], it has been held thus:
“19. … There is also a distinction between the concept of setting
               aside an unjustified, illegal or perverse order and cancellation of
               an order of bail on the ground that the accused has
               misconducted himself or certain supervening circumstances
               warrant such cancellation. If the order granting bail is a perverse
               one or passed on irrelevant materials, it can be annulled by the
               superior court.”




      6 (2022) 15 SCC 211
7
22.
In
Abdul    Basit v. Mohd.    Abdul    Kadir    Chaudhary [Abdul
Basit
v. Mohd. Abdul Kadir Chaudhary, (2014) 10 SCC 754 : (2015) 1
SCC (Cri) 257], this Court has opined that: (SCC p. 763, para 19)

      “19. Therefore, the concept of setting aside an unjustified, illegal
      or perverse order is different from the concept of cancellation of
      a bail on the ground of accused's misconduct or new adverse
      facts having surfaced after the grant of bail which require such
      cancellation and a perusal of the aforesaid decisions would
      present before us that an order granting bail can only be set
      aside on grounds of being illegal or contrary to law by the court
      superior to the court which granted the bail and not by the same
      court.”
***
24. As can be discerned from the above decisions, for cancelling
bail once granted, the court must consider whether any supervening
circumstances have arisen or the conduct of the accused post grant
of bail demonstrates that it is no longer conducive to a fair trial to
permit him to retain his freedom by enjoying the concession of bail
during trial [
Dolat Ram v. State of Haryana
, (1995) 1 SCC 349 : 1995
SCC (Cri) 237] . To put it differently, in ordinary circumstances, this
Court would be loathe to interfere with an order passed by the court
below granting bail but if such an order is found to be illegal or
perverse or premised on material that is irrelevant, then such an
order is susceptible to scrutiny and interference by the appellate
court.
25. Some of the circumstances where bail granted to the accused
under
Section 439(1)
CrPC can be cancelled are enumerated below:
(a) If he misuses his liberty by indulging in similar/other
      criminal activity;
(b) If he interferes with the course of investigation;
(c) If he attempts to tamper with the evidence;
(d) If he attempts to influence/threaten the witnesses;
(e) If he evades or attempts to evade court proceedings;
(f) If he indulges in activities which would hamper smooth
      investigation;
(g) If he is likely to flee from the country;
(h) If he attempts to make himself scarce by going
      underground        and/or      becoming    unavailable  to   the
      investigating agency;
(i) If he attempts to place himself beyond the reach of his
      surety.
(j) If any facts may emerge after the grant of bail which are
      considered unconducive to a fair trial.
We may clarify that the aforesaid list is only illustrative in nature
and not exhaustive.
(emphasis ours)
8
18.   In the present case, the High Court revoked the orders granting

      bail after noting    that   the Sessions   Court   kept only two

      considerations in mind: period of custody and ‘no opposition from

      the prosecution’, without a discussion of the other factors in

      detail. However, the Sessions Court having primarily proceeded

      on the premise of there being no objection from the side of the

      prosecution for grant of bail, it would have been just and proper

      for the High Court to direct the Sessions Court to consider all the

      relevant factors and decide afresh the application of the

      appellants for bail. Evidently, in the absence of the Sessions

      Court looking into all relevant factors for grant of bail, the High

      Court took upon itself such a responsibility. Looking at the gravity

      of the crime and the apprehension of evidence being tampered

      and witnesses being susceptible to influence and intimidation,

      the High Court proceeded to revoke the bail.
19.   What weighs with us now, in the facts and circumstances of the

      present case, is whether the High Court ought to have revoked

      the bail for the reasons that it assigned or should the High Court

      have directed the Sessions Court to decide the application for bail

      afresh.
20.   Directing the Sessions Court to decide the application for grant of

      bail is an available option to us given the circumstances noted

      above but having regard to the lapse of time and the submissions

      advanced, we propose to decide the appeals on merits.
9
21.   Apart from the fact that it has not been shown to our satisfaction

      that the appellants violated any of the conditions of bail except in

      one case, which we propose to consider a little later, we are of

      the considered opinion that notwithstanding the gravity of the

      offences alleged against the appellants, the conflicting interests

      of individual liberty on the one hand and the victim’s rights as

      well as concerns for community safety on the other could have

      been better balanced bearing in mind that the appellants had

      suffered incarceration for nearly a year and thereafter had been

      on bail for almost 2 (two) years before the orders granting bail

      were revoked vide the impugned order. The likelihood of the

      accused   influencing   the   witnesses   or   tampering   with   the

      evidence and ensuring smooth progress of the trial could have

      been taken care of by imposing stringent conditions over and

      above those which were imposed while granting bail.
22.   Reverting to the sole instance of violation of bail condition, we

      note that after the grant of interim bail by this Court, Vishnu and

      A-1 had allegedly assaulted and threatened Abhiram with a knife,

      which led to Abhiram lodging an FIR under Sections 115 (2),

      118(1), 351(2) and
25
of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.

      Seeking quashing of the said FIR, Vishnu approached the High

      Court. The records indicate that Abhiram filed an affidavit before

      the High Court denying Vishnu’s involvement in the crime stating

      that “(T)he police may have for reasons best known to them

      implicated him in the offence. After preparing the statement, I
10
merely affixed by signature at the paper as shown by them

         without reading the statement. I was never aware that the

         Petitioner’s name was included … .”. Abhiram also denied having

         settled the dispute and clarified that “upon conciliation talks only

         the misunderstanding was mitigated”. Suffice it to record on

         perusal of the above statement that there is much more than

         what meets the eyes. We are not prepared to accept the

         contention that the FIR lodged by Abhiram affords ground for

         cancellation of bail granted to Vishnu.
23.      Our attention was also invited to the status report filed by the

         State, to indicate the various criminal antecedents of the

         appellants. Suffice it to say, however, that such antecedents by

         themselves cannot constitute a ground for denial of bail.
In this

         context, a useful reference may be made to the decision of a

         coordinate Bench of this Court in
Ayub Khan v. State of

         Rajasthan7
of which one of us (Augustine George Masih, J.) was

         a member. The relevant paragraph therefrom is extracted below:
10. The presence of the antecedents of the accused is only one of
            the several considerations for deciding the prayer for bail made by
            him. In a given case, if the accused makes out a strong prima
            facie case, depending upon the fact situation and period of
            incarceration, the presence of antecedents may not be a ground to
            deny bail. There may be a case where a Court can grant bail only on
            the grounds of long incarceration. The presence of antecedents may
            not be relevant in such a case. In a given case, the Court may grant
            default bail. Again, the antecedents of the accused are irrelevant in
            such a case. Thus, depending upon the peculiar facts, the Court can
            grant bail notwithstanding the existence of the antecedents. ……… .
24.      Cancellation/revocation of bail, no doubt, seeks to uphold trial

         integrity. The dominant purpose thereof is to ensure a fair trial
      7 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3763
11
and protect societal interests by preventing persons accused of a

      heinous or grave crime and having tendencies to influence or

      intimidate witnesses or to tamper evidence from being released.

      Indeed, if such accused are likely to interfere with witness

      testimony, the courts could be justified in ordering the accused to

      be taken back into custody. However, at the same time, the

      golden rule of bail jurisprudence propounded by Hon’ble V.R.

      Krishna Iyer, J. of ‘bail being the rule and jail an exception’ cannot

      be ignored. Taking back the appellants in custody for no better

      reason than that the Sessions Court should not have been

      swayed by omission of the Public Prosecutor to raise any

      objection to grant of bail should not operate to the appellants’

      prejudice, more so when two years have passed in the

      interregnum.
25.   Upon perusing the status report filed by the State, we find that

      the case was posted for “schedule trial” on 30th May, 2025 and

      thereafter the case has been listed on various dates. As per the

      chargesheet, a total of 141 (one hundred forty-one) witnesses are

      to be examined. Of them, there are at least five witnesses who

      allegedly witnessed the crime. The trial will obviously take time to

      conclude. Bearing in mind that the appellants since grant of bail

      have not been involved in any similar or other offence, we prefer

      to   lean   in   favour    of   liberty   rather   than   its   curtailment.

      Accordingly,     while    setting   aside the      impugned     order,   the
12
appellants’ liberty is not curtailed subject to imposition of certain

      stringent conditions.
26.   To obviate any possibility of tampering with evidence and

      intimidation and/or influencing of the witnesses by the appellants,

      we impose the following conditions for grant of bail to the

      appellants:
a. The appellants shall not enter the limits of district Alappuzha,

         save when their presence is required for the purposes of trial.
b. The appellants shall inform the trial court of their respective

         address where they propose to stay during such time condition
(a) remains in force.
c. On every alternative day, the appellants shall mark their

         presence at the police station having jurisdiction in respect of

         their proposed places of stay. Such attendance need not be

         marked, if on any particular day, they are required to remain

         present before the trial court.
d. The appellants shall not procrastinate the trial and fully

         cooperate with the trial court to take the trial to its logical

         conclusion without any delay.
e. The appellants shall not tamper with prosecution evidence and

         influence/intimidate the witnesses.
f. The   appellants     shall   not   pray   for   deferment   of   cross-

         examination of any eye-witness.
13
g. After the evidence of all the alleged eye-witnesses is recorded,

         the appellants shall be at liberty to seek modification of

         condition (a) supra before the trial court.
h. The appellants shall be required to furnish bail bonds to the

         satisfaction of the trial court.
27.   The trial court, in addition to the aforesaid conditions, may

      impose any other conditions as it may deem fit and proper.
28.   The   police   administration    of   the   State   may   appoint   the

      investigating officer of the case or any other police officer to

      ensure that not only do the appellants not influence/intimidate

      the witnesses but also that protection to the witnesses, as and

      when the occasion so demands, is provided.
29.   We direct the State too to cooperate with the trial court by

      ensuring the presence of all the private and official witnesses on

      the dates fixed by the trial court for recording evidence.
30.   The trial court is encouraged to expedite the trial by scheduling

      dates in such a manner that witness testimony is recorded

      without undue delay.
31.   The appellants shall continue to remain on bail, pending trial,

      subject to adherence to the terms and conditions for such grant

      as imposed by the trial court, in addition to the conditions

      imposed by us. Should there be any breach of the terms and

      conditions and the same is brought to the notice of the trial court,
14
appropriate orders may be passed including cancellation of the

        bail granted by this Court.
32.     The impugned judgment and order revoking the orders granting

        bail stands set aside. The appeals are, accordingly, allowed.
33.     Pending application (s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
………..…………….………………J.
                                                  (DIPANKAR DATTA)




                                            …………..……………..……………J.
                                            (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)


      NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 22, 2025.
15