[Cites
22
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Satheesh V.K vs The Federal Bank Ltd on 23 September, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 1140                                                                    REPORTABLE
                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NOS.11752-11753/2025
                                [ARISING OUT OF SLP(C) NOS.30056-30057/2024]


                     SATHEESH V.K.                                          … APPELLANT

                                                         VERSUS

                     THE FEDERAL BANK LTD.                                  … RESPONDENT



                                                     JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
1.            Appellant, Satheesh V.K., is a borrower within the meaning of section

                             2(f) of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and

                             Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 20021. Undisputedly, the

                             appellant obtained financial assistance from the respondent-Federal

                             Bank, a secured creditor within the meaning of
section 2(zd)
of the

                             SARFAESI Act, by creating equitable mortgage over properties

                             situated in Kozhikode. However, the appellant having defaulted in his

                             obligation to repay the loan, the respondent classified the loan

                             account as ‘Non-Performing Asset’ (NPA) and initiated measures

                             under
section 13(4)
of the SARFAESI Act.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
rashmi dhyani pant
Date: 2025.09.23
17:16:42 IST
Reason:
1
SARFAESI Act
1
2.    Aggrieved by the action taken by the respondent, the appellant

      invoked the jurisdiction of the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam

      under
Article 226
of the Constitution by presenting a writ petition2.

      According to the respondent, the total outstanding amount was

      Rs.7,77,41,321/-. The order dated 1st October, 2024 passed by the

      High Court disposing of the writ petition required the appellant to pay

      Rs.2,00,00,000/- on or before 30th October, 2024 and the remaining

      amount along with future interest in 12 (twelve) equal monthly

      instalments. The first instalment was to be paid on or before 15 th

      November, 2024 and the remaining eleven (11) instalments were to

      be paid on or before 15th day of each succeeding month. The

      impugned order further directed that in case of failure to make

      payment of Rs.2,00,00,000/- or any of the subsequent instalments,

      as directed, the respondent would be free to proceed against the

      appellant under the
SARFAESI Act
for realisation of the dues in

      accordance with law. Appellant was also granted liberty to approach

      the respondent for one time settlement after making payment of the

      initial sum of Rs.2,00,00,000/- on or before 30th October, 2024.
3.    The order dated 1st October, 2024 was challenged by the appellant in

      a special leave petition3 before this Court. Order dated 28th

      November, 2024 recorded on the said special leave petition by a co-

      ordinate Bench reads as follows:
2
Writ Petition (C) No.33280 of 2024
3
Special Leave Petition (C) No.28259/2024
2
ORDER
1. After arguing for some time and on our expressing reservation in
        entertaining the present petition, the learned senior counsel for the
        petitioner seeks permission to withdraw the present petition.
2. Permission to withdraw is granted.
3. The Special Leave Petition is dismissed as withdrawn.
4.   Having been permitted to withdraw the special leave petition, the

     appellant next approached the High Court with a petition4 seeking

     review of the order dated 1st October, 2024. Such petition came to be

     dismissed vide order dated 5th December, 2024.
5.   Consequent upon such dismissal, these two civil appeals were

     presented by the appellant before this Court on 12th December, 2024.
The appeal5 registered prior in point of time is directed against the

     order dated 1st October, 2024 of disposal of the appellant’s writ

     petition, whereas the one6 subsequently registered is directed against

     the dismissal of the review petition.
6.   The alacrity with which the appellant moved from court to court

     between 1st October, 2024 (date of disposal of his writ petition) and

     12th December, 2024 (date of presenting the special leave petitions

     before this Court giving rise to these appeals) without showing

     semblance of an inclination to repay the dues of the respondent and

     to buy time by resorting to technicalities are certainly factors which

     we propose to bear in mind while deciding these appeals.
4
RP No.1294 of 2024
5
Civil Appeal No.11752/2025
6
Civil Appeal No.11753/2025
3
7.    Mr. Aljo K. Joseph, learned counsel appearing for the respondent, has

      vehemently objected to maintainability of the appeals. He has

      referred to the aforesaid order dated 28th November, 2024 passed on

      the appellant’s previous special leave petition and contended that no

      liberty having been sought and/or granted by this Court to present a

      fresh special leave petition to lay a challenge to the order dated 1 st

      October, 2024, the appellant has no right in law to approach this

      Court once again after withdrawing the initial challenge. Also, in view

      of Order XLVII Rule 7 (1)
of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 19087, there

      can be no appeal against an order refusing review.
8.    The objection to the maintainability of the appeal against the order

      dated 1st October, 2024 was sought to be countered by Mr. Menon,

      learned counsel for the appellant, by citing the decision of a co-

      ordinate Bench of this Court in
S. Narahari and Others v. S.R.

      Kumar and Others8
. It was pointed out that a reference was made

      for constitution of a larger Bench to deliberate and adjudicate the

      issue as to whether a second special leave petition would be

      maintainable against an order which was previously challenged in a

      special leave petition but the challenge had either been withdrawn or

      spurned.
Our attention was further drawn by Mr. Menon to orders

      dated 29th July, 2024 and 13th August, 2024 passed by another co-

      ordinate Bench of this Court [of which one of us (Dipankar Datta) was
7
CPC
8
(2023) 7 SCC 740
4
a member] in
N.F. Railway Vending and Catering Contractors

      Association Lumding Division vs. Union of India & Ors.9
where,

      noticing
S. Narahari
(supra), the special leave petitions were

      adjourned till such time the reference is decided.
9.    Apart from referring to the aforesaid decisions, Mr. Menon relied on a

      compilation of precedents starting from
Dhakeswari Cotton Mills

      Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal
10.
Reliance

      was placed on paragraph 8 of
Dhakeswari Cotton Mills Ltd.
(supra)

      on the extent of powers conferred by
Article 136
of the Constitution,

      reading as follows:
“8. … It is not possible to define with any precision the limitations on
             the exercise of the discretionary jurisdiction vested in this Court by
             the constitutional provision made in
Article 136.
The limitations,
             whatever they be, are implicit in the nature and character of the
             power itself. It being an exceptional and overriding power, naturally
             it has to be exercised sparingly and with caution and only in special
             and extraordinary situations. Beyond that it is not possible to fetter
             the exercise of this power by any set formula or rule. All that can be
             said is that the Constitution having trusted the wisdom and good
             sense of the Judges of this Court in this matter, that itself is a
             sufficient safeguard and guarantee that that power will only be used
             to advance the cause of justice, and that its exercise will be governed
             by well-established principles which govern the exercise of overriding
             constitutional powers. It is, however, plain that when the Court
             reaches the conclusion that a person has been dealt with arbitrarily
             or that a court or tribunal within the territory of India has not given
             a fair deal to a litigant, then no technical hurdles of any kind like the
             finality of finding of facts or otherwise can stand in the way of the
             exercise of this power because the whole intent and purpose of this
             Article is that it is the duty of this Court to see that injustice is not
             perpetuated or perpetrated by decisions of courts and tribunals
             because certain laws have made the decisions of these courts or
             tribunals final and conclusive. …”
9
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos.17501-17502/2024
10
AIR 1955 SC 65
5
10.    According to Mr. Menon, the power conferred by
Article 136
of the

       Constitution of India is an extra-ordinary power and such power must

       be exercised to advance the cause of justice and not to thwart it.
11.    Other decisions relied on by Mr. Menon are
Patel Narshi Thakershi

       and Ors. v. Shri Pradyumansinghji Arjunsinghji11
,
S. Nagaraj

       and Others v. State of Karnataka and Another12
,
Lily Thomas

       and Others v. Union of India & Ors.13
,
Kunhayammed and

       Others v. State of Kerala & Another14
,
Ramnik Vallabhdas

       Madhvani and Others v. Taraben Pravinlal Madhvani15
, Union

       of India v. Amrit Lal Manchanda and Another16, and Khoday

       Distilleries Limited (Now Known
as Khoday India Limited) and

       Others v. Sri Mahadeshwara Sahakara Sakkare Karkhane

       Limited, Kollegal (Under Liquidation) Represented by the

       Liquidator17
.
12.    Of   these   decisions,
Kunhayammed
(supra)   and    Khoday

       Distilleries Limited (supra) have relevance and, therefore, we

       propose to consider the same in some detail for deciding the question

       arising before us at a later part of this judgment. The other decisions

       not being directly related to the point under consideration are not

       separately considered. Suffice to record, these decisions lay down
11
(1971) 3 SCC 844
12
1993 Supp (4) SCC 595
13
(2000) 6 SCC 224
14
(2000) 6 SCC 359
15
(2004) 1 SCC 497
16
(2004) 3 SCC 75
17
(2019) 4 SCC 376
6
general principles of law, inter alia, of what is a review, that power to

           review is not an inherent power and has to be statutorily conferred,

           whether res judicata is applicable in a case where there is inherent

           lack of jurisdiction, how to read precedents, and that law has to bend

           before justice in given circumstances.
13.        On merits, Mr. Menon referred to the decision in M/s Pro Knits v.
The Board of Directors of Canara Bank & Ors.18 and Shri Shri

           Swami Samarth Construction & Finance Solution and Another

           v. Board of Directors of NKGST Co-op. Bank Ltd and Others19

           to contend that the appellant’s company being an unit which is an

           MSME, it is entitled to the benefits flowing from Notification dated

           29th May, 2015 issued by the Central Government in terms of
Section

           9
of the Micro Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006

           and that the respondent had acted illegally in not extending the

           benefit of such notification to the appellant.
14.        Since the question of examining the merits of the appellant’s claim

           would arise if the objection to the maintainability were overcome, we

           proceed to examine the maintainability aspect first.
15.        In course of hearing, we had invited Mr. Menon’s attention to the

           order of recent origin dated 1st September, 2025 of another co-

           ordinate Bench in Vasantalata Kom Vimalanand Mirjankar Rep.

           by G.P.A. Holder vs. Deepa Mavinkurve & Ors.20. Mr. Menon
18
(2024) 10 SCC 292
19
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1566
20
Special Leave Petition (C) Diary No.36933/2025
7
sought to distinguish Vasantalata (supra) by referring to the

      opening sentence of paragraph 7. It was submitted that this Court in

      Vasantalata (supra) had dealt with a case where a special leave

      petition was dismissed and not withdrawn, as in the present case;

      therefore, Vasantalata (supra) has no application here.
16.   The question we are tasked to decide, though of frequent occurrence

      now-a-days, is not res integra. It is, whether a special leave petition

      (second in the series) would be maintainable against a judgment and

      order which was earlier challenged before this Court but such

      challenge turned out to be abortive because the special leave petition

      before this Court is either (i) withdrawn unconditionally, or (ii)

      dismissed on merits by a brief order not containing reasons, or (iii)

      withdrawn with liberty to apply for review but without the liberty to

      approach this Court once again, should the review too fail.
17.   No doubt, the co-ordinate Bench in
S. Narahari
(supra) has referred

      the issue to a larger Bench for consideration. The facts therein may

      be noted now.
The coordinate Bench in
S. Narahari
(supra) was

      seized of the question as to whether, upon dismissal of a special leave

      petition against the parent order as withdrawn with liberty to file a

      review before the high court but without liberty to approach this Court

      again against the parent order should the review fail, a fresh special

      leave petition filed against both the parent order and the review

      rejection order would be maintainable. The Bench pondered whether

      liberty granted by this Court to approach the high court in review
8
automatically places the said matter in the “escalation matrix”, and

         makes the remedy of a special leave petition available again.
The

         Bench traced the first line of cases,
Vinod Kapoor v. State of Goa21
and
Sandhya Educational Society v. Union of India22
which ruled

         that when no liberty has been granted to approach the Supreme

         Court once again, a subsequent special leave petition is not

         maintainable.
This was contrasted with the decision rendered in

         Khoday Distilleries (supra) wherein after placing reliance on
Kunhayammed
(supra),   a   three-Judge   Bench   came   to   the

         conclusion that even after dismissal of a special leave petition, a

         review before the high court is maintainable.
18.      The Bench in
S. Narahari
(supra) while acknowledging that the

         question in the matter before it was different, was of the view that

         the logic employed by the larger Bench in Khoday Distilleries

         (supra) caused a crack in the reasoning of the first line of cases and

         came to the conclusion that Khoday Distilleries (supra) essentially

         ruled that the doctrine of merger does not apply when a special leave

         petition is dismissed by way of a non-speaking order.
If indeed that

         be so, the Bench in
S. Narahari
(supra) was concerned that such

         dismissal by way of a non-speaking order is not to be considered as

         law declared under
Article 141
of the Constitution and then the same

         cannot be considered res judicata; therefore, in every such dismissal,
21
(2012) 12 SCC 383
22
(2014) 7 SCC 701
9
the remedy of filing a special leave petition would still persist. Further,

        if a review is allowed to be filed after a special leave petition is

        dismissed, then a fresh special leave petition cannot be barred

        arbitrarily. Hence, the matter was referred to a larger Bench to put a

        quietus to the issue.
19.     Having noticed
S. Narahari
(supra), a stark dissimilarity in facts is

        discernible. There, the unsuccessful petitioner at the time of dismissal

        of the special leave petition as withdrawn had prayed for and was

        granted leave to apply for a review. Upon the review being dismissed,

        the parent order was challenged once again. Before us, there is

        something very adverse to the appellant. He having sensed that the

        co-ordinate Bench was not inclined to entertain the special leave

        petition, did not invite an order of dismissal thereof on merits but

        went away content with permission to withdraw. Neither permission

        was sought to apply for review nor was any window kept open by this

        Court to permit the appellant to approach it once again mounting a

        challenge to the same order.
This is a plain and simple case where

        the law
laid down in
the previous century by a co-ordinate Bench in

        its decision in
Upadhyay & Co. v. State of U.P. and Others23
would

        squarely apply.
20.     As noted by the co-ordinate Bench in its order dated 13th August,

        2024 in
N.F. Railway Vending and Catering Contractors

        Association
(supra), relied on by Mr. Menon, the decision in
23
(1999) 1
SCC 81
10
Upadhyay & Co.
(supra) was not placed for consideration of the co-
ordinate Bench in
S. Narahari
(supra).
21.
In
Upadhyay & Co.
(supra), it was held thus:
“9. In the meanwhile, the petitioner challenged the order of the
           Allahabad High Court dated 3-5-1996 by filing SLP (C) No. 12673 of
           1996 in this Court. But for reasons better known to the petitioner he
           withdrew the SLP on 9-7-1996. Thereafter, he filed an application
           before the High Court for clarification of the order dated 3-5-1996,
           but the Division Bench did not find anything to be clarified about that
           order and hence dismissed the petition on 10-10-1997.
10. The present special leave petitions are filed against the two
           orders of the High Court, one dated 3-5-1996 and the other dated
           10-9-1997.
11. We made a recapitulation of the events as above for the purpose
           of showing that the petitioner has absolutely no case in the present
           SLPs. He cannot, at any rate, now challenge the order of the High
           Court dated 3-5-1996 over again having withdrawn the SLP which he
           filed in challenge of the same order. It is not a permissible practice
           to challenge the same order over again after withdrawing the special
           leave petition without obtaining permission of the court for
           withdrawing it with liberty to move for special leave again
           subsequently.
12. The above principle has been incorporated as a rule in the realm
           of suits.
Order 23 Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure
deals with
           withdrawal of suit or abandonment of part of the claim. Sub-rule (3)
           says that the court may in certain contingencies grant permission to
           withdraw from a suit with liberty to institute a fresh suit in respect of
           the subject-matter of such suit. Sub-rule (4) reads thus:
‘1. (4) Where the plaintiff—
(a) abandons any suit or part of a claim under sub-rule (1),
                   or
(b) withdraws from a suit or part of a claim without the
                   permission referred to in sub-rule (3),
                   he shall be liable for such costs as the court may award and
                   shall be precluded from instituting any fresh suit in respect of
                   such subject-matter or such part of the claim.’
13. The aforesaid ban for filing a fresh suit is based on public policy.
This Court has made the said rule of public policy applicable to
           jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution [Sarguja Transport
           Service v. STAT : (1987) 1 SCC 5]. The reasoning for adopting it in
           writ jurisdiction is that very often it happens, when the petitioner or
           his counsel finds that the court is not likely to pass an order admitting
           the writ petition after it is heard for some time, that a request is
           made by the petitioner or his counsel to permit him to withdraw it
           without seeking permission to institute a fresh writ petition. A court
           which is unwilling to admit the petition would not ordinarily grant
           liberty to file a fresh petition while it may just agree to permit
           withdrawal of the petition. When once a writ petition filed in a High
11
Court is withdrawn by the party concerned, he is precluded from filing
            an appeal against the order passed in the writ petition because he
            cannot be considered as a party aggrieved by the order passed by
            the High Court. If so, he cannot file a fresh petition for the same
            cause once again. The following observations of E.S. Venkataramiah,
            J. (as the learned Chief Justice then was) are to be quoted here:
‘[W]e are of the view that the principle underlying Rule 1 of
                   Order 23 of the Code should be extended in the interests of
                   administration of justice to cases of withdrawal of writ petition
                   also, not on the ground of res judicata but on the ground of
                   public policy as explained above. It would also discourage the
                   litigant from indulging in bench-hunting tactics. In any event
                   there is no justifiable reason in such a case to permit a
                   petitioner to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of the High
                   Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution once again. While
                   the withdrawal of a writ petition filed in the High Court without
                   permission to file a fresh writ petition may not bar other
                   remedies like a suit or a petition under
Article 32
of the
                   Constitution of India since such withdrawal does not amount
                   to res judicata, the remedy under
Article 226
of the
                   Constitution of India should be deemed to have been
                   abandoned by the petitioner in respect of the cause of action
                   relied on in the writ petition when he withdraws it without such
                   permission.’
14. ***
15. We have no doubt that the above rule of public policy, for the
            very same reasoning, should apply to special leave petitions filed
            under
Article 136
of the Constitution also. Even otherwise, the order
            passed by the Division Bench of the High Court on 3-5-1998 does not
            warrant interference on merits as the learned Judges of the High
            Court have taken into account all the relevant facts and come to the
            correct conclusion.”
                                                                    (emphasis ours)
22.
Upadhyay & Co.
(supra), which precedes
Kunhayammed
(supra)

      in point of time, is still the law holding the field declaring in no certain

      terms that the principle flowing from
Order XXIII Rule 1 of the CPC
is

      also applicable to special leave petitions presented before this Court.
Reading Upadhyay & Co.
(supra) together with
Sarguja Transport

      Service
(supra), which had the occasion to deal with a subsequently

      filed writ petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India after

      unconditional withdrawal of the first writ petition under the same
12
article, the position in law seems to be this - a second special leave

      petition would not be maintainable at the instance of a party, who

      elects not to proceed with the challenge laid by him in an earlier

      special leave petition and withdraws such petition without obtaining

      leave to file a fresh special leave petition; if such party applies for a

      review before the court from whose order the special leave petition

      was initially carried and the review fails, then he can neither challenge

      the order rejecting the review nor the order of which review was

      sought.
23.   That no appeal lies from an order rejecting a petition for review is

      clear from the plain language of Order XLVII Rule 7(1),
CPC
. We need

      not burden this judgment by referring to any authority on this point.
24.   However, the principle underlying Order XLVII Rule 7(1),
CPC
may be

      understood. Whenever a party aggrieved by a decree or order seeks

      a review thereof based on parameters indicated in Section 114 read

      with
Order XLVII, CPC
and the application ultimately fails, the decree

      or order under review does not suffer any change. It remains intact.

      In such an eventuality, there is no merger of the decree or order

      under review in the order of rejection of the review because such

      rejection does not bring about any alteration or modification of the

      decree or order; rather, it results in an affirmance of the decree or

      order. Since there is no question of any merger, the party aggrieved

      by the rejection of the review petition has to challenge the decree or

      order, as the case may be, and not the order of rejection of the review
13
petition. On the contrary, if the petition for review is allowed and the

        suit or proceedings is placed for rehearing, Rule 7(1) permits the

        party aggrieved to immediately object to the order allowing the

        review or in an appeal from the decree or order finally passed or

        made in the suit, i.e., after rehearing of the matter in dispute.
25.     It is now time to consider the decisions relied upon by Mr. Menon.
26.     The passage from the decision in Dhakeswari Cotton Mills Ltd.
(supra) referred to by Mr. Menon has no application on facts and in

        the circumstances of the present case. We are inclined to the view

        that the nature of power exercisable by this Court under
Article 136
,

        as elaborately laid down there, would apply in the first round when a

        judgment and order is challenged and not when the challenge to the

        same judgment and order is withdrawn in the first round and a second

        bite at the cherry is attempted without having obtained the

        permission of the Court to re-approach it.
27.     Reliance placed by Mr. Menon on the decisions in
Kunhayammed
(supra) and Khoday Distilleries Limited (supra) also do not aid the

        appellant’s cause for the reasons that follow.
28.
In
Kunhayammed
(supra), the facts were these. After the special

        leave petition of the State of Kerala which was directed against an

        appellate judgment and order of the High Court dated 17th December,

        1982 was dismissed on 18th July, 1983 by a single line order24, the

        State had invoked the review jurisdiction of the High Court in January,
24
“Special Leave Petition is dismissed on merits.”
14
1982 seeking review of
the said judgment
and order dated 17 th

        December, 1982. A preliminary objection to the maintainability of the

        review petition was raised before the High Court, which came to be

        overruled by an order dated 14th December, 1995. The said order also

        directed the review petition to be posted for hearing on merits. The

        order dated 14th December, 1995 overruling the preliminary objection

        was carried to this Court in a special leave petition, on which leave

        was granted on 16th September, 1996. By an order dated 14th March,

        2000, the matter was referred to a three-Judge Bench for decision.
29.
Kunhayammed
(supra) is considered an authority on the doctrine

        of merger. However, on the facts before the three-Judge Bench, it was

        held that since the judgment and order of the High Court dated 17 th

        December, 1982 did not merge in the single line unreasoned order of

        dismissal of the special leave petition (dated 18th July, 1983), the

        petition for review was maintainable.
30.     Turning to Khoday Distilleries (supra), two appeals were under

        consideration. It is found that in the lead appeal, a petition for review

        of the judgment and order dated 12th November, 2008 was not

        entertained by the High Court of Karnataka by its order dated 9 th

        September, 2011 on the ground that a special leave petition against

        the said judgment and order dated 12th November, 2008 stood

        dismissed by a single line order25 of this Court dated 4th December,
25
“Delay condoned. Special leave petition is dismissed.”
15
2009. The question of law arising for decision was noted in paragraph

      8, reading as follows:
“8. The question of law which needs to be determined in the aforesaid
            circumstances is as to whether the review petition is maintainable
            before the High Court seeking review of a judgment against which
            the special leave petition has already been dismissed by this Court.”
31.   After extensively referring to and/or relying on
Kunhayammed
(supra), the three-Judge Bench summed up the legal position in

      paragraph 26 as under:
“26. From a cumulative reading of the various judgments, we sum
            up the legal position as under:
26.1. The conclusions rendered by the three-Judge Bench of this
            Court in Kunhayammed and summed up in para 44 are affirmed and
            reiterated.
26.2. We reiterate the conclusions relevant for these cases as under
            : (
Kunhayammed
case, SCC p. 384)
                   ‘(iv) An order refusing special leave to appeal may be a non-
speaking order or a speaking one. In either case it does not
                   attract the doctrine of merger. An order refusing special leave
                   to appeal does not stand substituted in place of the order
                   under challenge. All that it means is that the Court was not
                   inclined to exercise its discretion so as to allow the appeal
                   being filed.
(v) If the order refusing leave to appeal is a speaking order
                   i.e. gives reasons for refusing the grant of leave, then the
                   order has two implications. Firstly, the statement of law
                   contained in the order is a declaration of law by the Supreme
                   Court within the meaning of
Article 141
of the Constitution.
                   Secondly, other than the declaration of law, whatever is stated
                   in the order are the findings recorded by the Supreme Court
                   which would bind the parties thereto and also the court,
                   tribunal or authority in any proceedings subsequent thereto by
                   way of judicial discipline, the Supreme Court being the Apex
                   Court of the country. But, this does not amount to saying that
                   the order of the court, tribunal or authority below has stood
                   merged in the order of the Supreme Court rejecting the special
                   leave petition or that the order of the Supreme Court is the
                   only order binding as res judicata in subsequent proceedings
                   between the parties.
(vi) Once leave to appeal has been granted and appellate
                   jurisdiction of the Supreme Court has been invoked the order
                   passed in appeal would attract the doctrine of merger; the
                   order may be of reversal, modification or merely affirmation.
16
(vii) On an appeal having been preferred or a petition seeking
                      leave to appeal having been converted into an appeal before
                      the Supreme Court the jurisdiction of the High Court to
                      entertain a review petition is lost thereafter as provided by
                      sub-rule (1) of
Order 47 Rule 1 CPC
.’
               26.3. Once we hold that the law
laid down in
Kunhayammed is to be
               followed, it will not make any difference whether the review petition
               was filed before the filing of special leave petition or was filed after
               the dismissal of special leave petition. Such a situation is covered in
               para 37 of Kunhayammed case6.
27. Applying the aforesaid principles, the outcome of these appeals
               would be as under.
Civil appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.
               490 of 2012
28. In the instant case, since special leave petition was dismissed in
               limine without giving any reasons, the review petition filed by the
               appellant in the High Court would be maintainable and should have
               been decided on merits. Order dated 12-11-2008 passed by the High
               Court is accordingly set aside and matter is remanded back to the
               High Court for deciding the review petition on merits. The civil appeal
               is disposed of accordingly.”
32.
In Khoday Distilleries Limited (supra), the order under appeal was

      clearly in the teeth of the ratio laid down in
Kunhayammed
(supra)

      and it was only a matter of time for such erroneous order to be set

      aside.
33.   Since the facts in
Kunhayammed
(supra) and Khoday Distilleries

      Limited (supra) were different, there is evidently no consideration of

      the decision in
Upadhyay & Co.
(supra) which clinches the issue and

      assists us in drawing the conclusion we do hereunder.
34.
Insofar as the order dated 13th August, 2024 passed in
N.F. Railway

      Vending        and    Catering     Contractors      Association      Lumding

      Division
(supra) is concerned, the order records developments

      having taken place subsequent to the order dated 29th July, 2024
17
which, in the opinion of the Bench, required a further consideration.
The order dated 13th August, 2024, for such reason, recalled the

      earlier order dated 29th July, 2024 and issued notice on the special

      leave petition as well as on the application for stay together with

      interim protection. The order dated 13th August, 2024 recalled the

      order dated 29th July, 2024 whereby hearing was adjourned sine die

      awaiting the reference made in
S. Narahari
(supra). No assistance

      can, thus, be drawn by the appellant from such order.
35.   We have no doubt that entertaining a special leave petition in a case

      of the present nature would be contrary to public policy and can even

      tantamount to sitting in appeal over the previous order of this Court

      which has attained finality. The maxim interest reipublicae ut sit finis

      litium (it is for the public good that there be an end to litigation)

      would apply in all fours when it is found that proceedings challenging

      an order were not carried forward by withdrawing the special leave

      petition and the litigant has returned to the same court after some

      time mounting a challenge to the self-same order which was earlier

      under challenge and such challenge had not been pursued. This is a

      course of action which cannot be justified either in principle or

      precept.
36.   For the foregoing reasons, the preliminary objections to the

      maintainability of the appeals raised by the respondent succeed.
37.   The   civil   appeals   are,   consequently,   dismissed.   Connected

      applications, if any, stand closed.
18
38.   If so advised, the appellant may pursue his remedy before the

      appropriate forum in accordance with law.
……………………..………J.
                                                    [DIPANKAR DATTA]


                                                  …………..…………………J.
                                                   [K.V. VISWANATHAN]

  NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 23, 2025.
19