[Cites
25
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Nagamma @ Nagarathna vs State Of Karnataka on 22 September, 2025
2025 INSC 1135


                                                                                 Reportable

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014

                            Nagamma @ Nagarathna & Ors.
                                                                             …Appellants
                                                               Versus
                            The State of Karnataka
                                                                            …Respondent

                                                             JUDGEMENT
K. VINOD CHANDRAN, J.
1.      The default in repayment of a loan led to a crime, most

                            foul, of murder, is the prosecution case. The allegation was

                            that a police man, the 1st accused, took a loan from another

                            police man, the deceased, who was killed by the wife,

                            brother and brother-in-law of the former; at his instigation.

                            The deceased, the driver of a Superintendent of Police made

                            persistent demands for repayment of the loan. This led to

                            A2, the wife of A1, calling the deceased to her home on the
Signature Not Verified
pretext of repaying the debt, on the night of 10.03.2006. At
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2025.09.22
14:45:47 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
around 2am on the next day the victim was made immobile

by throwing chili powder on his face and hacked to death

with two choppers wielded by the accused. A2 then, after

sunrise, went directly to the police station and confessed to

the SHO about the crime and apprised him of the presence

of the dead body in her house. The SHO deputed a police

constable to make enquiries and later an inquest was done

by PW-24 at the house of A2, after which the body was taken

to the hospital.
2.      Before the trial court, the prosecution examined 24

witnesses and marked 33 documents as also 16 material

objects. The first accused examined himself and during the

examination of the prosecution witnesses marked Exs.D1 to

D8. The trial court found, from the evidence of the

prosecution witnesses, that the presence of the dead body

in the house of A2 was proved, and the crime itself was

confessed to by A2, who also pointed out the dead body

which was lying in her house. A2 is said to have made extra
Page 2 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
judicial confessions to other persons, including the wife of

the deceased.
3.      A recovery was made of a chopper, and one chopper

(sickle) was seized from the scene of occurrence itself. A1,

who was arrayed for instigation, had a perfect alibi insofar

as the night duty undertaken in another police station,

deposed to by PW-14, who was also on duty. There was

nothing to indicate an instigation, which led to the acquittal

of A1. A2 to A4 were convicted under Section 302 read with

Section 34 and was sentenced to life. The High Court

affirmed the findings of the Trial Court in an appeal by A2 to

A4, finding established; the motive and the culpability of the

accused based on other circumstances, like extra judicial

confessions, recovery of a chopper under Section 27, the

crime scene being the house of A1&2 and the absence of

explanation for the dead body being at the house of the

accused, under Section 106.
4.      Mr.C.B. Gururaj, learned counsel for the appellants

would argue that since Section 302 is charged against four
Page 3 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
accused read with Section 34, when one of the accused is

acquitted, it should inure to the benefit of the others also.

Reliance was placed on
State of West Bengal v. Vindu

Lachmandas Sakhrani
alias
Deru1 and Suraj Pal v. State of

Uttar Pradesh2
. The depositions were read over to us and it

was argued that the eye witnesses had turned hostile and

there was no circumstance bringing out the culpability of the

accused.
5.        Mr.Nishanth Patil, learned AAG, however, sought to

uphold the conviction on the ground that the dead body was

found in the house of A2, which was pointed out by her and

there was no explanation even under Section 313

questioning. The motive was proved, and the extra judicial

confessions further established the crime. The recovery as

against A4 also provided a link in the chain of

circumstances, which chain is complete.
1
AIR 1994 SC 772
2
AIR 1995 SC 419
Page 4 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
6.      Undisputedly, this is a case of circumstantial evidence,

especially since the eyewitnesses who were projected as

tenants in the building in which the crime occurred, turned

hostile. It is also pertinent that as per the allegation of the

prosecution, a police man was killed by the wife of another

police man, with the aid of her brother and brother-in-law.

Upon the sad news being conveyed to the wife of the

deceased, she allegedly went to the premises with her

relatives and friends; the latter of whom were either police

men or their spouses.
7.      On the question of whether the death was a homicide,

there can be no dispute raised, unequivocally established

by the evidence of PW-23, the Doctor who conducted the

post-mortem. Almost 13 wounds were noticed which were

lacerated and chop wounds. According to the Doctor, death

was caused due to the injuries sustained to the head; all the

internal and external injuries being ante-mortem in nature.

The chop wounds were found on the right side & middle of

the forehead as also over the left parietal prominence and
Page 5 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
the eye, the nose and the lip on the left side. There were

wounds on the right cheek, over the right ear lobe, incised

wound extending from the occipital area to the left ear, with

comminuted fracture on the occipital area, at the right

temporal bone extending to lower of left temporal bone,

with brain tissue exposed. There were other lacerated and

chop wounds on the left leg exposing the libia and fibula and

on the left wrist a joint fracture in the second metacarpal

bone. The injuries bring forth a case of a brutal frontal

attack, which is opined, by PW-23, to be possible by the

chopper recovered from the scene of occurrence and that

recovered at the instance of A4.
8.      The death, no doubt is homicidal in nature and now we

turn to the culpability of the accused. The first argument of

the learned counsel for the appellants, that, the appellants

too have to be acquitted, considering their parity with A-1,

cannot at all be countenanced.
In Vindu Lachmandas

Sakhrani alias
Deru1
(supra), a husband and his wife were

charged with the kidnapping and murder of a six-year-old
Page 6 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
child. While the husband was acquitted, the trial court

convicted the wife, which conviction was overturned in

appeal on the ground of parity. In that case, dependent

solely on circumstantial evidence, it was held that the

charge under Section 302 read with
Section 34
IPC, based

on the common intention of both, falls flat with the acquittal

of the husband, especially when there was no simpliciter

charge under
Section 302
against the wife.
9.
In
Suraj Pal2
(supra), the charges were under
Sections

147
,
323
,
307
and
302
read with
Section 149
of the IPC. There

was no independent charge against the sole accused

convicted for the offence under
Sections 307
and
302
IPC. In

that circumstance when all the others were acquitted, one of

the accused who was arrested for shooting the deceased,

could not have been convicted under
Sections 307
and
302
IPC, was the finding. In the present case, the charge against

A1 was under
Section 109
, instigation, leading to a charge

under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
. The charge against

the other accused was under
Section 302
read with Section
Page 7 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
34
IPC
; quite distinguishable. There was no evidence to

substantiate instigation and an independent charge under
Section 302
would not stand against A2 by reason of the air-

tight alibi.
10.     The motive alleged is of a loan of Rs.1 lakh taken from

the deceased having not been repaid giving rise to

persistent demands, resulting in ill will between the

deceased and the accused, leading to frequent quarrels.

The trial court and the High Court placed reliance on the

evidence of PW-18, 11 &12, the wife, mother and brother of

the accused and PW-7, to find motive.
11.     In chief examination, PW-18 deposed that it was A2

who revealed to her that she owed a sum of Rs.1 lakh to the

deceased which A2 had obtained at the time of construction

of the house. The chief examination of PW-18 does not at all

support the motive set up by the prosecution. In cross

examination, it was categorically stated by PW-18 that in the

domestic inquiry against A-1, she had appeared before the

inquiry officer; Dy. S.P. Arasikare, and deposed that her
Page 8 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
husband and accused were in cordial terms and there were

no transactions between them. Very strangely, after the

cross examination by the accused, the Special Public

Prosecutor sought to treat the witness as hostile and

attempted a cross examination. She categorically asserted

that the statement made before the inquiry officer was not

under coercion.
12.     Yet another witness proffered by the prosecution to

prove the motive was PW-7, a police constable and a

neighbour of the deceased. In his chief examination, it was

deposed that while occupying the police quarters, the

deceased and the accused were on friendly terms. He also

deposed that he had no information regarding any loan

taken by A-1 from the deceased. The witness was treated

hostile and cross examined by the prosecution, when it was

brought out that in the statement under
Section 161
, Cr. PC,

the witness had spoken about the loan of Rs.1 lakh taken by

A-1 from the deceased, which alone would not prove the

motive since it was not deposed in his chief examination.
Page 9 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
13.      PW-11 and PW-12, the mother and brother of the

deceased, however spoke of a loan having been taken by

A-1 from the deceased. The reliability of the said witnesses

has to be tested on the totality of the circumstances as

deposed to by the witnesses. PW-18 deposed that PWs-

11&12 were not on cordial terms with her husband; belying

their knowledge of the loan availed, which even the wife of

the deceased was not aware of. PW-18 asserted that she or

her husband were not in the habit of discussing their

problems with PWs-11&12 nor was there even exchange of

pleasantries. There are further reasons to disbelieve the

testimony of PWs-11&12, which we shall deal with a little

later.
14.      Absence of motive is not an imperative circumstance

to arrive at a conviction, in a case where there is ocular

evidence. The role of motive is not very significant even

when circumstances otherwise form an unbreakable chain.

Motive only provides another link, and the absence of

motive is a factor that weighs in favour of the accused as held
Page 10 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
in
Babu v. State of Kerala3
. We cannot find a motive in this

case; of the financial transaction having led to the crime.

Further, the prosecution case is that the deceased was

summoned over telephone, to the house of A2, on the

pretext of repaying the loan. But even PW-18 has no case

that the deceased left the house on such a mission, after a

telephone call. There is also no clear evidence as to whether

the deceased returned to his home in the evening of that

day.
15.        Even according to the prosecution, the police came to

know about the death from A2 who surrendered before the

Police Station and made a voluntary statement before PW-

15, the Station House Officer (SHO) in the presence of PW-

17, a Sentry on duty at the Police Station. PW-15,

immediately called PW-21, a constable and directed him to

proceed to the house of A2 to verify the information given

by A2. PW-22, with another constable, visited the house of
3
(2010) 9 SCC 189
Page 11 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
A2 and having seen the dead body, intimated it to PW-15.

PW-15 informed PW-18, who in turn informed her

neighbours and her relatives.
16.     The prosecution in addition to the official witnesses,

sought to establish the presence of the dead body at the

house of A1& A2, through the other witnesses including the

wife, mother and brother of the deceased who were alleged

to have come to the crime scene and witnessed the presence

of the dead body thereat. PW-18, the wife of the deceased

more than once deposed in her chief examination and cross

examination, that she came to know of the death of her

husband at ‘7 O’clock’ on the morning of 11.03.2006 when

the police came to her house with the information of the

crime. Though, she stated in her chief examination that she

went to the house of A2 and saw the dead body, before the

inquiry officer, Dy. S.P. Arasikare, she had stated that she

saw the dead body first at the hospital; admitted in her

testimony before Court. In cross examination by the

Prosecutor, after she was declared hostile, it was
Page 12 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
categorically stated by PW-18 that she did not see the dead

body of her husband at the house of A-1&2.
17.     PW-6 and PW-8, the wives of two police constables

who resided near to the house of the deceased stated before

police that they saw the dead body at the house of A-1&2,

but resiled from their statement before Court and both of

them were declared hostile. PW-7, in his chief examination

stated that he too saw the dead body first at the hospital but,

in cross examination by the prosecution, sought to assert

that he had seen the body of the deceased at the house of A-

1&2; which statement he had not made before the police.
18.      The inquest report was drawn up by PW-24, allegedly

at the house of A-1&2. PWs-1&4, the witnesses to the inquest

report, did not corroborate and deposed that the report was

drawn up and signed at the hospital. PW-11 and PW-12, the

mother and brother of the deceased spoke of having seen

the dead body at the alleged crime scene, the house of A-

1&2. It is pertinent that according to PW-18, the relatives

including her mother-in-law and brother-in-law came to the
Page 13 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
hospital. The presence of the said witnesses in the alleged

scene of crime, after the crime proper, is suspect.
19.        PW-11, the mother of the deceased stated in her cross

examination that PW-18 called her over phone at 4 am to

inform her about the crime committed. It is also stated that

she was informed by PW-18 through the phone of one

Shankarappa, who was not examined before Court. PW-12,

the brother of the accused stated in his cross examination

that having been informed of the murder of his brother, by

PW18, he came to Hassan at about 05:30 am in the morning.

PW18 at the risk of repetition, asserted before Court more

than once, that she was first informed about the death of her

husband at 7 am when the police came to her house with the

said information.
20.        Useful reference can be made to the decision of this

Court in
Santosh v. State (NCT of Delhi
)4, wherein the dead

body was recovered from an apartment occupied by the
4
(2023) 19 SCC 321
Page 14 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
appellant/accused as a tenant. The Court categorically

found that there was no serious dispute to the tenancy

arrangement but even then, that was insufficient by itself, to

hold the accused guilty. It was held:
“… there is no general presumption against the
           owner/tenant of a property with regard to his/her
           guilt if a dead body with homicidal injuries is
           found in his/her property. No doubt if the
           prosecution succeeds in proving a chain of
           circumstances from which a reasonable inference
           can be drawn regarding one’s guilt then, in
           absence of proper explanation, the court can
           always draw an appropriate conclusion with
           respect to his/her guilt with the aid of
Section 106
of Evidence Act, 1872. But, if the chain of
           circumstances is not established, mere failure of
           the accused to offer an explanation is not sufficient
           to hold him guilty.”
21.        This Court also relied on
Shivaji Chintappa Patil v.

State of Maharashtra5
in which it was observed that
Section

106
of Evidence Act 1872 does not directly operate against

either the husband or the wife, staying under the same roof,

even if he/she is the last person seen with the deceased. It

does not absolve the prosecution of discharging its primary
5
(2021) 5 SCC 626
Page 15 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
burden of proving a case beyond reasonable doubt. Unless

there is evidence led to sustain a conviction or which makes

out a prima facie case, the question does not arise of a

burden of proof placed upon the accused to offer an

explanation.
22.     As we found, there is no cogent, credible evidence

that the body was at the house of A-1&2. But, for the moment

we will accept the said circumstance to have been proved

on two grounds. One, PW-15, the SHO to whom A2 spoke of

the crime, even if eschewed as a confession, recorded the

statement, marked as Ext.P10(a) in the Station Diary

produced as Ext.P10. PW-17 corroborated the statement,

leading to the discovery of the body at the house of A2 by

PW-21, the Constable deputed to verify. Even if these

circumstances are accepted, going by the decisions cited,

that alone cannot be conclusive proof to find A2 guilty,

without other corroborating evidence.
23.     One another circumstance, heavily relied upon by the

trial court and the High Court are the extra judicial
Page 16 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
confessions made by A2 to various persons, but all inside

the police station. The First Information Report was on the

complaint made by PW-18, the wife of the deceased, though

the information first supplied was by A2 in the morning, to

PW-15, the SHO and PW-17, the Sentry. Both these extra

judicial confessions have been made in the police station

before the police officers, even according to the

prosecution, on which no reliance can be placed. PW-18, the

wife of the deceased deposed that it was A2 who revealed

to her the murder of her husband, at the police station, which

was the testimony of PW-7 also. The extra judicial

confessions and the context in which they were made, within

the police station cannot at all be relied upon.
24.
Section 25
of the Evidence Act mandates that no

confession made to a police officer shall be proved as

against a person accused of any offence and
Section 26
also

restricts any confession by a person in the custody of a

police officer from being proved against him unless it is

made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate.
In
State of
Page 17 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
U.P. v. Deoman Upadhyaya6
, this Court had considered the

impact of
Section 25
and
26
, in paragraph 7, from which the

relevant portion is extracted herein below:
“… The expression, “accused person” in
Section 24
and the expression “a person
          accused of any offence” have the same
          connotation, and describe the person against
          whom evidence is sought to be led in a criminal
          proceeding. As observed in Pakala Narayan
          Swami v. Emperor by the Judicial Committee of
          the Privy Council, “
Section 25
covers a
          confession made to a police officer before any
          investigation has begun or otherwise not in the
          course of an investigation”. The adjectival
          clause “accused of any offence” “is therefore
          descriptive of the person against whom a
          confessional statement made by him is declared
          not provable, and does not predicate a
          condition of that person at the time of making
          the statement for the applicability of the ban.
Section 26
of the Indian Evidence Act by its first
          paragraph provides. “No confession made by
          any person whilst he is in the custody of a police
          officer, unless it be made in the immediate
          presence of a Magistrate, shall be proved as
          against a person accused of any offence”. By this
          section, a confession made by a person who is
          in custody is declared not provable unless it is
          made in the immediate presence of a
          Magistrate. …”
6
1960 SCC OnLine SC 8
Page 18 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
25.     The extra judicial confessions, said to have been made

by A2 in the present case, were all within the police station,

where she is said to have voluntarily come, to confess about

the murder. The confession made to the SHO, PW-15,

overheard by PW-17, the Sentry of the police station, hence

has to be completely eschewed under
Section 25
. The

confession made to PW-18, the wife of the deceased and

PW-7, though a police constable; who arrived at the police

station in the status of the neighbour of the deceased, also

has to be eschewed under
Section 26
. The other witnesses

to whom the extra judicial confession was made, that too

inside the police station, in any case turned hostile.
26.     Yet another circumstance relied upon by the

prosecution is the recovery of a chopper, MO-16 on the

confession statement of A4 under
Section 27
. In this context,

we have to look at the evidence of PW-24, the investigating

officer (I.O) who deposed that A3 and A4 were taken into

police custody on 15.03.2006 after their voluntary surrender

before Court on 13.03.2006. It is the categoric statement of
Page 19 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
the I.O that both A3 and A4 confessed in their voluntary

statements that they would point out the chopper used for

commission of offence by leading the police to the spot

where they concealed it. A4 alone was taken to the spot,

leading to the recovery of MO-16, is the case of the

prosecution.
27.      Disclosure statements taken from one or more persons

in police custody do not go out of the purview of
Section 27
altogether, as held in
State (NCT of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu

@ Afsan Guru7
and reiterated in
Kishore Bhadke v. State of

Maharashtra8
. While asserting that a joint or simultaneous

disclosure would per se be not inadmissible under
Section

27
, it was observed that it is very difficult to place reliance

on such an utterance in chorus; which was also held to be, in

fact, a myth. Recognising that there would be practical

difficulty in placing reliance on such evidence, it was

declared that it is for the Courts to decide, on a proper



7 (2005) 11 SCC 600
8 (2017) 3 SCC 760
Page 20 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
evaluation of evidence, whether and to what extent such a

simultaneous disclosure could be relied upon. In Kishor

Bhadke7, while affirming the above principles in Navjot

Sandhu6, the facts revealed were noticed, wherein the

information given by one, after the other, was without any

break, almost simultaneously and such information was

followed up by pointing out the material thing by both the

accused, in which circumstance it was held that there is no

reason to eschew such evidence.
28.     With the above principles in mind when we look at the

facts of the present case, the I.O though has stated about the

disclosure statement of both A3 and A4, he does not specify

whether it is simultaneous or one after the other. It is also not

clear; if the disclosure is at different points of time, in which

event, who made the first disclosure. Deposition of PW-24

though does not speak of the exact location as stated by the

accused in the confession statement; PW-24 speaks of

having taken A4 to the bush of Rose Trees at the Helipad

near Udayagiri Layout from where the chopper was
Page 21 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
produced. PW-2 and PW-3, the witnesses of recovery of MO-

16 turned hostile and they deposed that they affixed their

signatures to the recovery mahazar at the police station.

Further, it also has to be noticed that but for the recovery

there is nothing to indicate the culpability of A3 and A4

through forensic evidence to link the recovered weapon to

the crime proper.
29.
Insofar as the recovery under
Section 27
, as has been

reiterated in
Mohd. Inayatullah v. State of Maharashtra9
,

the expression ‘fact discovered’ includes not only the

physical object produced, but also the place from which it is

produced and the knowledge of the accused about the

concealment. In the cited decision, which considered the

offence of theft, the accused had made a statement of the

place where the stolen drums were kept by him. Finding the

admissible portion of the statement to be only the location

of the three drums, it was held that the information taken in
9
(1976) 1 SCC 828
Page 22 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
conjunction with the facts discovered, was insufficient to

draw the presumption that the accused was the thief or the

receiver of the stolen property, with the knowledge that it

was stolen. The drums in question were found in the

compound or yard of a musafirkhana (rest place for

travellers) and it was neither lying concealed nor was the

compound under the lock and key of the accused. In the

present case, the I.O, PW-24, categorically deposed before

Court that after A3 and A4 were taken into custody on

15.03.2006, pursuant to their surrender before Court on

13.03.2006, confessions were made by both the accused

regarding the concealment of the chopper allegedly used

for commission of offence; which statement of ‘use in the

commission of offence’ has to be totally eschewed. The exact

spot in which the concealment was made as stated in the

disclosure statement has also not been deposed to by the

I.O.
Page 23 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
30.
Manoj Kumar Soni v. State of M.P.10
was a case in

which all the accused persons made disclosure statements

to the IO whereupon recovery of various articles were

effected. It was held that even when disclosure statements

hold significance as a contributing factor in a case, it is not

so strong a piece of evidence sufficient on its own and

without anything more to bring home the charges beyond

reasonable doubt (sic, para 22).
31.        The fact that confessions were made by both the

accused and the recovery was made from one of the

accused, A4, leading the police to the spot would restrain us

from treating the recovery as an inculpating circumstance

against A3 or A4, especially when the confession is taken

simultaneously from both the accused. We are of the opinion

that in the present case there can be no reliance placed on

the recovery based on the sketchy evidence adduced.
10
2023 SCC OnLine SC 984
Page 24 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
32.     Now, looking at the witness who supported the

prosecution case, we find them to be totally unreliable.

PW-7, whose evidence was relied upon for the purpose of

motive and also the presence of the dead body at the house

of A-1&2, we have already found, did not speak of either of

these circumstances before the police under
Section 161
or

in the chief examination. As far as PW-11 and PW-12 are

concerned, their presence at the scene of occurrence itself

is doubtful. The motive sought to be proved through PW-

11&12 as also the presence of the dead body in the house of

A-1&2, hence stands totally discredited. It is also relevant

that     PW-16,        the       brother-in-law   of   the   deceased,

categorically stated that he saw the dead body at the

hospital and not at the house of A-1&2.
33.     As we noticed at the outset, PW-20 and PW-22

eyewitnesses turned completely hostile. We are at a loss to

understand how the High Court and the trial court made an

observation that though they were declared hostile, there

was credible material in their evidence pointing to the
Page 25 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
culpability of the accused, which could be relied upon. We

find no such material in the chief examination or the cross

examination. PW-20 and PW-22, who as per the prosecution

were brothers staying in the house of A1 and A2 on rent. The

witnesses admitted that they were bothers but they denied

that they were tenants of A1 and A2. After PW-20 was

declared hostile, the prosecutor had put forth P-12 to P-20

contradictions in the alleged statements under
Section 161
recorded by the police, which were all denied by the said

witness. Likewise, PW-22 also did not subscribe to the

prosecution case and there was nothing in his evidence to

find culpability of the accused.
34.     The prosecution case itself was that the deceased was

summoned to the house of A-1&2, for which there is no

evidence adduced nor does PW-18, the wife speaks of the

deceased having left the house on receiving such a call.

Further it is the case of the prosecution that the deceased

reached the house of the accused at around 10 pm while the

death was confirmed as having occurred at 2 pm. What
Page 26 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
happened in the interregnum is not clear and together with

what we noticed above, there is a suspicion as to the genesis

and origin of the crime which compounds the reasonable

doubt regarding the prosecution case.
35.     Undisputably, the case is one of circumstantial

evidence which is treated as proved only when there is a

complete chain of circumstances, comprising cogent and

reliable material, providing an unbreakable link, leading

only to the culpability of the accused and bringing forth the

hypothesis only of guilt and not leading to any reasonable

doubt as to the guilt or otherwise of the accused. The motive

projected and the crime itself has not at all been proved and

there is no circumstance leading to the culpability of the

accused. The presence of the dead body in the house of the

accused is also under a cloud and in any event, that, with the

absence of a proper explanation cannot by itself bring home

a conviction.
36.     Considering the totality of the circumstances and the

evidence led in the trial, we are of the considered opinion
Page 27 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014
that the conviction cannot be sustained; which we set aside

and acquit the accused. If the accused are in custody, they

shall be released forthwith, if they are not wanted in any

other case. However, if they are on bail, their bail bonds

shall stand cancelled and revoked.
37.     The criminal appeal stands allowed.
38.     Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
……….…………………….….. J.
(K. V. VISWANATHAN)



                                 ……….…………………….….. J.
(K. VINOD CHANDRAN)

NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 22, 2025.
Page 28 of 28
Criminal Appeal No.425 of 2014