[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajnesh Sharma vs M/S Business Park Town Planners Limited on 24 September, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 1149                                                                     NON-REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3988 OF 2023


                    RAJNESH SHARMA                                                   … APPELLANT

                                                            VS.

                    M/S. BUSINESS PARK TOWN PLANNERS LTD.                          … RESPONDENT


                                                   JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
THE APPEAL
1.                 This appeal assails an order dated 13th January, 2023, passed by the

                         National   Consumer    Disputes    Redressal       Commission,   New   Delhi1

                         disposing of a consumer complaint lodged before it by the appellant.


             FACTS
2.                 Facts in brief, necessary for the disposal of the present appeal, are as

                         follows:
a. On 10th March, 2006, the appellant booked a plot2 in a project of

                              the respondent named Park Land for a total sale consideration of

                              Rs.   36,03,692/-    (basic    price      -    Rs.    30,87,000/-).   As
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
JATINDER KAUR
Date: 2025.09.24
17:47:10 IST
Reason:
1
NCDRC
2
Plot bearing no. 2, Block G-4, Phase -2 admeasuring 343 square yards
1
advance/registration charges, Rs. 7,86,218/- was paid on the same

          day.
b. On 11th December, 2007, a plot buyer agreement3 was executed

          between the parties.
c. As per clause 22 of the AGREEMENT, the possession of the plot was

          to be handed over within 24 months of sanction of service plans of

          the entire colony. Furthermore, clause 12 provided that time is of

          the essence, and in case of default by the buyer, late payment

          charges at 18% p.a. on the due amount, compounded at the time

          of every succeeding instalment or three months, whichever is

          earlier, would be levied by the respondent.
d. By April, 2011, the appellant had paid a sum of Rs. 28,79,065/-.

          On 13th April, 2011, more than 5 (five) years after the first

          payment, the respondent informed the appellant that due to

          changes in the layout plan, it had decided to allot an alternative plot

          to the appellant. Since the new plot was 7 sq. yards larger than the

          original plot, the respondent further demanded a sum of Rs.

          2,30,784/- as an additional amount. Accordingly, an addendum to

          the AGREEMENT was executed between the parties on 13th April,

          2011. Clause 7 of the AGREEMENT (discussed in the latter part of the

          judgment) provided for allotment of an alternative plot if a change

          in layout plan was required by any statutory authority.
3
AGREEMENT
2
e. The appellant on 11th March, 2015, paid a sum of Rs. 83,377.67,

          out of which Rs. 83,300.76 was towards interest @ 18% p.a.

          charged by the respondent for the appellant’s default in making the

          payments.
f. As per the statement of accounts dated 23rd March, 2015 prepared

          by the respondent, the appellant had paid a sum total of Rs.

          43,13,312.67/-.
g. Aggrieved by the respondent’s inaction in allotting the plot, the

          appellant terminated the AGREEMENT with the respondent vide letter

          dated 27th March, 2017.
h. Thereafter, on 27th March, 2017, the appellant issued a legal notice

          informing the respondent about such termination and seeking a

          refund of Rs. 43,13,212/- along with 24% interest p.a. and a sum

          of Rs. 72,30,000/- on account of loss of appreciation of property.

       i. Ultimately, in April 2018, the appellant lodged the consumer

          complaint4 before the NCDRC referred to in the opening paragraph.

       j. After the lodging of the complaint, the respondent offered the

          possession of the plot on 8th May, 2018, subject to payment of a

          further amount of Rs. 7,60,900.33/-.
k. Vide the impugned order, the consumer complaint was disposed of

          with directions to the respondent to refund the entire principal

          amount of Rs. 43,13,212/- along with simple interest @ 9% p.a.
4
Consumer Case No. 885 of 2018
3
from the date of each payment till the date of refund. Additionally,

             Rs. 25,000/- was awarded towards litigation costs to the appellant.

         l. The said order is under challenge before this Court in this appeal at

             the instance of the partly successful complainant.


     IMPUGNED ORDER
3.     During the course of hearing before the NCDRC, learned counsel for the

       respondent offered to repay the principal amount with 9% simple

       interest per annum. This weighed with the NCDRC, and it ordered

       accordingly without going into the merits of the case. It is imperative to

       mention that the impugned order nowhere records that the appellant

       accepted such an offer. Rather, the NCDRC disposed of the matter merely

       based on the offer made by the counsel for the respondent.


     SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
4.     It was submitted by Mr. Vivek Malik, learned counsel appearing for the

       appellant, that the impugned order is liable to be set aside for more than

       one reason. Inter alia, it was urged that:
4.1    The NCDRC erred in forcing upon the appellant refund of the

              principal amount paid by him with a meagre simple interest of 9%

              p.a.

       4.2    The appellant paid a total sum of Rs. 43,13,313/-, in instalments,

              as and when demands were raised by the respondent. Despite

              booking the plot in the year 2006, the possession thereof was not
4
delivered until 2018. In such view of the facts, interest @ 9% p.a.

            was insufficient causing huge loss to the appellant.

     4.3    Various additional costs were wrongly charged by the respondent,

            because of which the appellant ended up paying Rs. 43,13,313/-,

            whereas the initial sale consideration was Rs. 36,03,692/-. First,

            after allotting an alternative plot in 2011, the respondent

            demanded a sum of Rs. 2,30,784/-, whereas since the alternative

            plot was larger by only 7 sq. yards, the correct amount should

            have been Rs. 73,283/- [Rs. 9,000 (basic rate) x 7 + Rs. 1024

            (EDC) x 7 + Rs. 445 (IDC) x 7]. Secondly, the developer charged

            Rs. 4,81,600/- under the head “Enhanced EDC”, which is over and

            above the EDC5 and IDC6 specified in the AGREEMENT. Thirdly, on

            11th March, 2015, four years after the last payment was made in

            the year 2011, the respondent demanded a sum of Rs.
83,300.67/- towards “interest” on delayed payment without giving

            any details as to how such an amount was arrived at. The appellant

            paid the amounts, as demanded, as he did not want to be

            embroiled in a dispute with the respondent.
4.4    After filing the consumer complaint, the respondent offered

            possession of the plot on 8th May, 2018, but demanded a further

            sum of Rs. 7,60,900.33/- [interest of Rs. 83,302/-, electricity and

            STP charges of Rs. 3,13,250/-, utility connect charges of Rs.
5
External Development Charges
6
Infrastructure Development Charges
5
15,000, GST of Rs. 59,086/-, previous dues of Rs. 70,262.33/-
and stamp duty charges of Rs. 2,20,000]. After inviting our

      attention to the payment plan contained in Schedule I (Schedule

      of Costs) to the AGREEMENT, which contains details of all the

      charges payable by the buyer, it was submitted that electricity and

      STP charges do not find mention in the table and hence could not

      have been demanded. Furthermore, the respondent sought to

      charge GST, which was introduced in the year 2017, whereas all

      the payments were made prior to 2012.
4.5   Preferential location charges (PLC) of Rs. 75,000/-, payable as per

      Schedule I to the AGREEMENT, was paid by the appellant. However,

      the respondent, in the offer letter dated 8th May, 2018, sought to

      charge a sum of Rs. 3,15,000/-, which is unexplained.

4.6   Even after the passing of the impugned order, when the

      respondent did not make payments within the timeline prescribed

      by the NCDRC, the appellant (through his power of attorney)

      approached the respondent for compliance with the impugned

      order;   however,   the   respondent   refused   to   give   money,

      questioning the authenticity of the power of attorney.

4.7   Thus, the conduct of the respondent has been full of blemishes

      throughout.
4.8   Finally, the respondent charged the appellant interest @ 18% p.a.

      whereas agreed to give back to the appellant the principal amount

      with 9% interest, which is in defiance of logic and reason.
6
Respondent, for its default, should have been judged by the same

                   standard and made to pay back 18% interest.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
5.         Per contra, learned senior counsel for the respondent Mr. Nayyar with

           considerable vehemence supported the impugned order and made

           fourfold submissions:
5.1     First, it was submitted that for grant of relief under the Consumer

                    Protection Act, 19867, it is imperative for the consumer to prove

                    actual loss or injury to him due to neglect of the other party.
Reference was made to section 14 of the Act, which reads thus:
14. Finding of the District Forum.-
(l) If, after the proceeding conducted under section 13, the District
                     Forum is satisfied that the goods complained against suffer from any
                     of the defects specified in the complaint or that any of the allegations
                     contained in the complaint about the services are proved, it shall
                     issue an order to the opposite party directing him to do one or more
                     of the following things, namely:-
(a) …;
(b) …;
(c) …;
(d) to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as compensation to
                     the consumer for any loss or injury suffered by the consumer
                     due to the negligence of the opposite party;
***
                                                         (emphasis supplied by counsel)

                    Therefore, evidence must be led to prove actual loss suffered by

                    the consumer before the grant of compensation. Grant of

                    compensation cannot be beyond actual loss and cannot venture

                    into the territory of gain-based remedies. In the present case,

                    while the respondent’s claim for charging interest @ 18% on
7
the Act
7
default is supported by the AGREEMENT, the appellant’s claim for

           grant of interest @ 18% cannot be sustained, as he did not lead

           evidence to prove actual loss.
In support of this proposition,

           reliance was placed on the judgment of this Court in
Ghaziabad

           Development Authority v. Balbir Singh8
and
Fortune

           Infrastructure v. Trevor D’Lima9
.
5.2   Secondly, a consumer cannot, as a matter of routine, be

           awarded compensation at the rate charged by the builder under

           the contract. This Court has consistently granted a 9% interest

           rate to the consumers for deficiency in services.

     5.3   Thirdly, this Court has consistently rejected the claims of

           consumers who claimed parity with builders in the interest

           charged on delayed payments. Reliance was placed upon the

           judgment of this court in
IREO Grace Realtech (P) Ltd. v.

           Abhishek Khanna10
where this Court held:
51. We have considered the rival submissions made by both the
             parties. The delay compensation specified in the apartment buyer's
             Agreement of Rs 7.5 per square foot which translates to 0.9% to 1%
             p.a. on the amount deposited by the apartment buyer cannot be
             accepted as being adequate compensation for the delay in the
             construction of the project. At the same time, we cannot accept the
             claim of the apartment buyers for payment of compound interest @
             20% p.a., which has no nexus with the commercial realities of the
             prevailing market. We have also taken into consideration that in IREO
             Grace Realtech (P) Ltd. v. Subodh Pawar [IREO Grace Realtech (P)
             Ltd. v. Subodh Pawar, 2019 SCC OnLine SC 1937] , this Court
             recorded the statement of the counsel for the developer that the
             amount would be refunded with interest @ 10% p.a. A similar order
             was passed in IREO Grace Realtech (P) Ltd. v. Surendra Arora [IREO
             Grace Realtech (P) Ltd. v. Surendra Arora, 2019 SCC OnLine SC
8
2004 5 SCC 65, para 8
9
2018 5 SCC 442, paras 19 and 25
10
(2021) 3 SCC 241
8
1943] . However, the order in these cases were passed prior to the
               outbreak of the pandemic.
(emphasis supplied by the counsel)



               Similarly, in
Vidya v. Parsvnath Developers Ltd.11
, this

               Court held:
19. Shri Jain therefore submitted that, applying the principle of
               parity, the learned Commission ought to have awarded the interest
               @ 24% p.a. It is submitted that, in any case the interest at the rate
               of only 9% p.a. is not sustainable in law.
******
22. However, we find that, insofar as award of interest @ 9% p.a. is
               concerned, the learned Commission was not justified in the facts of
               the case to award a lesser interest than even the one agreed upon in
               the agreement. Undisputedly, the facts of the case show that the
               project was delayed inordinately. The appellant complainants were
               made to suffer for long, for no fault of them. In spite of making the
               entire payment, they were deprived of the possession within the
               stipulated time.
23. In our view, the learned Commission, at least, ought to have
               awarded interest @ 12% p.a. in view of Clause 7(b) of the
               agreement.
24. In the result, the appeal is partly allowed. The direction made by
               the learned Commission for refund of the entire amount deposited by
               the appellant complainants is upheld. However, the direction with
               regard to interest is modified to the extent that it shall be paid @
               12% p.a. from the date of respective deposit till the date of refund.
The unpaid amount in terms of the aforesaid shall be paid within a
               period of three months from the date of this judgment [
Vidya v.
               Parsvnath Developers Ltd.
, 2022 SCC OnLine NCDRC 522].
In
Kolkata West International City Pvt. Ltd. v. Devasis

               Rudra12
, the builder-buyer agreement imposed an interest rate

               of 18% on the buyer for its delay in making payments, while

               the interest rate imposed on the developer was the equivalent

               of the prevailing savings bank interest of SBI. This Court found
11
(2024) 9 SCC 651
12
(2020) 18 SCC 613
9
the said agreement to be one-sided and modified the NCDRC’s

               order by reducing the interest rate from 12% p.a. to 9% p.a.

               The relevant passage is reproduced below:
7. It is the above clause which is pressed in aid by the developer.
Under the aforesaid clause, any delay beyond 30-6-2009 would result
               in the developer being required to pay interest at the prevailing
               savings bank interest of State Bank of India. Interestingly, where the
               buyer is in default, the agreement stipulates that interest @ 18%
               from the date of default until the date of payment would be charged
               for a period of two months, failing which the allotment would be
               cancelled by deducting 5% of the entire value of the property. The
               agreement was evidently one-sided. For a default on the part of the
               buyer, interest @ 18% was liable to be charged. However, a default
               on the part of the developer in handing over possession would make
               him liable to pay interest only at the savings bank rate prescribed by
               SBI. There is merit in the submission which has been urged by the
               buyer that the agreement was one-sided. The clause which has been
               extracted in the earlier part of this order will not preclude the right
               and remedy available to the buyer to claim reasonable interest or, as
               the case may be, compensation.
******
10. Having regard to all the facts and circumstances of the case, we
               modify the order [
Kolkata West International City (P) Ltd. v. Devasis
               Rudra
, 2016 SCC OnLine Ncdrc 2411] of NCDRC by directing that the
               appellant shall pay interest @ 9% p.a. to the respondent instead and
               in place of 12% as directed by NCDRC. Save and except for the above
               modification, we affirm the directions of NCDRC.
Similarly, in
Pioneer Urban Land and Infrastructure Ltd. v.

               Govindan Raghavan13
, this Court upheld an order of the

               NCDRC which awarded simple interest of 10.7% even though,

               as per the agreement, the builder was entitled to charge 18%

               on delay in payments by the buyer.
13
(2019) 5 SCC 725
10
5.4    Fourthly, if the builder-buyer agreement is found to be one-
sided, it cannot be enforced, even at the instance of the buyer.

         5.5    Lastly, the appellant’s allegation of demand of excessive amount

                is unsustainable because: (i) the PLC was increased on account

                of allotment of an alternative plot which was on a wider road and

                had potential of commercial usage; (ii) the interest amount of

                Rs. 83,300/- was charged on account of delayed payment by the

                appellant for the period of 2007-2011, and no further interest

                was charged; (iii) the electrification and STP charges were

                payable in terms of clause 2.5 (b) and 2.5 (c) of the AGREEMENT;

                and (iv) GST was charged only for the eligible charges levied for

                the first time on 8th May 2018 (letter of offer of possession).


     ISSUE
6.     Whether on facts and in the circumstances of the present case, viz. the

       terms of the agreement, the delay in offering possession, the conduct of

       the respondent and the interest rate charged by the respondent for

       default in payment by the appellant, the NCDRC erred in awarding delay

       compensation @ 9% p.a. instead of a higher rate?


     ANALYSIS
7.     We start by analyzing the arguments raised by the respondent.
8.     It was argued that this Court has consistently rejected the claim of parity

       raised by buyers. Various judgments of this Court, which were cited,

       have been noted. On perusal thereof, we find that in all such cases this
11
Court did not give elaborate reasons for rejecting the claim for parity but

      reduced/increased the rate of interest based on other factors peculiar to

      the facts and circumstances of each case, such as the prevailing market

      conditions, lockdown due to COVID, et cetera.
9.   To discuss a few, in
IREO Grace Realtech Pvt. Ltd.
(supra), this Court

      did not consider the issue as to whether the buyer can claim parity with

      the builder in interest rate for default. The buyer claimed interest @ 20%

      p.a.; however, this Court denied the same finding it to be excessive as

      per the prevailing commercial realities.
Similarly in
Vidya
(supra), this

      Court granted an interest rate of 12%, not by applying the principle of

      parity but after finding that the grant of an interest rate of 9% by the

      NCDRC, even when the agreement provided for a grant of interest of

      12%, was very low.
10.   Therefore, it cannot be said that this Court has always rejected the claim

      of parity.
11.   Suffice it to say, there is no principle of law that interest in default

      charged by the builder can never be granted to the buyer.
12.   Law is well settled that the amount of interest should be reasonable.
What is reasonable varies from case to case. The same is to be granted

      considering the facts and circumstances of each case. The series of

      judgments cited by the respondent to buttress its argument that this

      Court has consistently granted interest @ 9% p.a. will make no

      difference to the decision in this lis, as all the said cases were decided

      in light of the peculiar facts of each case.
12
13.   We now proceed to determine if the grant of interest awarded by the

      NCDRC was reasonable considering the facts and circumstances of the

      present case.
14.   As per clause 22 of the AGREEMENT, possession of the plot was to be

      handed over within 24 months of sanction of service plans of the entire

      colony. Admittedly, no offer for possession was made until the year

      2018. The conduct of the respondent in the interregnum is also worthy

      of a discussion.
15.   In April, 2011, the respondent invoked clause 7 of the AGREEMENT, and

      allotted an alternative plot to the appellant. The reason cited for such

      allotment was “due to changes in the layout plan”. Clause 7 of the

      AGREEMENT reads as follows:
The Seller/Confirming Party is in the process of developing Parklands in
         accordance with tentative and consolidated layout plan for the entire colony,
         as submitted to the Statutory /Competent Authority for final approval,
         which have been explained to and understood by the Purchaser(s).
         However, if any changes in the said layout plan and/or drawings are
         required by any statutory authority(s) of Govt., Or otherwise, the same may
         be effected suitably, to which the Purchaser(s) hereby agrees and has given
         his consent to the Seller to carry out the same.
         Provided, however, if as a result thereof, there by any change in the
         location, preferential location, number, boundaries or area of the said Plot,
         the same shall be valid and binding on the Purchaser(s). Further, if there is
         any increase or decrease in the area of the said Plot, revised price shall
         proportionally be determined by the Seller/Confirming Party on the basis of
         the original price.
If any preferentially located Plot, ceases to be so located, the
         Seller/Confirming Party will be liable only to refund without interest such
         extra charges paid by the Purchaser(s), for such preferential location. The
         Purchaser shall not raise any objection and shall have no claim monetary or
         otherwise of any nature whatsoever in this regard.
16.   Clause 7 provides that the location of the plot may be changed if the

      government or any statutory authority requires a change in the existing

      layout plan. During arguments, we enquired of Mr. Nayyar for the
13
respondent to show the basis for invoking clause 7 of the AGREEMENT,

      i.e., to show us that the layout plan was sought to be changed by the

      government or statutory authority. In answer thereto, it was submitted

      that the alternative allotment was made in the year 2011; however, till

      2018, the appellant raised no demur as regards the same. The answer

      is neither here nor there. Whether or not the appellant raised a demur

      is not relevant for validation of the respondent’s conduct. Also, the basis

      for offering such alternative allotment has not been disclosed in the

      written submissions filed by the respondent.
17.   Be that as it may, the possession of the alternative plot (allotted in the

      year 2011) was offered only in the year 2018.
18.   Having noted thus, we agree with Mr. Nayyar that before compensation

      can be granted by the NCDRC, actual loss must be proved to have been

      suffered by the consumer. The objective of granting compensation

      cannot be altered such that it amounts to a windfall gain to the other

      party. Proof of actual loss would require evidence to be tendered, for, it

      is a guiding lamp for grant of compensation. Be that as it may, in this

      case, we are not deciding the actual loss suffered by the appellant. We

      are only concerned with deciding the rate of interest to be awarded to

      the appellant on the principal amount paid by him to the respondent.
19.   Keeping in mind the overall conduct of the respondent: the delay caused

      by it in offering the plot, the fact that the respondent charged the

      appellant delay compensation @ 18% p.a. on the due amount, and the

      long wait that the appellant had to endure over a period of a decade,
14
causing harassment and anxiety, which are writ large, we find that this

        is an appropriate case where refund of the principal amount with interest

        @ 9% p.a., as awarded by the NCDRC, will not serve the ends of justice.
20.     In view of the conduct of the respondent, it cannot be permitted to

        escape with a nominal liability for its default, while it charged interest @

        18% on default committed by the appellant. Although, the rate of

        interest charged by the builder cannot be granted to the buyer as a rule

        of thumb, however, in the present case, equity and fairness demands

        that the respondent be put to the same rigours for charging 18% interest

        and face consequences similar to those imposed on the appellant for

        default committed by him. If we hold otherwise, we will be perpetuating

        a manifestly wrong bargain.
21.     We, therefore, substitute the rate of interest awarded by the NCDRC and

        increase it from 9% to 18% per annum, while keeping the other terms

        intact. Respondent shall refund the requisite amount within a period of

        two months from date.
22.     The appeal is, accordingly, partly allowed, without any order for costs.
………..…………………J.
                                                           (DIPANKAR DATTA)



                                                …………..…………..………………J.
                                                (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)


      NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 24, 2025.
15