[Cites
19
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Kaveri Plastics vs Mahdoom Bawa Bahrudeen Noorul on 19 September, 2025
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
2025 INSC 1133                                                              Reportable


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS._______                        OF 2025
                            (@SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NOS. 11184-11185/2024)


                            KAVERI PLASTICS                             …Appellant(s)

                                                      VERSUS

                            MAHDOOM BAWA BAHRUDEEN NOORUL
                                                        …Respondent(s)



                                                 JUDGMENT
N.V. ANJARIA, J.
Leave granted.
2.       When the amount mentioned and demanded in
                            the notice sent under Proviso (b) to
Section 138
of the
                            Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, to the payee or the
                            holder in due course of the cheque, is different from the
                            amount for which the cheque was issued, whether the
                            notice would stand valid in eye of law; whether a defence
                            that such was a typographical error could be a ground
                            which could be countenanced in law - are the questions
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
POOJA SHARMA
Date: 2025.09.19
falling for consideration in the present appeals.
   18:46:41 IST
   Reason:
Page 1 of 25
2.1.       The appeals arise out of the judgment and order
dated 26.02.2024 in Crl. M.C. No.2164 of 2022 and Crl.
M.A. No.9155 of 2022 passed by the High Court of Delhi
whereby the High Court quashed the Criminal Complaint
No.523804 of 2016 filed by the respondent herein under
Sections 138
,
141
and
142
of the Negotiable Instruments
Act, 1881 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the
NI Act
’), on the
ground that amount mentioned in the notice was not the
same as per the cheque, which rendered the notice
invalid.
3.         Stated in brief, the facts in the background are
inter alia that a complaint came to be filed by the
appellant herein against the respondent-arraigned as
accuse No.3, alleging that accused No.1-M/s. Nafto Gaz
India Private Limited entered into Memorandum of
Understanding      with   the   appellant-complainant    on
30.04.2012 relating to sale of land. A cheque bearing
number 876229 dated 12.05.2012 drawn on the Indian
Overseas Bank, R.K. Puram, Delhi for Rs.1,00,00,000/- was
issued by the accused No.1 in favour of the appellant,
which returned dishonoured on the ground ‘funds
insufficient’.
3.1        The appellant issued demand notice dated
08.06.2012. The relevant part of said notice is extracted
hereunder.
Page 2 of 25
“4.     That in pursuance of the MoU, in terms of
      part liability towards my clients, you the noticees
      issued the following cheque:
CHEQUE NO.      DATE          BANK & BRANCH       AMOUNT
      876229          30.04.2012   Indian Overseas Bank, 1 Crore
                                   B/o R.K. Puram   1,00,00,000/-
I, hereby call upon you to make the payments of
      the aforesaid cheques of 2,00,00,000/- (Rupees
      Two Crores) within the stipulated period of 15
      days from the date of receipt of this legal notice
      failing which I have definite instructions from my
      client to initiate legal proceedings, against you
      which please note shall solely be at your risk and
      cost. Copy kept.”


3.2      Another notice dated 14.09.2012 was issued to
accused No.1- M/s. Nafto Gaz India Private Limited and
its Directors through the advocates. Relevant portion
thereof is extracted hereinbelow:
‘Sub.: Legal Notice’

        Under instructions and on behalf of my client Sh.
      Deepak Gupta,       S/o Sh. Rameshwar Dass, R/o
      3862, Gali No.1, Pahari Dheeraj, Sadar Bazar,
      Delhi - 110006 and on the basis of the documents
      provided, I serve upon you the following legal
      notice;
Page 3 of 25
1.     That my client is a law abiding citizen
residing at the abovementioned address for the
past many years.
2.     That you the noticee no.1 is a company
registered under the
Indian Companies Act, 1956
having its office at the abovementioned address
while the noticees no. 2-5 are Directors of the
noticee no. 1 Company and are responsible for
day to day working of the noticee no. 1 company
and the noticee no. 6 is the authorised signatory of
the noticee no.1 company and noticees No.2-6 are
responsible for day to day activities of the noticee
no.-1 company.
3.     That you the notice no.1 entered into a
Memorandum of Understanding with my client on
30.04.2012 pertaining sale of land bearing Khasra
No. 75, Khewat No. 61, Khata No. 112 and Khatoni
No. 61/14, Village — Humayunpur situated in
Abadi of Arjun Nagar, New Delhi and also agreed
to take on lease the property till the final sale deed
is executed and issued certain cheques towards
your liability for rent of leased property.
4.     That in pursuance of the MoU, in terms of
part liability towards my clients, you the notices
issued the following cheque:
CHEQUE NO.      DATE          BANK & BRANCH       AMOUNT
876229          30.04.2012   Indian Overseas Bank, 1 Crore
                             B/o R.K. Puram   1,00,00,000/-
Page 4 of 25
5.     That you the noticees assured my client
      that the aforesaid cheque shall be honoured on
      presentation.
6.     That believing you assurance, my client
      presented the aforesaid cheque to his banker, but
      was astonished to see the fate of the cheque as the
      same returned dishonoured vide memos dated
      29.08.2012 for reason “FUNDS INSUFFICIENT”.
7.     That you have defrauded my client by
      issuing cheque from account maintained by you
      towards discharge of your legal liability towards
      my client and then not ensuring that the same is
      dishonoured thereafter, attracting penal action
      u/s 138 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881
and also under
Section 420
of the Indian Penal
      Code.
I, hereby call upon you to make the payments of
      the aforesaid cheque of ₹2,00,00,000/- (Rupees
      Two Crores) within the stipulated period of 15
      days from the date of receipt of this legal notice
      failing which I have definite instructions from my
      client to initiate legal proceedings, against you
      which please note shall solely be at your risk and
      cost. Copy kept.”


3.3      The fact situation is that the cheque in question
was issued for Rs.1,00,00,000/- whereas in both the
aforesaid notices sent to the accused – the drawer of the
Page 5 of 25
cheque upon bouncing of the cheque, the complainant
asked for the payment of Rs.2,00,00,000/-. At that stage,
the respondent accused filed an application seeking
discharge contending that the notice of demand as
aforementioned was not in terms of Proviso (b) to
Section
138
of the NI Act, therefore, the complaint was not
maintainable. The plea for discharge was dismissed by
the   Metropolitan    Magistrate      on   06.10.2021.        The
respondent herein then filed a petition before the High
Court, culminating into the impugned judgment and
order whereby the High Court held that as the demand
notice under Proviso (b) of
Section 138
of the NI Act was
at variance with the cheque amount, the same was invalid
rendering the complaint liable to be quashed.
3.4      In the reply filed by the appellant to the
discharge application the following defence was raised
as found in paragraph 2.
“That the notice dated 08.05,2012 is perfect and
      if contents of the entire notice be read as whole
      the said demands, the "aforesaid cheque" and the
      aforesaid cheque has been clearly described in
      para   4   of   the   notice,   however,   due     to
      typographical          inadvertent         mistake
      Rs.2,00,00,000/- has been mention after the word
      "aforesaid cheque". It is very relevant to mention
      herein that complainant has also issued other
      notices to the accused on the same day which
      consist the cheque for Rs.2,00,00,000/- and due to
Page 6 of 25
cut paste command inadvertently amount of Rs.
2,00,00,000/- could not change in the notice
        issued in the present case. It is very relevant to
        mention herein that contents of entire notice
        clearly speaks real facts and all the contents of the
        notice must be read in totality.”
4.        Learned Advocate for the appellant, Mr. Sanjay
Kumar assailing the judgment of the High Court,
contended that a too technical ground weighed with the
High Court in quashing the complaint, as it viewed that
since     amount      mentioned      in     the   notice        was
Rs.2,00,00,000/-while      the    cheque     issued    was      for
Rs.1,00,00,000/-, the notice was invalid. It was sought to
be submitted that there was a clear typographical error
on the part of the complainant in mentioning in the notice
the different amount. It was next submitted that other
details of cheque were mentioned in the notice and that
the court ought to have looked at the substance of the
matter rather than becoming technical.
4.1       It was then submitted that the offence under
Section 138
of the NI Act is essentially a civil wrong in the
attire of criminal offence. In that view, it was submitted,
the technicality should not be allowed to prevail. It was
further submitted that purpose of
Section 138
of the NI Act
is to facilitate smooth business transactions. Learned
counsel for the appellant submitted that the kind of view
taken by the High Court, if allowed to be sustained, it
Page 7 of 25
would give a premium to the drawer of the cheque whose
                       cheque is dishonoured and has remained unpaid.
4.2        It was submitted by relying on the decision of
                       this Court in
Suman Sethi vs. Ajay K. Churiwal & Anr.1
that the notice was required to be read as a whole.
By
                       pressing into service another decision also of this Court
                       in
Central Bank of India & Anr. vs. Saxons Farms &
                       Ors.2
it was highlighted that the object of the notice under
                       the Proviso (b) of
Section 138
of the NI Act, was to give a
                       chance to the drawer of the cheque to rectify his omission
                       and also to protect an honest drawer.
4.3        On the other hand, learned advocate for the
                       respondent Mr. Kush Chaturvedi submitted that in the
                       notice under Proviso (b) of
Section 138
of the NI Act
                       issued by the respondent, he gave incorrect details
                       demanding      double    the   cheque    amount.    Learned
                       advocate     for   the   respondent      highlighted      that
                       Rs.2,00,00,000/- was demanded in both the notices issued
                       on 08.06.2012 and next on 14.09.2012. It was submitted
                       with reference to the decisions of this Court as well as that
                       of different High Courts that the issue is no longer res
                       integra that the demand in legal notice cannot be different
                       than the cheque amount. He submitted that the
                       complainant took a false and a stock plea of typographical
                       error in the notice.
1
(2000) 2 SCC 380
2
(1999) 8 SCC 221
Page 8 of 25
5.       Having gathered the compass of the controversy
and considered the rival submissions, the provision of
Section 138
of the NI Act may be noticed at the outset. This
Section deals with the dishonour of the cheque. It reads
as under,

         “138. Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency,
      etc., of funds in the account.—Where any
      cheque drawn by a person on an account
      maintained by him with a banker for payment of
      any amount of money to another person from out
      of that account for the discharge, in whole or in
      part, of any debt or other liability, is returned by
      the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of
      money standing to the credit of that account is
      insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds
      the amount arranged to be paid from that account
      by an agreement made with that bank, such
      person shall be deemed to have committed an
      offence and shall, without prejudice to any other
      provision   of   this   Act,   be   punished    with
      imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
      years, or with fine which may extend to twice the
      amount of the cheque, or with both:
Provided that nothing contained in this section
      shall apply unless—
(a) the cheque has been presented to the bank
      within a period of six months from the date on
Page 9 of 25
which it is drawn or within the period of its
       validity, whichever is earlier;
(b) the payee or the holder in due course of the
       cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for
       the payment of the said amount of money by
       giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the
       cheque, within thirty days of the receipt of
       information by him from the bank regarding the
       return of the cheque as unpaid; and
(c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the
       payment of the said amount of money to the payee
       or as the case may be, to the holder in due course
       of the cheque within fifteen days of the receipt of
       the said notice.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,
       “debt   or other liability” means       a   legally
       enforceable debt or other liability.”


5.1      The aforesaid provision contemplates that
where any cheque drawn by a person in the account
maintained by him is returned dishonoured and unpaid,
it amounts to a punishable offence. The ingredients of this
penal provision are inter alia that the cheque should have
been drawn by a person on an account maintained by him
with a banker, for payment of any amount of money to
another person from out of that account. Such cheque
should be returned by the bank for the reason of money
in the credit of the account being insufficient, etc. In order
Page 10 of 25
to make out the offence under
Section 138
of the NI Act
                       complete, conditions stated in sub-clauses (a),(b) and (c)
                       of the Proviso should stand complied with. In the present
                       case, it is the condition (b) to the Proviso which is in focus.
5.1.1     In
K.R. Indira vs. Dr. G. Adinarayana3
, this
                       Court enlisted the components, aspects and the acts, the
                       concatenation of which would make the offence under
Section 138
of the Act complete, to be these (i) drawing
                       of the cheque by a person on an account maintained by
                       him with a banker, for payment to another person from
                       out of that account for discharge in whole/in part of any
                       debt or liability, (ii) presentation of the cheque by the
                       payee or the holder in due course to the bank, (iii)
                       returning the cheque unpaid by the drawee bank for want
                       of sufficient funds to the credit of the drawer or any
                       arrangement with the banker to pay the sum covered by
                       the cheque, (iv) giving notice in writing to the drawer of
                       the cheque within 15 days of the receipt of information by
                       the payee from the bank regarding the return of the
                       cheque as unpaid demanding payment of the cheque
                       amount, and (v) failure of the drawer to make payment to
                       the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, of
                       the amount covered by the cheque within 15 days of the
                       receipt of the notice.
3
(2003) 8 SCC 300
Page 11 of 25
5.2       The purport of group of words ‘makes a demand
                       for the payment of said amount of money’ occurring in
                       Proviso (b) to
Section 138
of the Act, and in particular the
                       connotation ‘the said amount of money’ therein, hold key
                       to the answer to the issue posed. The words ‘said amount
                       of money’ figure in Proviso (b),
Section 138
. The effect
                       and application of this phrase was dealt with by this Court
                       in
Suman Sethi vs. Ajay K. Churiwal & Anr.4                  The
context of facts was that the appellant
in that case
issued
                       a     cheque   of   Rs.20,00,000/-   which    was     returned
                       dishonoured. In the notice issued under the Proviso (b),
                       the complainant called upon the drawer of the cheque to
                       pay cheque amount of Rs.20,00,000/- along with
                       incidental charges of Rs.1500/- spent on the cheque and
                       also Rs.340/- as notice charges. It was stated that failing
                       to pay would entail legal steps holding the drawer liable
                       for all costs and consequences thereof. The contention
                       was that since the incidental amount was demanded in the
                       notice along with the cheque amount, the notice was
                       rendered bad.
5.2.1     Pertinently, in the process, delineating on the
                       meaning of the words ‘said amount of money’, the Court
                       in
Suman Sethi
(supra) stated thus.
“We have to ascertain the meaning of the words
                               the “said amount of money” occurring in clauses
(b) and (c) to the proviso to
Section 138
. Reading
4
(2000) 2 SCC 380
Page 12 of 25
the section as a whole we have no hesitation to
         hold that the above expression refers to the words
         “payment of any amount of money” occurring in
         the main
Section 138
i.e. the cheque amount. So in
         a notice, under clause (b) to the proviso, demand
         has to be made for the cheque amount.”     (Para 6)


5.2.2.     The Court proceeded to state further,

           “In the notice, demand has to be made for the
         “said amount” i.e. the cheque amount. If no such
         demand is made the notice no doubt would fall
         short of its legal requirement. Where in addition
         to the “said amount” there is also a claim by way
         of interest, cost etc. whether the notice is bad
         would depend on the language of the notice. If in
         a notice while giving the break-up of the claim the
         cheque amount, interest, damages etc. are
         separately specified, other such claims for
         interest, cost etc. would be superfluous and these
         additional claims would be severable and will not
         invalidate the notice.”                   (Para 8)


5.2.3      The Court observed that the demand in the
notice has to be made for the said amount which would be
the ‘cheque amount’. If no such demand is made the
notice would fall short of its legal requirement. In the facts
of that case, however, the Court held that since the
cheque amount in the notice was correctly stated, merely
because the respondent claimed in addition to the
cheque amount, the incidental charges and notice
Page 13 of 25
charges, which were severable, notice could not be
                       branded as bad in law.
5.2.4    It was further observed that however if in the
                       notice an ambiguous demand is made without specifying
                       the due amount under the dishonoured cheque, the notice
                       would fail to meet the legal requirement. In other words,
                       what was pinpointed was that the words ‘said amount’ in
                       Proviso (b) has to be same amount of the cheque which is
                       dishonoured. The object of the notice under Proviso (b) of
Section 138
of the Act was explained by this Court in
Central Bank of India vs. Saxons Farms & Ors.5
,
                       observing that the purpose of the notice is to give a
                       chance to the drawer of the cheque to rectify his omission.
                       Once the defaulter makes payment of the amount covered
                       by the cheque as mentioned in the notice within stipulated
                       15 days, he would stand absolved from his liability.
5.3      This Court in
K.R. Indira
(supra), again held
                       that specific demand for the payment of the sum covered
                       by the dishonoured cheque is required to be made in the
                       notice. In that case, there was a loan transaction in the
                       backdrop and the cheques were issued towards that
                       payment. In absence of specific demand for the cheque
                       amounts, the notice was held to be invalid.
In
Rahul
                       Builders vs. Arihant Fertilizers & Chemicals & Anr.6
,
                       the imperative character of the condition in the Proviso
5
(1999) 8 SCC 221
6
(2008) 2 SCC 321
Page 14 of 25
(b) to
Section 138
of the Act was again highlighted.
Amount of Rs.8,72,409 was due to the appellant thereof
from respondent No.1. Respondent issued a cheque for
Rs.1,00,000/- which was dishonoured. The appellant sent
notice to the respondent asking him to remit Rs.8,72,409/-
.
5.3.1     This Court in
Rahul Builders
(supra) stated that
one of the conditions was service of a notice making
‘demand of the payment of the amount of cheque’ as is
evident from the use of the phraseology ‘payment of the
said amount of money,

          “Service of a notice, it is trite, is imperative
        in character for maintaining a complaint. It
        creates a legal fiction. Operation of
Section
        138
of the Act is limited by the Proviso. When
        the Proviso applies, the main section would
        not. Unless a notice is served in conformity
        with proviso (b) appended to
Section 138
of
        the Act, the complaint petition would not be
        maintainable.
Parliament while enacting the
        said provision consciously imposed certain
        conditions.”                            (Para 10)


5.4       In more recent decision of this Court in
Dashrathbhai        Trikambhai        Patel    vs.     Hitesh
Page 15 of 25
Mahendrabhai Patel & Anr.7
the dictum of law was
                     reiterate in the following words,


                               “The notice demanding the payment of the
                             “said amount of money” has been interpreted
                             by judgments of this Court to mean the cheque
                             amount. The conditions stipulated in the
                             provisos to
Section 138
need to be fulfilled in
                             addition to the ingredients in the substantive
                             part of
Section 138
.”              (Para 34.5)

                     5.5       The different High Courts hold the view in
                     unanimity.
The High Court of Madhya Pradesh in
Gokuldas vs. Atal Bihari & Anr.8
observed that offence
                     under
Section 138
of the NI Act is a technical offence
                     therefore every technical formality as required under the
                     Section must be complied with strictly. In that case, the
                     complaint was filed on the ground that cheque of
                     Rs.4,30,000/- was issued in lieu of repayment of loan of
                     Rs.4,30,000/-. A notice under Proviso (b) to
Section 138
of
                     the NI Act was sent on the ground that cheque of
                     Rs.43,000/- was given. It was held that the notice was not
                     for ‘said amount of money’ to render it invalid.
5.5.1     In M/s.
Yankay Drugs and Pharmaceuticals
                     Ltd. Vs. CITI
bank9, the High Court of Andhra Pradesh
7
(2023) 1 SCC 578
8
MCRC 5458/2013
9
2001 DCR 609
Page 16 of 25
reiterated the proposition that while demanding payment
                     by issuing notice under
Section 138(b)
of the NI Act, the
                     payee or the holder in due course must demand payment
                     of the amount covered by the cheque. It was stated that if
                     the demand is for a lesser amount or a higher amount not
                     covered by the cheque, which was dishonoured, then the
                     prosecution must fail in as much as the statutory
                     requirement of
Section 138(b)
is not fulfilled. In that case
                     the amount of cheque which was dishonoured by the bank
                     was Rs.9,972/-. But in the notice under
Section 138(b)
of
                     the NI Act, the complainant failed to make any demand for
                     payment of the said amount, instead it was stated in the
                     notice that the cheque was issued for Rs.3,871/-. The High
                     Court rightly stated that the notice fell short of the
                     statutory requirement.
5.5.2        Before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, in
                     Chhabra Fabrics Private Limited vs. Bhagwan Dass10,
                     it was a case where there was a discrepancy in
                     mentioning the number of cheque which was claimed to
                     be a typographical error. The High Court observed that
                     even if it was true that there was a typographical error in
                     the legal notice while typing out the cheque number, such
                     typographical error, if any, does not meet the compliance
                     of the mandatory provisions of
Section 138
of the NI Act.
10
Crl. Appeal No.1772-SB of 2002
Page 17 of 25
5.5.3        The contention that the discrepancy in the
                   amount mentioned in the notice under Proviso (b) of
Section 138
of the NI Act was only a typographical error
                   to be overlooked, was again negatived by the High Court
                   of Karnataka in
K. Gopal vs. Mr. T. Mukunda11
. In that
                   case, the accused issued two cheques of Rs.2,00,000/-
                   each but in the legal notice the amount demanded was
                   only Rs.10,000/-. The argument advanced by the learned
                   counsel was that it was just a typographical error. The
                   High Court asserted that
Section 138(b)
of the NI Act
                   contemplates issuance of notice demanding the amount
                   covered under the cheque and in that view the notice has
                   to be treated as defective in law.
The Delhi High Court in
Sunglo Engineering India Pvt. Ltd. Vs. The State &
                   Ors.12
quashed the complaint where the amount
                   demanded in the notice was double the amount of cheque
                   which was issued for Rs.1,00,00,000/-, akin to the facts of
                   the present case.
6.           The interpretation of the words ‘said amount’ in
                   Proviso (b) to
Section 138
of the NI Act as above is based
                   on the principle of statutory interpretation that penal
                   statute would always be construed and applied strictly.
                   This Court in
M. Narayanan Nambiar vs. State of
                   Kerala13
, spoke on the rule of construction of a penal
                   provision in its true perspective by quoting from the
11
Criminal Appeal No.1011 of 2010
12
MANU/DE/3805/2021
13
AIR 1963 SC 1116
Page 18 of 25
English decision in Dyke vs. Elliott14 which was again
                    referred to in a more recent decision of this Court in
Balaji Traders vs. State of U.P. & Anr.15

                                  “A
decision of the judicial Committee in
                                Dyke v. Elliot, (1) cited by the learned counsel
                                as an aid for construction neatly states the
                                principle and therefore may be extracted:-
Lord justice James speaking (1)(1872) L. R. 4
                                P.C. 184, 191, for the Board observes at P.191:
“No doubt all penal Statutes are to be
                                construed strictly, that is to say, the Court must
                                see that the thing charged as an offence is
                                within the plain meaning of the words used,
                                and must not strain the words on any notion
                                that there has been a slip, that there has been
                                a casus omissus, that the thing is so clearly
                                within the mischief that it must have been
                                intended to be included if thought of. On the
                                other hand, the person charged has a right to
                                say that the thing charged although within the
                                words, is not within the spirit of the
                                enactment.””

                    6.1           The Privy Council decision in Dyke vs. Elliott
                    (supra) quoted by this Court with approval stated that the
14
(1872) 4 PC 184
15
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1314,
Page 19 of 25
court must see that the thing charged as an offence is
                         within the plain meaning of the words used and must not
                         strain the words on any notion that there has been a slip,
                         that there has been a casus omissus, that the thing is so
                         clearly within the mischief that it must have been
                         intended to be included if thought of. It was thereafter
                         observed that where the thing is brought within the words
                         and within the spirit, there a penal enactment is to be
                         construed, like any other instrument, according to the fair
                         commonsense meaning of the language used, and the
                         court is not to find or make any doubt or ambiguity in the
                         language of a penal statute.
6.2      The interpretative canon of strict construction of
                         penal statute was highlighted also in the Craies Statute
                         Law16 wherein the decision of U.S. v. Wiltberger17 was
                         referred to observing.
“The    distinction    between     a    strict
                               construction and a more free one has, no
                               doubt, in modern times almost disappeared,
                               and the question now is, what is the true
                               construction of the statute? I should say that in
                               a criminal statute you must be quite sure that
                               the offence charged is within the letter of the
                               law. This rule is said to be founded on the
                               tenderness of the law for the rights of
16
7th Edn. at p.529
17
18 US 76 (1820)
Page 20 of 25
individuals, and on the plain principle that the
                               power of punishment is vested in the
                               Legislature, and not in the judicial department,
                               for it is the Legislature, not the Court, which is
                               to define a crime and ordain its punishment.”

                        6.3      Having     noticed    the   above    principle     of
                        construction of penal statute, this Court in
Suman Sethi
(supra) concluded.
“ There is no ambiguity or doubt in the
                               language of
Section 138
. Reading the entire
                               section as a whole and applying common
                               sense, from the words, as stated above, it is
                               clear that the legislature intended that in a
                               notice under clause (b) to the proviso, the
                               demand has to be made for the cheque
                               amount.”                                 (Para 7)

                        6.4      The proposition that the penal provision has
                        to be construed strictly was again asserted by this
                        Court in
K.K. Ahuja vs. V.K. Vora & Anr.18 In
the
                        context of provision of
Sections 141
and
138
of the NI
                        Act it was observed in para 17 of the judgment that
                        penal statutes are to be construed strictly and that if
                        conditions are scraped, the courts will insist upon
                        strict literal compliance. It was stated that there is no
                        question of inferential or implied compliance.
18
(2009) 10 SCC 48
Page 21 of 25
7.        When the Proviso (b) to
Section 138
stipulates
the service of notice as one of the conditions for
constituting the offence, and when the words ‘said
amount’ is incorporated in the language of the provision,
it is the amount which is specifically referable to the
amount recoverable under the cheque in question.
Reading
Section 138
of the Act in a composite manner, the
word ‘said amount’ occurring in the Proviso (b) is
connectible with and operates in conjunction with
language in the parent part of the Section ‘where any
cheque drawn by a person ……of any amount of money’.
7.1       The words ‘said amount’ and the phrase ‘any
amount of money’ have the same purport signifying the
cheque amount. They operate hand-in-hand for the
purpose of applicability of the Section. The nexus or
linkage between the two is enacted by the Legislature
with a purpose of making the two to be the same and
inseparable components, the former describing the
offence and the latter denoting the condition to be
fulfilled for constituting the offence.
8.        From       the       afore-stated     reiterative
pronouncements and the principles propounded by the
courts, the position of law that emerges is that the notice
demanding the payment of the amount covered by the
dishonoured cheque is one of the main ingredients of the
offence under
Section 138
of the NI Act. In the event of the
main ingredient not being satisfied on account of
Page 22 of 25
discrepancy in the amount of cheque and one mentioned
in the notice, all proceedings under
Section 138
of the NI
Act would fall flat as bad in law. The notice to be issued
under Proviso (b) to
Section 138
of the Act, must mention
the same amount for which the cheque was issued. It is
mandatory that the demand in the statutory notice has to
be the very amount of the cheque. After mentioning the
exact cheque amount, the sender of the service may claim
in the notice amounts such as legal charges, notice
charges, interest and such other additional amounts,
provided the cheque amount is specified to be demanded
for payment.
8.1      A failure in above regard, namely when the
cheque amount is not mentioned in the Proviso (b) notice
or the amount different than the actual cheque amount is
mentioned, in the notice, such notice would stand invalid
in eye of law. The notice in terms of Proviso (b) being a
provision in penal statute and a condition for the offence,
it has to be precise while mentioning of the amount of the
cheque which is dishonoured. Even if the cheque details
are mentioned in the notice but corresponding amount of
cheque is not correctly mentioned, it would not bring in
law the validity for such notice. Here the principle of
reading of notice as a whole is inapplicable and
irrelevant. Any elasticity cannot be adopted in the
interpretation. It has to be given technical interpretation.
Page 23 of 25
8.2       The condition of notice under Proviso (b) is
required to be complied with meticulously. Even
typographical error can be no defence. The error even if
typographical, would be fatal to the legality of notice,
given the need for strict mandatory compliance. And in
the facts of the present case, the explanation that
mentioning of wrong amount in the cheque was in the
nature of typographical or inadvertent error could hardly
be accepted, for, the so called mistake occurred and
recurred in both the notices dated 08.06.2012 and
14.09.2012.
9.        When the provision is penal and the offence is
technical, there is no escape from holding that the ‘said
amount’ in proviso (b) cannot be the amount other than
mentioned in the cheque in question for dishonour of
which the notice is received, nor the mentioning of
omnibus    amount    in   the   notice   would   fulfil   the
requirement. It has to be held that in order to make a valid
notice under the Proviso (b) to
Section 138
of the NI Act,
it is mandatory that ‘said amount’ to be mentioned therein
is the very amount of cheque, and none other.
10.       Reverting to recollect the facts of this case, the
cheque which was drawn by the respondent was for
Rs.1,00,000/- whereas in the notice issued under Proviso
(b) to
Section 138
of the NI Act against the respondent,
appellant mentions the amount of Rs.2,00,000/-. The
rigours of law on this score being strict, the defence
Page 24 of 25
would not hold good that the different amount mentioned
in the notice was out of inadvertence. Even if the cheque
number was mentioned in the notice, since the amount
was different, it created an ambiguity and differentiation
about the ‘said amount’. The notice stood invalid and bad
in law. The order of quashment of notice was eminently
proper and legal.
11.      No case is made out for interfering with the
impugned order of the High Court. The appeals stand
dismissed.
In view of the disposal of the main appeals, all
the interlocutory applications as may be pending stands
disposed of.
………………………………..,CJI.
[ B.R. GAVAI]



                        ………………………………….., J.
[ N.V. ANJARIA ]



NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 19, 2025.
(VK)
Page 25 of 25