[Cites
68
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shivamma (Dead) By Lrs vs Karnataka Housing Board on 12 September, 2025
2025 INSC 1104                                                                  REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11794 OF 2025
                            (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019)



             SHIVAMMA (DEAD) BY LRS                                          ...APPELLANT(S)



                                                     VERSUS



             KARNATAKA HOUSING BOARD & ORS.                                ...RESPONDENT(S)




                                                 JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.09.12
16:31:07 IST
Reason:
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.:
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided in the following parts: -
INDEX
I. BRIEF FACTUAL MATRIX .......................................................................... 4
II. SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES............................................................... 7
   A. Submissions on behalf of the appellant. ...................................................... 7
   B. Submissions on behalf of the respondent State. ......................................... 9
III. ISSUE FOR DETERMINATION ................................................................. 13
IV. ANALYSIS ...................................................................................................... 13
   A.
Section 5
of the Limitation Act. .................................................................. 13
         i. Meaning and Scope of the expression “Within Such Period” used in
Section 5
of the Limitation Act. .............................................................. 14
              a.      Contradictory Views on the subject. .............................................. 16
              b.      Textual Import of the expressions “after the prescribed period” and
                      “for not preferring the appeal or making the application within such
                      period. ............................................................................................. 28
              c.      The expression “within such period” cannot be conflated with
                      “during such period” or “for such period”. ................................... 35
              d.      The contextual import of the expression “within such period” with
                      the Canons of Law of Limitation. ................................................. 38
              e.      Decisions which Rewa Coal Fields (supra) failed to take into
                      consideration. ................................................................................. 57
              f.      Condonation of Delay entails Extension of Limitation and not
                      Exclusion. ....................................................................................... 64
   B. What is to be understood by “sufficient cause” in
Section 5
of the
        Limitation. .................................................................................................... 73
         i. Length of the delay may be instructive but not determinative. .............. 81
         ii. Technical Considerations vis-à-vis Substantial Justice. ......................... 83
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                                                           Page 2 of 170
C. In what circumstances can the exercise of discretion to condone the delay
        be interfered with? ...................................................................................... 87
  D. There is no room for largesse for State lethargy and leisure under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act. ................................................................ 102
        i. View on the subject of Condonation of Delay prior to the decision of
             Postmaster General. .............................................................................. 102
        ii. Shift in jurisprudence on Condonation of Delay after the decision of
             Postmaster General. .............................................................................. 120
        iii. The ratio of the decision of Postmaster General. .................................. 135
        iv. Whether exercise of discretion in view of the earlier position of law may
             be interfered with? ................................................................................ 145
        v. Public Policy vis-à-vis Public Interest in matters of delay on part of the
             State or any of its instrumentalities. ...................................................... 149
  E. Whether the High Court was justified in condoning the delay? ........... 153
V. CONCLUSION ............................................................................................. 167
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                                                    Page 3 of 170
1.   Leave granted.
2.   This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High Court of

     Karnataka at Kalaburagi dated 21.03.2017 in I.A. No. 1 of 2017 filed in the

     Regular Second Appeal No. 200059 of 2017 (hereinafter the “Impugned

     Order”), by which the High Court condoned the delay of 3966 days in

     preferring the second appeal against the judgment and order passed by the

     First Appellate Court in Regular Appeal No. 405 of 2004 arising from the

     judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court in Original Suit No. 1100 of

     1989.
I.     BRIEF FACTUAL MATRIX
3.   The facts giving rise to this appeal may be summarized as under: -
a. It appears from the materials on record that a parcel of land bearing

         Survey No. 56/A, admeasuring 9 acres 13 guntas was originally owned

         and possessed by the father of the appellant herein.
b. After the demise of the appellant’s father, some disputes arose between

         inter-alia between the legal heirs of the original owner including the

         appellant herein and one Sri Gurulingappa C. Patil, which led to the

         institution of the partition suit being O.S. No. 74 of 1971.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 4 of 170
c. During the pendency of the aforesaid suit, Sri Gurulingappa C. Patil

        purportedly “donated” 4 acres out of the aforesaid land which was the

        subject matter of the suit (hereinafter the “land in question”) to the

        Government of Karnataka.
d. Pursuant to the aforesaid, the respondent housing corporation sometime

        in the year 1979 took over the possession of the land in question for the

        purpose of establishing a housing colony.
e. On 03.04.1989, a compromise decree was passed in the aforesaid partition

        suit by which the appellant herein became the absolute owner of the parcel

        of land bearing Survey No. 56/A including the 4 acres of land in question.
f. However, since the possession of the land in question was not reverted to

        the appellant herein, one another suit being O.S. No. 1100 of 1989 was

        instituted, this time against the respondent housing corporation, praying

        for the relief of declaration of title and possession of the land in question.
g. The said suit came to be dismissed by the Trial Court vide order dated

        17.04.1997.
h. Aggrieved by the same, the appellant preferred the Regular Appeal No.

        405 of 2004 (hereinafter the “first appeal”) before the 3rd Addl. District

        Judge, Gulbargam (hereinafter the “First Appellate Court”).

    i. The First Appellate Court vide its judgment and order dated 03.01.2006

        allowed the appeal and accordingly decreed the suit in favor of the

        appellant, granting the declaration as prayed for in the suit. However, the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 5 of 170
First Appellate Court declined to grant the relief of possession in view of

         the fact that substantial construction had already been undertaken on the

         land in question by the respondent housing corporation, and thus, instead

         directed the grant of compensation to the appellant herein.

     j. Since no action was taken by the respondent no. 1 in accordance with the

         decree drawn by the First Appellate Court, the appellant herein initiated

         execution proceedings on 20.01.2011.
k. Remarkably, it was only on 14.02.2017, that the respondent no. 1 realized

         the seriousness of the situation and accordingly a second appeal came to

         be filed by it before the High Court along with an application for

         condonation of delay of 3966 days against the judgment and decree

         passed by the First Appellate Court vide its order dated 03.01.2006.

     l. The High Court vide its impugned judgment and order dated 21.03.2017,

         allowed the aforesaid application under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act,

         1963 (for short, the “
Limitation Act
”) read with
Section 151
of the Code

         of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short, the “
CPC
”) by the respondent no. 1

         herein, and thereby condoned the delay.
4.   In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant is here before this

     Court with the present appeal.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 6 of 170
II.   SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES.
A.    Submissions on behalf of the appellant.
5.    Mr. Akshat Shirvastava, the learned Counsel appearing for the appellants

      in his written submissions has stated thus: -
“PREPOSTION / SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF
                                THE PETITIONER

                  A. That it is most respectfully submitted that the
                     respondent no. l failed to demonstrate any sufficient
                     cause and there is no explanation as to why the regular
                     second appeal could not have been filed by the
                     respondent no. l within the prescribed period of
                     limitation.
B. That it is most respectfully submitted that from the
                     perusal of the application filed by the respondent no. 1,
                     the last entry in the file of Karnataka Housing Board
                     dates back to 20.03.2008 and that there is no
                     subsequent entry with regard to the movement of files.
C. That it is most respectfully submitted that the
                     respondent no. 1 admits that due to the negligence of
                     its officers the appeal could not have been filed within
                     the prescribed period of limitation that there has been
                     a pedantic approach on the part of the officials of the
                     Housing Board and despite service of notice in the
                     execution proceedings way back on 20.04.2011, no
                     explanation is forthcoming as to what steps had been
                     taken by the Board immediately thereafter in filing the
                     appeal before the Hon'ble High Court.
D. That it is most respectfully submitted that this Hon'ble
                     Court in a plethora of judgments has explained the
                     expression "sufficient cause" u/s. 5 of the
Limitation
                     Act, 1963
in Maniben Devraj Shah v. Municipal Corpn.
                     of Brihan Mumbai, (2012) 5 SCC 157 in Para 24 & 25
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 7 of 170
"24. What colour the expression "sufficient
                        cause" would get in the factual matrix of a
                        given case would largely depend on bona fide
                        nature of the explanation. If the court finds that
                        there has been no negligence on the part of the
                        applicant and the cause shown for the delay
                        does not lack bona fides, then it may condone
                        the delay. If, on the other hand, the explanation
                        given by the applicant is found to be concocted
                        or he is thoroughly negligent in prosecuting his
                        cause, then it would be a legitimate exercise of
                        discretion not to condone the delay.
25.       In cases involving the State and its
                        agencies/instrumentalities, the court can take
                        note of the fact that sufficient time is taken in
                        the decision-making process but no premium
                        can be given for total lethargy or utter
                        negligence on the part of the officers of the
                        State and/or its agencies/instrumentalities and
                        the applications filed by them for condonation
                        of delay cannot be allowed as a matter of
                        course by accepting he plea that dismissal of
                        the matter on the ground of bar of limitation
                        will cause injury to the public interest."
E. Case laws relied by the Petitioner: -
1.
Maniben Devraj Shah v. Municipal Corpn
.
ofBrihan Mumbai, (2012) SCC 157
2.
Brijesh Kumar v. State of Haryana
, (2014) 11
                        SCC 351
3.
Sheo Raj Singh v. Union of India
, (2023) 10
                        SCC 531”
6.
In such circumstances
referred to above
, it was prayed on behalf of the

      appellant that there being merit in his appeal, the same may be allowed.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 8 of 170
B.    Submissions on behalf of the respondent State.
7.    Ms. Kiran Suri, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents

      in her written submissions has stated thus: -
“SUBMISSIONS

           I)     The first submission is that Section 5 of the Llmitation Act
                  provides for condonation of delay if "sufficient cause" is
                  shown for "such period". While interpreting the word
                  "such period" under
Limitation Act
, there is some conflict
                  as to for which period sufficient cause is required to be
                  shown.
a) The following judgments provide that the word "such
                      period" would mean the explanation of delay from the
                      last day prescribed for filing of an appeal till the date
                      on which appeal is filed:-
i)     AIR 1962 SC 361 (
Ramlal, Motilal and Chhotelal
                            v. Rewa Coalfields Ltd
).
Para 8
                     ii)    1996 (3) sec 132 (
State of Haryana v. Chandra
                            Mani and Ors
). Para 3
b) The following judgments provide· that explanation of
                      delay has to be shown for the period of limitation means
                      if period of limitation is 90 days, then explanation as to
                      why the petitioner was unable to institute the
                      proceedings within 90 days and the events occurred
                      after 91 st day till the last day is of no consequence.
iii) 2024 SCC online SC 3612:(
State of Madhya
                             Pradesh v. Ramkumar Choudhary
) Para 7
iv)     1981 (1) SCC 495 (Ajit Singh Thakur Singh
                             AndAnr. v. State of Gujarat) Para 6

           II)    That Second submission is that when the Hon'ble High
                  Court has exercised its discretionary powers and
                  condoned the delay holding that there is sufficient cause
                  shown by the respondent No. 1 herein, Law is well settled
                  that "a court of appeal should not ordinarily interfere with
                  the discretion exercised by the courts below." It is further
                  submitted that "an appellate Court interferes not when the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 9 of 170
order appealed is not right but only when it is clearly
                  wrong."
i)    2023 (10) SCC 531 (Sheo Raj Singh(D) Tr. Lrs v.
Union Of India). Para 33
ii)   2003 (10) SCC 390 (Manjunath Anandappa Urf. v.
Tammanasa& Ors.) para 36 and 37
iii) 1980 (2) SCC 593 (Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd v.
Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha) Para 73

                  In the present case, the Hon'ble High Court has exercised
                  its discretionary power after considering the sufficient
                  cause and the same cannot be said to be clearly wrong so
                  as to require interference.
III)   That third submission is that in case there have been
                  deliberate lapses on the part of the public officials and
                  public servants to defeat justice by causing delay, delay,
                  however huge may be, should be condoned and the latter
                  be decided on merits.
i)    2015 (3) SCC 569 (
Executive Officer, Antiyur Town
                        Panchayat v. G. Arumugam (D) By Lrs
.) para 3 and
4
IV)    That fourth submission is when substantial justice and
                  technical considerations are pitted against each other, the
                  former would_ prevail specially when public interest is
                  involved. It is submitted that it is not the length of delay
                  but sufficiency of cause, which is relevant.
i)     1987 (2) SCC 107 (
Collector Land Acquisition,
                         Anantnag &Anr. v. Mst
. Katiji& Ors).
para 3
                  ii)    2005 (3) SCC 752 (
State of Nagaland v. Lipok Ao &
                         Ors.
) Para 8 & 9
                  iii) 2013 (12) SCC 649 (Esha Bhattaharyajeev.
Raghunathpur Nafar Academy) Para 21
                  iv)    2019 (10) SCC 408 (
The State of Manipur v. Koting
                         Lamkang
) Para 10

           V)     The fifth submission is that the Government cannot carry
                  on business upon principle of distrust and men in
responsible position are to be trusted. The deliberate
                  inaction on the part of the officials and mala fide of the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 10 of 170
officers, cannot be imputed to the government or
                  Government undertakings.
i)     1988 (2) SCC 142 (
G. Ramegowda, Major and
                         others v. Special Land Acquisition Officer,
                         Bangalore
) Para l5 to 17

           VI)    The sixth submission is that the discretion by the Hon'ble
High Court is exercised in 2017 and judgments in "(2020)
                  (10) SCC 654) (
State of MP v. Beru Lal
&(2020 (13) SCC
                  745 (
University of Delhi v. Union of India & Ors.
" are
                  subsequent. Therefore, the exercise of power is to be seen
                  from the point of view of the cases of Katiji, Rameguda,
                  Chandra Mani cases etc.
i)    2023 (10) SCC 531 (Sheo Raj Singh (D) by Lrs) v.
Union of India &Anr.) Para 34

           VII) The seventh submission is that if inordinate delay has
                occurred and it has not resulted in the litigant being
                benefitted by such delay, such belated approach must be
                construed by adopting justice oriented approach. In the
                present case, there had been negligence on the part of the
                officials, who were supposed to protect the interest of KHB
                and action has been taken against those officers by
                suspending them and initiating disciplinary proceedings.

           VIII) That KHB has taken decision to file an appeal in the year
                 2006 itself and had appointed litigation conducting officer
                 to engage advocate. KHB had again appointed litigation
                 conducting officer in 2011 to engage advocate and appear
                 in Execution petition. There was no reason for the KHB to
                 dis rust its officer. It is only in 2017 when a letter was
                 received from Deputy Commissioner to the Commissioner,
                 KHB that the commissioner came to know about their non-
representation and non filing of the appeal. Immediate
                 action is taken thereafter.
IX)    It is submitted that Sh. AD. Inamdar was authorised by the
                  Commissioner to act as litigation conducting officer for
                  filing appeal and also to appear in EP on 02.04.2011.
SLAO sent letter dated 06.04.2011 to said AD Inamdar to
                  engage counsel and take appropriate action. The said
                  Inamdar appointed AEE as special officer. Even though
                  the Executive Engineer was authorized to engage the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                       Page 11 of 170
Advocate and contact the Advocate regularly, order sheet
                  of Execution Petition reveals that neither the Executive
                  Engineer nor the Assistant Executive Engineer have
                  engaged Advocate in Execution Petition. KHB came to
                  know the issue -of warrant of attachment of their movables
                  from Deputy Commissioner only on 28.01.2017. Both the
                  officers were suspended.
X)     It is submitted that neither the land is purchased nor
                  acquired by the KHB nor any allotment is made by KHB.
The petitioner filed a suit for possession. The lower
                  appellant court moulded the relief and directed payment of
                  compensation. The payment of compensation without
                  acquisition of land by Respondent-1 is against public
                  interest and it also involves huge public money.
Respondent-1 cannot be directed to pay compensation
                  when they have not acquired the land. The persons in
                  possession are illegal occupants and the KHB has nothing
                  to do with that land or its occupants. It is relevant to note
                  that petitioners filed WP No. 82306/2011 praying for
                  mandamus direction R-1 and R-2 to acquire the land,
                  which was withdrawn on 19.07.2011.
XI)    KHB has no objection if decree is passed for possession
                  against the persons in possession and not against the KHB.
                  It is also relevant to Note that the petitioner has not made
                  the persons in possession as party to the proceedings. The
                  delay of 3966 days will not clothe the petitioner with any
                  right in law when the petitioner is not entitled for any relief
                  against Defendant-I and Defendant-2.”
8.    In such circumstances
referred to above
, it was prayed on behalf of the

         respondent that there being no merit in the present appeal, the same may

         be dismissed.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 12 of 170
III.     ISSUE FOR DETERMINATION
9.      Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone

         through the materials on record, the following questions fall for our

         consideration: -
I)       What is the meaning and import of the expression “within such

                  period” used in
Section 5
of the Limitation Act?
II)      When can the exercise of discretion in condoning the delay by a

                  lower court be interfered with by a court in appeal?
III)     Whether the High Court in the present case at hand was justified in

                  condoning the delay?
IV.      ANALYSIS

 A.
Section 5
of the Limitation Act.
10.
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, reads as under: -
“5. Extension of prescribed period in certain cases.—
                Any appeal or any application, other than an application under
                any of the provisions of
Order XXI of the Code of Civil
                Procedure
, 1908 (5 of 1908), may be admitted after the
                prescribed period if the appellant or the applicant satisfies the
                court that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal or
                making the application within such period.
Explanation.— The fact that the appellant or the applicant was
                misled by any order, practice or judgment of the High Court in
                ascertaining or computing the prescribed period may be
                sufficient cause within the meaning of this section.”
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                             Page 13 of 170
11.
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, which corresponds to the erstwhile
Section

       5
of the now-repealed Limitation Act, 1908, confers upon the courts the

       discretionary power to admit any appeal or application (except that under
Order XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908) if filed after the expiry of

       the prescribed period of limitation, provided the erring party is able to show

       to the court a sufficient cause for not filing the same within the stipulated

       period of limitation, and the court is satisfied with sufficiency of such cause.
It is only in cases, where such “sufficient cause” for the resultant delay in

       filing / presenting of the appeal or application is shown by the defaulting

       party, and the courts are satisfied with the explanation and sufficiency of such

       cause that the recourse to
Section 5
of the Limitation Act may be taken by

       the courts, and in exercise of its discretion the delay be condoned and thereby

       admit the appeal or application.
i.    Meaning and Scope of the expression “Within Such Period” used in
Section 5
of the Limitation Act.
12.    Ms. Suri, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents herein

       vociferously contended that although it is a well settled position of law that

       for the purpose of seeking condonation of delay by recourse to
Section 5
of

       the Limitation Act, the delay in the filing of an appeal or application beyond

       the stipulated period of limitation has to be explained by demonstrating the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 14 of 170
existence of a “sufficient cause” yet there appears to be a divergence of

      opinion as to the precise period for which the “sufficient cause” must be

      demonstrated for seeking condonation.
13.   It was submitted that, there is a cleavage of opinion expressed as regards the

      meaning of the expression “within such period” occurring in
Section 5
of the

      Limitation Act, wherein the expression has been understood to mean the

      period commencing from the last date on which the appeal or application, as

      the case may could have been filed i.e., the last day on which the period of

      limitation would have expired, up to the actual date on which such appeal or

      application is ultimately filed. In other words, the delay that has to be

      explained is only for the interregnum period between the expiry of limitation

      and the actual date of filing, and the court concerned should be satisfied about

      the existence of a sufficient cause resulting in such delay for this period

      alone.
In this regard, reliance was placed on the decisions of this Court in
Ramlal, Motilal & Chhotelal v. Rewa Coalfields Ltd.
reported in AIR 1962

      SC 361 and State of Haryana v. Chandra Mani & Ors. reported in (1996) 3

      SCC 132, respectively.
14.   Whereas on the other hand, the same expression has been construed to mean

      that “sufficient cause” must be shown to have existed not merely during the

      period of delay post the expiry of limitation, but rather throughout the entire
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 15 of 170
statutory period of limitation itself till the date of actual filing. According to

      this line of authority, “within such period” for the purpose of
Section 5
of the

      Limitation Act, means the entire duration from the date when the cause of

      action accrued or the clock of limitation began to tick, until the date of actual

      filing. To put it simply, if the party seeking condonation of delay has no good

      explanation to offer for demonstrating the existence of a “sufficient cause”

      during the period of limitation, which inhibited the timely filing of the appeal

      or application, then even if there existed a “sufficient cause” after the expiry

      of the limitation that contributed to the delay, the same would be

      inconsequential insofar as
Section 5
of the Limitation Act is concerned.
In

      this regard, reliance was placed on the decisions of Ajit Singh Thakur &

      Anr. v. State of Gujrat reported in (
1981) 1 SCC 495 and State of Madhya

      Pradesh v. Ramkumar Choudhary
reported in 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3612,

      respectively.
a.     Contradictory Views on the subject.
15.   The expression “within such period” occurring in
Section 5
of the Limitation

      Act, first fell for the consideration of this Court in
Rewa Coalfields
(supra).

      This Court speaking through P.B. Gajendragadkar J. (as his Lordship, then

      was) held that the aforesaid expression means that existence of a sufficient

      cause for the delay in filing the appeal or application, as the case may be, has

      to be shown for the period from the last day of the limitation prescribed till
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 16 of 170
the date of the actual filing of the appeal or application, as the case may be.

    In other words, if the period of limitation is, say, 90-days, delay has to be

    explained only for the 90th day till the day of actual filing of the appeal or

    application, as the case may be.
The said decision
is in three parts: -
(i)    First, it held that in the context of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, the

           expression “within such period” used therein, means the period from

           the last day of the limitation that has been prescribed till the day on

           which the appeal or application is filed. Thus, it held that for the

           purpose of condonation of delay in terms of
Section 5
of the Limitation

           Act, the party has to assign sufficient cause for why he was unable to

           file an appeal for the entire period covered from the last day of the

           limitation prescribed till the day on which such appeal or application

           came to be filed. The relevant observations read as under: -
“8. [...] The context seems to suggest that “within such
                   period” means within the period which ends with the last
                   day of limitation prescribed. In other words, in all cases
                   falling under
Section 5
what the party has to show is why
                   he did not file an appeal on the last day of limitation
                   prescribed. That may inevitably mean that the party will
                   have to show sufficient cause not only for not filing the
                   appeal on the last day but to explain the delay made
                   thereafter day by day. In other words, in showing
                   sufficient cause for condoning the delay the party may be
                   called upon to explain for the whole of the delay covered
                   by the period between the last day prescribed for filing
                   the appeal and the day on which the appeal is filed. [...]”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 17 of 170
(ii)    Secondly, although, this Court acknowledged that the context in which

            the aforesaid expression has been employed, seems to suggest that it

            only means “within the period which ends with the last day of

            limitation prescribed” yet, it was reluctant to adopt the aforesaid

            interpretation, as it would be too unreasonable to expect or require a

            party to take necessary action on the very first day after the cause of

            action accrues. It observed if such an interpretation is adopted the same

            would result in the expression “within such period” being construed as

            “during such period”, an understanding which is repugnant to both the

            bare text as-well as the context of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act. The

            relevant observations read as under: -
“8. Now, what do the words “within such period”
                   denote? It is possible that the expression “within such
                   period” may sometimes mean during such period. But the
                   question is : Does the context in which the expression
                   occurs in
Section 5
justify the said interpretation? [...]
                   The context seems to suggest that “within such period”
                   means within the period which ends with the last day of
                   limitation prescribed. [...] To hold that the expression
                   “within such period” means during such period would,
                   in our opinion, be repugnant in the context. [...]”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
(iii)   Thirdly, it observed that since a party is entitled to take its time and

            file the appeal or application, as the case may be, on any day, during

            the prescribed period of limitation, it would be unreasonable, where

            there has been any delay in preferring such appeal or application, to
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 18 of 170
then call upon the party to explain its conduct during the whole of the

           said period. Accordingly, it rejected the contention that for the purpose

           of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, the delay in filing of the appeal or

           application, as the case may be, has to be explained for the entire

           period of the limitation prescribed. The relevant observations read as

           under: -
8. [...]
If the Limitation Act
or any other appropriate
                   statute prescribes different periods of limitation either for
                   appeals or applications to which
Section 5
applies that
                   normally means that liberty is given to the party intending
                   to make the appeal or to file an application to act within
                   the period prescribed in that behalf. It would not be
                   reasonable to require a party to take the necessary action
                   on the very first day after the cause of action accrues. In
                   view of the period of limitation prescribed the party
                   would be entitled to take its time and to file the appeal on
                   any day during the said period; and so prima facie it
                   appears unreasonable that when delay has been made by
                   the party in filing the appeal it should be called upon to
                   explain its conduct during the whole of the period of
                   limitation prescribed. [...]
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
(iv)   Lastly, it held that the thumb rule of general consideration of the

           diligence of parties in pursuing their legal remedies cannot be applied

           for the purpose of construing the import of the expression “within such

           period” employed in
Section 5
of the Limitation Act. This is because,

           even after sufficient cause has been shown the court still has to enquire

           whether it, in its discretion, should condone the delay. As such the only

           place where such considerations of diligence and bona-fides of the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 19 of 170
party may be of relevance under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, is at

           the stage of deciding whether the discretionary power to condone the

           delay should be exercised by the court or not, after sufficient cause has

           been shown, to its satisfaction. However, this Court cautioned, that

           considerations of bona fides or due diligence, which unlike in
Section

           14
of the Limitation Act, have not been expressly made material or

           relevant under
Section 5
, ought not be applied to the same extent or

           manner as under
Section 14
, so as to invite an enquiry into the reasons

           for the party’s inaction during the entire prescribed period of

           limitation. The relevant observations read as under: -
“8. [...] In our opinion, it would be immaterial and even
                   irrelevant to invoke general considerations of diligence
                   of parties in construing the words of
Section 5
. [...]

                                 xxx           xxx          xxx
10. On the other hand, in
Kedarnath v. Zumberlal the
                   Judicial Commissioner
at Nagpur has expressed the view
                   that an appellant who wilfully leaves the preparation and
                   presentation of his appeal to the last day of the period of
                   limitation prescribed therefor is guilty of negligence and
                   is not entitled to an extension of time if some unexpected
                   or unforeseen contingency prevents him from filing the
                   appeal within time. According to this decision, though the
                   period covered between the last day of filing and the day
                   of actual filing may be satisfactorily explained that would
                   not be enough to condone delay because the appellant
                   would nevertheless have to show why he waited until the
                   last day. In coming to this conclusion the Judicial
                   Commissioner has relied substantially on what he
                   regarded as general considerations. “This habit of
                   leaving things to the last moment”, says the learned
                   Judge, “has its origin in laxity and negligence; and, in
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 20 of 170
my opinion, having regard to the increasing pressure of
                   business in the law Courts and the many facilities now
                   available for the punctual filing of suits, appeals and
                   applications therein, it is high time that litigants and their
                   legal advisers were made to realise the dangers of the
                   procrastination which defers the presentation of a suit,
                   appeal or application to the last day of the limitation
                   prescribed therefor”. There can be no difference of
                   opinion on the point that litigants should act with due
                   diligence and care; but we are disposed to think that such
                   general consideration can have very little relevance in
                   construing the provisions of
Section 5
. The decision of the
                   Judicial Commissioner shows that he based his
                   conclusion more on this a priori consideration and did
                   not address himself as he should have to the construction
                   of the section itself. Apparently this view has been
                   consistently followed in Nagpur.
12. It is, however, necessary to emphasise that even after
                   sufficient cause has been shown a party is not entitled to
                   the condonation of delay in question as a matter of right.
The proof of a sufficient cause is a condition precedent
                   for the exercise of the discretionary jurisdiction vested in
                   the court by
Section 5
. If sufficient cause is not proved
                   nothing further has to be done; the application for
                   condoning delay has to be dismissed on that ground
                   alone. If sufficient cause is shown then the court has to
                   enquire whether in its discretion it should condone the
                   delay. This aspect of the matter naturally introduces the
                   consideration of all relevant facts and it is at this stage
                   that diligence of the party or its bona fides may fall for
                   consideration; but the scope of the enquiry while
                   exercising the discretionary power after sufficient cause
                   is shown would naturally be limited only to such facts as
                   the court may regard as relevant. It cannot justify an
                   enquiry as to why the party was sitting idle during all the
                   time available to it. In this connection we may point out
                   that considerations of bona fides or due diligence are
                   always material and relevant when the court is dealing
                   with applications made under
Section 14
of the Limitation
                   Act. In dealing with such applications the court is called
                   upon to consider the effect of the combined provisions of
Sections 5
and
14
. Therefore, in our opinion,
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 21 of 170
considerations which have been expressly made material
                    and relevant by the provisions of
Section 14
cannot to the
                    same extent and in the same manner be invoked in dealing
                    with applications which fall to be decided only under
Section 5
without reference to
Section 14
. [...]”

                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
16.   The
ratio
laid down in
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) was followed by a three-
Judge Bench of this Court in
Chandra Mani
(supra), wherein this Court

      reiterated that in showing sufficient cause to condone the delay, it is not

      necessary to explain whole of the period between the date of the judgment

      till the date of filing the appeal. It is sufficient for the purpose of
Section 5
of

      the Limitation Act to only explain the delay caused during the period between

      the last of the dates of limitation and the date on which the appeal/application

      is actually filed. The relevant observations read as under: -
“3.
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, 1963 (for short, the ‘Act’)
            extends prescribed period of limitation in filing an application or
            an appeal except under the provisions of Order 21 of Civil
            Procedure Code, 1908 (for short, the ‘Code’) and gives power to
            the court to admit the appeal or application after the prescribed
            period. The only condition is that the applicant/appellant
            satisfies the court that he had sufficient cause for not preferring
            the appeal or making the application within such period.
In
Ramlal v. Rewa Coalfields Ltd.
it was laid down that in
            showing sufficient cause to condone the delay, it is not necessary
            that the applicant/appellant has to explain whole of the period
            between the date of the judgment till the date of filing the appeal.
            It is sufficient that the applicant/appellant would explain the
            delay caused in the period between the last of the dates of
            limitation and the date on which the appeal/application is
            actually filed.”

                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                             Page 22 of 170
17.   Thus, as per the decisions of this Court in
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) and
Chandra Mani
(supra), respectively, the expression “within such period”

      used in
Section 5
of the Limitation Act has been construed to mean the period

      commencing from the last date on which the prescribed period of limitation

      would have expired, and extending up to the actual date on which such appeal

      or application comes to be filed, and therefore, “sufficient cause” for the

      delay in such filing has to be explained only for this circumscribed interval,

      rather than for the whole of the period of limitation prescribed.
18.   On the other hand, in Ajit Singh Thakur (supra) a two-Judge Bench of this

      Court held that “sufficient cause” for the delay in filing of an appeal or

      application, as the case may be, has to be established by some event or

      circumstance that had arisen before the limitation expired. It observed that,

      although a party is entitled to wait until the last day of the prescribed period

      of limitation for filing an appeal or application, as the case may be, yet when

      it allows the limitation to expire and then pleads sufficient cause for not filing

      the same earlier, such a plea or explanation must be traced to a cause arising

      within the period of limitation. The relevant observations read as under: -
“6. [...] Now, it is true that a party is entitled to wait until the last
            day of limitation for filing an appeal. But when it allows
            limitation to expire and pleads sufficient cause for not filing the
            appeal earlier, the sufficient cause must establish that because of
            some event or circumstance arising before limitation expired it
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                              Page 23 of 170
was not possible to file the appeal within time. No event or
            circumstance arising after the expiry of limitation can constitute
            such sufficient cause. There may be events or circumstances
            subsequent to the expiry of limitation which may further delay the
            filing of the appeal. But that the limitation has been allowed to
            expire without the appeal being filed must be traced to a cause
            arising within the period of limitation. In the present case, there
            was no such cause, and the High Court erred in condoning the
            delay.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
19.   It is pertinent to mention that the decision of this Court in Ajit Singh Thakur

      (supra) did not refer or take into consideration, the earlier decision of this

      Court in
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra).
20.   Arguendo, it could be said that the observation made in Ajit Singh Thakur

      (supra), more particularly, that “the sufficient cause must establish that

      because of some event or circumstance arising before limitation expired it

      was not possible to file the appeal within time” could not be said to be in

      conflict with the observations made in
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) that

      sufficient cause has to be established from the last day of the limitation

      prescribed till the day on which such appeal or application came to be filed,

      inasmuch as, the starting point from when “sufficient cause” includes the

      prescribed period of limitation i.e., the period before the limitation prescribed

      had expired as per Ajit Singh Thakur (supra) and the last day on which the

      limitation would have expired as per
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra), as the net

      effect of embracing both these perspectives, is one and the same, that
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 24 of 170
“sufficient cause” is required to be established for the period within the

      prescribed limitation, which includes the last day on which the said period

      would have expired, as clarified in
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra), till the date of

      actual filing of the appeal or application, as the case may be.
21.   However, we do not think, that when this Court in Ajit Singh Thakur (supra)

      said that “no event or circumstance arising after the expiry of limitation can

      constitute such sufficient cause”, what it had in its mind was that the

      sufficient cause must establish some event or circumstance, only for the last

      day of the prescribed period of limitation, as held in
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra).
This is because, nowhere has this Court in Ajit Singh Thakur (supra)

      made any reference to the point of origin if a “sufficient cause” would suffice

      to mean only the last day of the prescribed period of limitation. The ratio laid

      in Ajit Singh Thakur (supra) to our mind, must be understood as a whole,

      and in the context of two pertinent observations made by it; “that a party is

      entitled to wait until the last day of limitation for filing an appeal” juxtaposed

      with the observation “but when it allows limitation to expire”, which can only

      mean one thing, that it is not sufficient to only explain the delay caused in

      the period between the last of the dates of limitation and the date on which

      the appeal/application is actually filed, and rather explanation must be

      offered for what the concerned party was doing for the entire period of the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 25 of 170
prescribed limitation till the date of actual filing. We shall discuss the same

      in a greater detail in the latter parts of this judgment.
22.
In
Basawaraj & Anr. v. Special Land Acquisition Officer
reported in (2013)

      14 SCC 81, a two-Judge Bench of this Court held that “sufficient cause” as

      used in
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, connotes that the party who failed to

      file the appeal or application within the prescribed limitation period, must

      demonstrate that such failure was not due to negligence, lack of diligence or

      vigilance, nor the result of indolence or inactivity, and that it was not

      occasioned by any lack of bona fides. The relevant observations read as

      under: -
“9. Sufficient cause is the cause for which the defendant could
            not be blamed for his absence. The meaning of the word
            “sufficient” is “adequate” or “enough”, inasmuch as may be
            necessary to answer the purpose intended. Therefore, the word
            “sufficient” embraces no more than that which provides a
            platitude, which when the act done suffices to accomplish the
            purpose intended in the facts and circumstances existing in a
            case, duly examined from the viewpoint of a reasonable standard
            of a cautious man. In this context, “sufficient cause” means that
            the party should not have acted in a negligent manner or there
            was a want of bona fide on its part in view of the facts and
            circumstances of a case or it cannot be alleged that the party has
            “not acted diligently” or “remained inactive”. However, the
            facts and circumstances of each case must afford sufficient
            ground to enable the court concerned to exercise discretion for
            the reason that whenever the court exercises discretion, it has to
            be exercised judiciously. The applicant must satisfy the court that
            he was prevented by any “sufficient cause” from prosecuting his
            case, and unless a satisfactory explanation is furnished, the court
            should not allow the application for condonation of delay. The
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 26 of 170
court has to examine whether the mistake is bona fide or was
            merely a device to cover an ulterior purpose. [...]

                             xxx                xxx         xxx
11. The expression “sufficient cause” should be given a liberal
            interpretation to ensure that substantial justice is done, but
            only so long as negligence, inaction or lack of bona fides cannot
            be imputed to the party concerned, whether or not sufficient
            cause has been furnished, can be decided on the facts of a
            particular case and no straitjacket formula is possible.”

                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
23.
In
Ramkumar Choudhary
(supra), this very Bench had the occasion to

      examine the meaning of the expression “within such period” used in
Section

      5
of the Limitation Act.
Placing reliance on the decisions of this Court in Ajit

      Singh Thakur (supra) and
Basawaraj
(supra), it was held that for the purpose

      of
Section 5
, the party seeking condonation of delay has to explain why it

      was unable to institute the proceedings within the prescribed period of

      limitation. Events that occurred after the expiry of the period of limitation till

      the date of actual filing of the appeal or application, as the case may be, would

      be of no consequence insofar as condonation is concerned, if it is unable to

      explain what came in the way of the party that it was unable to file it. It

      reiterated that no event or circumstance arising after the expiry of limitation

      can constitute such sufficient cause, where the party allowed the limitation

      to expire unless it can trace such failure in allowing the limitation to expire

      to a cause arising within the period of limitation. The relevant observations

      read as under: -
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 27 of 170
“7. There is one another aspect of the matter which we must not
            ignore or overlook. Over a period of time, we have noticed that
            whenever there is a plea for condonation of delay be it at the
            instance of a private litigant or State the delay is sought to be
            explained right from the time, the limitation starts and if there is
            a delay of say 2 years or 3 years or 4 years till the end of the
            same. For example if the period of limitation is 90 days then the
            party seeking condonation has to explain why it was unable to
            institute the proceedings within that period of limitation. What
            events occurred after the 91st day till the last is of no
            consequence. The court is required to consider what came in the
            way of the party that it was unable to file it between the 1 st day
            and the 90th day. It is true that a party is entitled to wait until the
            last day of limitation for filing an appeal. But when it allows the
            limitation to expire and pleads sufficient cause for not filing the
            appeal earlier, the sufficient cause must establish that because of
            some event or circumstance arising before the limitation expired
            it was not possible to file the appeal within time. No event or
            circumstance arising after the expiry of limitation can constitute
            such sufficient cause. There may be events or circumstances
            subsequent to the expiry of limitation which may further delay the
            filing of the appeal. But that the limitation has been allowed to
            expire without the appeal being filed must be traced to a cause
            arising within the period of limitation. [...]”

                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
24.   Thus, there appears to be a cleavage of opinion expressed as regard the

      meaning and interpretation of the expression “within such period” occurring

      in
Section 5
of the Limitation Act.
b.     Textual Import of the expressions “after the prescribed period” and
        “for not preferring the appeal or making the application within such
        period.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                            Page 28 of 170
25.   At the cost of repetition, we deem it necessary to once again quote the

      provision of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, for a better exposition. The same

      reads thus: -
“5. Extension of prescribed period in certain cases.—
            Any appeal or any application, other than an application under
            any of the provisions of
Order XXI of the Code of Civil
            Procedure
, 1908 (5 of 1908), may be admitted after the
            prescribed period if the appellant or the applicant satisfies the
            court that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal or
            making the application within such period.
Explanation.— The fact that the appellant or the applicant was
            misled by any order, practice or judgment of the High Court in
            ascertaining or computing the prescribed period may be
            sufficient cause within the meaning of this section.”
26.   The text of the provision stipulates that where an appeal or application, as the

      case may be, is not filed within the prescribed period of limitation, the same

      may be admitted if “sufficient cause” for such failure is shown. The court

      may, in its discretion, proceed to condone the delay, if it is satisfied, that the

      appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, had “sufficient cause” for not

      preferring the appeal or making the application, respectively, “within such

      period”.
27.   A plain yet careful reading of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, leaves very

      little to imagination insofar as how the import of the phrase “within such

      period” should be construed for the purpose of the said provision. The

      aforesaid phrase cannot be singled out and construed devoid of the context
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 29 of 170
provided by the other expressions used throughout the provision. The

      expression should be interpreted and understood in the precise context in

      which it has been employed in the bare text of the provision. The provision

      of
Section 5
, itself makes it amply clear how the phrase “within such period”

      ought to be understood by supplying the necessary context and interpretive

      key, through two significant phrases, namely; “after the prescribed period”

      and “for not preferring the appeal or making the application”.
28.   We say so because, the use of the word “such” in “within such period”

      signifies that it is alluding to something that the legislature has already

      alluded to within the provision, and thus, the significance of this phrase, has

      to be necessarily construed in reference to the expressions “after the

      prescribed period” and “for not preferring ... or making ... within such

      period”.
29.   The phrase “within such period” has been consciously prefaced by the

      legislature with the expression “for not preferring the appeal or making the

      application”. This prefatory expression denotes that period of window within

      which the appeal or the application, as the case may be, was required or

      expected to be instituted under the law. It signifies the original period within

      which, the appeal or the application, should have been filed, if not for the

      delay. It refers to none other than that period within which, the appeal or
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 30 of 170
application, could have been instituted in the first place, had there been no

      delay, or, to put it simply, the statutory period of limitation, within which,

      such an appeal or application, should have ordinarily been filed.
30.   The negative terminology couched in “for not preferring ... or making” is

      suggestive of the lapse or default that the appellant or applicant, as the case

      may be, has committed in preferring the appeal or application, respectively,

      which is nothing but the failure to file it within the prescribed statutory period

      of limitation. This is further reinforced when one considers the meaning that

      would have been derived, if the negative language used in the provision is

      stripped away, or in other words, by understanding the opposite meaning of

      the aforesaid phrase, which the legislature has deliberately chosen not to

      provide by use of the negative language “for not”.
31.   By removing or inverting the said negative connotation from the phrase “for

      not preferring ... or making”, the expression would then inevitably have

      connoted that point of time at which the appeal or application, as the case

      may be, ought to have been instituted or the period within which, the

      appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, was otherwise well within its

      right to prefer the appeal or make the application, respectively.
32.   The aforesaid makes it crystal clear that the legislature, by employing the

      phrase “for not preferring the appeal or making the application”, is
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 31 of 170
unmistakably alluding to the original statutory period of limitation within

      which the appeal or application, as the case may be, was required to be

      instituted or simpliciter the prescribed period of limitation, for the purpose

      of construing the expression “within such period”.
33.   However, one must be mindful that the aforesaid is not the only time period

      that has been mentioned in the language of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act.

      In other words, the meaning of the expression “within such period” does not

      refer to only the original period of limitation.
34.   One another expression of significance that, the legislature has introduced,

      within the text of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, is “after the prescribed

      period”. This expression refers to the point of time when the appeal or

      application, as the case may be, in question, has come to be instituted, which

      is, after the statutory period of limitation expired. It denotes the period after

      the prescribed limitation had run out till the actual date when the filing of the

      appeal or application, as the case may be, took place.
35.   By use of the phrase “after the prescribed period”, it is clear that the

      legislature, for the purpose of construing the expression “within such period”,

      has contemplated to also include the time period after the expiry of the

      prescribed period of limitation till the actual date of filing of the appeal or

      application, as the case may be.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 32 of 170
36.   In
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, the phrases “for not preferring the appeal

      or making the application” and “after the prescribed period” have been used

      by the legislature conjointly to assign meaning to the expression “within such

      period”. As already discussed, the former refers to the period in which the

      appeal or the application was required by the law to be filed within, while the

      latter signifies the period within which such appeal or application, is being

      filed or in other words, the original prescribed period of limitation and the

      period after the expiry of limitation till the actual date of institution,

      respectively.
37.   When one reads the phrase “within such period” together with the

      expressions “after the prescribed period” and “for not preferring the appeal

      or making the application”, it becomes as clear as a noon day, that the said

      phrase i.e., “within such period” includes both the original period of

      limitation prescribed as-well as the period of delay leading up to the actual

      filing of the appeal or application, as the case may be. There can be no

      question of construing “within such period” as making a reference either to

      only the original period of limitation or to only the actual period of delay

      after the expiry of limitation.
38.   It is a well settled rule of statutory interpretation that while construing a

      provision, a meaningful effect should be given to each and every word used
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 33 of 170
by the legislature within the text of the provision. In interpreting a provision,

      a coherent meaning has to be culled out from the entire scheme of the Act

      and the provisions contained therein. The entire text of the provision must be

      read holistically with the entire Act, in toto, and harmoniously integrated

      with the other provisions to preserve internal consistency. Stray lines or

      words of a provision cannot be isolated or construed in fragments, detached

      from the remaining words and expressions of the provision as-well as the

      other provisions within the statute.
39.   Thus, we have no hesitation in saying that both the expressions, by a

      necessary implication indicate that the phrase “within such period” signifies

      that the period covered therein extends to not only the original period within

      which, the appeal or the application, as the case may be, should have been

      filed, if not for the delay, but also the period taken in addition to the

      prescribed period of limitation for filing such appeal or application, as the

      case may be.
40.   As such, under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, for the purpose of seeking

      condonation of delay in filing of an appeal or application, as the case may

      be, beyond the stipulated period of limitation, the delay in the filing has to be

      explained by demonstrating the existence of a “sufficient cause” that resulted

      in such delay for both the prescribed period of limitation as-well as the period

      after the expiry of limitation, up to actual date of filing of such appeal or
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 34 of 170
application, as the case may be, or to put it simply, explanation has to be

      given for the entire duration from the date when the clock of limitation began

      to tick, up until the date of actual filing, for seeking condonation of delay by

      recourse to
Section 5
of the Limitation Act.
c.     The expression “within such period” cannot be conflated with “during
        such period” or “for such period”.
41.   We may now look into the decision of
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra), more

      particularly the observations “to hold that the expression “within such

      period” means during such period would, in our opinion, be repugnant in

      the context”, made therein.
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra), in arriving at the

      conclusion, that the expression “within such period” refers to the period after

      the expiry of limitation, beginning from the last day of the limitation that has

      been prescribed till the day on which the appeal or application is filed, had

      held that, if the expression is interpreted to mean only the prescribed period

      of limitation ending with the last day of limitation, then the same would

      tantamount to reducing the expression “within such period” to “during such

      period”, an understanding which is repugnant to the bare text as-well context

      of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 35 of 170
42.   With all humility at our command and with due deference if this is what was

      in the mind of the learned Judges then we are afraid that is not the correct

      position of law.
43.   We shall discuss the context of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act in detail, in

      the latter parts of this judgment. For now, we shall test the meaning of the

      expression “within such period” from the textual interpretation of the

      provision.
44.
Insofar, as the apprehension that
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) harboured as

      regards the expression “within such period” being conflated with “during

      such period” if
Section 5
is construed to mean that delay has to be explained

      for the duration of the prescribed period of limitation, the same, to our minds

      does not appear to be a correct understanding of the bare text of the provision.
45.   No doubt, in
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, the legislature has not used the

      expression “during such period” and instead, has consciously employed the

      phrase, “within such period”, and thus, the expression cannot be solely

      confined to mean only the prescribed period of limitation. To the extent of

      the aforesaid, we are in complete agreement with
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra).
46.   However, to say that the expression “within such period” has to then

      necessarily be construed to mean only the period after the expiry of

      limitation, beginning from the last day of the prescribed limitation till the day
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 36 of 170
on which the appeal or application is filed, is not a correct appreciation of the

      provision.
47.   We must be mindful of the fact, that the legislature has consciously not

      employed the phrase “for such period” within the provision so as to convey

      that the period for which explanation has to be offered refers to only that

      period which is in actual delay i.e., the period after the expiry of limitation,

      beginning from the last day of the limitation that has been prescribed till the

      day on which the appeal or application is filed, as has been inadvertently

      understood by
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra).
48.   If at all we are to go into the semantics of what has been used and what has

      not been used by the legislature within the bare text of the said provision,

      then we must also not ignore how the legislature refrained from employing

      the phrase “for such period”. Merely because, the expression “during such

      period” has not been used in
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, is by no stretch

      of imagination, a reason to construe that the phrase “within such period”

      would cover within its ambit only that period which is in actual delay or

      beyond the prescribed period of limitation. Had the intent of the legislature

      been so, then it would have used the phrase “for such period” instead.
49.   What can be discerned from the above discussion is that the meaning of the

      expression, “within such period” cannot possibly be confined or restricted to
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 37 of 170
mean any one extreme i.e., it can neither be construed to mean only the

      prescribed period of limitation nor to denote only that period beyond the

      prescribed limitation, sans the use of the phrase “during such period” or “for

      such period”, respectively, by the legislature.
50.   Thus, the only natural corollary that could be supplied to the aforesaid is that,

      the phrase “within such period” must then necessarily be construed to refer

      and encompass both; the original prescribed period of limitation as-well as

      the period subsequent to its expiry, extending up to actual date of filing of

      the appeal or application, as the case may be, i.e., the entire continuum

      commencing from the point at which the limitation period first began to run,

      until the eventual filing of the appeal or application, as the case may be. An

      interpretation, which is also naturally apparent and forthcoming, when the

      phrase “within such period” is read and understood in conjunction with the

      expressions “after the prescribed period” and “for not preferring the appeal

      or making the application”, as contained in the said provision.
51.   We shall now look into the context of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, more

      particularly the manner and the circumstances in which the court condones

      the delay in filing of an appeal or application, as the case may be.


 d.     The contextual import of the expression “within such period” with the
        Canons of Law of Limitation.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 38 of 170
52.   This Court in
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) observed that since a party is entitled

      to take its time and file the appeal or application, as the case may be, on any

      day, during the prescribed period of limitation, it would be “unreasonable

      that when delay has been made by the party in filing the appeal it should be

      called upon to explain its conduct during the whole of the period of limitation

      prescribed”. Although, it said that such consideration may be of relevance

      for the purpose of deciding whether a particular case is one fit for the court

      to exercise its discretion to condone the delay, yet the same would be a

      question to be answered, only after sufficient cause is shown, as otherwise it

      is of no significance, for the purpose of construing the period for which delay

      has to be explained under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act. It further

      elaborated that the general considerations of diligence of parties in pursuing

      their legal remedies “have very little relevance in construing the provisions

      of
Section 5
” and that there cannot be any “enquiry as to why the party was

      sitting idle during all the time available to it”.
53.   It is for this reason, that this Court in
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra), hesitated in

      accepting the contention, that the period for which explanation has to be

      given by demonstrating sufficient cause is the duration from the last day of

      expiry of limitation leading up to the actual date of filing of the appeal or

      application, as the case may be.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 39 of 170
54.   We find ourselves, yet again, unable to agree to the aforesaid reasoning

      assigned by this Court in
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) for the reasons that we

      shall assign hereinafter.
55.   First, we must try to understand what was in the mind of this Court in
Rewa

      Coal Fields
(supra) when it made the aforementioned observations as regards

      examining into the diligence of parties for the purpose of condonation of

      delay.
What has been conveyed in so many words, by
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) is that
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, does not expressly lay down

      parameters of bona-fides or diligence of the litigant, as opposed to
Section

      14
of the self-same Act, where the legislature has specifically employed the

      words “good faith”.
56.
What Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) is trying to convey is that, if such parameters

      which otherwise cannot be culled out from the text of the provision, can only

      be read into “sufficient cause” that too for the limited purpose of deciding

      whether the discretion to condone the delay be exercised or not, then such

      parameters will be of no significance insofar as interpreting “within such

      period” is concerned, for it is confined only to the “sufficient cause”, and if

      that be the case, then the inaction of party for the entire prescribed period of

      limitation, will too, be of no significance.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 40 of 170
57.   Thus, the party would effectively be required to only come and explain the

      delay in filing of the appeal or application, as the case may be, only from the

      last day on which the limitation would have expired, till the actual date of

      filing of such appeal or application.
58.   The law of limitation is founded on public policy. The object of limitation is

      to put a quietus on stale and dead disputes. A person ought not to be allowed

      to agitate his claim after a long delay.
59.   Rules of limitation are not meant to destroy the rights of parties. They are

      meant to see that parties do not resort to dilatory tactics, but seek their remedy

      promptly. The object of providing a legal remedy is to repair the damage

      caused by reason of legal injury. The law of limitation fixes a lifespan for

      such legal remedy for the redress of the legal injury so suffered. Time is

      precious and wasted time would never revisit. During the efflux of time,

      newer causes would sprout up necessitating newer persons to seek legal

      remedy by approaching the courts. So a lifespan must be fixed for each

      remedy.
Unending period for launching the remedy may lead to unending

      uncertainty and consequential anarchy. The idea is that every legal remedy

      must be kept alive for a legislatively fixed period of time. The law of

      limitation is thus founded on public policy. [See:
N. Balakrishnan v. M.

      Krishnamurthy
, (1998) 7 SCC 123]
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 41 of 170
60.   The bedrock of law on limitation flows from two age-old Latin maxims;
interest reipublicae up sit finis litium and vigilantibus non dormientibus jura

      subveniunt, which mean; “it is in the interest of the State that there be an end

      to litigation” and “the law assists those who are vigilant, and not those who

      sleep over their rights”, respectively. The former emphasizes that protracted

      litigation puts a strain on the judicial system and undermines the law’s role

      in dispute resolution, and so the public interest requires that disputes be

      resolved in some final form rather than continuing indefinitely to drain the

      resources of courts and the parties. While the later connotes that a person

      who has slept on his rights may be denied enforcement of the same when the

      resulting delay would cause an unfair prejudice.
61.   What flows from the aforesaid is that the dominant objective underlying the

      law of limitation is that any lis cannot be kept in a state of flux or uncertainty,

      doubt or suspense. Public interest demands that at some point finality be put

      to the litigation. It is in this context that the
Limitation Act
, prescribes the

      specific points of time from which the period of limitation begins to run for

      the institution of actions or recourse to litigation. On expiry of such period,

      no action can be initiated save and except where the court condones the delay

      for a sufficient cause. A party who is insensible to the value of civil remedies,

      and who does not assert his claim with promptitude is denied the ability to
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                            Page 42 of 170
enforce even an otherwise rightful claim. [See:
DDA v. Tejpal & Ors.
, (2024)

      7 SCC 433]
62.   At this stage, it would be apposite to refer to
Section 3
of the Limitation Act,

      which reads as under: -
“3. Bar of limitation.—
            (1) Subject to the provisions contained in
sections 4
to
24
            (inclusive)
, every suit instituted, appeal preferred, and
            application made after the prescribed period shall be dismissed,
            although limitation has not been set up as a defence.
(2) For the purposes of this Act,—
(a) a suit is instituted,—
(i)     in an ordinary case, when the plaint is
                            presented to the proper officer;
(ii)    in the case of a pauper, when his
                            application for leave to sue as a pauper is
                            made; and
(iii)   in the case of a claim against a company
                            which is being wound up by the court, when
                            the claimant first sends in his claim to the
                            official liquidator;
(b) any claim by way of a set off or a counter claim, shall
                be treated as a separate suit and shall be deemed to have
                been instituted—
(i)    in the case of a set off, on the same date as
                           the suit in which the set off is pleaded;
(ii) in the case of a counter claim, on the date
                           on which the counter claim is made in
                           court;
(c) an application by notice of motion in a High Court is
                made when the application is presented to the proper
                officer of that court.”
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 43 of 170
63.   Bare reading of the aforesaid provision leaves no room for doubt that if a suit

      is instituted, appeal is preferred or application is made after the prescribed

      period, it has to be dismissed even though no such plea has been raised or

      defence has been set up. In other words, even in the absence of such plea by

      the defendant, respondent or opponent, as the case may be, the court or

      authority must dismiss such suit, appeal or application, if it is satisfied that

      the suit, appeal or application is barred by limitation. Limitation goes to the

      root of the matter. If a suit, appeal or application is barred by limitation, a

      court or an adjudicating authority has no jurisdiction, power or authority to

      entertain such suit, appeal or application and to decide it on merits. [See:

      Noharlal Verma v. Distt. Coop. Central Bank Ltd., (2008) 14 SCC 445]
64.
Section 3
sub-section (1) of the
Limitation Act
makes every proceeding filed

      after the prescribed period, liable to be dismissed, subject however to the

      provisions in Section(s) 4 to 24 of the
Limitation Act
. It mandates that it

      would be the duty of the court to dismiss any suit instituted after the

      prescribed period of limitation irrespective of the fact that limitation has not

      been set up as a defence. If a suit is ex facie barred by the law of limitation,

      a court has no choice but to dismiss the same even if the defendant

      intentionally has not raised the plea of limitation. [See: V.M. Salgaocar and

      Bros. v. Board of Trustees of Port of Mormugao, (2005) 4 SCC 613]
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 44 of 170
65.   The above exposited fundamental pillars of the law on limitation, namely, (i)

      that the sword of prosecution ought not to be hanging over an individual for

      an indeterminate period and (ii) those who have been lethargic in

      safeguarding their interests should not expect the law to come to their rescue,

      are reflected in
Section 3
of the Limitation Act, more particularly sub-section

      (1) inasmuch as it enjoins a duty upon the courts to dismiss any suit instituted,

      appeal preferred and application made, after the period of limitation

      prescribed therefor by Schedule I irrespective of the fact whether the

      opponent had set up the plea of limitation or not. It is the duty of the court

      not to proceed with the application if it is made beyond the period of

      limitation prescribed.
66.   Thus, the Limitation Act is an embodiment of a clear legislative policy that

      litigation must be commenced, prosecuted, and concluded within a definite

      timeframe.
Section 3
of the Limitation Act gives effect to this mandate in

      categorical terms by obligating courts to dismiss every suit, appeal, or

      application instituted beyond the prescribed period, irrespective of whether

      limitation is raised as a defence. This provision is not a matter of discretion

      but of duty, for it reflects the underlying public interest in ensuring certainty,

      finality, and repose in legal disputes.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 45 of 170
67.   Section(s) 4 to 24 of the
Limitation Act
is only an exception to the aforesaid

      unexceptionable rule. Likewise,
Section 5
of the Limitation Act is no

      different. It cannot be construed in isolation from
Section 3
or from the

      overarching rationale behind the said provision. When we say, that Section(s)

      4 to 24 of the
Limitation Act
, which includes
Section 5
, is only an exception,

      we do not for a moment say that it is an exception to the core axioms of

      ‘interest reipublicae up sit finis litium’ and ‘vigilantibus non dormientibus

      jura subveniunt’ that underline the
Limitation Act
. The aforesaid form the

      very jurisprudential underpinnings on why we even have prescribed periods

      of limitation, and are the very basis for the existence of statutes on limitation

      in every civilized country that has ever existed.
68.   Section(s) 4 to 24 of the
Limitation Act
are only an exception insofar as the

      mandate enshrined under
Section 3
is concerned, which enjoins a duty upon

      the courts to dismiss any suit instituted, appeal preferred, or application made

      after the prescribed period of limitation. They as a matter of exception, enable

      the courts to entertain a suit, appeal or application, filed even after the

      prescribed period of limitation where the delay was owed to factors beyond

      the reasonable control of the litigant. But this does not mean, that delays

      occasioned or accompanied to some extent by negligence, inaction, or a lack

      of care or vigilance of the litigant would also be liable to be excused, or at

      the very least ignored by the court even if the delay in question happens to
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 46 of 170
formulaically fulfil the statutorily prescribed parameters for excusing the

      same.
69.   To say otherwise, that Section(s) 4 to 24 of the
Limitation Act
and by

      extension
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, is an exception to the rule requiring

      litigants to be vigilant and diligent in their endeavours for pursuing legal

      remedies, or that the negligence or inaction of a litigant during the prescribed

      period of limitation have no place, insofar as Section(s) 4 to 24 are

      concerned, would have a chilling effect of eradicating every basic tenet for

      which a prescribed period of limitation exists and could result in manifest

      injustice to those prejudiced by such laches or delays, if condoned. It would

      tantamount to reducing Section(s) 4 to 24 of the
Limitation Act
to tools for

      subverting rather than effectuating the legislative intent to not excuse

      negligence, inaction, or lack of diligence on the part of a litigant except where

      the delay is occasioned by factors that lie beyond its reasonable control, and

      thereby create a very skewed and distorted understanding of the
Limitation

      Act
, where despite the aforesaid legislative intent being imbued in every

      other provision of the
Limitation Act
, permeating across the scheme thereof,

      the same would be discarded for a select set of provisions i.e., Section(s) 4

      to 24, while being scrupulously enforced for all other provisions.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 47 of 170
70.   Thus, Section(s) 4 to 24 of the
Limitation Act
, including
Section 5
, must be

      understood in the broader framework of the law of limitation. They cannot

      be construed as a gateway to overlook or overcome the sound principles of

      ‘interest reipublicae up sit finis litium’ and ‘vigilantibus non dormientibus

      jura subveniunt’ that are the elementary constituents of the
Limitation Act
and all its ideals. It is in the same breath that we say, that the provision of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, cannot be read in a manner which is either

      derogatory to, or tends to dilute the aforesaid fundamental edifice of the law

      of limitation to a mere ad-lib.
71.
In this regard we may refer to the decision of this Court in
Hameed Joharan

      (Dead) & Ors. v. Abdul Salam (Dead) by LRs & Ors.
, reported in (2001) 7

      SCC 573, wherein it was observed that the general policy of the law of

      limitation encapsulated in the
Limitation Act
is to favour the use of legal

      diligence. Expounding the maxim of ‘vigilantibus et non dormientibus jura

      subveniunt’ it was held that a court of law never tolerates an indolent litigant

      since delay defeats equity. It further held that lapse of time is a species for

      forfeiture of right. The relevant observations read as under: -
“14. Needless to record that engrossment of stamped paper
            would undoubtedly render the decree executable but that does
            not mean and imply, however, that the enforceability of the
            decree would remain suspended until furnishing of the stamped
            paper — this is opposed to the fundamental principle on which
            the statutes of limitation are founded. It cannot but be the general
            policy of our law to use the legal diligence and this has been the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 48 of 170
consistent legal theory from the ancient times: even the doctrine
            of prescription in Roman law prescribes such a concept of legal
            diligence and since its incorporation therein, the doctrine has
            always been favoured rather than claiming disfavour. Law courts
            never tolerate an indolent litigant since delay defeats equity —
            the Latin maxim vigilantibus et non dormientibus jura
            subveniunt (the law assists those who are vigilant and not those
            who are indolent). As a matter of fact, lapse of time is a species
            for forfeiture of right. Wood, V.C. in Manby v. Bewicke (K&J at
            p. 352) stated: (ER p. 1144)

                “The legislature has in this, as in every civilized country
                that has ever existed, thought fit to prescribe certain
                limitations of time after which persons may suppose
                themselves to be in peaceful possession of their property,
                and capable of transmitting the estates of which they are
                in possession, without any apprehension of the title being
                impugned by litigation in respect of transactions which
                occurred           at      a         distant        period,
                when evidence in support of their own title may be most
                difficult to obtain.””
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
72.   As aptly noted in
Hameed Joharan
(supra), lapse of time is a specie for

      forfeiture of right, which is why where a litigant allows the limitation to

      expire for any right or remedy, due to its own volition, be it in the form of,

      inaction, lethargy, negligence or mistake, which could have been avoided, no

      indulgence should ordinarily be shown by the courts in entertaining or

      enforcing the assertion of such rights, de hors, the litigant otherwise

      demonstrating a cause for such delay, which may as well also fit within any

      of the parameters of the exceptions carved out within Section(s) 4 to 24 of

      the
Limitation Act
.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 49 of 170
73.   Thus, the reasoning of this Court in
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) that the

      parameters of ‘bona-fides’, ‘diligence’ or ‘inaction’ of the litigant have no

      bearing on relevance for the purpose of construing
Section 5
of the Limitation

      Act, in the absence of any express language in this regard being couched in

      the provision is flawed. These parameters flow directly from the maxim

      ‘vigilantibus et non dormientibus jura subveniunt’ enshrined in the
Limitation Act
, albeit to varying degrees depending upon the provision in

      question, but by no stretch are they excluded from application, wantonly or

      otherwise, in any provision thereof. Merely because the provision does not

      explicitly lay down any of the aforesaid parameters cannot be construed to

      mean that the legislative intent behind the provision also, was to not allude

      to the same.
74.   The legislature always speaks through the statute it enacts, and its intention

      behind any provision or provisions thereof, is to be gathered from the

      language used in the provision along with the avowed objects with which the

      same came to be enacted. In construing or interpreting a provision, any

      deviation from the legislative intent that backs the particular statute

      containing the said provision cannot be done casually. Mere omission of few

      stray words, does not detract or take away the lofty intent behind enacting

      the statute and cannot always be interpreted to impute a contrary intent unless
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 50 of 170
the same is apparent and supported by some other salutary object with which

      such omission may have been made.
75.   In this regard, it could be argued that the legislature may have intentionally

      omitted the express mentioning of any of the aforesaid parameters pertaining

      to party diligence in
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, to lay stress on two key

      components of the law of limitation. First, that a party has a right to file an

      appeal or application, as the case may be on any day within the prescribed

      period of limitation and secondly, that the rules of limitation are not meant to

      destroy or extinguish rights of litigants but only to curb deliberate dilatory

      tactics.
76.   If at all such was the intention behind the legislature, then the same is being

      adequately subserved by virtue of the discretion bestowed onto the the courts

      under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act.
77.   There was no need to exclude the applicability of these parameters from the

      expression “within such period” or the overall provision of
Section 5
of the

      Limitation Act, if all that the legislature intended was to ensure that expiry

      of limitation should not result in extinguishment of rights of parties.
78.   The legislature in its wisdom, has in order to lay emphasis that rights of a

      party ought not to be defeated or relinquished by the expiry of limitation,
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 51 of 170
conferred the discretion to courts to condone the same, subject to showing

      sufficient cause.
79.   But to read this entitlement to file the appeal or application, on any day of

      the limitation, as instrument to construe the import of “within such period”,

      would run counter to the object of limitation, which is to enthuse a sense of

      responsibility and vigilance upon the litigants and avoid protraction of the

      lis. It would, in our opinion, invariably give the litigants, a ‘free-pass’ to

      resort to dilatory tactics for the substantial portion of the prescribed period

      of limitation, with little to no consequence.
80.   For illustration, any person, who is able to demonstrate that he or she, began

      to take some steps towards preferring the appeal or making the application,

      on the very last day of limitation, whereafter, he or she, ran into some snags

      which otherwise, was a sufficient cause, for the subsequent delay, would be

      entitled to condonation of the same. The courts in such a scenario, even after

      being satisfied about the existence of a ‘sufficient cause’ may nevertheless

      have the discretion to choose not to condone the same, but not for the reasons

      of prior inaction of such litigant during the remaining period of limitation if

      the dictum of
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) is squarely followed.
This is because,
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) also deprecates “an enquiry as to why the party

      was sitting idle during all the time available to it” even after sufficient cause
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 52 of 170
is shown to it, although not as a straitjacket formula, but still nevertheless

      very rigidly.
81.   On the contrary, recognizing the flip side of the proposition that rules of

      limitation are not meant to destroy the rights of parties into the exercise of

      discretion by the courts to admit any assertion of the same, after the

      prescribed period of limitation, provided there is no inaction or negligence,

      on the part of the litigant, rather than reading the same into “within such

      period” or “sufficient cause”, to our minds, appears to be the least disruptive

      interpretation of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, that would balance the

      salutary object of any statute of limitation, in toto. It would not only ensure

      that not even an ounce of dilatory tactics by a litigant is allowed to pollute

      the streams of justice, but also curb the seriously falling standards of

      diligence that the litigants today have towards assertion of their rights or

      availment of remedies, and a growing tendency to leave things for the last

      moment, at the cost of prejudice to other litigants, and without any modicum

      of respect for the courts and judicial resources. At the same time, it will also

      allow courts to save those rights and permit their enforcement or

      adjudication, by a judicious exercise of their discretion in justified instances

      of delays, that are not a byproduct or result of the litigant’s own inaction or

      negligence.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 53 of 170
82.   Thus, to our minds, the fixation by
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) that “within

      such period” covers only the period from the last day of limitation till the

      actual date of filing, does not appear to be supported either by the bare text

      of the provision or by the mere omission of an express contextual

      concomitant, in the form of any parameters to avert to any inaction,

      negligence or lack of diligence of a litigant under
Section 5
of the Limitation

      Act, that could be suggestive of the legislative intent to avoid applicability of

      such parameters for the condonation of delay thereunder.
83.   We need not dwell any further on this. We may only say, that even in the

      absence of any express mentioning of any of the aforesaid parameters, the

      legislature’s intent is very limpid. The use of the prefix “sufficient” in
Section

      5
of the Limitation Act, itself for lack of a better word, sufficiently indicates

      that the legislature was conscious of its use and import, and inherently

      intends to convey the applicability of these parameters to these provisions.

      Once it is clear, that such parameters of diligence or lack of any inaction etc.,

      can be read into “sufficient cause” it can be no one’s case that, the same

      would also not include averting to any inaction of the party during the

      remaining period of limitation, and only to the last day of expiry of limitation,

      as
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) has understood.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 54 of 170
84.   We say so, because both the expressions “sufficient cause” and “within such

      period” are inextricably linked together. We have already alluded how the

      expression “within such period” is to be construed. For the purpose of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, the foremost requirement is to demonstrate

      existence of a “sufficient cause” for the period covered by the expression

      “within such period”, thereby meaning that, any inaction of the litigant

      during the remaining prescribed period of limitation apart from the last day

      of the limitation would be equally relevant for determining sufficiency of

      cause or to be precise the lack thereof. To put it simply, if the inaction of a

      party is relevant for the last day of the limitation to determine that there was

      no sufficient cause as per
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra), then it would also,

      invariably be relevant for the remaining period of the prescribed limitation,

      as-well as the period after the expiry of limitation leading up to the actual

      filing of the appeal, as the expression “within such period” used in
Section

      5
, does not demarcate any difference between these intervals.
85.   Rather, the expression “within such period” treats, ‘the prescribed period of

      limitation’, ‘the last day of expiry of limitation’ and ‘the period after the

      expiry of limitation till the date of filing’, as the same for the purpose of

      condonation of delay, which is to say that, as long as there was a “sufficient

      cause” continuing between all these three intervals, the court would have the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 55 of 170
discretion to condone the same, provided the sufficient cause is not the result

      of negligence, inaction or lack of diligence of the litigant.
86.   One another good reason that fortifies our mind to hold the aforesaid is due

      to the very nature of the provision of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act. The

      said provision, as evident from its text, is only applicable in respect of

      appeals or applications. Lis that arises from appeals or applications, more

      often than not, do not partake the character of original proceedings. The

      deliberations and contemplations that a party undertakes before availing the

      remedy of the courts, is much lesser in threshold in case of appeals or

      applications, than in proceedings of original nature.
87.   The aforesaid unique distinction between the nature of original and appellate

      proceedings for the purpose of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, was

      recognized by this Court in
University of Delhi v. Union of India & Ors.
reported in (2020) 13 SCC 745, with the following relevant observations: -
“25. The entire explanation for the inordinate delay of 916 days
            is twofold i.e. the non-availability of the Vice-Chancellor due to
            retirement and subsequent appointment of new Vice-Chancellor,
            also that the matter was placed before the Executive Council and
            a decision was taken to file the appeal and the said process had
            caused the delay. The reasons as stated do not appear very
            convincing since the situation was of availing the appellate
            remedy and not the original proceedings requiring such
            deliberation when it was a mere continuation of the proceedings
            which had already been filed on behalf of the appellant herein,
            after due deliberation. [...]”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 56 of 170
88.   It follows, that such appeals or applications, are generally preferred as

      continuation of proceedings already instituted or within proceedings already

      ongoing before a forum. In such instances, the degree of vigilance that is

      expected is much higher, a party is required be prompt in making all possible

      endeavours to take the next step by filing the appeal or application. The

      inaction or laxity of the party in making such endeavours is all the more

      significant for deciding if delay should be condoned or not, as, by the time

      the stage of preferring the appeal or application, arises, it already has the

      necessary knowledge to act upon quickly, by virtue of the prior or ongoing

      proceedings. If despite it, a party chooses to wait till the very last date, it may

      in all probability be the result of a deliberate action to dilate the proceedings

      or the lack of any modicum of respect for the prescribed period of limitation.
89.   Thus, the notion that a party who failed to timely avail its remedies, by way

      of appeal or application, despite having sufficient awareness of the original

      proceedings should be shown due deference in condonation of delay, and is

      entitled to wait, without being questioned, till the last day of limitation, is

      preposterous.
e.     Decisions which
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) failed to take into
        consideration.
90.   There are a conspectus of decisions, by this Court, which lay down that

      general considerations of lack of diligence or vigilance, indolence or
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                            Page 57 of 170
inactivity are of relevance for the purpose of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act,

      more particularly for both the expressions “sufficient cause” and “within such

      period”. We need not discuss, all the decisions, and rather intend to only refer

      and rely upon a handful of them.
91.
In
Dinabandhu Sahu v. Jadumoni Mangaraj
, reported in (1954) 1 SCC

      800, a five-Judge Bench of this Court was inter-alia called upon to examine

      Section 85 of the Representation of People’s Act, 1951, which is materially

      similar to
Section 5
of the erstwhile Limitation Act, 1908, which is pari

      materia to its counterpart provision under the present
Limitation Act
.
In
the

      said decision
, this Court approvingly referred to a Full Bench decision of the

      Madras High Court in Krishna v. Chathappan reported in 1889 SCC

      OnLine Mad 1, to hold that the words “sufficient cause” in
Section 5
of the

      Limitation Act should receive “a liberal construction so as to advance

      substantial justice when no negligence nor inaction nor want of bona fides is

      imputable” (emphasis). The relevant observations read as under: -
“Even if the matter had to be judged under
Section 5
of the
            Limitation Act, it would have been a proper exercise of the power
            under that section to have excused the delay. As was observed in
            the Full Bench decision in Krishna v. Chathappan in a passage
            which has become classic, the words “sufficient cause” should
            receive “a liberal construction so as to advance substantial
            justice when no negligence nor inaction nor want of bona fides is
            imputable to the appellant”. We have, therefore, no hesitation in
            holding that the order dated 2-7-1952 is on the facts a proper one
            to pass under the proviso to Section 85.”
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 58 of 170
(Emphasis supplied)
92.   Thus, as per the dictum laid by a five Judge Bench all the way back in 1954

      in
Dinabandhu Sahu
(supra), considerations of negligence, inaction or want

      of bon-fides, are relevant under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, more

      particularly for determining “sufficient cause”.
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra),

      whilst making the observations that “it would be immaterial and even

      irrelevant to invoke general considerations of diligence of parties in

      construing the words of
Section 5
... If sufficient cause is shown then the court

      has to enquire whether in its discretion it should condone the delay. This

      aspect of the matter naturally introduces the consideration of all relevant

      facts and it is at this stage that diligence of the party or its bona fides may

      fall for consideration; but the scope of the enquiry while exercising the

      discretionary power after sufficient cause is shown would naturally be

      limited only to such facts as the court may regard as relevant.
It cannot justify

      an enquiry as to why the party was sitting idle during all the time available

      to it” failed to take into account the earlier larger bench decision of this Court

      in
Dinabandhu Sahu
(supra).
93.   It would be apposite to refer to one another decision of this Court in Sitaram

      Ramcharan Etc. v. M.N. Nagarshana & Ors. reported in 1959 SCC OnLine

      SC 89, which was, remarkably, rendered by the very same Bench that later
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 59 of 170
rendered the decision of
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra). In the said case, the

    appellants therein had filed applications for claim of overtime wages, that

    they were entitled to receive on the strength of one decision of the Small

    Causes Court delivered on May 2nd 1952. However, since the applications

    for claim of overtime wages, had been filed after expiry of the prescribed

    period of limitation, an additional prayer for condonation of delay was made

    under the second proviso to
Section 15
sub-section (2) of the
Payment of

    Wages Act, 1936
, which empowered the concerned authority to inter-alia

    condone the delay was due to sufficient cause. The prayer for condonation fo

    delay was rejected by the concerned authority and thereafter by the High

    Court as-well.
In appeal, this Court placed reliance on
Section 5
of the Limitation

    Act, to construe the import of the term “sufficient cause”. Although, this

    Court ambiguously observed that “in dealing with the question of

    condonation of delay” the “party has to satisfy the court that he had sufficient

    cause” and “this has always been understood to mean that the explanation

    has to cover the whole of the period of delay”, yet it never explained or

    elaborated what duration of period would be covered. It did not allude

    whether the same would include only the period from the last day of expiry

    of limitation, till the date of actual filing, or only the prescribed period of
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 60 of 170
limitation, or both, nor does the decision relied upon by it shed any light on

    the same.
However, a closer look at the decision would reveal that, what was

    in the mind of this Court was that explanation has to cover both the aforesaid

    periods i.e., the entire duration from when the limitation period started till

    the actual date of filing. Moreover, it also appears to have applied the general

    considerations of inaction and lack of diligence of the parties for construing

    “sufficient cause”. We say, so, because this Court held that the appellants

    therein had failed to establish “sufficient cause” as they could not explain

    their inaction between May 2nd 1952 (which we may clarify, was the date

    when the limitation period began to run) till the respective dates on which

    they filed their applications, and thus, would be fatal to their prayer for

    condonation of delay, and by extension the ultimate fate of their applications.

    The relevant observations read as under: -
“4. [...] On May 2, 1952, the appellate decision delivered by the
           Chief Judge of the Court of Small Causes, in the case of Ruby
           Mills, however, construed
Section 70
of the Bombay Shops and
           Establishments Act and held that the employees falling under the
           provisions of the said section were entitled to claim overtime
           wages under
Section 59
of the Factories Act. In other words, this
           decision for the first time properly construed
Section 70
of the
           Bombay Act and held that the said section in substance extended
           the provisions of
Section 59
of the Factories Act to the employees
           covered by Section 70.
xxx                xxx       xxx
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 61 of 170
14. As we have already noticed the authority has held against the
           appellants on two grounds, one that ignorance of law cannot be
           a sufficient cause, and second that, even if it was, in fact the
           appellants had not explained the delay made by them in making
           the present applications after they knew of the decision in the
           case of Ruby Mills on May 2, 1952. This latter conclusion is a
           finding on a question of fact and its propriety or validity could
           not have been challenged before the High Court and cannot be
           questioned before us in the present appeals. Unfortunately it
           appears that the attention of the learned judges of the High Court
           was not drawn to this finding; otherwise they would have
           considered this aspect of the matter before they proceeded to deal
           with the interesting question of law raised before them.
15. Mr Phadke fairly conceded that he could not effectively
           challenge the finding of the authority that no satisfactory
           explanations had been given for the delay in question. He,
           however, argued that the said finding would not effect the final
           decision because, according to him, once it is held that ignorance
           of law can be a sufficient cause, then the period until May 2,
           1952, would be covered by the appellants' ignorance about the
           true scope and effect of the provisions of
Section 70
of the
           Bombay Shops and Establishments Act. This position may be
           conceded. It is true that the true effect of the said section was not
           appreciated by either the workmen and Their union or the
           employers or the authorities under the
Factories Act
, or even by
           the industrial courts. But the question still remains whether the
           appellants are not required to explain the delay made by them
           after May 2, 1952. Mr Phadke says that it is not necessary for his
           clients to explain this delay. His argument is that what the
           relevant proviso really means is that if sufficient cause has been
           shown for not making the application within the prescribed
           period of six months then the application can be made any time
           thereafter. The statutory bar created by the prescribed limitation
           is removed once it is shown that there was sufficient cause for not
           making the application within the said period; and once that bar
           is removed, there is no further question of limitation and the
           applicant cannot be called upon to explain the subsequent delay.
That is the effect of the argument urged by Mr Phadke on the
           relevant proviso.
xxx                xxx        xxx
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 62 of 170
19. The proviso with which we are concerned has prescribed the
            limitation of six months for the institution of the application itself,
            and so the principle
laid down in
Lingley case can have no
            application to the question which we have to decide. Indeed, the
            present proviso is in substance similar to the provision in
Section
            5
of the Limitation Act and Mr Phadke has fairly conceded that
            there is consensus of judicial opinion on the question of the
            construction of
Section 5
.
It cannot be disputed that in dealing
            which the question of condoning delay under
Section 5
of the
            Limitation Act the party has to satisfy the court that he had
            sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal or making the
            application within the prescribed time, and this has always been
            understood to mean that the explanation has to cover the whole
            of the period of delay (vide
Ram Narain Joshi v. Parameswar
            Narain Mehta
. Therefore the finding recorded by the authority
            that the appellants have failed to establish sufficient cause for
            their inaction between May 2, 1952, and the respective dates on
            which they filed their present applications is fatal to their claim.
            That is why we think it unnecessary to consider the larger
            question of law which Mr Phadke sought to raise before us.
(Emphasis supplied)
94.   From the above, it is manifest that in Sitaram Ramcharan (supra) this Court

      has in so many words, held that “sufficient cause” for the purpose of

      condonation of delay in terms of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, would entail

      explaining the existence of such “sufficient cause” within the prescribed

      period of limitation till the actual date of filing of appeal or application, as

      the case may be. It is also manifest that the general considerations of

      negligence or inaction of the litigant during the prescribed period of

      limitation would be equally relevant for the purpose of determining

      “sufficient cause”.
Thus, it appears that the very Bench which rendered
Rewa
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                            Page 63 of 170
Coal Fields
(supra) failed to refer to its own earlier decision in Sitaram

      Ramcharan (supra).
f.     Condonation of Delay entails Extension of Limitation and not
        Exclusion.
95.   Even otherwise, one another reason why we find ourselves unable to agree

      with
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) insofar as its observations as regards the

      context of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act is concerned, may be understood

      from one another angle.
96.   The marginal note appended to
Section 5
of the Limitation Act is titled

      “Extension of prescribed period in certain cases”. The provision provides

      that where an appeal or application, as the case may be, is not filed within

      the prescribed period of limitation, the same may be admitted if “sufficient

      cause” for such failure is shown. The court may, in its discretion, proceed to

      condone the delay, if it is satisfied about the existence of such sufficient cause

      that resulted in the delay. In doing so, the court condones the delay in such

      filing by ‘extending’ the prescribed period of limitation in order to bring the

      application or appeal, as the case may be, in the eyes of law, within the

      limitation period, to then admit the same.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 64 of 170
97.   What is pertinent to take note of is that the condonation of delay does not

      result in exclusion of the period during which the sufficient cause persisted,

      it instead talks about extension of the period from the date when the

      prescribed period of limitation expired till the actual date of filing of the

      appeal or application. This gives the very first clue, that the expression

      “within such period” includes the prescribed period of limitation as-well. We

      say so, because, when the court condones the delay, it only extends that

      amount of period that would be required to bring the appeal or application,

      as the case may be, in the eyes of law, within the limitation period. Even if

      the “sufficient cause” occasioned on the very first day when the clock of

      limitation began to tick, the court would effectively only extend for that

      period, which was consumed after the expiry of limitation. Thus, the neither

      the expression “after the prescribed period of limitation” nor the period

      which is being extended by the court in condoning the delay, could be said

      to be the sole constituent of the expression “within such period”.
98.   It is no more res-integra, that for the purpose of
Section 5
of the Limitation

      Act, “sufficient cause” must have occasioned during the prescribed period of

      limitation, and even
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) concurs with the aforesaid,

      although to the limited extent that, only the sufficient cause on the last day

      of expiry of limitation is material.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 65 of 170
99.   This Court in
Shakuntala Devi Jain v. Kuntal Kumari
reported in 1968 SCC

      OnLine SC 139 held that
Section 5
of the Limitation Act gives the courts a

      discretion, where even if sufficient cause for the delay is made out, the court

      may refuse to condone the delay. The relevant observations read as under: -
“7. The next question is whether the delay in filing the certified
            copy or, to put it differently, the delay in refiling the appeal with
            the certified copy should be condoned under
Section 5
of the
            Limitation Act. If the appellant makes out sufficient cause for the
            delay, the Court may in its discretion condone the delay. As
laid
            down in
Krishna v. Chathappan “
Section 5
gives the courts a
            discretion which in respect of jurisdiction is to be exercised in
            the way in which judicial power and discretion ought to be
            exercised upon principles which are well understood; the words
            “sufficient cause” receiving a liberal construction so as to
            advance substantial justice when no negligence nor inaction nor
            want of bona fides is imputable to the appellant.”

                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
100.
In
Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. v. Subrata Borah Chowlek
, reported in (2010) 14

      SCC 419 this Court reiterated that even upon showing a sufficient cause, a

      party is not entitled to the condonation of delay as a matter of right, yet it is

      trite that in construing sufficient cause. The relevant observations read as

      under: -
“6. Having heard the learned counsel, we are of the opinion that
            in the instant case a sufficient cause had been made out for
            condonation of delay in filing the appeal and therefore, the High
            Court erred in declining to condone the same. It is true that even
            upon showing a sufficient cause, a party is not entitled to the
            condonation of delay as a matter of right, yet it is trite that in
            construing sufficient cause, the courts generally follow a liberal
            approach particularly when no negligence, inaction or mala
            fides can be imputed to the party.
(Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 66 of 170
101. From the above discussion, it is clear that the period which is being

     effectively extended is only ancillary to the “sufficient cause” that would

     have occasioned. Even the bare text of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, makes

     it abundantly clear that while “sufficient cause” has to be shown for the

     duration covered by the expression “within such period”, nowhere does the

     provision allude that the “period” which would be effectively extended by

     the court, in exercise of its discretion for condoning the delay under
Section

     5
of the Limitation Act would be the period for which “sufficient cause” is

     demonstrated. Rather, the expression “may be admitted after the prescribed

     period” clearly indicates that it is only that period, which has been subsumed

     after the expiry of limitation, as a result of the “sufficient cause” persisting,

     which would be effectively getting extended by way of condonation. Thus,

     while the expression “sufficient cause” and “within such period” are itself

     inextricably linked together, both these expressions have nothing to do with

     the manner in which the court proceeds to condone the delay i.e., the period

     which the court extends in exercise of its discretion under
Section 5
of the

     Limitation Act.
102. If the contention is accepted that “sufficient cause” has to be demonstrated

     only for that length of the period that is required to be extended, in order to

     admit the appeal or application, as the case may be, then it would result in
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 67 of 170
“extension” being conflated with “exclusion”. Although semantically both

     may appear to be one and the same, and even the end-result that would ensue

     if “extension” is read as “exclusion” would in substance be the same, as

     ultimately it would be that period after the expiry of limitation till the actual

     filing that would be extended or excluded to admit the appeal, yet there is

     very fine but discernible difference between the two, which if not

     appreciated, would completely warp the mechanism of
Section 5
of the

     Limitation Act, as envisaged by the legislature.
103. If the court in condoning the delay in exercise of its powers under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act is construed as excluding that period which was

     consumed after the expiry of limitation, in order to bring it within the

     “prescribed period of limitation”, for the limited purpose of admitting the

     appeal or application, as the case may be, then this would bring one

     significant change in how sufficient cause is to be demonstrated.
104. The net-effect of the aforesaid would be that, a litigant for seeking

     condonation of delay, would only be required to demonstrate that “sufficient

     cause” only for that amount of period which is necessary to be excluded so

     that it is able to bring its appeal or application, as the case may be, within the

     prescribed period of limitation. For illustration, say, the prescribed period of

     limitation was 90-days, and the actual date of filing took additional 10-days.

     Now, in such a scenario, if we read “extension” as “exclusion”, then
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 68 of 170
“sufficient cause” only has to be shown for the 10-days so that, once it is

     excluded, his filing would be deemed as if it was filed on the 90 th day.
105. Although the aforesaid, may not, on the surface seem like a drastic

     consequence if “extension” is read as “exclusion”, yet, it would have an

     underlying effect which would be contrary to the provision of
Section 5
of

     the Limitation Act, which we shall now explain. If “extension” is read as

     “exclusion” and a party is required to demonstrate “sufficient cause” only for

     that duration necessary to be excluded, for the appeal or application, to once

     again fall within the prescribed period of limitation, for it to be admitted, then

     the entire exercise contemplated under
Section 5
, would in simple terms

     involve showing “sufficient cause” such that after the exclusion, the litigant

     is once again put back into the “prescribed period of limitation”.
106. In other words, if the above interpretation is adopted then the litigant would

     only have to show “sufficient cause” for that period, which after excluding

     would at the very least put him back into the outermost date on which he

     could have filed the appeal or application i.e., the last day on which the

     limitation would have expired.
107. However, the power that the court exercises in condoning the delay, is not

     for the purpose of putting the litigant back into the position he would have

     enjoyed during the prescribed period of limitation. This is because, during
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 69 of 170
the prescribed period of limitation, the litigant is entitled, as a matter of right,

     to file the appeal or application, as the case may be, and the courts cannot

     object or refuse to admit the same.
108. However,
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, does not say that, once “sufficient

     cause” is established and the court is also satisfied about the same, then the

     appeal or application, has to be mandatorily be admitted. On the contrary, the

     provision, by use of the word “may” lays emphasis that even after the court

     is satisfied about the existence of a “sufficient cause”, it has the discretion to

     decide, whether to admit the appeal or application, as the case may be, or not.

     A catena of decisions of this Court including
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra) hold

     that “even after sufficient cause has been shown a party is not entitled to the

     condonation of delay in question as a matter of right ... if sufficient cause is

     shown then the court has to enquire whether in its discretion it should

     condone the delay”.
109. If at all, what is contemplated under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, is

     exclusion of the period consumed after the expiry of limitation for the filling

     of appeal or application, such that the litigant is put into the same position,

     he enjoyed on the last day of limitation, or any other day within the prescribed

     limitation, then where is the question of the courts still being able exercise

     discretion for deciding to admit or not admit such appeal or application.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                            Page 70 of 170
110.
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, also does not speak that the discretion

     conferred to the courts is limited only for determining if sufficient cause

     exists or not, and where it has in its discretion decided that such “sufficient

     cause” existed, it has to then mandatorily condone the delay. As succinctly

     put in
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra), even “if sufficient cause is shown then the

     court has to enquire whether in its discretion it should condone the delay”.
111. The discretion that the courts have been conferred under
Section 5
of the

     Limitation Act, is two-fold, for determining if “sufficient cause” existed and

     where the former is answered in the affirmative, then whether the case is a

     fit one for it to condone the delay, to admit the appeal or application as the

     case may be. Which is why, the legislature consciously used the word

     “extension” rather than “exclusion” in marginal note to
Section 5
of the

     Limitation Act.
112. To say, that the purpose for demonstrating “sufficient cause” is to exclude

     only that extent of period which would once again put the litigant back into

     the last day on which, he could have filed the appeal or application, would,

     in our opinion, gravely misconstrue the entire mechanism of
Section 5
of the

     Limitation Act. Thus, the expression “within such period” for this reason also

     cannot be possibly construed to mean the period from the last day of expiry

     of the limitation, till the actual date of filing of appeal or the application, as
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 71 of 170
understood by
Rewa Coal Fields
(supra). The phrase “extension” used in
Section 5
of the Limitation Act is not a misnomer.
113. It is for this reason that the decisions of this Court in Ajit Singh Thakur

     (supra) and
Ramkumar Choudhary
(supra) held that “sufficient cause” for

     the delay in filing of an appeal or application, as the case may be, has to be

     established by some event or circumstance that had arisen before the

     limitation expired and that the party seeking condonation has to explain the

     delay the entire continuum commencing from the point at which the

     limitation period first began to run, until the eventual filing of the appeal or

     application, as the case may be.
114. We may, with a view to obviate any confusion, clarify that the observations

     made by this Court in
Ramkumar Choudhary
(supra), particularly that “what

     events occurred after the 91st day till the last is of no consequence” should

     not be construed devoid of its context.
When this Court in
Ramkumar

     Choudhary
(supra) said that events after the expiry of limitation till the date

     of actual filing would be of no consequence, the same was made in view of

     the well-established rule that “sufficient cause must be establish that because

     of some event or circumstance arising before the limitation expired”.
The

     aforesaid observations of “what events occurred after the 91st day till the last

     is of no consequence” in
Ramkumar Choudhary
(supra) were made in the

     peculiar facts of that case, where the appellant had failed to assign any
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 72 of 170
“sufficient cause” occasioning during the period of limitation, which

      rendered the events occurring after the expiry of limitation as irrelevant.
115. However, as is manifest from the entire discussion above, for the purpose of

      condonation of delay in terms of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, the delay

      has to be explained by establishing the existence of “sufficient cause” for the

      entirety of the period from when the limitation began till the actual date of

      filing. In other words, if the period of limitation is 90-days, and the appeal is

      filed belatedly on the 100th day, then explanation has to be given for the entire

      100-days.
B.     What is to be understood by “sufficient cause” in
Section 5
of the
        Limitation.
116. As already discussed in the foregoing parts, for the purpose of seeking

      condonation of delay under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, the party has to

      demonstrate the existence of a “sufficient cause” “within the prescribed

      period” to the satisfaction of the court. Thus, establishment of “sufficient

      cause” is the first ingredient for the purpose of condonation of delay. Insofar,

      as what is meant by the phrase “sufficient cause”, neither
Section 5
nor the
Limitation Act
itself provide any guidance on what its constituent elements

      ought to be. Instead,
Section 5
leaves the task of determining appropriate

      reasons for seeking condonation of delay to judicial interpretation and
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 73 of 170
exercise of discretion upon the facts and individual circumstances of each

     case.
117. While there is no arithmetical formula, through decades of judicial

     application, certain yardsticks for judging the sufficiency of cause for

     condonation of delay have evolved. Mere good cause is not sufficient enough

     to turn back the clock and allow resuscitation of a claim otherwise barred by

     delay. The court ought to be cautious while undertaking such an exercise,

     being circumspect against condoning delay which is attributable to the

     applicant. Although the actual period of delay might be instructive, it is the

     explanation for the delay which would be the decisive factor.
118. The court must also desist from throwing the baby out with the bathwater. A

     justice-oriented approach must be prioritised over technicalities, as one

     motivation underlying such rules is to prevent parties from using dilatory

     tactics or abusing the judicial process. Pragmatism over pedanticism is

     therefore sometimes necessary, despite it appearing liberal or magnanimous.

     The expression “sufficient cause” should be given liberal construction so as

     to advance substantial justice.
119. The expression “sufficient cause” employed by the legislature is adequately

     elastic to enable the courts to apply the law in a meaningful manner which

     subserves the ends of justice — that being the life-purpose for the existence
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 74 of 170
of the institution of courts. Despite the liberal approach being adopted in such

     matters, which was termed justifiable, this Court lamented that the message

     had not percolated down to all the other courts in the hierarchy and,

     accordingly, emphasis was laid on the courts adopting a liberal and justice-

     oriented approach. [See:
Sheo Raj Singh v. Union of India
, (2023) 10 SCC

     531]
120. Sometimes, due to want of sufficient cause being shown or an acceptable

     explanation being proffered, delay of the shortest range may not be condoned

     whereas, in certain other cases, delay of long periods can be condoned if the

     explanation is satisfactory and acceptable. Of course, the courts must

     distinguish between an “explanation” and an “excuse”. An “explanation” is

     designed to give someone all of the facts and lay out the cause for something.

     It helps clarify the circumstances of a particular event and allows the person

     to point out that something that has happened is not his fault, if it is really

     not his fault. Care must, however, be taken to distinguish an “explanation”

     from an “excuse”. Although people tend to see “explanation” and “excuse”

     as the same thing and struggle to find out the difference between the two,

     there is a distinction which, though fine, is real. [See:
Sheo Raj Singh v.

     Union of India
, (2023) 10 SCC 531]
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 75 of 170
121. This Court in
Esha Bhattacharjee v. Managing Committee of

     Raghunathpur Nafar Academy & Ors
, reported in (2013) 12 SCC 649, after

     examining a plethora of decisions on what is meant by “sufficient cause”,

     summarized its principles as under: -
“21. From the aforesaid authorities the principles that can
            broadly be culled out are:
21.1. (i) There should be a liberal, pragmatic, justice-oriented,
            non-pedantic approach while dealing with an application for
            condonation of delay, for the courts are not supposed to legalise
            injustice but are obliged to remove injustice.
21.2. (ii) The terms “sufficient cause” should be understood in
            their proper spirit, philosophy and purpose regard being had to
            the fact that these terms are basically elastic and are to be
            applied in proper perspective to the obtaining fact-situation.
21.3. (iii) Substantial justice being paramount and pivotal the
            technical considerations should not be given undue and uncalled
            for emphasis.
21.4. (iv) No presumption can be attached to deliberate causation
            of delay but, gross negligence on the part of the counsel or
            litigant is to be taken note of.
21.5. (v) Lack of bona fides imputable to a party seeking
            condonation of delay is a significant and relevant fact.
            21.6. (vi) It is to be kept in mind that adherence to strict proof
            should not affect public justice and cause public mischief because
            the courts are required to be vigilant so that in the ultimate
            eventuate there is no real failure of justice.
21.7. (vii) The concept of liberal approach has to encapsulate the
            conception of reasonableness and it cannot be allowed a totally
            unfettered free play.
21.8. (viii) There is a distinction between inordinate delay and a
            delay of short duration or few days, for to the former doctrine of
            prejudice is attracted whereas to the latter it may not be
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 76 of 170
attracted. That apart, the first one warrants strict approach
           whereas the second calls for a liberal delineation.
21.9. (ix) The conduct, behaviour and attitude of a party relating
           to its inaction or negligence are relevant factors to be taken into
           consideration. It is so as the fundamental principle is that the
           courts are required to weigh the scale of balance of justice in
           respect of both parties and the said principle cannot be given a
           total go by in the name of liberal approach.
21.10. (x) If the explanation offered is concocted or the grounds
           urged in the application are fanciful, the courts should be vigilant
           not to expose the other side unnecessarily to face such a
           litigation.
21.11. (xi) It is to be borne in mind that no one gets away with
           fraud, misrepresentation or interpolation by taking recourse to
           the technicalities of law of limitation.
21.12. (xii) The entire gamut of facts are to be carefully
           scrutinised and the approach should be based on the paradigm
           of judicial discretion which is founded on objective reasoning
           and not on individual perception.
21.13. (xiii) The State or a public body or an entity representing
           a collective cause should be given some acceptable latitude.
22. To the aforesaid principles we may add some more guidelines
           taking note of the present day scenario. They are:
22.1. (a) An application for condonation of delay should be
           drafted with careful concern and not in a haphazard manner
           harbouring the notion that the courts are required to condone
           delay on the bedrock of the principle that adjudication of a lis on
           merits is seminal to justice dispensation system.
22.2. (b) An application for condonation of delay should not be
           dealt with in a routine manner on the base of individual
           philosophy which is basically subjective.
22.3. (c) Though no precise formula can be laid down regard
           being had to the concept of judicial discretion, yet a conscious
           effort for achieving consistency and collegiality of the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 77 of 170
adjudicatory system should be made as that is the ultimate
            institutional motto.
22.4. (d) The increasing tendency to perceive delay as a non-
serious matter and, hence, lackadaisical propensity can be
            exhibited in a nonchalant manner requires to be curbed, of
            course, within legal parameters.
122. The exceptional provision of condonation of delay on grounds of “sufficient

     cause” is couched as a manifestation of substantive justice. This Court in
Pathapati Subba Reddy (Died) by L.Rs. v. Special Deputy Collector (LA
),

     reported in 2024 SCC OnLine SC 513, summarized the principles governing

     the exceptions imagined under “sufficient cause” vis-à-vis substantive justice

     as under: -
“26. On a harmonious consideration of the provisions of the law,
            as aforesaid, and the law
laid down by
this Court, it is evident
            that:
(i)   Law of limitation is based upon public policy that there
                  should be an end to litigation by forfeiting the right to
                  remedy rather than the right itself;
(ii) A right or the remedy that has not been exercised or
                  availed of for a long time must come to an end or cease to
                  exist after a fixed period of time;
(iii) The provisions of the
Limitation Act
have to be construed
                  differently, such as
Section 3
has to be construed in a strict
                  sense whereas
Section 5
has to be construed liberally;
(iv) In order to advance substantial justice, though liberal
                  approach, justice-oriented approach or cause of
                  substantial justice may be kept in mind but the same cannot
                  be used to defeat the substantial law of limitation
                  contained in
Section 3
of the Limitation Act;
(v) Courts are empowered to exercise discretion to condone
                  the delay if sufficient cause had been explained, but that
                  exercise of power is discretionary in nature and may not
                  be exercised even if sufficient cause is established for
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 78 of 170
various factors such as, where there is inordinate delay,
                  negligence and want of due diligence;
(vi) Merely some persons obtained relief in similar matter, it
                  does not mean that others are also entitled to the same
                  benefit if the court is not satisfied with the cause shown for
                  the delay in filing the appeal;
(vii) Merits of the case are not required to be considered in
                  condoning the delay; and
(viii) Delay condonation application has to be decided on the
                  parameters laid down for condoning the delay and
                  condoning the delay for the reason that the conditions have
                  been imposed, tantamounts to disregarding the statutory
                  provision.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
123. From above, it is manifest that that the phrase “sufficient cause” in
Section

      5
of the Limitation Act is an expression of elastic import, incapable of

      precise definition, yet not without boundaries. Its purpose is to empower

      courts to advance the cause of justice by preventing genuine litigants from

      being shut out on account of unavoidable delays. At the same time, it is

      equally clear that the phrase is not a charter for indolence or a device to

      revive stale claims that the law of limitation otherwise extinguishes.
124. The burden to establish sufficient cause lies upon the party seeking

      condonation, and the court must be satisfied that the cause is real, bona fide,

      and free of negligence. Sufficiency of cause is to be determined

      contextually, on the totality of circumstances, with due regard to the

      conduct of the applicant and the prejudice caused to the opposite party. The
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 79 of 170
inquiry is not mechanical but principled, resting on the dual pillars of bona

      fides and diligence.
125. The expression “sufficient cause” is not itself a loose panacea for the ill of

      pressing negligent and stale claims. The expression is to be construed with

      justice-oriented flexibility so as not to punish innocent litigants for

      circumstances beyond their control.
126. Courts must not condone gross negligence, deliberate inaction, or casual

      indifference, for to do so would undermine the maxim interest reipublicae

      ut sit finis litium and destabilise the certainty that limitation law seeks to

      secure.
127. The expression “sufficient cause” must be construed in a manner that

      advances substantial justice while preserving the discipline of limitation.

      The courts are not to be swayed by sympathy or technical rigidity, but rather

      by a judicious appraisal of whether the applicant acted with reasonable

      diligence in pursuing the remedy. Where explanation is bona fide,

      plausible, and consistent with ordinary human conduct, courts have leaned

      towards condonation. Where negligence, want of good faith, or a casual

      approach is discernible, condonation has been refused.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 80 of 170
i.    Length of the delay may be instructive but not determinative.
128. When it comes to condonation of delay, the length of delay is immaterial,

      and what matters is the acceptability of the explanation. A short delay may

      still warrant dismissal if unsupported by sufficient cause, whereas even a

      long delay may be condoned if justified by circumstances demonstrating

      bona fides.
129. Delay by itself is not inherently indicative of negligence. In certain cases,

      unavoidable circumstances such as illness, fraud, miscommunication, or

      bona fide mistake may stretch over long periods, yet remain excusable if

      they are explained with candour and supported by material. Conversely, an

      unexplained delay of even a few days may reveal inaction or deliberate

      disregard of statutory timelines, and therefore disentitle the party to

      indulgence.
130. The quantum of delay has no direct nexus in law with sufficiency of the

      cause. The law are independent and diverse factors. Hence the extent of

      delay should not determine whether the cause is sufficient or not.
Section 5
of the Limitation Act does not say that such discretion can be exercised only

      if the delay is within a certain limit. Length of delay is no matter,

      acceptability of the explanation is the criterion. The criterion for condoning

      the delay is sufficiency of reason and not the length of the delay.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 81 of 170
131. The decisive factor is the adequacy of the cause shown, not the length of

      delay. What is critical is whether the party seeking condonation acted with

      reasonable diligence during the prescribed period and whether the reasons

      advanced demonstrate a genuine inability to file within time. Thus, the test

      is qualitative rather than quantitative.
132. This is not to say that the length of delay is irrelevant. A long delay naturally

      casts a heavier burden on the applicant to furnish cogent, credible, and

      convincing explanations. The proof required becomes stricter in proportion

      to the delay. The longer the time elapsed, the stronger the justification that

      must be put forth. Hence, length is instructive in determining the degree of

      scrutiny, but it is not determinative of the outcome.
133. The length of the delay functions as a contextual indicator but not a

      determinative factor. It alerts the court to the degree of rigour required in

      examining the explanation, yet the ultimate focus remains on whether

      “sufficient cause” has been shown. The doctrine thereby preserves both the

      integrity of statutory timelines and the imperative of doing justice in

      deserving cases.
134. Thus, in exercising discretion under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act the

      courts should adopt a pragmatic approach. A distinction must be made

      between a case where the delay is inordinate and a case where the delay is
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 82 of 170
of a few days. Whereas in the former case the consideration of prejudice to

      the other side will be a relevant factor so the case calls for a more cautious

      approach but in the latter case, no such consideration may arise and such a

      case deserves a liberal approach. No hard-and-fast rule can be
laid down in
this regard. The court has to exercise the discretion on the facts of each case

      keeping in mind that in construing the expression “sufficient cause”, the

      principle of advancing substantial justice is of prime importance.



ii.   Technical Considerations vis-à-vis Substantive Justice.
135. In construing “sufficient cause” it must be borne in mind that rules of

      procedure are handmaids of justice. Procedural rigidity should not become

      an instrument of injustice. In the context of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act,

      this balance assumes special significance. Courts have repeatedly

      underscored that while limitation provisions are founded on sound

      principles of finality and certainty, their application cannot be divorced

      from the overarching objective of ensuring that litigants are not shut out

      from the doors of justice merely on account of technicalities.
136. When technical considerations of limitation conflict with the imperative of

      substantial justice, the latter should ordinarily prevail. Rules of limitation

      are not designed to destroy the rights of parties but to prevent inordinate
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 83 of 170
delay in seeking remedies. Thus, the interpretation of “sufficient cause”

      must be liberal and purposive, aimed at advancing the cause of justice rather

      than defeating it. This is why the courts, while construing applications for

      condonation of delay, emphasize the bona fides of the applicant over the

      sheer arithmetical length of the delay.
137. Where strict adherence to these rules results in injustice, the Court is duty-
bound to apply a liberal interpretation of “sufficient cause” so as to balance

      technical requirements with the demands of justice. A litigant does not

      stand to benefit by lodging an appeal late, and therefore, a pragmatic and

      justice-oriented approach must inform the judicial discretion under Section
5. This decision continues to be the most frequently cited authority for the

      proposition that the judiciary should incline towards justice rather than

      technicality. Therefore, when courts interpret “sufficient cause,” they are

      expected to exercise discretion in a manner that fosters justice, fairness, and

      equity, keeping in mind the realities of litigation.
138. When a Court of Law deals with an application to condone the delay filed

      under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, such application will have to be

      generally viewed in a liberal and lenient way to do substantial justice

      between the parties.
Section 5
of the Limitation Act must be liberally

      construed and applied so as to advance substantial justice. It is undoubtedly

      true that a justice oriented approach is necessary while deciding application
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 84 of 170
under
Section 5
of Limitation. However, it cannot be said that in every case

      delay must necessarily be condoned. It is a condition precedent for
Section

      5
of the Limitation Act that there must be a sufficient reason for condoning

      the delay.
139. However, while substantial justice must be advanced, the law of limitation

      is equally binding, and “sufficient cause” must be shown in substance, not

      in empty form. This ensures that the balance between justice and certainty

      is not skewed in favour of unmerited litigants.
140. However, at the same time, the courts must be mindful that strong case on

      merits is no ground for condonation of delay. When an application for

      condonation of delay is placed before the court, the inquiry is confined to

      whether “sufficient cause” has been demonstrated for not filing the appeal

      or proceeding within the prescribed period of limitation. The merits of the

      underlying case are wholly extraneous to this inquiry. If courts were to look

      into the merits of the matter at this stage, it would blur the boundaries

      between preliminary procedural questions and substantive adjudication,

      thereby conflating two distinct stages of judicial scrutiny. The purpose of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act is not to determine whether the claim is

      legally or factually strong, but only whether the applicant had a reasonable

      justification for the delay.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 85 of 170
141. Test of “sufficient cause” cannot be substituted by an examination of the

      merits of the case. Condonation of delay is a matter of discretion based on

      explanation for the delay, not on the prospects of success in the case. If

      merits are considered, a litigant with a stronger case may be favoured with

      condonation despite negligence, while a weaker case may be rejected even

      if sufficient cause is made out. This would lead to an inequitable and

      inconsistent application of the law, undermining the uniform standard that

      the doctrine of limitation is designed to maintain.
142. Another practical reason why merits must not be considered at the stage of

      delay condonation is that it risks prejudicing the mind of the court against

      one party even before the matter is substantively heard. By glancing into

      merits prematurely, the court may inadvertently form a view that colours

      the fairness of the subsequent adjudication. The judicial discipline required

      at this stage demands that only the cause for delay be scrutinized, and

      nothing more. This ensures that the ultimate adjudication of rights occurs

      in a neutral and unprejudiced setting.
143. The law of limitation is meant to apply uniformly across cases, regardless

      of the intrinsic strength or weakness of the claims involved. To import

      merits into condonation proceedings would effectively dilute this

      uniformity.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 86 of 170
C.      In what circumstances can the exercise of discretion to condone the
        delay be interfered with?
144. One another submission that was canvassed on behalf of the respondents

      herein is that, where the court of first instance was satisfied as to the

      existence of “sufficient cause” for not filing the appeal or application, as

      the case may be, during the prescribed period of time and, on that basis,

      exercised its discretion in condoning the delay, then, in such cases, a court

      siting in appeal ought not to ordinarily interfere with the subjective view

      and prerogative of the court below in condoning the delay.
145. Ms. Suri, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents, submitted

      that, in the present case, the High Court, whilst passing the impugned

      judgment and order, was satisfied with the explanation given by the

      respondents herein as to the existence of a sufficient cause which had

      prevented them from filing the appeal within the period of limitation, and

      that it was only after due consideration of all the material on record that the

      High Court proceeded to exercise its discretion to condone the delay in the

      filing thereof. She would submit that once the High Court, in its wisdom

      had, found the case at hand to be a fit one for the exercise of its discretion

      in condoning the delay, and had accordingly passed such an order, then this
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 87 of 170
Court ought to refrain from interfering with the subjective view taken by

      the High Court.
146. In this regard, the learned Senior Counsel drew are attention to three

      decisions of this Court in Sheo Raj Singh (D) Tr. Lrs. v. Union of India,

      reported in (2023) 10 SCC 531, Manjunath Anandappa urf.
Shivappa

      Hanasi v. Tammanasa & Ors.
reported in (
2003) 10 SCC 390 and Gujarat

      Steel Tubes Ltd. v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha
reported in (1980)

      2 SCC 593.
147. The expression “may be admitted” vests in the court a discretion, the

      exercise of which is pre-conditioned to the proof of a “sufficient cause” for

      the failure to file the appeal or application, as the case may be, within the

      prescribed period of limitation. It enables a court to either admit or reject

      any appeal or application, for being barred by limitation, even if “sufficient

      cause” is shown to its satisfaction. The idea behind vesting the courts with

      such discretion is to ensure that the power to condone any delay in the filing

      of an appeal or application, as the case may be, is exercised only to advance

      substantial justice, where no prejudice or injustice would meted from such

      delay being condoned. Condonation of delay is not a matter of right but a

      discretion of the court.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 88 of 170
148. The recourse to
Section 5
of the Limitation Act for condonation of delay is

      not an inter-parte proceeding. Condonation of delay essentially is a

      question that the court has to decide on the basis of the material on records

      and the relevant law. The role of the parties is only confined to brining on

      record the relevant material to assist the court in exercising its discretion.

      Unlike adversarial proceedings in a lis where competing claims and

      counterclaims of parties are adjudicated, the adjudication under
Section 5
is primarily inquisitorial in nature, with the court being called upon to

      assess, on an objective consideration of facts and circumstances, whether

      the explanation offered is sufficient and reasonable so as to warrant an

      extension of time, from the material it has relied upon for furnishing such

      explanation.
149. The Privy Council in
Krishnasami Panikondar v. S.R.M.A.R. Ramasami

      Chettiar
reported in 1917 SCC OnLine PC 70 held that an order of a court

      excusing the delay is not final or precluded from being questioned, and that

      it is always open to reconsideration at the instance of the party so affected

      by it. The relevant observations read as under: -
“It has been argued that the admission of the appeal by Sankaran
           Nair, J., was final, and that the Division Bench had no
           jurisdiction at the hearing of the appeal to reconsider the
           question whether the delay was excusable. But this order of
           admission was made not only in the absence of Ramasami
           Chettiar, the contesting Respondent, but without notice to him.
           And yet in terms it purported to deprive him of a valuable right,
           for it put in peril the finality of the decision in his favour, so that
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                            Page 89 of 170
to preclude him from questioning its propriety would amount to
           a denial of justice. It must, therefore, in common fairness be
           regarded as a tacit term of an order like the present that though
           unqualified in expression it should be open to reconsideration at
           the instance of the party affected; and this view is sanctioned by
           the practice of the Courts in India.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
150. The aforesaid observations came to be endorsed by a Five judge-Bench of

      this Court in
Dinabandhu Sahu
(supra). The relevant observations read as

      under: -
8. [...] In this respect, the position under the proviso to Section
           85 is materially different from that under
Section 5
of the
           Limitation Act, under which an order excusing delay is not final,
           and is liable to be questioned by the respondent at a later stage.
(Vide the decision of the Privy Council in
Krishnasami
           Pandikondar v. Ramasami Chettiar
.)
151.
In
Shanti Prasad Gupta v. Dy. Director of Consolidation
reported in 1981

      Supp SCC 73, this Court held since the issue, whether there is a sufficient

      cause or not is a question of fact, where an order has been made under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act by the lower court in the exercise of its

      discretion allowing or refusing an application to extend time, it cannot be

      interfered with in revision, unless the lower court has acted with material

      irregularity or contrary to law or has come to that conclusion on no

      evidence. The relevant observations read as under: -
“3. We find that Contention (1) is not correct. The order against
           which Gian Chand Bansari went in revision before the Director
           did not fall within the purview of Section 9-A of the U.P.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 90 of 170
Consolidation of Holdings Act
and, as such, was not appealable
           under
Section 11
of that Act. We however find a good deal of
           force in the second contention of the appellant. Whether or not
           there is sufficient cause for condonation of delay, is a question of
           fact dependent upon the facts and circumstances of a particular
           case, and the proposition is well-settled that when order has been
           made under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act by the lower court in
           the exercise of its discretion allowing or refusing an application
           to extend time, it cannot be interfered with in revision, unless the
           lower court has acted with material irregularity or contrary to
           law or has come to that conclusion on no evidence. [...]”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
152. This Court in
N. Balakrishnan
(supra) held that once the court below

      accepts the explanation of delay as sufficient, the superior court should not

      disturb such finding unless the exercise of discretion was on wholly

      untenable grounds or arbitrary or perverse. However, where the first court

      refuses to condone the delay, there the superior court would be free to

      consider the cause shown for the delay afresh to come to its own finding de

      hors the conclusion of the court below. The relevant observations read as

      under: -
“9. It is axiomatic that condonation of delay is a matter of
           discretion of the court.
Section 5
of the Limitation Act does not
           say that such discretion can be exercised only if the delay is
           within a certain limit. Length of delay is no matter, acceptability
           of the explanation is the only criterion. Sometimes delay of the
           shortest range may be uncondonable due to a want of acceptable
           explanation whereas in certain other cases, delay of a very long
           range can be condoned as the explanation thereof is satisfactory.
           Once the court accepts the explanation as sufficient, it is the
           result of positive exercise of discretion and normally the superior
           court should not disturb such finding, much less in revisional
           jurisdiction, unless the exercise of discretion was on wholly
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 91 of 170
untenable grounds or arbitrary or perverse. But it is a different
           matter when the first court refuses to condone the delay. In such
           cases, the superior court would be free to consider the cause
           shown for the delay afresh and it is open to such superior court
           to come to its own finding even untrammelled by the conclusion
           of the lower court.
10. The reason for such a different stance is thus:
“The primary function of a court is to adjudicate the
               dispute between the parties and to advance substantial
               justice. The time-limit fixed for approaching the court in
               different situations is not because on the expiry of such
               time a bad cause would transform into a good cause.””

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
153.
In
Mithailal Dalsangar Singh v. Annabai Devram Kini
reported in (2003)

      10 SCC 691 this Court held that the finding of the court below on the

      question of availability of “sufficient cause” ought to be given weight and

      should not normally be interfered with in superior jurisdiction. The relevant

      observations read as under: -
“9. The courts have to adopt a justice-oriented approach
           dictated by the uppermost consideration that ordinarily a litigant
           ought not to be denied an opportunity of having a lis determined
           on merits unless he has, by gross negligence, deliberate inaction
           or something akin to misconduct, disentitled himself from seeking
           the indulgence of the court. The opinion of the trial Judge
           allowing a prayer for setting aside abatement and his finding on
           the question of availability of “sufficient cause” within the
           meaning of sub-rule (2) of Rule 9 of Order 22 and of
Section 5
of
           the Limitation Act, 1963 deserves to be given weight, and once
           arrived at would not normally be interfered with by superior
           jurisdiction.”
                                              (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 92 of 170
154. A coordinate Bench of this Court in a recent decision of
Sheo Raj Singh
(supra) speaking through Hon’ble Justice Dipankar Datta, held that there

      exists a fine distinction between when a court is hearing application for

      condonation of delay and when it is sitting in appeal over the exercise of

      discretion granting condonation of delay. In the former, the only material

      question is whether the delay be condoned or not, whereas in the latter the

      question is confined to if there has been proper exercise of discretion in

      favour of grant of such prayer. It further cautioned that a court of appeal

      should not ordinarily interfere with the discretion exercised by the courts

      below. The relevant observations read as under: -
“33. Be that as it may, it is important to bear in mind that we are
           not hearing an application for condonation of delay but sitting in
           appeal over a discretionary order of the High Court granting the
           prayer for condonation of delay. In the case of the former,
           whether to condone or not would be the only question whereas in
           the latter, whether there has been proper exercise of discretion
           in favour of grant of the prayer for condonation would be the
           question. Law is fairly well-settled that “a court of appeal should
           not ordinarily interfere with the discretion exercised by the
           courts below”. If any authority is required, we can profitably
           refer to the decision in
Manjunath Anandappa v. Tammanasa
,
           which in turn relied on the decision in
Gujarat Steel Tubes
           Ltd. v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha
where it has been
           held that:
“an appellate power interferes not when the
                    order appealed is not right but only when it is
                    clearly wrong”.”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 93 of 170
155.
In
Manjunath Anandappa
(supra) this Court reiterated that a court of

      appeal should not ordinarily interfere with the discretion exercised by the

      courts below. The relevant observations read as under: -
“36. It is now also well settled that a court of appeal should not
           ordinarily interfere with the discretion exercised by the courts
           below.
37. In U.P. Coop. Federation Ltd. v. Sunder Bros., the law is
           stated in the following terms:
“8. It is well established that where the discretion vested
               in the court under Section 34 of the Indian Arbitration Act
               has been exercised by the lower court the appellate court
               should be slow to interfere with the exercise of that
               discretion. In dealing with the matter raised before it at
               the appellate stage the appellate court would normally
               not be justified in interfering with the exercise of the
               discretion under appeal solely on the ground that if it had
               considered the matter at the trial stage it may have come
               to a contrary conclusion. If the discretion has been
               exercised by the trial court reasonably and in a judicial
               manner the fact that the appellate court would have taken
               a different view may not justify interference with the trial
               court's exercise of discretion. As is often said, it is
               ordinarily not open to the appellate court to substitute its
               own exercise of discretion for that of the trial Judge; but
               if it appears to the appellate court that in exercising its
               discretion the trial court has acted unreasonably or
               capriciously or has ignored relevant facts then it would
               certainly be open to the appellate court to interfere with
               the trial court's exercise of discretion. This principle is
               well established; but, as has been observed by Viscount
               Simon, L.C., in Charles Osenton & Co. v. Johnston

                    ‘The law as to the reversal by a court of appeal
                    of an order made by a Judge below in the
                    exercise of his discretion is well established,
                    and any difficulty that arises is due only to the
                    application of well-settled principles in an
                    individual case.’”
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                            Page 94 of 170
(Emphasis supplied)
156.
In
Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd. v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha
reported in (1980) 2 SCC 593, this Court speaking through the inimitable

      V.R. Krishna Iyer J. (as his Lordship then was), observed that “an appellate

      power interferes when the order appealed is not right but only when it is

      clearly wrong”. The erudite observations read as under: -
“73. While the remedy under
Article 226
is extraordinary and is
           of Anglo-Saxon vintage, it is not a carbon copy of English
           processes.
Article 226
is a sparing surgery but the lancet
           operates where injustice suppurates. While traditional restraints
           like availability of alternative remedy hold back the court, and
           judicial power should not ordinarily rush in where the other two
           branches fear to tread, judicial daring is not daunted where
           glaring injustice demands even affirmative action. The wide
           words of
Article 226
are designed for service of the lowly
           numbers in their grievances if the subject belongs to the court's
           province and the remedy is appropriate to the judicial process.
           There is a native hue about
Article 226
, without being
           anglophilic or anglophobic in attitude. Viewed from this
           jurisprudential perspective, we have to be cautious both in not
           overstepping as if
Article 226
were as large as an appeal and not
           failing to intervene where a grave error has crept in. Moreover,
           we sit here in appeal over the High Court's judgment. And an
           appellate power interferes not when the order appealed is not
           right but only when it is clearly wrong. The difference is real,
           though fine.
(Emphasis supplied)
157. However, the aforesaid observations must not be viewed in isolation from

      the immediately preceding paragraph. The observations therein are

      significant, for a holistic understanding. This Court in
Gujarat Steel Tubes
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 95 of 170
(supra) whilst holding the aforesaid, elaborated on when a court in appellate

      jurisdiction may be compelled to interfere with the order of a court below.
It observed that where such order was vitiated by the fundamental flaws of

      gross miscarriage of Justice, absence of legal evidence, perverse misreading

      of facts, serious errors of law on the face of the order, jurisdictional failure,

      and any other defects of like nature, the appellate court would be justified

      to intervene. The relevant observations read as under: -
“72. Once we assume that the jurisdiction of the arbitrator to
           enquire into the alleged misconduct was exercised, was there any
           ground under
Article 226
of the Constitution to demolish that
           holding? Every wrong order cannot be righted merely because it
           is wrong. It can be quashed only if it is vitiated by the
           fundamental flaws of gross miscarriage of Justice, absence of
           legal evidence, perverse misreading of facts, serious errors of
           law on the face of the order, jurisdictional failure and the like.”

                                                (Emphasis supplied)
158. Deciding whether there was any proper and judicious exercise of discretion

      to condone the delay or not, is a slippery slope. Despite lengthy cautionary

      tales from this Court of judicial restraint in wantonly interfering with the

      subjective view of a court below, having been preached for time

      immemorial, it is plausible for an appellate court to falter in adhering to the

      same.
159. We are in complete agreement with the decision of this Court in
Sheo Raj

      Singh
(supra) as regards the significance of the distinction in scope when a
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 96 of 170
court is hearing application for condonation of delay and when it is sitting

      in appeal over the exercise of discretion granting condonation of delay.
160. It is no more res integra that where a court below refused to condone the

      delay, then the court sitting in appeal would be entitled to consider if delay

      should be condoned or not afresh, notwithstanding the decision of the lower

      court. However, some weight and importance would have to be given to the

      reasons which swayed the court below from refusing to exercise its

      discretion. Because refusal to condone the delay is also, nevertheless an

      exercise of discretion to not exercise discretion. However, the scope,

      available to the appellate court to substitute its findings in such scenarios

      would enjoy a considerable degree of play in its joints.
161. However, where a court is sitting in appeal over the exercise of discretion

      granting condonation of delay, it is only required to see if there was a proper

      exercise of discretion by the courts below and if the same was for advancing

      the cause of justice. But the question that we ask ourselves is, what is meant

      by “proper exercise of discretion”? What does the enquiry into the propriety

      of discretion encompass?
162. Proper exercise of discretion in condoning the delay connotes that the such

      exercise was not improper or unwarranted. This as a naturally corollary

      would open up an inquiry into the fundamental constituents or ingredients
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 97 of 170
necessary for the exercise of power to condone delay. As such it would

      require the appellate court to see if the sufficient cause had occasioned

      during the prescribed period of limitation, if the explanation offered

      inspires confidence, if the court below in construing “sufficient cause” had

      ventured into extraneous considerations. Likewise, where a lower court’s

      decision in accepting the “sufficient cause” is either contrary to the law or

      suffers from any material irregularity or is vulnerable for lack of evidence,

      then such an order condoning the delay would be a fit one to be interfered

      with by the appellate court.
163. Thus, a two pronged inquiry is required by the appellate court; first, into

      the existence of a “sufficient cause” and secondly, into the exercise of

      discretion itself, where the first test is satisfied.
164. This would necessarily entail the appellate court to look into the material

      on record, the contents of the explanation that had swayed the mind of the

      court below. However, the extent to which the court sitting in appeal is to

      look into the same is confined to ascertaining whether the view taken by

      the court below is forthcoming and plausible or not. The observations “but

      if it appears to the appellate court that in exercising its discretion the trial

      court has acted unreasonably or capriciously or has ignored relevant facts

      then it would certainly be open to the appellate court to interfere with the

      trial court's exercise of discretion” made in
Manjunath Anandappa
(supra)
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 98 of 170
bolster this view. Thus, the appellate court must see if the material on record

      inspires confidence for accepting the plea of “sufficient cause” and the

      explanation offered in that regard for the entirety of the period from when

      the limitation began till the actual date of filing. If the lower court had

      accepted the explanation capriciously or without proper legal material to

      support its decision, then the same may be interfered with.
165. However, we again at the cost of repetition, make it clear, that the entire

      purpose this enquiry is only to see if the view that was arrived at by the

      court below could have been taken by it, from the material on record, had

      it been in seisin of the matter as a court of first instance, or had the court

      below refused the prayer for condonation of delay. Once the appellate court

      is of the opinion that the view arrived at by the court of below is plausible

      and not contrary to the law, it would not be open for it to interfere with the

      same, merely because another view is also equally plausible.
166. The role of the appellate court is limited to assessing the material on record,

      and to satisfy itself that the order passed by the court below is not vitiated

      due to any material irregularity, want of evidence, extraneous

      considerations, failure to take into consideration any relevant fact, or being

      contrary to the law of the land, which inevitably includes if the ingredients

      of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act were met or not. It is to ensure that a plea
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 99 of 170
of “sufficient cause” is not accepted superficially merely because some

      explanation was offered by looking into the material that constituted such

      sufficient cause.
167. Once, the material on record lend support to the view arrived at by the court

      below, the enquiry of the appellate court into the material on record ends.
Thereafter, what remains to be seen is only the exercise of discretion by the

      court below, which warrants a careful and delicate approach from the

      appellate court. This is because acceptance of the explanation as a sufficient

      cause is the result of a positive exercise of discretion and normally the

      appellate court should not disturb such exercise of discretion, unless the

      exercise of discretion was on wholly waterable grounds or arbitrary or

      perverse.
168. In this regard, what the appellate court has to see is that the discretion that

      was exercised by the court below, was not done in a mechanical or routine

      manner and without any application of mind as to whether such an exercise

      would advance the cause of justice or lead to miscarriage of justice. The

      exercise of discretion must have been in a reasonable manner, and should

      not have resulted in any grave prejudice to the other side. The test is to is if

      the exercise of discretion was patently wrong or not, and ordinarily the

      appellate court will be slow and circumspect to substitute its own opinion

      on the exercise of discretion, once it is satisfied that the view of the court
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 100 of 170
below in accepting the plea of sufficient cause was plausible. If it is found

      that in exercising the discretion to condone the delay, the court below had

      lost sight of a general rule or misdirected itself as to the applicability of the

      rule, then it will be deemed to have misdirected itself as to the law

      applicable to the case, and the appellate court will interfere and remit the

      case or itself exercise the discretion.
169. To sum up, the appellate court cannot embark upon an inquiry to enter a

      finding based on its likes or dislikes. The true test is to see, if it had been

      up to the appellate court, could the delay have been plausibly condoned for

      the same reason that was assigned by the court below, by looking into the

      material on record to see if the ingredients of
Section 5
of the Limitation

      Act were fulfilled or not. If the ingredients of the provision is found to not

      have been fulfilled, the appellate court can and ought to interfere with the

      order of the court below.
170. However, if the aforesaid is answered in an affirmative, all that remains to

      be seen is that the discretion that was exercised in condoning the delay was

      not done mechanically, arbitrarily or capriciously, and was exercised for

      the purpose of advancing the cause of justice. Only where the exercise of

      discretion was clearly wrong, would the court sitting in appeal, interfere

      with the same.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 101 of 170
D.    There is no room for largesse for State lethargy and leisure under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act.
171. The next submission that was advanced on behalf of the respondents herein

      is that, in matters pertaining to condonation of delay, a certain degree of

      leeway ought to be accorded to the Government and Public Authorities

      owing to the innate complexities in the way the State apparatus functions.

      The argument is that due to the inherent bureaucracy and involvement of

      various departments of different hierarchy which are endemic to the

      functioning of the State and its instrumentalities, unavoidable delays tend

      to crop up even without any deliberate intention, and thus, the courts ought

      to be pragmatic and liberal where the State or any of its instrumentalities is

      seeking condonation of delay in the filing of the appeal or application, as

      the case may be. In this regard, reliance was placed on the decision of this

      Court in
G. Ramegowda, Major & Ors. v. Special Land Acquisition

      Officer, Bangalore
reported in (1988) 2 SCC 142.
i.    View on the subject of Condonation of Delay prior to the decision of
      Postmaster General.
172. Prior to the landmark decision of this Court in Postmaster General v.
Living Media India Ltd., reported in (2012) 3 SCC 563, the practice that
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 102 of 170
was in place consistently leaned in favour of affording a degree of latitude

      to the State and its instrumentalities in matters of condonation of delay. The

      rationale underlying such an approach was the recognition of the

      peculiarities of governmental functioning, which, unlike private litigants, is

      impersonal, heavily layered, and subject to multiple levels of procedural

      clearances before culminating into a decision.
173. As early as in
Special Tehsildar, Land Acquisition v. K.V. Ayisumma
,

      reported in (1996) 10 SCC 634, a two-Judge Bench of this Court

      emphasized that since the State represents the collective cause of the public,

      any delay on its part ought not to be viewed through the same lens as that

      of a private party. It observed that adoption of a strict standard of proof in

      respect of the State or its instrumentalities, where no one takes personal

      responsibility in processing the matters expeditiously, would lead to grave

      miscarriage of public justice. Thus, it held that in such circumstances, the

      correct approach to be adopted is to be pragmatic and condone the delay

      without insisting upon explaining every day's delay. The relevant

      observations read as under: -
“2. It is now settled law that when the delay was occasioned at
           the behest of the Government, it would be very difficult to explain
           the day-to-day delay. The transaction of the business of the
           Government was being done leisurely by officers who had no or
           evince no personal interest at different levels. No one takes
           personal responsibility in processing the matters expeditiously.
           As a fact at several stages, they take their own time to reach a
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 103 of 170
decision. Even in spite of pointing at the delay, they do not take
           expeditious action for ultimate decision in filing the appeal. This
           case is one of such instances. It is true that
Section 5
of the
           Limitation Act envisages explanation of the delay to the
           satisfaction of the court and in matters of
Limitation Act
made no
           distinction between the State and the citizen.
Nonetheless
           adoption of strict standard of proof leads to grave miscarriage of
           public justice. It would result in public mischief by skilful
           management of delay in the process of filing the appeal. The
           approach of the Court should be pragmatic but not pedantic.
           Under those circumstances, the Subordinate Judge has rightly
           adopted correct approach and had condoned the delay without
           insisting upon explaining every day's delay in filing the review
           application in the light of the law
laid down by
this Court. The
           High Court was not right in setting aside the order. Delay was
           rightly condoned.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
174. Likewise, in
State of Haryana v. Chandra Mani
, reported in (1996) 3 SCC

      132, this Court reiterated that some latitude must be shown to the State and

      its instrumentalities in matters of condonation of delay. It observed that “the

      State represents the collective cause of the community” and so a pragmatic

      view ought to be adopted while dealing with applications for condonation

      of delay filed by public authorities. It further emphasised that technicalities

      of limitation should not result in grave injustice to the public interest,

      especially where the delay was not tainted by mala fides. The relevant

      observations read as under: -
“11. It is notorious and common knowledge that delay in more
           than 60 per cent of the cases filed in this Court — be it by private
           party or the State — are barred by limitation and this Court
           generally adopts liberal approach in condonation of delay
           finding somewhat sufficient cause to decide the appeal on merits.
           It is equally common knowledge that litigants including the State
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 104 of 170
are accorded the same treatment and the law is administered in
           an even-handed manner. When the State is an applicant, praying
           for condonation of delay, it is common knowledge that on
           account of impersonal machinery and the inherited bureaucratic
           methodology imbued with the note-making, file-pushing, and
           passing-on-the-buck ethos, delay on the part of the State is less
           difficult to understand though more difficult to approve, but the
           State represents collective cause of the community. It is axiomatic
           that decisions are taken by officers/agencies proverbially at slow
           pace and encumbered process of pushing the files from table to
           table and keeping it on table for considerable time causing delay
           — intentional or otherwise — is a routine. Considerable delay of
           procedural red-tape in the process of their making decision is a
           common feature. Therefore, certain amount of latitude is not
           impermissible. If the appeals brought by the State are lost for
           such default no person is individually affected but what in the
           ultimate analysis suffers, is public interest. The expression
           “sufficient cause” should, therefore, be considered with
           pragmatism in justice-oriented approach rather than the
           technical detection of sufficient cause for explaining every day's
           delay. The factors which are peculiar to and characteristic of the
           functioning of the governmental conditions would be cognizant
           to and requires adoption of pragmatic approach in justice-
           oriented process. The court should decide the matters on merits
           unless the case is hopelessly without merit. No separate
           standards to determine the cause laid by the State vis-à-vis
           private litigant could be laid to prove strict standards of sufficient
           cause. The Government at appropriate level should constitute
           legal cells to examine the cases whether any legal principles are
           involved for decision by the courts or whether cases require
           adjustment and should authorise the officers to take a decision or
           give appropriate permission for settlement. In the event of
           decision to file appeal needed prompt action should be pursued
           by the officer responsible to file the appeal and he should be
           made personally responsible for lapses, if any. Equally, the State
           cannot be put on the same footing as an individual. The
           individual would always be quick in taking the decision whether
           he would pursue the remedy by way of an appeal or application
           since he is a person legally injured while State is an impersonal
           machinery working through its officers or servants. Considered
           from this perspective, it must be held that the delay of 109 days
           in this case has been explained and that it is a fit case for
           condonation of the delay.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 105 of 170
(Emphasis supplied)
175. The above view came to be affirmed in the decision of
State of Nagaland

      v. Lipok AO
, reported in (2005) 3 SCC 752, wherein this Court

      acknowledged the bureaucratic realities that often account for delay in

      governmental decision-making. It held that deference must be shown to the

      fact that governmental actions are “conducted by officers who cannot act

      on their own but must obtain approvals at different levels,” and thus, the

      element of delay is almost “inbuilt in the governmental decision-making

      process.” Accordingly, it held that factors which are peculiar to and

      characteristic of the functioning of the governmental conditions requires

      adoption of pragmatic and justice-oriented approach by the courts in

      matters pertaining to condonation of delay. The relevant observations read

      as under: -
“13. Experience shows that on account of an impersonal
           machinery (no one in charge of the matter is directly hit or hurt
           by the judgment sought to be subjected to appeal) and the
           inherited bureaucratic methodology imbued with the note-
           making, file-pushing, and passing-on-the-buck ethos, delay on its
           part is less difficult to understand though more difficult to
           approve. The State which represents collective cause of the
           community, does not deserve a litigant-non-grata status. The
           courts, therefore, have to be informed with the spirit and
           philosophy of the provision in the course of the interpretation of
           the expression of sufficient cause. Merit is preferred to scuttle a
           decision on merits in turning down the case on technicalities of
           delay in presenting the appeal. Delay as accordingly condoned,
           the order was set aside and the matter was remitted to the High
           Court for disposal on merits after affording opportunity of
           hearing to the parties.
In
Prabha v. Ram Parkash Kalra
[1987
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 106 of 170
Supp SCC 339] this Court had held that the court should not
           adopt an injustice-oriented approach in rejecting the application
           for condonation of delay. The appeal was allowed, the delay was
           condoned and the matter was remitted for expeditious disposal
           in accordance with law.
14.
In
G. Ramegowda v. Spl. Land Acquisition Officer
[(1988) 2
           SCC 142] it was held that no general principle saving the party
           from all mistakes of its counsel could be laid. The expression
           “sufficient cause” must receive a liberal construction so as to
           advance substantial justice and generally delays in preferring the
           appeals are required to be condoned in the interest of justice
           where no gross negligence or deliberate inaction or lack of bona
           fides is imputable to the party seeking condonation of delay. In
           litigations to which Government is a party, there is yet another
           aspect which, perhaps, cannot be ignored. If appeals brought by
           Government are lost for such defaults, no person is individually
           affected, but what, in the ultimate analysis, suffers is public
           interest. The decisions of Government are collective and
           institutional decisions and do not share the characteristics of
           decisions of private individuals. The law of limitation is, no
           doubt, the same for a private citizen as for governmental
           authorities. Government, like any other litigant must take
           responsibility for the acts, omissions of its officers. But a
           somewhat different complexion is imparted to the matter where
           Government makes out a case where public interest was shown
           to have suffered owing to acts of fraud or bad faith on the part of
           its officers or agents and where the officers were clearly at cross-
purposes with it. It was, therefore, held that in assessing what
           constitutes sufficient cause for purposes of
Section 5
, it might,
           perhaps, be somewhat unrealistic to exclude from the
           considerations that go into the judicial verdict, these factors
           which are peculiar to and characteristic of the functioning of the
           Government. Government decisions are proverbially slow
           encumbered, as they are, by a considerable degree of procedural
           red tape in the process of their making. A certain amount of
           latitude is, therefore, not impermissible. It is rightly said that
           those who bear responsibility of Government must have “a little
           play at the joints”. Due recognition of these limitations on
           governmental functioning — of course, within reasonable limits
           — is necessary if the judicial approach is not to be rendered
           unrealistic. It would, perhaps, be unfair and unrealistic to put
           Government and private parties on the same footing in all
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 107 of 170
respects in such matters. Implicit in the very nature of
           governmental functioning is procedural delay incidental to the
           decision-making process. The delay of over one year was
           accordingly condoned.
15. It is axiomatic that decisions are taken by officers/agencies
           proverbially at a slow pace and encumbered process of pushing
           the files from table to table and keeping it on the table for
           considerable time causing delay — intentional or otherwise — is
           a routine. Considerable delay of procedural red tape in the
           process of their making decision is a common feature. Therefore,
           certain amount of latitude is not impermissible. If the appeals
           brought by the State are lost for such default no person is
           individually affected but what in the ultimate analysis suffers, is
           public interest. The expression “sufficient cause” should,
           therefore, be considered with pragmatism in a justice-oriented
           approach rather than the technical detection of sufficient cause
           for explaining every day's delay. The factors which are peculiar
           to and characteristic of the functioning of the governmental
           conditions would be cognizant to and requires adoption of
           pragmatic approach in justice-oriented process. The court
           should decide the matters on merits unless the case is hopelessly
           without merit. No separate standards to determine the cause laid
           by the State vis-à-vis private litigant could be laid to prove strict
           standards of sufficient cause. The Government at appropriate
           level should constitute legal cells to examine the cases whether
           any legal principles are involved for decision by the courts or
           whether cases require adjustment and should authorise the
           officers to take a decision or give appropriate permission for
           settlement. In the event of decision to file appeal, needed prompt
           action should be pursued by the officer responsible to file the
           appeal and he should be made personally responsible for lapses,
           if any. Equally, the State cannot be put on the same footing as an
           individual. The individual would always be quick in taking the
           decision whether he would pursue the remedy by way of an
           appeal or application since he is a person legally injured while
           the State is an impersonal machinery working through its officers
           or servants.
16. The above position was highlighted in
State of Haryana v.
           Chandra Mani
[(
1996) 3 SCC 132] and Special Tehsildar, Land
           Acquisition v. K.V. Ayisumma
[(1996) 10 SCC 634]. It was noted
           that adoption of strict standard of proof sometimes fails to
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 108 of 170
protract (sic) public justice, and it would result in public mischief
           by skilful management of delay in the process of filing an appeal.
17. When the factual background is considered in the light of
           legal principles as noted above, the inevitable conclusion is that
           the delay of 57 days deserved condonation. Therefore, the order
           of the High Court refusing to condone the delay is set aside.”

                                                (Emphasis supplied)
176.
In
Indian Oil Corpn.
(supra) this Court held that although
Section 5
of the

      Limitation Act makes no distinction between the State and a private litigant

      insofar as the explanation of delay to the satisfaction of the court is

      concerned, yet adoption of a strict standard of proof in case of the

      Government, which is dependent on the actions of its officials, who often

      have no personal interest in its cause, may lead to grave miscarriage of

      justice and thus, certain amount of latitude may be permitted to them. The

      relevant observations read as under: -
“9.
In
State (NCT of Delhi) v. Ahmed Jaan
[(2008) 14 SCC 582
           : (2009) 2 SCC (Cri) 864] while observing that although no
           special indulgence can be shown to the Government which, in
           similar circumstances is not shown to an individual suitor, one
           cannot but take a practical view of the working of the
           Government without being unduly indulgent to the slow motion
           of its wheels, highlighted the following observations of this Court
           in
State of Nagaland v. Lipok Ao
[(2005) 3 SCC 752 : 2005 SCC
           (Cri) 906] : (
Ahmed Jaan
case [(2008) 14 SCC 582 : (2009) 2
           SCC (Cri) 864] , SCC p. 588, para 11)

               “11. ‘… 15. It is axiomatic that decisions are taken by
               officers/agencies proverbially at a slow pace and
               encumbered process of pushing the files from table to
               table and keeping it on the table for considerable time
               causing delay—intentional or otherwise—is a routine.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 109 of 170
Considerable delay of procedural red tape in the process
               of their making decision is a common feature. Therefore,
               certain amount of latitude is not impermissible. If the
               appeals brought by the State are lost for such default no
               person is individually affected but what in the ultimate
               analysis suffers, is public interest. The expression
               “sufficient cause” should, therefore, be considered with
               pragmatism in a justice-oriented approach rather than
               the technical detection of sufficient cause for explaining
               every day's delay. The factors which are peculiar to and
               characteristic of the functioning of the governmental
               conditions would be cognizant to and requires adoption
               of pragmatic approach in justice-oriented process.’ [ As
               observed in
State of Nagaland v. Lipok Ao
, (2005) 3 SCC
               752, p. 760, para 15.
]”

           (See also
Tehsildar, Land Acquisition v. K.V. Ayisumma
[(
1996)
           10 SCC 634] , State of Haryana v. Chandra Mani
[(1996) 3 SCC
           132] .)
10. It is manifest that though
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, 1963
           envisages the explanation of delay to the satisfaction of the court,
           and makes no distinction between the State and the citizen,
           nonetheless adoption of a strict standard of proof in case of the
           Government, which is dependent on the actions of its officials,
           who often do not have any personal interest in its transactions,
           may lead to grave miscarriage of justice and therefore, certain
           amount of latitude is permissible in such cases.”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
177.
In
G. Ramegowda, Major
(supra), this Court observed that public interest

      suffers if appeals brought by the Government are thrown out due to the

      lapse of the limitation period. Accordingly, it held that a certain amount of

      latitude towards the Government is, therefore, not impermissible, for the

      purpose of condonation of delay. The relevant observations made therein

      read as under: -
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 110 of 170
“15. In litigations to which Government is a party there is yet
           another aspect which, perhaps, cannot be ignored. If appeals
           brought by Government are lost for such defaults, no person is
           individually affected; but what, in the ultimate analysis, suffers is
           public interest. The decisions of Government are collective and
           institutional decisions and do not share the characteristics of
           decisions of private individuals.
16. The law of limitation is, no doubt, the same for a private
           citizen as for governmental authorities. Government, like any
           other litigant must take responsibility for the acts or omissions of
           its officers. But a somewhat different complexion is imparted to
           the matter where Government makes out a case where public
           interest was shown to have suffeed owing to acts of fraud or bad
           faith on the part of its officers or agents and where the officers
           were clearly at cross-purposes with it.
17. Therefore, in assessing what, in a particular case, constitutes
           “sufficient cause” for purposes of
Section 5
, it might, perhaps,
           be somewhat unrealistic to exclude from the considerations that
           go into the judicial verdict, these factors which are peculiar to
           and characteristic of the functioning of the government.
Governmental decisions are proverbially slow encumbered, as
           they are, by a considerable degree of procedural red tape in the
           process of their making. A certain amount of latitude is,
           therefore, not impermissible. It is rightly said that those who bear
           responsibility of Government must have “a little play at the
           joints”. Due recognition of these limitations on governmental
           functioning — of course, within reasonable limits — is necessary
           if the judicial approach is not to be rendered unrealistic. It
           would, perhaps, be unfair and unrealistic to put government and
           private parties on the same footing in all respects in such
           matters. [...]”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
178. What can be discerned from the aforesaid is that, the position of law, as it

      originally stood, was that there existed a marked difference in a case where

      the delay was attributable to a private litigant and a case where the delay

      was occasioned on part of the State or its instrumentalities. This distinction
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 111 of 170
was founded on the impersonal character of public authorities, where no

      one public officer has any vested individual interest in diligently espousing

      the State’s cause. This resultantly rendered the actions of the State and its

      instrumentalities qualitatively different from those of private individuals

      who are motivated to act in their own cause.
179. Unlike a private litigant, where the State or any of its instrumentalities

      happens to be the litigant in a lis, the decision to prefer an appeal or file an

      application is seldom the result of a singular will; rather, it emerges from a

      collective exercise involving procedural compliance, legal opinion,

      administrative authorisation and responsible officers bound by rigid

      protocols and established hierarchies. Consequently, it was an accepted

      norm that unavoidable delays would inevitably arise in its litigation, not out

      of any want of diligence or mala fides, but as a by-product of the

      bureaucratic processes.
180. One another reason why this distinction assumed significances was for the

      reason that, if the cause espoused by the Government is non-suited merely

      on the ground of delay, the ultimate prejudice is not restricted just to the

      Government as a litigant. The real brunt of such dismissal falls upon the

      public at large, for it is the public exchequer and, consequently, public

      interest that stand to suffer. Unlike in the case of private parties, where the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 112 of 170
consequences of dismissal may remain confined to the litigants themselves,

      the dismissal of a proceeding initiated by the State has a cascading effect,

      as it directly impacts the community whose interests the State represents.

      Adoption of a rigid and uncompromising standard towards the State in

      matters of condonation of delay, would, in substance, punish the public for

      delays that are occasioned by systemic and institutional constraints rather

      than by deliberate inaction or negligence.
181. It is in light of the aforesaid, the understanding which prevailed was that,

      for the purpose of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, in cases where

      condonation of delay is sought by the State or any of its instrumentalities,

      there the courts should not apply the standard of strict scrutiny that is

      ordinarily applied to private parties. Instead, a pragmatic approach must be

      adopted that acknowledges the practical realities of governmental

      functioning and accords some latitude to the State, consistent with the

      maxim; ‘lex non cogit ad impossibilia’ i.e., the law does not compel the

      impossible. The courts ought to remain mindful of the proverbially slow

      pace at which governmental decisions often move, weighed down by

      procedural encumbrances and institutional delays. A certain degree of

      latitude, therefore, must be extended to the State and its instrumentalities in

      matters concerning the condonation of delay, lest the rigidity of limitation

      operate to the detriment of public interest.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 113 of 170
182. The ultimate test that was evolved whether substantial justice would suffer

      if condonation were denied. Thus, the balance was tilted in favour of

      condonation when the litigant was the State, as denial could prejudice

      public interest, frustrate legitimate claims, or impact the public exchequer.

      The jurisprudence therefore evolved to give primacy to public interest over

      procedural rigidity.
183. However, the aforesaid understanding was never intended to be accepted as

      an immutable proposition or treated as gospel truth. This is particularly

      evident from a catena of other decisions of this Court that were rendered

      around the same time.
184. Long before the decision of
K.V. Ayisumma
(supra) this Court in
State of

      W.B. v. Administrator, Howrah Municipality
reported in (1972) 1 SCC

      366 had observed that irrespective of whether the litigant is a Government

      entity or a private person, the provisions of law applicable are the same and

      as such same consideration that is shown by courts to a private party when

      he claims the protection of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act should also be

      adopted towards the State. The expression “sufficient cause” cannot be

      construed too liberally, merely because the party is the Government and the

      courts are not bound to accept readily whatever has been stated on behalf

      of the State to explain the delay. The relevant observations read as under: -
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 114 of 170
“26. The legal position when a question arises under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act is fairly well-settled. It is not possible to lay
           down precisely as to what facts or matters would constitute
           “sufficient cause” under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act. But it
           may be safely stated that the delay in filing an appeal should not
           have been for reasons which indicate the party's negligence in
           not taking necessary steps, which he could have or should have
           taken. Here again, what would be such necessary steps will again
           depend upon the circumstances of a particular case and each
           case will have to be decided by the courts on the facts and
           circumstances of the case. Any observation of an illustrative
           circumstance or fact will only tend to be a curb on the free
           exercise of the judicial mind by the Court in determining whether
           the facts and circumstances of a particular case amount to
           “sufficient cause” or not. It is needless to emphasise that courts
           have to use their judicial discretion in the matter soundly in the
           interest of justice.
27. Mr D. Mukherji, learned Counsel for the first respondent, is
           certainly well-founded in his contention that the expression
           “sufficient cause” cannot be construed too liberally, merely
           because the party is the Government. It is no doubt true that
           whether it is a Government or a private party, the provisions of
           law applicable are the same, unless the statute itself makes any
           distinction. But it cannot also be gainsaid that the same
           consideration that will be shown by courts to a private party
           when he claims the protection of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act
           should also be available to the State.
28. In the case before us, it must be stated in fairness to the
           learned Solicitor General that he has not contended that the State
           must be treated differently. On the other hand, his contention is
           that the reasons given by the appellant, which, according to him
           will establish “sufficient cause” have not at all been adverted to,
           much less, considered by the High Court. In our opinion, the
           contention of the learned Solicitor General is perfectly justified
           in the circumstances of this case. The High Court, certainly, was
           not bound to accept readily whatever has been stated on behalf
           of the State to explain the delay. But, it was the duty of the High
           Court to have scrutinised the reasons given by the State and
           considered the same on merits and expressed an opinion, one
           way or the other. That, unfortunately, is lacking in this case.”
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                            Page 115 of 170
(Emphasis supplied)
185. Similarly in
Lanka Venkateswarlu v. State of A.P.
reported in 2011 SCC

      OnLine SC 403 this Court deprecated the High Court in condoning the

      delay in filing of the appeal therein, that was occasioned not by any

      unavoidable circumstance, but by the sheer inefficiency and ineptitude of

      the Government Pleaders concerned, merely because the party seeking

      condonation happened to be the State. In doing so, this Court observed that

      concepts such as “liberal approach”, “justice oriented approach”,

      “substantial justice” cannot be employed to jettison the substantial law of

      limitation, particularly in cases where the court concludes that there is no

      justification for the delay. The relevant observations read as under: -
“26. Having recorded the aforesaid conclusions, the High Court
           proceeded to condone the delay. In our opinion, such a course
           was not open to the High Court, given the pathetic explanation
           offered by the respondents in the application seeking
           condonation of delay. This is especially so in view of the remarks
           made by the High Court about the delay being caused by the
           inefficiency and ineptitude of the Government Pleaders.
27. The displeasure of the Court is patently apparent from the
           impugned order itself. In the opening paragraph of the impugned
           order the High Court has, rather sarcastically, dubbed the
           Government Pleaders as without merit and ability. Such an
           insinuation is clearly discernable from the observation that,
           “This is a classic case, how the learned Government Pleaders
           appointed on the basis of merit and ability (emphasis supplied)
           are discharging their function protecting the interest of their
           clients.” Having said so, the High Court, graphically narrated
           the clear dereliction of duty by the Government Pleaders
           concerned in not pursuing the appeal before the High Court
           diligently. The High Court has set out the different stages at
           which the Government Pleaders had exhibited almost culpable
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 116 of 170
negligence in performance of their duties. The High Court found
           the justification given by the Government Pleaders to be
           unacceptable. Twice in the impugned order, it was recorded that
           in the normal course, the applications would have been thrown
           out without having a second thought in the matter. Having
           recorded such conclusions, inexplicably, the High Court
           proceeds to condone the unconscionable delay.
28. We are at a loss to fathom any logic or rationale, which could
          have impelled the High Court to condone the delay after holding
          the same to be unjustifiable. The concepts such as “liberal
          approach”, “justice oriented approach”, “substantial justice”
          cannot be employed to jettison the substantial law of limitation.
Especially, in cases where the court concludes that there is no
          justification for the delay. In our opinion, the approach adopted
          by the High Court tends to show the absence of judicial balance
          and restraint, which a Judge is required to maintain whilst
          adjudicating any lis between the parties. We are rather pained to
          notice that in this case, not being satisfied with the use of mere
          intemperate language, the High Court resorted to blatant
          sarcasms.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
186. It is also not out of place to mention that the observations made by this

      Court in the decisions of
Chandra Mani
(supra) and
Lipok AO
(supra) as

      regards the distinction between the State or any of its instrumentalities vis-

      à-vis a private individual, for the purpose of
Section 5
of the Limitation

      Act, should be understood in its proper context and true spirit.
187. This Court in
Chandra Mani
(supra) and
Lipok AO
(supra) explicitly held

      that the State or any of its instrumentalities cannot be put on the same

      footing as a private party for the purposes of condonation of delay under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act. It observed that an individual would always

      be quick in taking the decision whether he would pursue the remedy by way
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 117 of 170
of an appeal or application since he is a person legally injured while the

      State is an impersonal machinery working through its officers or servants,

      bound by bureaucratic methodology. Thus, it held that although equality

      before law is sacrosanct, equality does not mandate a refusal to recognise

      institutional realities.
188. However, what is equally significant to note is that the aforesaid

      observations of this Court in
Chandra Mani
(supra) and
Lipok AO
(supra)

      were accompanied by a clear message to the State and all its

      instrumentalities, that a leisurely and lethargic approach cannot continue

      for all times to come. It had urged the State and all public authorities to

      constitute legal cells to examine the cases whether any legal principles are

      involved for decision by the courts, if not then then endeavour should be

      made towards arriving at a settlement instead, rather than reagitating the

      belated causes before the courts. It further observed that where the case

      requires an appeal or application to be filed, despite the delay, then prompt

      action should be pursued by the officer responsible to file the appeal and he

      should be made personally responsible for lapses, if any.
189. This was followed by
Indian Oil Corpn
(supra) wherein this Court sowed

      the seeds for the shift in approach of the courts in matters where

      condonation of delay was sought by the State or its instrumentalities,
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 118 of 170
inasmuch as it held that the Government and its various functionaries

      cannot be placed on a pedestal higher than any ordinary litigants, and held

      that the pragmatic and justice-oriented approach of the courts should be

      confined only to cases where there was no gross negligence or deliberate

      inaction on part of the State.
190. From the aforesaid, it is manifest that prior to the decision of this Court in

      Postmaster General (supra), the approach was characterised by judicial

      sympathy towards the State and its instrumentalities in matters of

      condonation of delay, owing to the peculiar nature of their functioning.
At

      the same time, there also existed contrary views such as
Administrator,

      Howrah Municipality
(supra) and
Lanka Venkateswarlu
(supra) which

      held that, irrespective of whether the litigant is a Government entity or a

      private individual, the provisions of limitation would apply uniformly, and

      any leeway shown by the courts would also remain the same.
191. Even in the decisions of
Chandra Mani
(supra) and
Lipok AO
(supra)

      where this Court recognized the necessity for drawing a demarcation

      between a State or any of its instrumentalities, on the one hand and a private

      individual, on the other, for the purpose of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act,

      this Court simultaneously observed that such differential treatment cannot

      continue for all times to come. We say so, because this Court, in the latter

      parts of the aforesaid decisions, conveyed an emphatic message to all the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 119 of 170
States and its instrumentalities to constitute legal cells for the timely

      scrutiny of its cases, to explore the possibility of settlement instead of

      pursuing belated claims, wherever possible and to ensure that filing of

      appeals or application as the case may be, is undertaken expeditiously, and

      the officer responsible for pursuing such action is made personally liable

      for lapses, if any.
ii.   Shift in jurisprudence on Condonation of Delay after the decision of
      Postmaster General.
192. However, despite the aforementioned exhortations of this Court in
Chandra Mani
(supra) and
Lipok AO
(supra), the same largely remained

      unheeded as the State and its instrumentalities continued to approach the

      courts after significant delays under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act as

      though it were a license for indolence and institutional lethargy.
193. It was in this backdrop, particularly, the persistent disregard to the laws of

      limitation by the States and its instrumentalities that compelled this Court

      in Postmaster General (supra) to deviate from the earlier practice of

      extending unwarranted leniency governmental agencies, and to emphasise

      that the law of limitation binds the State no less than the ordinary litigant.

      The said decision is in three parts: -
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 120 of 170
(i)    First, This Court held that claims of the Government and its

             functionaries being an impersonal machinery and inherited with

             bureaucratic methodology can no longer be accepted to excuse

             delays under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, in view of the modern

             technologies being used and available. The relevant observations

             read as under: -
“27. It is not in dispute that the person(s) concerned were
                   well aware or conversant with the issues involved
                   including the prescribed period of limitation for taking up
                   the matter by way of filing a special leave petition in this
                   Court. They cannot claim that they have a separate
                   period of limitation when the Department was possessed
                   with competent persons familiar with court proceedings.
                   In the absence of plausible and acceptable explanation,
                   we are posing a question why the delay is to be condoned
                   mechanically merely because the Government or a wing
                   of the Government is a party before us.
28. Though we are conscious of the fact that in a matter
                   of condonation of delay when there was no gross
                   negligence or deliberate inaction or lack of bona fides, a
                   liberal concession has to be adopted to advance
                   substantial justice, we are of the view that in the facts and
                   circumstances, the Department cannot take advantage of
                   various earlier decisions. The claim on account of
                   impersonal machinery and inherited bureaucratic
                   methodology of making several notes cannot be accepted
                   in view of the modern technologies being used and
                   available. The law of limitation undoubtedly binds
                   everybody, including the Government.”

                                                (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 121 of 170
(ii)    Secondly, this Court in Postmaster General (supra) held that it was

              high time that the practice of condoning delay merely because the

              litigant is a government entity was done away with, and that delay

              should be condoned only where there is a reasonable and acceptable

              explanation for such delay and was accompanied by a bona fide

              effort. It further observed that the usual explanation of bureaucratic

              inefficiency and of procedural red tapism can no longer be accepted.
The relevant observations read as under: -
“29. In our view, it is the right time to inform all the
                   government bodies, their agencies and instrumentalities
                   that unless they have reasonable and acceptable
                   explanation for the delay and there was bona fide effort,
                   there is no need to accept the usual explanation that the
                   file was kept pending for several months/years due to
                   considerable degree of procedural red tape in the
                   process.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
(iii)   Lastly, as regards the earlier line of thought that if meritorious causes

              advanced by the State or any of its instrumentalities are dismissed on

              the ground of delay, the resultant hardship would ultimately fall upon

              the public exchequer and thereby the public at large, was

              emphatically rejected by this Court. It held that condonation of delay

              is a matter of exception and cannot be treated as an anticipated

              privilege accruing to governmental bodies by reason of their

              hierarchical structure or bureaucratic methodology. The law shelters
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 122 of 170
everyone under the same light and should not be swirled for the

             benefit of a few. Thus, the plea of public interest cannot by any

             stretch be used as a carte blanche for official inaction. It observed

             that Government departments, far from being entitled to presumptive

             indulgence, are in fact under a higher obligation to discharge their

             functions with diligence, vigilance, and scrupulous regard to

             limitation. The relevant observations read as under: -
“29. [...] The government departments are under a
                   special obligation to ensure that they perform their duties
                   with diligence and commitment. Condonation of delay is
                   an exception and should not be used as an anticipated
                   benefit for the government departments. The law shelters
                   everyone under the same light and should not be swirled
                   for the benefit of a few.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
194.
In
Amalendu Kumar Bera v. State of West Bengal
reported in (2013) 4

      SCC 52 this Court held that although a liberal approach is to be adopted in

      matters of condonation of delay, such indulgence cannot be extended in

      cases where the delay is attributable to serious laches or negligence on the

      part of the State. Delays as a result of the official business of the

      government requires its pedantic approach from public justice perspective.

      It held that delay should not be condoned mechanically in the absence of

      “sufficient cause” merely because the party happens to be the State. The

      relevant observations read as under: -
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 123 of 170
“9. We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the
           appellant and the learned counsel appearing for the respondent
           State. There is no dispute that the expression “sufficient cause”
           should be considered with pragmatism in justice oriented
           approach rather than the technical detection of “sufficient
           cause” for explaining every day's delay. However, it is equally
           well settled that the courts albeit liberally considered the prayer
           for condonation of delay but in some cases the court may refuse
           to condone the delay inasmuch as the Government is not accepted
           to keep watch whether the contesting respondent further put the
           matter in motion. The delay in official business requires its
           pedantic approach from public justice perspective.
In a recent
           decision in
Union of India v. Nripen Sarma
[(2013) 4 SCC 57 :
AIR 2011 SC 1237] the matter came up against the order passed
           by the High Court condoning the delay in filing the appeal by the
           appellant Union of India. The High Court refused to condone the
           delay on the ground that the appellant Union of India took their
           own sweet time to reach the conclusion whether the judgment
           should be appealed or not. The High Court also expressed its
           anguish and distress with the way the State conducts the cases
           regularly in filing the appeal after the same became operational
           and barred by limitation.
10. In the instant case as noticed above, admittedly earlier
           objection filed by the respondent State under Section 47 of the
           Code was dismissed on 17-8-2010. Instead of challenging the
           said order the respondent State after about one year filed another
           objection on 15-9-2011 under Section 47 of the Code which was
           finally rejected by the executing court. It was only after a writ of
           attachment was issued by the executing court that the respondent
           preferred a civil revision against the first order dated 17-8-2010
           along with a petition for condonation of delay. Curiously enough
           in the application for condonation of delay no sufficient cause
           has been shown which would entitle the respondent to get a
           favourable order for condonation of delay. True it is, that courts
           should always take liberal approach in the matter of condonation
           of delay, particularly when the appellant is the State but in a case
           where there are serious laches and negligence on the part of the
           State in challenging the decree passed in the suit and affirmed in
           appeal, the State cannot be allowed to wait to file objection under
           Section 47 till the decree-holder puts the decree in execution. As
           noticed above, the decree passed in the year 1967 was in respect
           of declaration of title and permanent injunction restraining the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 124 of 170
respondent State from interfering with the possession of the suit
           property of the appellant-plaintiff. It is evident that when the
           State tried to interfere with possession the decree-holder had no
           alternative but to levy the execution case for execution of the
           decree with regard to interference with possession. In our
           opinion their delay in filing the execution case cannot be a
           ground to condone the delay in filing the revision against the
           order refusing to entertain objection under
Section 47
CPC. This
           aspect of the matter has not been considered by the High Court
           while deciding the petition for condoning the delay. Merely
           because the respondent is the State, delay in filing the appeal or
           revision cannot and shall not be mechanically considered and in
           the absence of “sufficient cause” delay shall not be condoned.”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
195. The view taken in the decision of Postmaster General (supra) also came to

      be endorsed and followed by this Court in
State of U.P. v. Amar Nath

      Yadav
reported in (2014) 2 SCC 422.
196.
In
State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. v. Bherulal
reported in (2020) 10 SCC

      654 this Court expressed its deep anguish over the routine manner in which

      the State and its instrumentalities continue to seek condonation of delay on

      the pretext of bureaucratic inefficiencies. It held that the earlier decisions

      that had afforded a degree of leeway for such inefficiencies no longer

      reflects the correct position of law insofar as condonation of delay is

      concerned.
This Court held that in view of the decision of Postmaster

      General (supra), any delay as a result of unavailability of the documents or

      the process of arranging for them through bureaucratic process works is no
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 125 of 170
longer an acceptable reason or excuse to condone such delay. The relevant

      observations read as under: -
“2. We are constrained to pen down a detailed order as it
           appears that all our counselling to the Government and
           government authorities has fallen on deaf ears i.e. the Supreme
           Court of India cannot be a place for the Governments to walk in
           when they choose ignoring the period of limitation prescribed.
           We have raised the issue that if the government machinery is so
           inefficient and incapable of filing appeals/petitions in time, the
           solution may lie in requesting the legislature to expand the time
           period for filing limitation for government authorities because of
           their gross incompetence. That is not so. Till the statute subsists,
           the appeals/petitions have to be filed as per the statutes
           prescribed.
3. No doubt, some leeway is given for the government
           inefficiencies but the sad part is that the authorities keep on
           relying on judicial pronouncements for a period of time when
           technology had not advanced and a greater leeway was given to
           the Government [LAO v. Katiji]. This position is more than
           elucidated by the judgment of this Court in Postmaster
           General v. Living Media (India) Ltd. [...]
4. A reading of the aforesaid application shows that the reason
           for such an inordinate delay is stated to be only “due to
           unavailability of the documents and the process of arranging the
           documents”. In para 4, a reference has been made to
           “bureaucratic process works, it is inadvertent that delay
           occurs”.
xxx                xxx        xxx
6. We are also of the view that the aforesaid approach is being
           adopted in what we have categorised earlier as “certificate
           cases”. The object appears to be to obtain a certificate of
           dismissal from the Supreme Court to put a quietus to the issue
           and thus, say that nothing could be done because the highest
           Court has dismissed the appeal. It is to complete this formality
           and save the skin of officers who may be at default that such a
           process is followed. We have on earlier occasions also strongly
           deprecated such a practice and process. There seems to be no
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 126 of 170
improvement. The purpose of coming to this Court is not to obtain
           such certificates and if the Government suffers losses, it is time
           when the officer concerned responsible for the same bears the
           consequences. The irony is that in none of the cases any action is
           taken against the officers, who sit on the files and do nothing. It
           is presumed that this Court will condone the delay and even in
           making submissions, straightaway the counsel appear to address
           on merits without referring even to the aspect of limitation as
           happened in this case till we pointed out to the counsel that he
           must first address us on the question of limitation.
(Emphasis supplied)
197. This Court in
Bherulal
(supra) further cautioned that where any public

      authority persists in approaching the courts for condonation of delay on

      such feeble and untenable grounds would not only be denied the indulgence

      of condonation but would also be imposed with costs for wastage of judicial

      time. The relevant observations read as under: -
7. We are thus, constrained to send a signal and we propose to
           do in all matters today, where there are such inordinate delays
           that the Government or State authorities coming before us must
           pay for wastage of judicial time which has its own value. Such
           costs can be recovered from the officers responsible.
(Emphasis supplied)
198. This Court in
University of Delhi v. Union of India
, reported in (2020) 13

      SCC 745 held that consideration for condonation of delay under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act does not and cannot vary depending on the identity or

      status of the party, whether it be the Government, a public body, or a private

      litigant, so as to apply a different yardstick. The ultimate consideration
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 127 of 170
should be to render even-handed justice to the parties, irrespective of their

      status. Furthermore, any explanation which betrays a casual or indifferent

      approach on the part of the Government or its instrumentalities,

      demonstrating a lack of regard for the mandate of limitation, cannot be

      excused or condoned merely by invoking the impersonal character of

      bureaucratic decision-making. The relevant observations read as under: -
“23. From a consideration of the view taken by this Court
           through the decisions cited supra the position is clear that, by
           and large, a liberal approach is to be taken in the matter of
           condonation of delay. The consideration for condonation of delay
           would not depend on the status of the party, namely, the
           Government or the public bodies so as to apply a different
           yardstick but the ultimate consideration should be to render
           even-handed justice to the parties. Even in such case the
           condonation of long delay should not be automatic since the
           accrued right or the adverse consequence to the opposite party
           is also to be kept in perspective. In that background while
           considering condonation of delay, the routine explanation would
           not be enough but it should be in the nature of indicating
           “sufficient cause” to justify the delay which will depend on the
           backdrop of each case and will have to be weighed carefully by
           the courts based on the fact situation. In Katiji [LAO v. Katiji,
           (1987) 2 SCC 107] the entire conspectus relating to condonation
           of delay has been kept in focus. However, what cannot also be
           lost sight of is that the consideration therein was in the
           background of dismissal of the application seeking condonation
           of delay in a case where there was delay of four days pitted
           against the consideration that was required to be made on merits
           regarding the upward revision of compensation amounting to
           800%.
24. As against the same, the delay in the instant facts in filing the
           LPA is 916 days and as such the consideration to condone can
           be made only if there is reasonable explanation and the
           condonation cannot be merely because the appellant is public
           body. The entire explanation noticed above, depicts the casual
           approach unmindful of the law of limitation despite being aware
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 128 of 170
of the position of law. That apart when there is such a long delay
           and there is no proper explanation, laches would also come into
           play while noticing as to the manner in which a party has
           proceeded before filing an appeal. In addition in the instant facts
           not only the delay and laches in filing the appeal is contended on
           behalf of the respondents seeking dismissal of the instant appeal
           but it is also contended that there was delay and laches in filing
           the writ petition itself at the first instance from which the present
           appeal had arisen. In that view, it would be necessary for us to
           advert to those aspects of the matter and notice the nature of
           consideration made in the writ petition as well as the LPA to
           arrive at a conclusion as to whether the High Court was
           justified.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
199. A similar view was iterated in Government of Maharashtra (Water

      Resources Department) represented by
Executive Engineer v. Borse

      Brothers Engineers and Contractors Pvt. Ltd.
reported in (2021) 6 SCC

      460 wherein this Court placing reliance on Postmaster General (supra) held

      that a different yardstick for condonation of delay cannot be laid down

      merely because the Government is involved. The relevant observations read

      as under: -
“59. Likewise, merely because the Government is involved, a
           different yardstick for condonation of delay cannot be laid down.
           This was felicitously stated in Postmaster General v. Living
           Media (India) Ltd.”
200.
In
State of Odisha & Ors. v. Sunanda Mahakuda
reported in (2021) 11

      SCC 560 this Court held that the leeway which was earlier enjoyed by the

      State and its instrumentalities on account of bureaucratic inefficiencies in

      matters of condonation of delay is no longer available in view of the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 129 of 170
technological advancement and the shift in jurisprudence as elucidated in

      Postmaster General (supra). It observed that no case under
Section 5
of the

      Limitation Act could be said to be made out where there is no reason or

      excuse given in respect of the period for which condonation is sought. The

      relevant observations read as under: -
“3. A reading of the aforesaid shows that there is no reason much
           less sufficient and cogent reason assigned to explain the delay
           and the application has also been preferred in a very casual
           manner. We may notice that there are number of orders of this
           State Government alone which we have come across where
           repeatedly matters are being filed beyond the period of limitation
           prescribed. We have been repeatedly discouraging such
           endeavours where the Governments seem to think that they can
           walk in to the Supreme Court any time they feel without any
           reference to the period of limitation, as if the statutory Law of
           Limitation does not exist for them.
4. There is no doubt that these are cases including the present
           one where the Government machinery has acted in an inefficient
           manner or it is a deliberate endeavour. In either of the two
           situations, this Court ought not to come to the rescue of the
           petitioner. No doubt, some leeway is given for Government
           inefficiency but with the technological advancement now the
           judicial view prevalent earlier when such facilities were not
           available has been over taken by the elucidation of the legal
           principles in the judgment of this Court in Postmaster
           General v. Living Media (India) Ltd. We have discussed these
           aspects in
State of M.P. v. Bherulal
and thus, see no reason to
           repeat the same again.
5. In the present case, the State Government has not even taken
           the trouble of citing any reason or excuse nor any dates given in
           respect of the period for which condonation is sought. The
           objective of such an exercise has also been elucidated by us in
           the aforesaid judgment where we have categorised such cases as
           “certificate cases”.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 130 of 170
6. The object of such cases appears to be to obtain a certificate
           of dismissal from the Supreme Court to put a quietus to the issue
           and thus, say nothing could done because the highest Court has
           dismissed the appeal. It is mere completion of formality to give a
           quietus to the litigation and save the skin of the officers who may
           be at fault by not taking action in prescribed time. If the State
           Government feels that they have suffered losses, then it must fix
           responsibility on officers concerned for their inaction but that
           ironically never happens. These matters are preferred on a
           presumption as if this Court will condone the delay in every case,
           if the State Government is able to say something on merits.
7. Looking to the period of delay and the casual manner in which
           the application has been worded, we consider it appropriate to
           impose costs of Rs 25,000 to be deposited with the Supreme Court
           Advocates-on-Record Welfare Fund. The amount be deposited in
           four weeks. The amount be recovered from the officers
           responsible for the delay in filing both the writ appeal and the
           special leave petition and a certificate of recovery be also filed
           in this Court within the same period of time.”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
201. Similarly, in
State of U.P. v. Sabha Narain
, reported in (2022) 9 SCC 266,

      this Court once again deprecated the tendency of State and its

      instrumentalities to proceed on the assumption that they may approach the

      courts at their own convenience and sweet will, disregarding the period of

      limitation prescribed by statute, as though the Limitation statute does not

      apply to them.
It held that the leeway which was at one point extended to

      the Government/public authorities on account of innate functional

      inefficiencies is no more the norm, particularly in the wake of the decision

      of Postmaster General (supra). The relevant observations read as under: -
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 131 of 170
“3. We have repeatedly discouraged State Governments and
           public authorities in adopting an approach that they can walk in
           to the Supreme Court as and when they please ignoring the
           period of limitation prescribed by the statutes, as if the Limitation
           statute does not apply to them.
In this behalf, suffice to refer to
           our judgments in
State of M.P. v. Bherulal [State of M.P.
v.
           Bherulal, (2020) 10 SCC 654 : (2021) 1 SCC (Cri) 117 : (2021)
           1 SCC (Civ) 101 : (2021) 1 SCC (L&S) 84] and State of Odisha
           v. Sunanda Mahakuda [State of Odisha v. Sunanda Mahakuda,
           (2021) 11 SCC 560 : (2022) 1 SCC (Cri) 300 : (2022) 2 SCC
           (L&S) 393] . The leeway which was given to the
           Government/public authorities on account of innate
           inefficiencies was the result of certain orders of this Court which
           came at a time when technology had not advanced and thus,
           greater indulgence was shown.
This position is no more
           prevalent and the current legal position has been elucidated by
           the judgment of this Court in Postmaster General v. Living Media
           India Ltd. [Postmaster General v. Living Media India Ltd.,
           (2012) 3 SCC 563 : (2012) 2 SCC (Civ) 327 : (2012) 2 SCC (Cri)
           580 : (2012) 1 SCC (L&S) 649] Despite this, there seems to be
           little change in the approach of the Government and public
           authorities.
4. We have also categorised such kind of cases as “certificate
           cases” filed with the only object to obtain a quietus from the
           Supreme Court on the ground that nothing could be done because
           the highest Court has dismissed the appeal. The objective is to
           complete a mere formality and save the skin of the officers who
           may be in default in following the due process or may have done
           it deliberately. We have deprecated such practice and process
           and we do so again. We refuse to grant such certificates and if
           the Government/public authorities suffer losses, it is time when
           officers concerned responsible for the same, bear the
           consequences. The irony, emphasised by us repeatedly, is that no
           action is ever taken against the officers and if the Court pushes
           it, some mild warning is all that happens.
5. Looking to the period of delay and the casual manner in which
           the application has been worded, we consider appropriate to
           impose costs on the petitioner(s) of Rs 25,000 for wastage of
           judicial time which has its own value and the same be deposited
           with the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Welfare Fund
           within four weeks. The amount be recovered from the officers
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 132 of 170
responsible for the delay in filing the special leave petition and a
           certificate of recovery of the said amount be also filed in this
           Court within the same period of time.”

                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
202.
In
Union of India v. Jahangir Byramji Jeejeebhoy
reported in 2024 SCC

      OnLine SC 489, this Court speaking through one of us (J.B. Pardiwala J.)

      held that it hardly matters whether a litigant is a private party or a State or

      Union of India when it comes to condoning a gross delay in filing of an

      appeal or application, as the case may be. It held that unless the Department

      has reasonable and acceptable reason for the delay and there was bona fide

      effort, there is no need to accept the usual explanation that the file was kept

      pending for several months/years due to considerable degree of procedural

      red tape in the process. The relevant observations read as under: -
“25. It hardly matters whether a litigant is a private party or a
           State or Union of India when it comes to condoning the gross
           delay of more than 12 years. If the litigant chooses to approach
           the court long after the lapse of the time prescribed under the
           relevant provisions of the law, then he cannot turn around and
           say that no prejudice would be caused to either side by the delay
           being condoned. This litigation between the parties started
           sometime in 1981. We are in 2024. Almost 43 years have elapsed.
           However, till date the respondent has not been able to reap the
           fruits of his decree. It would be a mockery of justice if we condone
           the delay of 12 years and 158 days and once again ask the
           respondent to undergo the rigmarole of the legal proceedings.
xxx                xxx        xxx
27. We are of the view that the question of limitation is not merely
           a technical consideration. The rules of limitation are based on
           the principles of sound public policy and principles of equity. We
           should not keep the ‘Sword of Damocles’ hanging over the head
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 133 of 170
of the respondent for indefinite period of time to be determined
           at the whims and fancies of the appellants.
xxx                xxx        xxx
30. In Postmaster General v. Living Media India Limited, (2012)
           3 SCC 563, this Court, while dismissing the application for
           condonation of delay of 427 days in filing the Special Leave
           Petition, held that condonation of delay is not an exception and
           it should not be used as an anticipated benefit for the government
           departments. In that case, this Court held that unless the
           Department has reasonable and acceptable reason for the delay
           and there was bona fide effort, there is no need to accept the
           usual explanation that the file was kept pending for several
           months/years due to considerable degree of procedural red tape
           in the process cannot be accepted. [...]

                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
203. This Court in
Jahangir Byramji Jeejeebhoy
(supra) further held that when

      it comes to
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, delay should not be excused as

      a matter of generosity. Rendering substantial justice is not a free-pass to

      cause prejudice to the opposite party. The vital test for condoning the delay

      is for the party that is praying for such condonation to prove that it was

      reasonably diligent in prosecuting the matter. The relevant observations

      read as under: -
“35. In a plethora of decisions of this Court, it has been said that
           delay should not be excused as a matter of generosity. Rendering
           substantial justice is not to cause prejudice to the opposite party.
           The appellants have failed to prove that they were reasonably
           diligent in prosecuting the matter and this vital test for condoning
           the delay is not satisfied in this case.”

                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 134 of 170
iii.   The ratio of the decision of Postmaster General.
204. We are conscious of a few decisions of this Court, particularly,
Inder Singh

       v. State of M.P.
reported in 2025
SCC OnLine SC 600, Sheo Raj Singh v.

       Union of India
, reported in (
2023) 10 SCC 531 and State of Manipur v.

       Koting Lamkang
reported in (2019) 10 SCC 408 wherein the decision of

       Postmaster General (supra) was distinguished or not followed, and the

       delay on account of the government entity therein was condoned. We shall

       briefly take a look at these decisions.
205.
In
Koting Lamkang
(supra) there was a delay of 312-days in preferring the

       regular first appeal by the State Government therein. Both the courts below

       had declined to condone the delay on the ground that there was no

       explanation for a certain period of time. This Court whilst setting aside the

       impugned order and condoning the delay in filing of the appeal, held that

       interest of justice would be better served, if the delay is condoned and the

       matter is allowed to be heard on merits, as otherwise it would be the public

       interest which would likely suffer if the State is non-suited on the ground

       of delay. We have gone through the decision multiple times.
Nowhere has

       this Court in
Koting Lamkang
(supra) referred to or taken note of the

       change in position of law by the decision of Postmaster General (supra).
Thus, in our considered opinion, this decision falls smack of and is in teeth
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 135 of 170
of the ratio laid in Postmaster General (supra) that has been consistently

      followed.
206.
In
Inder Singh
(supra) there was a delay of 1537-days in filing of the

      Second Appeal by the respondent state therein. While the First Appellate

      Court refused to condone the delay for want of sufficient cause, the High

      Court on the other hand, condoned the delay. In appeal, this Court whilst

      affirming the condonation of delay by the High Court observed that the

      respondent state therein had demonstrated “sufficient cause” for the delay

      by virtue of having pursed a Review Petition, which itself had been delayed,

      and further delay on account of COVID-19.
Although, the decision of

      Postmaster General (supra) was not alluded to, yet a closer reading of the

      decision reveals that the explanation offered by the respondent state was

      not the typical departmental delays or bureaucratic inefficiency, and rather

      had assigned detailed, plausible account of delay, which is why the delay

      was condoned.
Even otherwise, what is of importance, is that, nowhere has

      this Court in
Inder Singh
(supra) accorded any special treatment in

      condonation of delay, by virtue of the party being a State, thus, we need not

      dwell on this decision any further.
207. The decision of
Sheo Raj Singh
(supra) is of particular significance, and

      may be the most instructive in understanding the decision of Postmaster
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 136 of 170
General (supra). In the said case, there was a delay of 479-days in

      preferring the appeal. The explanation put forth by the respondent state for

      the delay were of the nature of lamentable institutional inefficiency and the

      deplorable bureaucratic inertia, which ultimately found favour with the

      High Court, and accordingly the delay was condoned.
In appeal, the

      decision of the High Court was assailed on the touchstone of the decisions

      of Postmaster General (supra) and a catena of other decisions that had held

      that such an explanation of bureaucratic lethargy cannot be accepted.
208. This Court in
Sheo Raj Singh
(supra) exhaustively examined all the

      decisions of this Court, prior to and after the decision of Postmaster

      General (supra).
It observed that although, the subsequent decisions of this

      Court have not accepted governmental lethargy, tardiness and indolence in

      presenting appeals as sufficient cause for condonation of delay, yet, because

      the High Court had condoned the delay by accepting such explanation

      before the decision of Postmaster General (supra) was rendered, the

      exercise of discretion by the High Court has to be tested on the anvil of the

      liberal and justice oriented approach as expounded in the decisions which

      earlier occupied the field. It was in light of the aforesaid that this Court,

      refused to interfere with the exercise of discretion by the High Court

      therein. The relevant observations read as under: -
“33. Be that as it may, it is important to bear in mind that we are
           not hearing an application for condonation of delay but sitting in
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 137 of 170
appeal over a discretionary order of the High Court granting the
           prayer for condonation of delay. In the case of the former,
           whether to condone or not would be the only question whereas in
           the latter, whether there has been proper exercise of discretion
           in favour of grant of the prayer for condonation would be the
           question. Law is fairly well-settled that “a court of appeal should
           not ordinarily interfere with the discretion exercised by the
           courts below”. If any authority is required, we can profitably
           refer to the decision in
Manjunath Anandappa v. Tammanasa
,
           which in turn relied on the decision in
Gujarat Steel Tubes
           Ltd. v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha
where it has been
           held that:
“an appellate power interferes not when the
                    order appealed is not right but only when it is
                    clearly wrong”.”
34. The order under challenge in this appeal is dated 21-12-
2011. It was rendered at a point of time when the decisions
           in Katiji, Ramegowda, Chandra          Mani, K.V.      Ayisumma
           and Lipok AO were holding the field. It is not that the said
           decisions do not hold the field now, having been overruled by any
           subsequent decision. Although there have been some decisions in
           the recent past [
State of M.P. v. Bherulal16
is one such decision
           apart from University of Delhi which have not accepted
           governmental lethargy, tardiness and indolence in presenting
           appeals within time as sufficient cause for condonation of delay,
           yet, the exercise of discretion by the High Court has to be tested
           on the anvil of the liberal and justice oriented approach
           expounded in the aforesaid decisions which have been
referred
           to above
.
xxx                xxx       xxx
41. Having bestowed serious consideration to the rival
           contentions, we feel that the High Court's decision 1 to condone
           the delay on account of the first respondent's inability to present
           the appeal within time, for the reasons assigned therein, does not
           suffer from any error warranting interference. As the
           aforementioned judgments have shown, such an exercise of
           discretion does, at times, call for a liberal and justice-oriented
           approach by the courts, where certain leeway could be provided
           to the State. The hidden forces that are at work in preventing an
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 138 of 170
appeal by the State being presented within the prescribed period
           of limitation so as not to allow a higher court to pronounce upon
           the legality and validity of an order of a lower court and thereby
           secure unholy gains, can hardly be ignored. Impediments in the
           working of the grand scheme of governmental functions have to
           be removed by taking a pragmatic view on balancing of the
           competing interests.
(Emphasis supplied)
209. At this juncture, it would be apposite to refer to the decision of this Court

      in
State of Rajasthan & Anr. v. Bal Kishan Mathur (Dead
) through Legal

      Representatives & Ors. reported in (2014) 1 SCC 592, wherein this Court

      explained the ratio of the decision in Postmaster General (supra).
This

      Court explained that as per Postmaster General (supra) there cannot be any

      preferential treatment towards the State or any of its instrumentality, when

      it comes to condonation of delay. It further explained that as long as there

      is no gross negligence or deliberate inaction or lack of bona fides, a broad

      and liberal approach should be adopted when dealing with an application

      for seeking condonation of delay. Unless the explanation furnished for the

      delay is wholly unacceptable or if no explanation whatsoever is offered or

      if the delay is inordinate and third-party rights had become embedded

      during the interregnum the courts should lean in favour of condonation. The

      relevant observations read as under: -
“8. It is correct that condonation of delay cannot be a matter of
           course; it is also correct that in seeking such condonation the
           State cannot claim any preferential or special treatment.
           However, in a situation where there has been no gross negligence
           or deliberate inaction or lack of bona fides this Court has always
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 139 of 170
taken a broad and liberal view so as to advance substantial
           justice instead of terminating a proceeding on a technical ground
           like limitation. Unless the explanation furnished for the delay is
           wholly unacceptable or if no explanation whatsoever is offered
           or if the delay is inordinate and third-party rights had become
           embedded during the interregnum the courts should lean in
           favour of condonation. Our observations in Postmaster
           General v. Living Media India Ltd. and
Amalendu Kumar
           Bera v. State of W.B.
do not strike any discordant note and have
           to be understood in the context of facts of the respective cases.”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
210. What may be discerned from the aforesaid is that the jurisprudence on

      condonation of delay under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, particularly

      where the State or any of its instrumentality is involved, has witnessed a

      significant shift. From a regime that once accorded preferential indulgence

      to the State, premised on its bureaucratic complexities and institutional

      inertia, the law has now evolved to insist upon parity between the

      government and private litigants. The rationale is that public interest is

      better served not by excusing governmental inefficiency, but by fostering

      accountability, diligence, and responsibility in the conduct of public

      litigation.
211. The earlier decisions of this Court, particularly in
K.V. Ayisumma
(supra),
Chandra Mani
(supra),
Lipok AO
(supra) and
Indian Oil Corpn
(supra)

      insofar as they favoured a liberal approach towards the State or any of its

      instrumentality in matters of condonation of delay, and showed indulgence
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 140 of 170
in condoning the same on ground of impersonal and slow-moving nature of

      these entities, no longer reflects the correct position in law. No litigant, be

      it a private party or a State or any of its functionaries, is entitled to a broader

      margin of error, falling in the category of inaction, negligence or

      casualness, in matters of limitation.
212. The law as it presently stands, post the decision of Postmaster General

      (supra), is unambiguous and clear. Condonation of delay is to remain an

      exception, not the rule. Governmental litigants, no less than private parties,

      must demonstrate bona fide, sufficient, and cogent cause for delay. Absent

      such justification, delay cannot be condoned merely on the ground of the

      identity of the applicant.
213. From a combined reading of
Bal Kishan Mathur
(supra) and
Sheo Raj

      Singh
(supra) it is equally manifest that the ratio of Postmaster General

      (supra) is, in essence, twofold. First, that State or any of its

      instrumentalities cannot be accorded preferential treatment in matters

      concerning condonation of delay under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act. The

      State must be judged by the same standards as any private litigant. To do

      otherwise would not only compromise the sanctity of limitation. The earlier

      view, insofar as it favoured a liberal approach towards the State or any of

      its instrumentality is no more the correct position of law. Secondly, that the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                            Page 141 of 170
habitual reliance of Government departments on bureaucratic red tape,

      procedural bottlenecks, or administrative inefficiencies as grounds for

      seeking condonation of delay cannot always, invariably accepted as a

      “sufficient cause” for the purpose of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act. If such

      reasons were to be accepted as a matter of course, the very discipline sought

      to be introduced by the law of limitation would be diluted, resulting in

      endless uncertainty in litigation.
214. What has been conveyed in so many words, by the decision of Postmaster

      General (supra) is that while excuses premised solely on bureaucratic

      lethargy cannot, by themselves, constitute sufficient cause, there may

      nonetheless be circumstances where the explanation offered, though

      involving bureaucratic procedures, reflects a genuine and bona fide cause

      for the delay. In such instances, the true test is whether the explanation

      demonstrates that the State acted with reasonable diligence and whether the

      delay occurred despite efforts to act within time. Where such bona fides are

      established, the Court retains the discretion to condone the delay.
215. In other words, Postmaster General (supra) does not shut the door on

      condonation of delay by the State in all cases involving bureaucratic

      processes. The real distinction lies between a case where delay is the result

      of gross negligence, inaction, or casual indifference on the part of the State,
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 142 of 170
and a case where delay has occurred despite sincere efforts, owing to the

      inherent complexities of governmental decision-making. While the former

      category must necessarily be rejected to uphold the discipline of limitation,

      the latter can still attract judicial indulgence where public interest is at stake

      and the cause is shown to be reasonable.
216. In this regard, the vital test that has to be employed, wherever “sufficient

      cause” is sought to be demonstrated on the ground of bureaucratic

      inefficiencies is to distinguish between whether the same is an

      “explanation” or an “excuse”. Although the two may appear to be one and

      the same, yet there exists a fine but pertinent distinction between an

      “excuse” and an “explanation”.
217. As illustrated in
Sheo Raj Singh
(supra) an “excuse” is often offered by a

      person to deny responsibility and consequences when under attack. It is sort

      of a defensive action. Calling something as just an “excuse” would imply

      that the explanation proffered is believed not to be true. An “explanation”

      on the other hand would demonstrate genuineness in actions and reasons

      assigned, and would other wise be devoid of any gross negligence,

      deliberate inaction or lack of bona fides, or indifference or casualness in

      conduct. Thus said, there is no formula that caters to all situations and,

      therefore, each case for condonation of delay based on existence or absence

      of sufficient cause has to be decided on its own facts.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                            Page 143 of 170
218. However, equally important to note is that wherever, any explanation is

      sought to be given on account of bureaucratic lethargy and inherent

      complexities of governmental decision-making, the same more often than

      not would invariably always is an “excuse”, as experience has shown us,

      depicted from a long line of decisions of this Court. It is at this stage, where

      the decision of Postmaster General (supra) assumes significance. It seeks

      to convey the messages, that court should not be agnostic, to how the State

      or its instrumentalities, often tend to take the recourse of condonation of

      delay in a casual manner.
219. Which is why, as per the ratio of Postmaster General (supra) and a plethora

      of other subsequent decision, the ordinary approach of the courts, in cases

      where delay is sought to be condoned by offering the explanation of

      bureaucratic lethargy or red-tapism, must be one of circumspection and

      reluctance. The courts ought to loathe in accepting such explanations as

      “sufficient cause”. They should apply their minds carefully, be slow in

      condoning delays on such reasons, and exceptional instances, where the

      explanation is found to be genuine, reflective of reasonable vigilance and

      promptitude in conduct, and free from gross negligence, deliberate inaction,

      lack of bona fides, or casual indifference, should such an explanation be

      accepted.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 144 of 170
iv.   Whether exercise of discretion in view of the earlier position of law
      may be interfered with?
220. Before we close this issue, we may address ourselves on one contention,

      vociferously canvassed on behalf of the respondents herein. It was

      submitted that since, in the present case the discretion to condone the delay

      was exercised by the High Court in 2017, and prior to the decisions of
Bherulal
(supra) and
University of Delhi
(supra), the High Court cannot be

      faulted with accepting the explanation offered by the respondents, tune with

      the decisions earlier occupying the field. Accordingly, it was urged that the

      exercise of discretion by the High Court must be tested on the anvil of the

      decisions that occupied the field when the delay was ultimately condoned.
In this regard, reliance was placed on
Sheo Raj Singh
(supra).
221. As already discussed, in
Sheo Raj Singh
(supra) since the explanation of

      bureaucratic inefficiencies was accepted and delay had been condoned by

      the High Court by exercising its discretion before the decision of

      Postmaster General (supra) came to be rendered, this Court in
Sheo Raj

      Singh
(supra) held that the exercise of discretion by the High Court would

      then, invariably have to be tested on the anvil of the liberal and justice

      oriented approach as expounded in the decisions which earlier occupied the

      field.
We may at the cost of repetition again reproduce the relevant

      observations of
Sheo Raj Singh
(supra) in this regard: -
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 145 of 170
“34. The order under challenge in this appeal is dated 21-12-
           2011. It was rendered at a point of time when the decisions
           in Katiji, Ramegowda, Chandra          Mani, K.V.      Ayisumma
           and Lipok AO were holding the field. It is not that the said
           decisions do not hold the field now, having been overruled by any
           subsequent decision. Although there have been some decisions in
           the recent past [
State of M.P. v. Bherulal16
is one such decision
           apart from University of Delhi which have not accepted
           governmental lethargy, tardiness and indolence in presenting
           appeals within time as sufficient cause for condonation of delay,
           yet, the exercise of discretion by the High Court has to be tested
           on the anvil of the liberal and justice oriented approach
           expounded in the aforesaid decisions which have been referred
           to above.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
222. At the outset, we may reject this contention outrightly. We say so, because

      the decisions of this Court in
Bherulal
(supra) and
University of Delhi
(supra) have followed the ratio laid in Postmaster General (supra), which

      was rendered all the way back in 2012 i.e., much prior to when the delay

      came to be condoned by the High Court in the case on hand.
223. Even if we assume, that the decision Postmaster General (supra) was not

      in existence, the contention of the respondent deserves to be rejected for the

      reasons we shall assign hereunder.
224. We have already elaborated in the earlier parts of this judgment on the two-
pronged inquiry that is required to be undertaken by the appellate court

      when sitting in appeal over a lower court’s decision in condoning the delay,

      which involves, first, looking into the existence of a “sufficient cause” and
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 146 of 170
secondly, into the exercise of discretion itself, where the first test is

      satisfied. This threshold test, involves ascertaining whether the order passed

      by the court below is not vitiated due to any material irregularity, want of

      evidence, extraneous considerations, failure to take into consideration any

      relevant fact, or being contrary to the law of the land (emphasis).
225. Where, however, the law, during the pendency of the appeal, has undergone

      a shift, there the court sitting in appeal, would not only be bound by the

      change in position of law, but would be well empowered to interfere with

      the lower courts decision, on that ground alone, notwithstanding the fact,

      that when the original decision was rendered, that was not the position of

      law. If any authority is required, in this regard, one may profitably refer to

      the decision of this Court in
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence v. Raj

      Kumar Arora & Ors.
reported in [2025 INSC 498] wherein one of us (J.B.

      Pardiwala J.) held that a decision of the court which either overrules or

      results in a change in position of law, generally operates retrospectively.
226. The question, whether interference on ground of change in law during

      pendency of proceedings, would really turn upon the context and nature of

      the discretion exercised. Ordinarily, such an interference would not only be

      justified but also warranted. But when it comes to condonation of delay, the

      considerations are slightly different, inasmuch as the court is required to

      prioritize a pragmatic and justice-oriented approach over technicalities.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 147 of 170
Rules of limitation are not meant to destroy the rights of parties. Thus, in

      such situations, the court may be refuse to interfere with the exercise of

      discretion by the lower court in condoning the delay, as long as view that

      was arrived at by the court below could have been taken by it, from the

      material on record, keeping in mind the position of law that prevailed then.

      However, this would depend upon the peculiar facts and circumstances of

      each case, and the attending circumstances, and what inevitably follows is

      that, there may be situations, where the appellate court may interfere,

      keeping in mind the changed position of law. No hard and fast rule can be
laid down in
this regard.
227. We may, with a view to obviate any confusion, clarify that ‘change in

      position of law’ should not be conflated with the ‘position of law’ that

      existed at the time of exercise of discretion to condone delay. In the former,

      the courts may or may not, interfere with the condonation of delay, if the

      same is in contradiction to a subsequent change in law, but in the latter, the

      courts ought to interfere with condonation of delay, for such a view could

      not have been plausibly arrived at by the lower court, in view of the law

      that already existed at the time of condonation of delay.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 148 of 170
v.   Public Policy vis-à-vis Public Interest in matters of delay on part of the
     State or any of its instrumentalities.
228. Limitation laws are themselves grounded in public policy, as already

      discussed in the preceding paragraphs of this judgment, it is based on the

      maxim ‘interest reipublicae ut sit finis litium’ i.e., “it is for the general

      welfare that a period be put to litigation”. Therefore, public interest is better

      served by timely governmental action than by condoning repeated lapses.

      State cannot simultaneously seek to represent the interest of the public and

      yet consistently fail to protect that very interest by allowing limitation

      periods to lapse.
229. Public interest is best served by ensuring efficiency and diligence in

      governmental functioning, rather than by condoning its lapses as a matter

      of course. Thus, a liberal inclination towards the State or any of its

      instrumentalities, in matters of condonation of delay, cannot be adopted,

      merely on the presumption that, if the delay is not condoned, public interest

      runs the risk of suffering, by a meritorious matter being thrown out. Public

      interest lies not in condoning governmental indifference, but in compelling

      efficiency, responsibility, and timely action.
230. To permit condonation of delay to become a matter of course for the

      Government would have the deleterious effect of institutionalising

      inefficiency. It would, in substance, incentivise indolence and foster a
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                           Page 149 of 170
culture where accountability for delay is eroded. If the State is assured that

      its lapses will invariably be excused under the rubric of “public interest,”

      there would remain little incentive for its officers to act with vigilance or

      for its instrumentalities to streamline procedures for timely action. The

      consequence would not be the advancement of public interest but rather its

      betrayal.
231. Public interest, therefore, does not lie in condoning governmental

      negligence, but in compelling efficiency, responsibility, and timely

      decision-making. This Court has time and again emphasised that liberal

      condonation of delay on behalf of the State, merely on the ground that

      refusal might cause the dismissal of a potentially meritorious matter, is a

      misplaced proposition. Public interest is not synonymous with the cause of

      the Government; it is, instead, synonymous with the enforcement of rule of

      law, certainty in legal rights, and an administrative machinery that functions

      with diligence and accountability.
232. It must, therefore, be underscored that the guiding principle is not the

      protection of governmental indifference but the promotion of responsible

      governance. The State is under a higher duty to act in time, for in every

      matter it litigates, it does so not in its private capacity, but as the trustee of

      the people’s interest. Hence, repeated indulgence in condoning delays on

      grounds of bureaucratic inefficiency would amount to eroding the very
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                            Page 150 of 170
object of limitation statutes, which are enacted in every civilised

      jurisdiction for the sake of finality, certainty, and public order.
233. Any other view, would invariably defeat the sound public policy embodied

      in the
Limitation Act
and fail in enthusing efficiency in administration, and

      bring a balance between accountability and autonomy of action, It would

      result in giving immunity or carte blanche power to act as it pleases with

      the public at whim or vagary and inevitably spell doom all over the

      collective responsibility that the State and its instrumentalities are entrusted

      with. Thus, we are of the considered opinion, that delay cannot be

      condoned, merely because not doing so would result in non-suiting the State

      and thereby run the ostensible risk of public interest suffering. Such by no

      stretch can be the sole consideration for the purpose of
Section 5
of the

      Limitation Act, as to do so would be to ignore the provision of
Section 3
and the overarching public policy of giving quietus to lis, that forms the

      bedrock of the
Limitation Act
.
234. Even otherwise, it is no more res-integra, that law of limitation has to be

      applied all but the same and with all its rigour, even if it may harshly affect

      a particular party.
In
Basawaraj
(supra) this Court observed that a result

      flowing from a statutory provision is never an evil. A court has no power

      to ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a distress resulting from

      its operation. Even if the statutory provision may cause hardship or
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 151 of 170
inconvenience to a particular party the court has no choice but to give full

      effect to the same. It is based on the legal maxim dura lex sed lex i.e., “the

      law is hard but it is the law”. The relevant observations read as under: -
“12. It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may
           harshly affect a particular party but it has to be applied with all
           its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no power
           to extend the period of limitation on equitable grounds. ‘A result
           flowing from a statutory provision is never an evil. A court has
           no power to ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a
           distress resulting from its operation.’ The statutory provision
           may cause hardship or inconvenience to a particular party but
           the court has no choice but to enforce it giving full effect to the
           same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means “the law is
           hard but it is the law”, stands attracted in such a situation. It has
           consistently been held that, “inconvenience is not” a decisive
           factor to be considered while interpreting a statute.
13. The statute of limitation is founded on public policy, its aim
           being to secure peace in the community, to suppress fraud and
           perjury, to quicken diligence and to prevent oppression. It seeks
           to bury all acts of the past which have not been agitated
           unexplainably and have from lapse of time become stale. [...]”

                                                (Emphasis supplied)
235. An application seeking condonation of delay is to be decided only within

      the parameters
laid down by
this Court. In case there was no sufficient cause

      to prevent a litigant to approach the court on time condoning the delay

      without any justification, on lofty ideals amounts to passing an order in

      violation of the statutory provisions and it tantamounts to showing utter

      disregard to the statute.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 152 of 170
E.     Whether the High Court was justified in condoning the delay?
236. We heard Mr. Akshat Shrivastava, the learned counsel appearing for the

      appellant. He would argue that the respondent no. 1 failed to assign any

      “sufficient cause” for the gross delay, more particularly as to why the second

      appeal could not be filled within the prescribed period of limitation. He

      submitted that the High Court erred in allowing the application seeking

      condonation of delay in the absence of any sufficient cause thereof. The

      learned counsel contended that the filing of the second appeal by the

      respondent housing corporation is nothing but gross abuse of process of law,

      more particularly when the officials of the respondent housing corporation

      did nothing for a period of almost 6-years, despite notice being served to

      them at the time of execution of the decree on 28.03.2011. He would submit

      that the condonation of such gross and inordinate delay by the High Court

      could be said to be ex-facie illegal and against the very fundamental cannons

      of the law of limitation and public policy.
237. Per contra, Ms. Kiran Suri, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

      respondent no. 1, would argue that the High Court no error not to speak of

      any error of law in condoning the delay and in accepting the sufficient cause

      assigned for the same. She would submit that, when substantial justice and

      technical considerations are pitted against each other, the latter must give
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 153 of 170
way to the former, more particularly when public interest is involved. She

     further submitted that the delay was on account of the deliberate negligence

     on the part of the officers, and in such circumstances the interest of

     respondent no. 1, as an instrumentality of State, must not be put to a

     disadvantage. She further brought to the notice of this Court that the

     respondent no. 1 had already taken disciplinary action against the erring

     delinquent officials.
238. The learned Senior Counsel also contended that the suit filed by the appellant

     was one for possession, however, the First Appellate Court proceeded to

     erroneously grant the relief of compensation, aggrieved by which the

     respondent no. 1 had to prefer second appeal before the High Court. She

     submitted that the persons who were found to be in unlawful possession of

     the suit property had nothing to do with the respondent no. 1, and that it

     would be very harsh to recover such compensation from the respondent no.

     1, which functions on public exchequer.
239. Indisputably, there was a gross and inordinate delay of almost 11-years in

     filing the second appeal. The respondent no. 1 maintains that the delay was

     on account of five erring officials, including an Executive Engineer who was

     designated as the litigation conducting officer. It is the case of the respondent

     housing corporation that the day it came to learn about the decree passed by
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 154 of 170
the First Appellate Court dated 15.04.2006, its legal department on

     27.05.2006 advised the respondent to prefer a second appeal. However, due

     to the sheer negligence exhibited by the Executive Engineer in furnishing the

     requisite information and documents to the Special Land Acquisition Officer

     (hereinafter the “SLAO”), in spite of various correspondence requesting for

     the same on 01.06.2006, 09.06.2006 and 20.07.2006, respectively the second

     appeal could not be filed in time.
240. It further appears that the decision to file the second appeal was taken only

     on 17.10.2006, which was anyway beyond the limitation period. Despite the

     expiry of the limitation period, it is only after almost a year that the matter

     was assigned to an advocate, on whose complaints of no assistance from the

     Executive Engineer, the SLAO pursued the Executive Engineer again, vide

     letter dated 16.10.2007, requesting him to provide the necessary files and

     record of the case. It is the case of the respondent no. 1, that such

     correspondences were exchanged until 2008.
241. The execution proceedings came to be initiated by the appellant on

     20.01.2011, pursuant to which the first notice was issued to the respondent

     no. 1 on 28.03.2011. Despite the callousness exhibited by the person holding

     the office of the Executive Engineer, the same officer was appointed to make

     representations for the respondent no. 1 in the proceedings. The
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 155 of 170
Commissioner of the respondent no. 1 was informed about the aforesaid

     proceedings on 28.01.2017 when an order of attachment was passed by the

     Executing Court. Thereafter, a new officer was appointed to facilitate the

     respondent’s litigation, and the second appeal was finally filed on 10.02.2017

     before the High Court, along with an application under
Section 5
of the 1963

     Act read with
Section 151
of the CPC.
242. To our utter shock and dismay, the High Court accepted the explanation of

     sufficient offered by the respondent no. 1. We are at our wits “end” to

     understand the aforesaid findings recorded by the High Court. It appears that

     the respondent no. 1 has tried to make the Executive Engineer a scapegoat,

     who undoubtedly acted in a most irresponsible and callous manner but did

     not have to take the entire blame to himself. This is more apparent from the

     fact that the disciplinary proceedings against the concerned Executive

     Engineer allegedly responsible for the delay was initiated only on

     10.03.2017, while the application for condonation of delay was filed exactly

     a month before i.e., on 10.02.2017. It appears to us that the respondent no. 1

     took such coercive actions only to ingratiate itself before the High Court to

     demonstrate its bona fides and butter its cries of vigilance.
243. It was urged by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents

     herein that the deliberate inaction or mala fides on the part of the officials
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 156 of 170
cannot be imputed to the State or its instrumentalities, since the Government

     cannot carry on business upon principle of distrust.
In this regard, reliance

     was placed on the decision of this Court in
G. Ramegowda, Major
(supra).
244.
In
G. Ramegowda, Major
(supra) this Court observed that due to the

     impersonal nature of the Government, it would be unfair and unrealistic to

     put government and private parties on the same footing in all respects in such

     matters. Thus, where a government makes out a case where public interest

     was shown to have suffered owing to acts of fraud or bad faith on the part of

     its officers or agents and where the officers were clearly at cross-purposes

     with it, then the conduct of such officers should not be imputed to the

     Government for refusing condonation of delay. The relevant observations

     read as under: -
“17. [...] It would, perhaps, be unfair and unrealistic to put
            government and private parties on the same footing in all
            respects in such matters. Implicit in the very nature of
            governmental functioning is procedural delay incidental to the
            decision-making process. In the opinion of the High Court, the
            conduct of the law officers of the Government placed the
            Government in a predicament and that it was one of those cases
            where the mala fides of the officers should not be imputed to
            Government. It relied upon and trusted its law officers. Lindley,
            M.R., in the In re National Bank of Wales Ltd. observed, though
            in a different context:
“Business cannot be carried on upon principles of
                distrust. Men in responsible positions must be trusted by
                those above them, as well as by those below them, until
                there is reason to distrust them.”

            In the opinion of the High Court, it took quite some time for the
            government to realise that the law officers failed that trust.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                       Page 157 of 170
18. While a private person can take instant decision a
            “bureaucratic or democratic organ” it is said by a learned Judge
            “hesitates and debates, consults and considers, speaks through
            paper, moves horizontally and vertically till at last it gravitates
            towards a conclusion, — unmindful of time and impersonally”.
Now at the end, should we interfere with the discretion exercised
            by the High Court? Shri Datar criticised that the delay on the
            part of Government even after January 20, 1971 for over a year
            cannot be said to be either bona fide or compelled by reasons
            beyond its control. This criticism is not without substance.
            Government could and ought to have moved with greater
            diligence and dispatch consistent with the urgency of the
            situation. The conduct of Government was perilously close to
            such inaction as might, perhaps, have justified rejection of its
            prayer for condonation. But as is implicit in the reasoning of the
            High Court, the unarticulated thought, perhaps was that in the
            interest of keeping the stream of justice pure and clean the
            awards under appeal should not be permitted to assume finality
            without an examination of their merits. The High Court noticed
            that the Government Pleader who was in office till December 15,
            1970 had applied for certified copies on July 20, 1970, but the
            application was allowed to be dismissed for default. In one case,
            however, he appears to have taken away the certified copy even
            after he ceased to be a Government Pleader.”

                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
245. As already discussed in the earlier parts of this judgment, State or any of its

      instrumentalities cannot be accorded preferential treatment in matters

      concerning condonation of delay under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act.
G.

      Ramegowda, Major
(supra) itself acknowledges that, ordinarily there is “no

      general principle saving the party from all mistakes of its counsel or agents”.

      Even if “there is negligence, deliberate or gross inaction or lack of bona

      fides on the part of the party or its counsel there is no reason why the opposite
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 158 of 170
side should be exposed to a time-barred appeal”. The relevant observations

     read as under: -
“14. The contours of the area of discretion of the courts in the
            matter of condonation of delays in filing appeals are set out in a
            number of pronouncements of this Court. See:
Ramlal, Motilal
            and Chhotelal v. Rewa Coalfield Ltd.
;
Shakuntala Devi
            Jain v. Kuntal Kumari
; Concord of India Insurance Co.
Ltd. v. Nirmala           Devi
;
Lala         Mata          Din v. A.
            Narayanan
;
Collector, Land Acquisition v. Katiji
etc. There is, it
            is true, no general principle saving the party from all mistakes of
            its counsel. If there is negligence, deliberate or gross inaction or
            lack of bona fides on the part of the party or its counsel there is
            no reason why the opposite side should be exposed to a time-
            barred appeal.”
246. However, the reason why, this Court nonetheless, held that acts of fraud or

     bad faith on the part of its officers or agents should not be imputed to the

     Government atleast for condonation of delay was in view of the earlier

     position of law, whereby the State and its instrumentalities were not placed

     on the same pedestal as any ordinary private litigant, in view of the

     impersonal character of the Government as an entity.
247. But the position of law is no longer this. As per Postmaster General (supra)

     and the subsequent decisions of this Court, consideration for condonation of

     delay under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act does not and cannot vary

     depending on the identity or status of the party, whether it be the

     Government, a public body, or a private litigant, so as to apply a different

     yardstick.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 159 of 170
248. The subsequent decision of this Court in
Tejpal
(supra), after duly taking

     note of the change in position of law, specifically rejected the contention that

     acts of mala fides on the part of specific individuals should not be imputed

     to the State or its instrumentalities. It held that to accept such a proposition

     would amount to creating an artificial distinction between the private parties

     and the Government entities vis-à-vis the law of limitation. The relevant

     observations read as under: -
“54. It seems to us that acceding to the appellants' request on the
            aforesaid account would also have undesirable consequences. If
            delay were to be condoned merely on the basis of a broad general
            assertion of bureaucratic indifference, without requiring
            demonstration of bona fides or an act of mala fides on the part of
            specific individuals, it would create an artificial distinction
            between the private parties and the Government entities vis-à-vis
            the law of limitation. This would not be in conformity with the
            spirit of equality before law as guaranteed under our
            Constitution. Allowing such latitude would further distort
            incentives for the Government and encourage more laxity by the
            bureaucracy in its general functioning, thereby undermining
            quality governance.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
249. Once the State chooses to litigate, it must shoulder the same responsibilities

     and abide by the same limitations that bind every litigant. To permit the State

     to evade the consequences of delay on the ostensible plea that the fault lay

     with individual officers would amount to diluting the rigour of limitation

     statutes and undermining their very object. Such an approach would not only
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 160 of 170
privilege the State unjustly over private parties but would also perpetuate a

     culture of indifference and irresponsibility within the administration.
250. As far back as 1996, this Court in
Chandra Mani
(supra) held that where the

     case requires an appeal or application to be filed, despite the delay, then

     prompt action should be pursued by the officer responsible to file the appeal

     and he should be made personally responsible for lapses, if any. Thus, even

     if for a moment, we accept that, mala-fide actions of few officers should not

     be imputed to the Government, the position still remains that, once the State

     or its instrumentality finds that, few of its officers were negligent, it should

     promptly take action to file the appeal or application, as the case may be,

     through its other officers and simultaneously take action against the

     delinquent officers.
251. As already observed, in the present case at hand, despite the callousness

     exhibited by the Executive Engineer, the respondent no. 1 herein took no

     steps towards mitigating the delays and ensuring that the appeal was

     preferring as soon as possible. On the contrary, the Executive Engineer was

     appointed to make representations for the respondent no. 1 in the

     proceedings. Even the disciplinary proceedings against the concerned

     Executive Engineer came to be initiated much later, to be precise exactly a

     month before the date on which the application for condonation of delay was
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 161 of 170
filed. In such circumstances, even if we do not impute the deliberate inaction

     or mala fides on the part of the Executive Engineer to the respondent no. 1

     herein, there is nothing to show that the respondent no. 1 acted in a

     reasonably diligent manner.
252. Even if the case put up by the respondent no. 1 is to be accepted at its face

     value, the respondent no. 1 could be said to have failed to assign any genuine

     sufficient cause to justify the delay from the date of receiving intimation

     about the order of the First Appellate Court, passed on 15.04.2006 till the

     expiry of the limitation period, which was sometime in July 2006, because it

     was only in the correspondence dated 17.10.2006 that the respondent no. 1,

     while acknowledging the advice tendered by its advocate, reflected that it

     would prefer a second appeal. We have little to no hesitation in saying that

     on 17.10.2006, it was already too late in the day to take any decision or make

     any forms of mind. Nonetheless, the second appeal was only filed on

     10.02.2017, with a delay of almost 11 years.
253. As already noted in the foregoing parts of this judgment the respondent no.
1 could be said to have failed to explain the delay on its part from the date of

     the receipt of the order of the First Appellate Court till the expiry of the

     limitation period.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 162 of 170
254. We say so because if such observations by the High Court, to condone delay

      in the interest of a State-machinery, were allowed to be sustained by us, it

      would allow the State-machineries a leeway to systematically orchestrate

      delays in the guise of laxity exhibited by their authorities. Given the majesty

      and colossality a State-machinery would hold against a private litigant, it

      would be grossly unfair to a litigant, who would be perpetually entangled in

      the clutches of litigation, if enormous delays, like that of almost 11 years in

      the present case, are permitted to be condoned. This Court has never turned

      a blind eye to the gradients of substantive justice.
255. It hardly matters whether a litigant is a private party or a State when it comes

      to condoning the gross delay of more than 11-years. If the litigant chooses to

      approach the court long after the lapse of the time prescribed under the

      relevant provisions of the law, then he cannot turn around and say that no

      prejudice would be caused to either side by the delay being condoned. This

      litigation between the parties started in 1989. We are in 2025. Almost 36

      years have elapsed. However, till date the respondent has not been able to

      reap the fruits of his decree. The High Court has made a mockery of justice

      by condoning this delay of 3966 days and once again ask the appellant to

      undergo the rigmarole of the legal proceedings.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 163 of 170
256. As far as the contention of the respondent no. 1 is concerned apropos to the

     merits of molding of relief by awarding of compensation by the First

     Appellate Court, the same is squarely answered by the principles

     encapsulated in
Pathapati Subba Reddy
(supra), wherein it is categorically

     maintained that the court considering a condonation of delay ought not go

     into the merits of the case at hand.
257. We also wish to highlight that the High Court applied the legal position

     incorrectly in the impugned order and performed an exercise of “merit-

     hunting”. It gave a prima facie relevance to the argument of the respondent

     no. 1 on the grounds that the suit of the appellant was not at all maintainable

     in the first place. In paragraph 13 of the impugned order, the High Court

     recorded that a semblance of right in favour of respondent no. 1 swayed its

     mind to allow the condonation of delay, and it accepted the same as a

     “sufficient cause”. We hold such observations to be erroneous and ex facie

     bad in law. Similar contentions were rejected by this Court in
State of

     Madhya Pradesh v. Bherulal
, reported in (2020) 10 SCC 654, wherein the

     appellant-State was seeking a condonation of delay of 663 days. This Court

     sternly noted that it will not let the courts to be forums wherein the

     Government can walk-in, when it desires, entirely ignoring the period of

     limitation, and buttress reliance on cases of this Court wherein it allowed
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 164 of 170
condonation, employing its discretionary powers, on merits or modalities of

    peculiarities of those cases. Relevant paragraphs are extracted below:
“3. No doubt, some leeway is given for the government
           inefficiencies but the sad part is that the authorities keep on
           relying on judicial pronouncements for a period of time when
           technology had not advanced and a greater leeway was given to
           the Government [...]

                             xxx               xxx        xxx
5. A preposterous proposition is sought to be propounded that if
           there is some merit in the case, the period of delay is to be given
           a go-by. If a case is good on merits, it will succeed in any case.
It is really a bar of limitation which can even shut out good cases.
           This does not, of course, take away the jurisdiction of the Court
           in an appropriate case to condone the delay.
6. We are also of the view that the aforesaid approach is being
           adopted in what we have categorised earlier as “certificate
           cases”. The object appears to be to obtain a certificate of
           dismissal from the Supreme Court to put a quietus to the issue
           and thus, say that nothing could be done because the highest
           Court has dismissed the appeal. It is to complete this formality
           and save the skin of officers who may be at default that such a
           process is followed. We have on earlier occasions also strongly
           deprecated such a practice and process. There seems to be no
           improvement. The purpose of coming to this Court is not to obtain
           such certificates and if the Government suffers losses, it is time
           when the officer concerned responsible for the same bears the
           consequences. The irony is that in none of the cases any action is
           taken against the officers, who sit on the files and do nothing. It
           is presumed that this Court will condone the delay and even in
           making submissions, straightaway the counsel appear to address
           on merits without referring even to the aspect of limitation as
           happened in this case till we pointed out to the counsel that he
           must first address us on the question of limitation.
7. We are thus, constrained to send a signal and we propose to
           do in all matters today, where there are such inordinate delays
           that the Government or State authorities coming before us must
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                          Page 165 of 170
pay for wastage of judicial time which has its own value. Such
            costs can be recovered from the officers responsible.”

                                                (Emphasis supplied)
258. The length of the delay is a relevant matter which the court must take into

     consideration while considering whether the delay should be condoned or

     not. From the tenor of the approach of the respondents, it appears that they

     want to fix their own period of limitation for instituting the proceedings for

     which law has prescribed a period of limitation. Once it is held that a party

     has lost his right to have the matter considered on merits because of his own

     inaction for a long, it cannot be presumed to be non-deliberate delay and in

     such circumstances of the case, it cannot be heard to plead that the substantial

     justice deserves to be preferred as against the technical considerations. While

     considering the plea for condonation of delay, the court must not start with

     the merits of the main matter. The court owes a duty to first ascertain the

     bona fides of the explanation offered by the party seeking condonation. It is

     only if the sufficient cause assigned by the litigant and the opposition of the

     other side is equally balanced that the court may bring into aid the merits of

     the matter for the purpose of condoning the delay.
259. We are of the view that the question of limitation is not merely a technical

     consideration. The rules of limitation are based on the principles of sound

     public policy and principles of equity. We should not keep the ‘Sword of
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 166 of 170
Damocles’ hanging over the head of the respondent for indefinite period of

      time to be determined at the whims and fancies of the appellants.
260. From the above exposition of law, it is abundantly clear that the High Court

      has erroneously condoned a massive delay of 3966 days on account of certain

      lapses at the administrative levels and of there being no follow-ups in the

      proceedings, along with finding certain merits in the case of the respondent

      no. 1 against the maintainability of the suit of the appellant and that of the

      relief molded by the First Appellate Court. We have no hesitation in stating

      that such grounds are nowhere near to being “sufficient cause” as per
Section

      5
of the 1963 Act. The High Court lost sight of the fact that the precedents

      and authorities it relied upon by it had delays of two-digits, or even that of

      single-digit, more particularly the delay in those cases was supported by

      sufficient cause. The present case, however, stands on a very different

      footing, owing to such an enormous delay. Hence, we are not inclined to

      accept the condonation of the delay by the High Court.
V.           CONCLUSION
261. Thus, for the reasons aforesaid, the impugned order of the High Court

       deserves to be set aside. Before we proceed to close this judgment, we deem

       it appropriate to make it abundantly clear that administrative lethargy and
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                        Page 167 of 170
laxity can never stand as a sufficient ground for condonation of delay, and

       we want to convey an emphatic message to all the High Courts that delays

       shall not be condoned on frivolous and superficial grounds, until a proper

       case of sufficient cause is made out, wherein the State-machinery is able to

       establish that it acted with bona fides and remained vigilant all throughout.

       Procedure is a handmaid to justice, as is famously said. But courts, and

       more particularly the constitutional courts, ought not to obviate the

       procedure for a litigating State agency, who also equally suffer the bars of

       limitation from pursuing litigations due to its own lackadaisical attitude.
262. The High Courts ought not give a legitimizing effect to such callous attitude

     of State authorities or its instrumentalities, and should remain extra cautious,

     if the party seeking condonation of delay is a State-authority. They should

     not become surrogates for State laxity and lethargy. The constitutional courts

     ought to be cognizant of the apathy and pangs of a private litigant. Litigants

     cannot be placed in situations of perpetual litigations, wherein the fruits of

     their decrees or favourable orders are frustrated at later stages. We are at

     pains to reiterate this everlasting trend, and put all the High Courts to notice,

     not to reopen matters with inordinate delay, until sufficient cause exists, as

     by doing so the courts only add insult to the injury, more particularly in

     appeals under
Section 100
of the CPC, wherein its jurisdiction is already

     limited to questions of law.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 168 of 170
263. Limitation periods are prescribed to maintain a sweeping scope for the lis to

     attain for finality. More than the importance of judicial time, what worries us

     is the plight of a litigant with limited means, who is to contest against an

     enormous State, and its elaborate and never-exhausting paraphernalia. Such

     litigations deserve to be disposed of at the very threshold, because, say if a

     party litigating against the State, for whatever reason, is unable to contest the

     condonation of delay in appeal, unlike the present case, it reopens the lis for

     another round of litigation, and leaves such litigant listless yet again. As

     courts of conscience, it is our obligation that we assure that a litigant is not

     sent from pillar to post to seek justice.
264. No litigant should be permitted to be so lethargic and apathetic, much less be

     permitted by the courts to misuse the process of law.
265. In the result, this appeal stands allowed. The impugned judgment and order

     of the High Court is hereby set aside. Apart from the costs of Rs 25,000/-

     imposed by the High Court, to be paid by the respondent no. 1 to the

     appellant, we impose an additional cost of Rs 25,000/- on the respondent no.

     1, to be paid to the Karnataka State Legal Services Authority within a period

     of four weeks from today.
266. The Court of Principle Judge (Junior Division), Kalaburagi, is directed to

     proceed with the execution of the decree in favour of the appellant in E.P.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                         Page 169 of 170
No. 2 of 2011, and shall ensure that the proceedings conclude within a period

      of 2 months from the date of this judgment.
267. Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
268. Registry shall circulate one copy each of this judgment to all the High Courts.
....................................... J.
(J.B. Pardiwala)




                                                        ....................................... J.
(R. Mahadevan)

 New Delhi;
12th September, 2025.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10704 of 2019                             Page 170 of 170