[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Prakash Asphaltings And Toll Highways ... vs Mandeepa Enterprises on 12 September, 2025
2025 INSC 1108



                                                                        REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11418 OF 2025
                              (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 12510 OF 2024)


                         PRAKASH ASPHALTINGS AND
                         TOLL HIGHWAYS (INDIA) LIMITED               APPELLANT(S)


                                                    VERSUS

                         MANDEEPA ENTERPRISES
                         AND OTHERS                                RESPONDENT(S)


                                               JUDGMENT
UJJAL BHUYAN, J.
This civil appeal is directed against the judgment

                         and order dated 23.02.2024 passed by a Division Bench of the

                         High Court at Calcutta (High Court) in MAT No. 93 of 2024.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHETAN ARORA
Date: 2025.09.12
2.        Be it stated that MAT No. 93 of 2024 was filed by
16:43:13 IST
Reason:
the respondent No. 1 as an intra-court appeal against the final
order dated 03.01.2024 passed by a learned Single Judge of

the High Court dismissing the writ petition, WPA No. 29001 of

2023, filed by respondent No. 1.
3.         Respondent No. 1 had filed the aforesaid writ

petition assailing the action of respondent Nos. 2, 3 and 4

(State of West Bengal and its officials) refusing to treat

respondent No. 1 as the highest bidder by permitting it to

rectify its financial bid after the bidding process was over. After

observing that there was no scope for interference, learned

Single Judge dismissed the writ petition.
4.         Aggrieved by such dismissal, respondent No. 1

preferred an intra-court appeal which was registered as MAT

No. 93 of 2024. According to the Division Bench, the error in

quoting the figure by respondent No. 1 was inadvertent;

instead of quoting the price for the entire contract period of

1095 days, respondent No. 1 had uploaded per day amount of

the Bill of Quantity (BOQ) of Rs. 9,72,999.00. Division Bench

further observed that respondent No. 1 had promptly sought

for correction of the error immediately after reopening of the
2
price bids. Therefore, the Division Bench allowed the writ

appeal vide the judgment and order dated 23.02.2024 by

setting aside the order of the learned Single Judge, further

directing respondent Nos. 2, 3 and 4 to evaluate the BOQ rate

of respondent No. 1 by treating the amount offered by

respondent No. 1 as the per day amount and then on that

basis to compute the total amount for the entire contract

period of 1095 days. However, the Division Bench was of the

view that an opportunity should be granted by the tendering

authority to the other bidders as well to match the price of

respondent No. 1 and thereafter to take a final decision with

regard to the award of contract.
5.        It is this judgment and order which is under

impugnment in the present proceeding.
6.        At the outset, relevant facts may be noted.
7.        A notice inviting electronic bid No. 7 of 2023-24

dated 17.10.2023 was issued by the Superintending Engineer

and Project Director, Project Implementation Unit – I, Public

Works (Roads) Directorate, Government of West Bengal for
3
engaging complete Road User Fee (RUF) collection operator for

RUF collection from commercial vehicles (non-passenger) at

designated locations on few roads in the State of West Bengal.

In this case, we are concerned with the following work:
RUF Collection with HNETC System Integration and
     Transaction Acquiring services at Fee collection plaza
     under   NETC    programme     through   NPCI    approved
     acquirer bank including engagement of required man
     power for operation of Road User Fee collection plaza for
     Dankuni Chandannagar Mogra in Hooghly district SH
13.
8.         The contract period is for 1095 days. While the

annual potential collection was pegged at Rs. 21.60 crores, the

earnest    money   deposit/bid    security   was    fixed   at   Rs.

25,00,000.00. As per Clause 2 of the notice inviting electronic

bid, there would be two bids: technical bid and financial bid,

both of which would have to be submitted concurrently duly

digitally signed in the website of the West Bengal Government.

Clause 3 mentioned that the rates should be quoted both in

words and in figures in specific format i.e. BOQ. In case of any

discrepancy between words and figures, the rate quoted in
4
words would be treated as the actual rate offered. After

bidding, the selected bidder will be the H1 bidder who will offer

the highest remittance for the contract period and will make

necessary agreement with the condition that the accepted bid

amount over the stipulated period will have to be deposited in

advance as per payment schedule to the government account

in lieu of RUF collection right.
9.          Clause 4 lays down the eligibility criteria for

participation in the Bid. Clause 4(g) is very specific. It says that

any change in the template of BOQ will not be accepted under

any circumstances. Clause 4(g) reads thus:
Any change in template of BOQ will not be accepted
       under any circumstances.
10.         The date and time schedule of the tender process

 as provided in Clause 9 was as follows:
9. Date & Time Schedule:
Particulars                 Date & Time
         1. Date of Publishing NIT & 17/10/2023
            Tender Documents
2.Document Sale/Download 18/10/2023 from 10.00
            Start Date               a.m.
3. Pre Bid Meeting with the 03/11/2023 at 1.00
            intending bidders        p.m. at the Conference
                                     Hall   of   PWD     at
5
Nabanna, 8th Floor,
                                   325, Sarat Chatterjee
                                   Road.,Howrah- 711102.
4. Bid Submission/ Upload 08/11/2023 from 3.00
             Start Date            p.m.
5. Bid Submission/ Upload 22/11/2023 upto 3.00
            End Date               p.m.
6. Date of opening of 24/11/2023 at 3.00
            Technical Proposals    p.m.
7. Date of opening of To be notified at the
            Financial Bid/ Proposals time of publishing List
                                     of Technically Qualified
                                     Bidders in the web
                                     portal only.
11.         Instructions to Bidders is part of the notice inviting

electronic bid. Clause 5 thereof deals with submission of bids.

It clarified that the notice inviting bid was of two bid system:
(i)   technical   and   (ii)   financial, both     to be submitted

concurrently in the portal. Bidders who would be technically

pre-qualified     in    respect       of   technical   and   financial

eligibility/capability criteria would only be permitted to

participate in the financial bidding. Bidders were required to

submit online in two folders for each work, one being technical

proposal and the other being financial proposal. It was clarified

that at the time of uploading bid, care should be taken so that

during evaluation, all the documents required to be submitted
6
by the bidders are found in a neat, clear and in a readable

format, otherwise the bid might be treated as cancelled. The

instructions to bidders also clarifies that technical proposals

will be opened by the Bid Inviting Authority (BIA) or by the Bid

Evaluation Committee, and thereafter to upload the summary

list of technically qualified bidders. Heading of sub-clause B is

bid evaluation. As per sub-clause B(v), in the course of

evaluation,   the    notice    inviting    authority     may     seek

clarification/information or additional supporting documents

or original hard copies of documents already submitted and if

these are not produced by the bidders within the stipulated

time frame, their proposals will be liable for rejection. Clause

5B (v) of the Instruction to Bidders is as follows:
v. While evaluation the Notice Inviting Authority may
     summon of the bids and seek clarification/information or
     additional supporting documents or original hard copies
     against any of the documents only, which are already
     submitted/uploaded to the web portal and if these are not
     produced by the intending Bidders within the stipulated
     time frame, their proposals will be liable for rejection.
7
12.          The following seven bidders had participated in the

present tender process. These seven bidders are as follows:
1. Ainul Hoque
2. SK Nasir.
3. Mandeepa Enterprises
4. RMN Infrastructures Limited.
5. M/S GVR Infra Projects Limited.
6. Prakash Asphaltings and Toll Highways India Ltd
7. Eagle Infra India Ltd.
13.          Tender evaluation was carried out by a five-member

screening committee for bid evaluation on 06.12.2023 which

was constituted vide G.O. No. 3410-PW/O/E-1/2M-17/2017

dated 18.09.2017. After evaluation of the technical bids by

aforesaid committee, it was found that out of the aforesaid

total seven bidders, only four numbers of bidders were found

to be technically qualified. Three bidders were found to be non

eligible and declared as disqualified. The short listed four

bidders are as follows:
(i)    Ainul Hoque

      (ii)   Mandeepa Enterprises
8
(iii)       Prakash Asphaltings and Toll Highways (India)

                  Limited

      (iv)        Eagle Infra India Limited
It was mentioned that financial bids would be

opened on 08.12.2023 at 06:30 pm.
14.               Accordingly, forty eight hours after declaration of

technical evaluation, financial bids of the four technically

qualified bidders were opened electronically as per the

e-tender mechanism. On such opening, it was found that the

appellant Prakash Asphaltings and Toll Highways (India)

Limited was the highest bidder with the quoted amount of

Rs. 91,19,00,000.00 (for 1095 days). It was also found that

respondent No. 1 was the lowest bidder (H4) at the offered

amount of Rs. 9,72,999.00. Details of financial bid evaluation

are as under:
BOQ Summary Details
  Tender Title: WBPWD/PW(R)/SEPD/PIU-I/NIB-07 OF 2023-24, SI-3
                 TENDER ID: 2023_WBPWD_595358_3

 Sheet    SI.               Bidder Name            Amount       Bid Rank
 Name     No.
 BoQ1      1        Prakash Asphaltings and Toll 911900000.00     H1
                    Highways India Ltd.
2     Eagle Infra India Ltd.     783899999.00       H2
9
3     Ainul Hoque                            652176525.00                  H3
                   4     Mandeepa Enterprises                   972999.00                     H4
15.              Since much hinges on this, we may extract the item

      rate BOQ of respondent No. 1 which is as under:
Item Rate BoQ
      Tender Inviting Authority: Superintending Engineer & Project
      Director, Project Implementation Unit-I.

      Name of Work: RUF Collection with HNETC System Integration and
      Transaction Acquiring services at Fee collection plaza under NETC
      programme through NPCI approved acquirer bank including
      engagement of required man power for operation of Road User Fee
      collection plaza for Dankuni Chandannagar Mogra in Hooghly
      district SH 13.
Contract No: SL No. 3 of eNIB No. 07 of 2023-2024 of S.E. & PD/PIU-I


Name of the Bidder/Bidding Firm/Company:                              Mandeepa Enterprises

                                            PRICE SCHEDULE
(This BOQ template must not be modified/replaced by the bidder and the same should be uploaded after
filling the relevant columns, else the bidder is liable to be rejected for this tender. Bidders are allowed to
enter the Bidder Name and Values only)
NUMB TEXT#                              NUMBER#     TEXT#     NUMBER#          NUMBER#        TEXT#
ER#
SL.     Name of the road on which       Quantity    Units     Amount      of   TOTAL          TOTAL
No.     Road User Fee Plaza is                                Road User Fee    AMOUNT         AMOUNT
        situated                                              in Figures To    (in figures)   In Words
                                                              be entered by    exclusive of
                                                              the Bidder for   all taxes
                                                              1095 Days Rs.
P
1.      RUF Collection with HNETC           1           Nos   972999.00        972999.00      INR Nine Lakh
        System Integration and                                                                Seventy Two
        Transaction         Acquiring                                                         Thousand Nine
        services at Fee collection                                                            Hundred &
        plaza under NETC progr-                                                               Ninety Nine
        amme       through      NPCI                                                          Only
        approved acquirer bank
        including engagement of
        required man power for
        operation of Road User Fee
        collection plaza for Dankuni
        Chandannagar Mogra in
        Hoogly district SH 13.
(Scope of work as per terms
10
and condition laid down in
      the NIB)
Total in Figures                                                    972999.00    INR Nine Lakh
                                                                                 Seventy Two
                                                                                 Thousand Nine
                                                                                 Hundred &
                                                                                 Ninety Nine
                                                                                 Only
Quoted Rate in Words               INR Nine Lakh Seventy Two Thousand Nine Hundred & Ninety
                                   Nine Only
16.             After the financial bids were opened and became

   public, respondent No. 1 made a request to the tender

   committee vide e-mail dated 13.12.2023. The e-mail was

   accompanied by an affidavit stating that the amount offered

   was per day rate and that the said figure should be worked out

   for      the     total      contract        period     of      1095      days      in

   which event, the offer of respondent No. 1 would stand at

   Rs. 106,54,33,905.00 for the contract period. The tendering

   authority was requested to treat the figure of Rs. 9,72,999.00

   as a typographical error and the figure offered by respondent

   No. 1 should be read as 106,54,33,905.00. The authority was

   further requested to consider the same keeping higher revenue

   in mind.
17.             It   appears        that     vide     communication           dated

   20.12.2023,          respondent        No.    4     rejected    the     prayer     of

   respondent No. 1 stating that such request for correction of
11
financial bid was not possible to be entertained as it would

impeach the sanctity of the tender process.
18.        Thereafter, respondent No. 1 filed a writ petition

before the High Court seeking the following reliefs:
a)   Leave under Rule 26 of the Rules relating to
      petitions under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India
      to move the writ petition before service of copy of the
      petition be granted to the petitioner to move the writ
      petition before service of copy thereof, in view of extreme
      urgency as narrated hereinabove;
b)   A Writ of Mandamus directing the respondents and
      each of them esp., the respondent No. 3, to rescind
      and/or cancel and/or withdraw the letter rejecting the
      prayer of the petitioner to amend the rate quoted by the
      petitioner in the bid in respect of the tender process
      being Annexure "P-1”to the petition forthwith;
c)   A Writ of Mandamus directing the respondent No.
      3 to allow the petitioner to amend and/or rectify the
      petitioner's bid in respect of the tender process dated
      17th October, 2023 being Annexure "P-1" hereto by
      quoting the rate for 1095 days instead or one day
      treating the same as bonafide and inadvertent mistake
      of the petitioner and then to consider the bid of the
      petitioner in the financial bid upon rectification of the
      same in terms of the prayers of the petitioner made in
      the letters and documents submitted by the petitioner
12
on 13.12.2023, 15.12.2023 and 20.12.2023 in respect of
the tender process dated 17th October, 2023 being
Annexure "P-5”, “P-6” and "P-7"· hereto;
d)   A writ of Certiorari calling upon the respondents
and each of them to certify and transmit all records in
respect of tender having Memo No. 590-R/PIU-I dated
17th October, 2023 being notice inviting Electronic Bid
No. 07-2023-24 by the Superintending Engineer/ Project
Director Unit-I Public Works (Roads) Directorate being
Annexure "P-1" hereto and all subsequent letters and
correspondences being Annexure "P-2" to "P-8" hereto to
this Hon'ble Court so that conscionable justice may be
done by quashing and/or setting aside the letter of
rejection by the respondent No.3 dated 20th December,
2023 being Annexure "P-8" hereto and by directing the
respondent No. 3 to allow the petitioner to rectify and/
or amend the bid for 1095 days and further process the
bid of the petitioner upon such rectification in the
financial bid of the said tender process being Annexure
"P-1" hereto;
e)   A Writ of Prohibition prohibiting the respondents
and each of them, esp., the respondent No. 3 from
indulging any further non-action and/or inaction in
allowing the petitioner from rectifying the bid of the
petitioner for l095 days and from further taking any
steps for issuing the Letter of Acceptance (LOA) to the H-
13
1 bidder in respect of the said tender process being
      Annexure "P-1" hereto;
f)    Interim order directing the respondents and each
      of them, esp., the respondent No. 3 from proceeding
      further in the tender process being Annexure "P-1"
hereto including issuing the Letter of Acceptance (LOA)
      to the H-1 bidder in respect of the tender process being
      Annexure "P-1" hereto till the disposal of the writ
      petition;
g)    Ad-interim order of terms of prayer (f) above;
h)    Rule NISI in terms of prayers (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f)
      and (g) above;
i)    Costs;

      j)    Such further or other order or orders be passed
and/or direction or directions be given as this Hon'ble
      Court may deem fit and proper.
19.         The writ petition was registered as W.P.A. No. 29001

of 2023. A Single Bench of the High Court dismissed the writ

petition vide the order dated 03.01.2024 by holding as under:
8.    Bona fides cannot be attributed to the petitioner;
rather, the petitioner was grossly negligent, since
            the price schedule indicated in the BOQ, which
            found place even in the bid of the petitioner itself,
            clearly showed that the amount of Road User Fee
14
in the figures was to be entered by the bidder for
      1095 days. Even after knowing the same and being
      aware of the various amounts involved by way of
      annual potential collection and bid security, the
      petitioner committed the error which it did.
9.    After the financial bid was opened, the petitioner
      wrote to the tender issuing authorities. If such an
      opportunity is to be given to a particular bidder,
      the same would upset the entire tender process
      and, as rightly argued by the respondents, would
      make the tender process opaque and arbitrary.
10.   The petitioner, with its eyes open, participated in
      the bid and quoted an erroneous amount. As such,
      the petitioner ought to suffer for the same and take
      responsibility therefor. Even if the petitioner's bid,
      if taken to be for 1095 days, would far exceed the
      next highest bid, such opportunity cannot be given
      to the petitioner to rectify its error after the entire
      bidding process was over and the financial bids of
      all the bidders were opened. Such chance, if given
      to the petitioner, would be contrary to every known
      principle of fairness pertaining to tenders and
      would amount to a special favour being extended
      to the petitioner for no particular reason.
11.   Thus, there is no scope of interference in the
      tender process.
15
20.        Aggrieved thereby, respondent No. 1 preferred a

letters patent appeal before the Division Bench of the High

Court which was registered as MAT No. 93 of 2024. Vide the

judgment and order dated 23.02.2024, the Division Bench of

the High Court observed as under:
8.   *          *           *           *          *
           Thus, in the light of the above undisputed factual
           position we are of the considered view that the
           Tender Inviting Authority had sufficient leverage
           and play in the joints to seek for any clarification
           or information during the entire evaluation process
           and sub-clause (b) of clause 5 of the Instruction to
           Bidders is not restricted to the stage of evaluation
           of the technical bid along but it encompasses the
           evaluation of the entire tender right from the stage
           of inception till the issuance of work order. This
           interpretation is proper interpretation that should
           be given to the said clause or else it would put
           shackles on the right of the Tender Inviting
           Authority. The explanation offered by the appellant
           is acceptable and the appellant’s offer is Rs.16
           crore over and above the highest offer which is now
           come to the light after the financial bid has been
           opened.
9.   For the above reasons, the appeal is allowed and
           order passed in the writ petition is set aside and
16
the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are
            directed to evaluate the appellant’s BOQ by taking
            the amount of Rs.106,54,33,905.00 for the period
            of 1095 days as called for in the tender notification.
10.   Since admittedly the affidavit for correction of the
            bid document was submitted after opening the
            financial bid, this Court feels that an opportunity
            is to be granted to other bidders to match the price
            quoted by the writ petitioner. The Tender Inviting
            Authority shall call upon all the bidders who were
            found to be technically qualified including the
            petitioner and after evaluating the bids of all such
            bidders and after giving opportunity to the other
            bidders, who are found technically qualified, to
            match the corrected figures quoted by the writ
            petitioner shall take a final decision with regard to
            award of the contract in question.
21.         It may be mentioned that both before the learned

Single Judge as well as before the Division Bench, appellant

was not arrayed as a party respondent, though on evaluation

of the financial bids, it was found to be the highest bidder (H1).
22.         Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order

dated 23.02.2024, appellant preferred the related special leave

petition. By order dated 27.05.2024, this Court granted
17
permission to the appellant to file the special leave petition.

While issuing notice, this Court also stayed the impugned

judgment and order dated 23.02.2024. Thereafter, the matter

was heard on 08.08.2025 when leave was granted.
23.       Mr. Kavin Gulati, learned senior counsel for the

appellant submits that after the financial bids were opened,

appellant was found to be and was declared as the highest (H1)

bidder by the tendering authority on 13.12.2023. Admittedly,

respondent No. 1 sought rectification/correction of its

financial bid only after the financial bids were opened and only

after the appellant was declared as H1. The tendering

authority was fully justified in rejecting the request of

respondent No. 1 for rectification/correction of its financial

bid.
23.1.     Learned Single Judge was justified in observing that

if the opportunity as sought for by respondent No. 1 is allowed,

the same would upset the entire tender process. Learned

Single Judge had rightly observed that respondent No. 1 had

participated in the tender process with its eyes wide open and
18
had quoted an erroneous amount. Even if its bid taken for the

entire    contract   period   exceeds   the   highest   bid,   such

opportunity for rectification cannot be given to respondent No.

1 to rectify its error after the entire bidding process was over

and the financial bids of all the tenderers were opened. If this

is accepted and respondent No. 1 is given such an opportunity,

it would be contrary to every known principle of fairness

pertaining to tenders and would amount to a special favour

being extended to respondent No. 1 for no particular reason.

Learned senior counsel submits that the view taken by the

learned Single Judge is the correct view and should not have

been interfered with by the Division Bench in a letters patent

appeal.
23.2.       Mr. Gulati submits that in the proceedings before

the learned Single Judge, appellant was not made a party

respondent though it was the highest (H1) bidder. Though the

relief claimed by respondent No. 1, if granted, would have

adversely affected the appellant, this issue did not arise

because the learned Single Judge did not accept the
19
contentions of respondent No. 1 and had declined to interfere

with the tender process.
23.3.      However, in the intra-court appeal before the

Division Bench, respondent No. 1 again did not array the

appellant as a party respondent. Division Bench took the view

that the tendering authority had sufficient leverage and play

in the joints to seek any clarification or information during the

tender evaluation process. Learned senior counsel submits

that the Division Bench had interpreted Clause 5B(v) of the

Instructions to Bidders erroneously to hold that the tendering

authority had the discretion to seek any clarification or

information at any stage of the tender process right from the

stage of inception till issuance of the work order and thereafter

to hold that any other interpretation would put shackles on

the functioning of the tendering authority. Learned senior

counsel submits that the aforesaid view taken by the Division

Bench is palpably erroneous having the effect of unsettling the

entire tender process. Clause 5B(v) of the Instructions to

Bidders cannot be given such a broad interpretation. Referring

to Clause 4(g) of the tender conditions, he submits that it is
20
clear therefrom that change of Bill of Quantity (BOQ) would

not be accepted under any circumstances. If the view of the

Division Bench is accepted, there would be no finality attached

to a tender process which in turn would impeach the sanctity

of the tender process itself.
23.4.      Learned senior counsel further submits that the

final direction of the Division Bench directing the tendering

authority to evaluate the BOQ of respondent No. 1 not at Rs.

9,72,999.00 which it held to be per day figure but to accept

respondent No. 1’s BOQ at Rs. 106,54,33,905.00 for the entire

contract period has changed, the entire complexion of the

tendering process thereby rendering the position of the

appellant wholly untenable despite being declared as the

highest (H1) bidder by the tendering authority. This direction

of the Division Bench entails adverse civil consequences upon

the appellant. Despite being so, the Division Bench did not

deem it appropriate to get the appellant impleaded in the

appellate proceedings. Consequently, no notice was issued or

opportunity of hearing granted to the appellant by the Division
21
Bench before disposing of the intra-court appeal. This is in

clear violation of the principles of natural justice.


23.5.      According to him, the reasoning adopted by the

Division Bench is highly questionable. Division Bench has

taken the view that if the BOQ amount of respondent No. 1 is

read as Rs. 106,54,33,905.00, the difference between the

amount quoted by respondent No. 1 and what is being offered

by the H1 bidder i.e. the appellant would be about 15 crores

and this additional amount would enure to the benefit of the

state exchequer. He submits that collecting higher revenue is

only one facet of public interest. The other aspect, which is

more important, is that because of the avoidable litigation

instituted by respondent No. 1, the State could not timely start

the contract work. As a result, it lost considerable amount of

revenue. However, this aspect of the matter was overlooked by

the Division Bench. He reiterates that if the view taken by the

Division Bench is accepted then there would be no finality to

a tender process.
22
23.6.           Learned senior counsel to buttress his arguments

        has submitted a compilation of judgments. Additionally, he

        has also placed reliance on few other judgments. The decisions

        relied upon by learned counsel for the appellant are as under:
(
i)     West Bengal State Electricity Board Vs. Patel
                        Engineering Company Limited
1
(
ii)    Jagdish Mandal Vs. State of Orissa2
(
iii)   Afcons     Infrastructure    Limited   Vs.   Nagpur
                        Metro Rail Corporation Limited
3
(iv)    Johra Vs. State of Haryana4
(v)     M/s.
ABCI Infrastructures Private Limited Vs.
                        Union of India5
23.7.           Finally,   learned      senior   counsel   submits    that

        whether on account of violation of the principles of natural

        justice or on the point of unduly interfering with a tender

        process, the impugned judgment and order of the Division

        Bench cannot be sustained. Therefore, the same is liable to be

        set aside and quashed.
1
(2001) 2 SCC 451
2
(2007) 14 SCC 517
3
(2016) 16 SCC 818
4
(2019) 2 SCC 324
5
(2025) INSC 215
23
24.       Mr. Anurag Soan, learned counsel appearing for

respondent No. 1 has opposed the challenge made by the

appellant. He submits that the Division Bench has rightly

observed that the tendering authority have the leverage to

consider the clarifications as sought for by respondent No. 1.

According to him, the mistake committed by respondent No. 1

was a bona fide one and completely unintentional. Since

ordinarily, the rates sought for and offered in the tenders

floated in the State of West Bengal are on the basis of per day

figures, respondent No. 1 offered per day BOQ figure whereas

the figure ought to have been a consolidated one for the entire

contractual period of 1095 days. This inadvertent mistake was

detected only when the financial bids were opened and without

loss of time, respondent No. 1 promptly e-mailed the tendering

authority pointing out the mistake and sought for rectification.

This was supported by an affidavit. If the BOQ amount of

respondent No. 1 for the entire contractual period is calculated

based on the per day rate, the bid offer of respondent No. 1

would be by far the highest; by an amount of Rs. 15 crores

over the bid value of the appellant. Therefore, there was no
24
reason why the tendering authority should have ignored the

rectification effort of respondent No. 1.
24.1.      Learned counsel submits that to the extent the

Division Bench held that the tendering authority had the

leverage to consider such clarification, the decision is in favour

of respondent No. 1. However, the Division Bench ought to

have declared respondent No. 1 as the highest bidder because

that would be the natural consequence of acceptance of

respondent No. 1’s rectification effort. But the direction of the

Division Bench to the state authorities to provide an

opportunity to the other bidders to match the BOQ figure of

respondent No. 1 is completely unwarranted. Viewed in that

context, though the intra-court appeal has been decided in

favour of respondent No. 1, it has actually been denied the

consequential relief.
24.2.      Mr. Soan submits that the BOQ figure offered by

respondent No. 1 was highest (H1) from day one; it was an

inadvertent mistake to declare the said amount as per day

figure instead of computing the total amount for the entire
25
contractual period. He submits that there is a material

difference between a total revision of price by quoting a new

amount and clarifying the existing price. The case of

respondent No. 1 falls in the latter category.


24.3.      Regarding non-joinder of appellant as a party

respondent, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 submits that

respondent no. 1 had approached the High Court seeking a

writ of mandamus against respondent No. 4 to allow

rectification/clarification   of   its   financial   bid   owing   to

inadvertent mistake and also sought for quashing of the

rejection letter dated 20.12.2023 issued by respondent No. 4

whereby the request for rectification/clarification of financial

bid by respondent No. 1 was rejected. No relief was sought for

against the appellant. Evidently, bid of respondent No. 1 is

substantially higher than that of the appellant. Public at large

would have benefitted by such rectification/clarification.

Therefore, non-joinder of appellant as respondent to the

proceedings before the High Court is not fatal. Consequently,

it cannot be said that there is any violation of the principles of

natural justice.
26
24.4.           Learned counsel has referred to Clause 5B(v) of the

          Instructions to Bidders which empowers the tendering

          authority to seek clarification of the documents submitted by

          the bidders. In terms of Clause D(ii) of the notice inviting bid,

          both the technical bid and the financial bid were required to

          be submitted simultaneously. Division Bench has correctly

          interpreted Clause 5B(v) of the Instructions to Bidders and

          such interpretation warrants no interference. Learned counsel

          for respondent No. 1 submits that the clarified financial bid of

          respondent No. 1 should be accepted in the light of the larger

          public interest otherwise the State would lose revenue by

          about 15 crores. Public exchequer should not be made to

          suffer because of an inadvertent mistake in quoting the BOQ

          figure by respondent No. 1.
In this connection, learned counsel

          has placed reliance on a decision of the Delhi High Court in

          the case of Supreme
Infrastructure India Limited Vs. Rail Vikas

          Nigam Limited6
in which case, rectification/clarification was

          allowed by the Delhi High Court.
6
2012 SCC Online Delhi 616
27
24.5.     Learned counsel further submits that matters

relating to tender and awarding of contract are essentially

commercial functions. In such matters, principles of equity

and natural justice should be kept at a distance.


24.6.     Learned counsel for respondent No. 1 submits that

the mistake committed by respondent No. 1 was so apparent

when compared with the annual potential collection of the

contract which is estimated in crores and the bid security is

fixed at Rs. 25 lakhs. Therefore, there was no reason for

respondent No. 1 to quote a figure of Rs. 9,72,000.00 as the

bid price for the entire contractual period of 1095 days. In the

absence of any allegation of malafides or collusion or fraud,

respondent No. 1’s right to request for clarification was

correctly allowed by the Division Bench.
24.7.     Clarifying the position, learned counsel submits

that in an earlier bid process in which respondent No. 1

participated, per day figure was sought for. It was because of

this that there was confusion and respondent No. 1 followed

the same protocol in the present case. It was only when the
28
financial bid was opened that respondent No. 1 realised the

inadvertent mistake. Rectification of such apparent mistakes

can in no manner be said to vitiate the sanctity of the tender

process as respondent No. 1 is also a technically qualified

bidder.
24.8.     In the facts and circumstances of the case, learned

counsel submits that no case for interference in the impugned

judgment is made out by the appellant and, therefore, the

appeal is liable to be dismissed.
25.       Ms. Nandini Sen Mukherjee, learned counsel

appearing for respondent Nos. 2 to 4, at the outset submits

that though the State has not challenged, the impugned

judgment and order of the Division Bench, nonetheless it is ad

idem with the appellant who has questioned the impugned

directions of the Division Bench.
25.1.     Learned counsel submits that both on the issue of

violation of the principles of natural justice and interference

with an ongoing tender process by a court in a proceeding
29
under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, the impugned

judgment and order cannot be sustained.
25.2.     She submits that both appellant and respondent

No. 1 alongwith two other bidders were found to be technically

qualified. Thereafter, when the financial bids were opened, it

was found that the bid offered by the appellant was the highest

and therefore it was declared as H1. On the other hand, bid of

respondent No. 1 was found to be the lowest. Accordingly, the

tendering authority had finalized the bidders. Therefore, when

respondent No. 1 moved the High Court and the Division

Bench had substantially granted relief to respondent No. 1

having the potential to upset the financial bids of the bidders

as finalized by the tendering committee, it was necessary that

appellant should have been made a party respondent in the

proceedings before the High Court. As the appellant was not

put to notice and was not heard, the impugned directions

which are prejudicial to the appellant cannot be sustained.


25.3.     Ms. Mukherjee further submits that the sanctity of

the entire tender process would be affected in case the
30
corrections suggested by the Division Bench are sustained.

This would not only be unfair to the bidders higher in rank

than respondent No. 1 but has unduly delayed finalisation of

the contract.
25.4.      After adverting to the facts of the case, learned

counsel representing respondent Nos. 2 to 4 submits that in

the BOQ template contained in the tender papers, it was

clearly mentioned that the rate was to be quoted for the entire

duration of the contractual period i.e. for 1095 days.

Therefore, the assertion of respondent No. 1 that it had

inadvertently quoted rate on per day basis instead of 1095

days cannot be accepted. In this connection, learned counsel

has also referred to Clause 4(g) of the notice inviting bid which

clearly prohibits change in the template of BOQ. This type of

post tender modification of quoted rate as sought for by

respondent No. 1 is not at all permissible. In fact, because of

this attempt on the part of respondent No. 1, finalisation of the

contract has been unduly delayed which in turn has affected

collection of government revenue.
31
25.5.     Elaborating further, learned counsel for respondent

Nos. 2 to 4 submits that respondent No. 1 did not mention

anywhere in its bid that the rate quoted by it was on ‘per day’

basis. It was only after opening of the financial bid that

respondent No. 1 claimed that the quoted rate was on per day

basis. Respondent No. 4 had rightly rejected such request

construing it to be an attempt to influence the bidding process.


25.6.     In these circumstances, learned counsel submits

that the Division Bench was not justified in setting aside the

order of the learned Single Judge and by directing respondent

Nos. 2 to 4 to accept the computed bid of respondent No. 1 by

converting the figure from per day basis to the entire contract

period of 1095 days and thereafter to make an analysis with

the bids offered by the other bidders. In view of a catena of

judgments of this Court, such interference by a writ court is

simply not permissible.
25.7.     Learned counsel therefore submits that as a matter

of fact, following the impugned judgment and order, all the

four technically qualified bidders were called upon to submit
32
their sealed bids afresh for 1095 days keeping the rates of

106,54,33,905.00 as the minimum. However, after this Court

granted stay, the aforesaid process has been cancelled.


25.8.     Learned counsel finally submits that permitting an

unsuccessful bidder to raise grievance after opening of the

financial bid would set a bad precedent. If it is permitted,

grievance of all kinds and of all sorts would be forthcoming

and the contracts would never get executed.
26.       Submissions made by learned counsel for the

parties have received the due consideration of the Court.
27.       Though we have adverted to the facts in the

preceding paragraphs, nonetheless for a proper appreciation it

would be apposite to briefly sum up the factual contours of the

present controversy.
28.       The contract in question relates to RUF collection at

fee collection plaza for Dankuni Chandannagar Mogra section

of SH 13 in the District of Hooghly, West Bengal. In terms of

the notice inviting electronic bid dated 17.10.2023, the

contract period is for 1095 days. While the annual potential
33
collection was pegged at Rs. 21.60 crores, the earnest money

deposit/bid security was fixed at Rs. 25,00,000.00. The tender

comprised of two bid system: technical bid and financial bid to

be submitted concurrently digitally in the website of the West

Bengal Government. The rates should be quoted in both words

and figures in BOQ format. In case of any discrepancy between

words and figures, the rate quoted in words would be accepted

as the actual rate offered. After the bidding process, the

selected bidder will be treated as H1 bidder who will offer the

highest remittance for the contract period. The eligibility

criteria made it clear that under no circumstances, change in

template of BOQ will be accepted.
28.1.     In all, total of seven bidders had participated in the

tender process out of which four were shortlisted by the

screening committee on 06.12.2023 as being technically

qualified. These four included appellant and respondent No. 1.


28.2.     Thereafter, financial bids of the four technically

qualified bidders were opened. On such opening, it was found

that the bid offered by the appellant at Rs. 91,19,00,000.00
34
for 1095 days was found to be the highest (H1) whereas the

bid offered by respondent No. 1 at Rs. 9,72,999.00 was found

to be the lowest (H4).
28.3.      After the financial bids were opened and finalized,

respondent No. 1 made a request to respondent No. 4 vide

email dated 13.12.2023 to change the rate offered by it by

treating the same as per day offer and on that basis, to

compute the amount for the entire contractual period of 1095

days which figure would stand at Rs. 106,54,33,905.00. It was

contended that respondent No. 1 was therefore the highest

bidder and its rate was more than Rs. 15 crores above that of

the appellant. The mistake committed by it was an inadvertent

one. Since it would be beneficial to the public exchequer,

respondent No. 4 was requested to correct the inadvertent

mistake.
28.4.      This prayer of respondent No. 1 was rejected by

respondent No. 4 vide the communication dated 20.12.2023.


28.5.      Thereafter, respondent No. 1 filed a writ petition

before the High Court being WPA No. 29001/2023. A learned
35
Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the writ petition vide

the order dated 03.01.2024.
28.6.       Aggrieved thereby, respondent No. 1 preferred a

letters patent appeal before the Division Bench of the High

Court being MAT No. 93 of 2024. Vide the judgment and order

dated 23.02.2024, the Division Bench allowed the appeal by

directing respondent Nos. 2 to 4 to evaluate the BOQ rate of

respondent No. 1 by treating Rs. 106,54,33,905.00 as the

amount for the entire contractual period of 1095 days instead

of Rs. 9,72,999.00 which was treated to be a per day figure.

However, since the other bidders were not before the court, it

was directed that opportunity be granted to such bidders to

match the price quoted by respondent No. 1. After evaluating

the bids of all such bidder, the said respondents were directed

to take a final decision with regard to award of the contract in

question.
29.         Having noted the factual backdrop of the case, let

us now examine the relevant provisions of the tender

conditions. We have already noted that Clause 4 of the notice
36
inviting electronic bid lays down the eligibility criteria for

participation in bid. Clause 4(g) specifically says that any

change in the template of BOQ will not be accepted under any

circumstances. Clause 5 of the Instructions to Bidders which

form part of the notice inviting electronic bid cautions the

bidders that care should be taken so that during evaluation of

the documents submitted by the bidders those are found to be

neat and clear and in a readable format, otherwise the bid

would be treated as cancelled. Clause 5B of the Instruction to

Bidders deals with bid evaluation. Clause 5B(v) says that

during the process of evaluation of bids, the notice inviting

authority may summon and seek clarification/information on

additional supporting documents or original hardcopies

against   any    of   the   documents     which     are     already

submitted/uploaded in the web portal. In the event, these are

not produced by the intending bidders within the stipulated

time frame, their proposals will be liable for rejection.
30.        Division Bench of the High Court has interpreted

this clause in a broad way to include rectification of bona fide

mistakes in quoting BOQ rates by the bidders. In our view, this
37
will be stretching things a bit too far. This provision is meant

to empower the notice inviting authority to seek clarification

or further information regarding any document filed by a

bidder. This cannot be interpreted so broadly as to include

rectification of the BOQ rates which is governed by Clause 4(g)

of the notice inviting electronic bid putting a complete embargo

to any change in the template of BOQ; the prohibition is

specific: change in the template of BOQ will not be accepted

under any circumstances.
31.       Our view is fortified by the item rate BOQ of

respondent No. 1 which we have extracted in paragraph 15 of

this judgment. In column 5, the heading is : amount of road

user fee in figures to be entered by the bidder for 1095 days.

As against this, respondent No. 1 quoted the figure of Rs.

9,72,999.00. In words, i.e. in column 6, the quoted rate was

mentioned as nine lakhs seventy two thousand nine hundered

and ninety nine only.
32.       Therefore, though the contention of respondent

No. 1 is that it had made an inadvertent mistake in quoting
38
the BOQ rate of per day figure instead of the total contract

period of 1095 days, a closer scrutiny would however belie

such contention. In columns 5, 6 and 7, respondent No. 1 filled

up the amount in figures and words as Rs. 9,72,999.00 and

Rupees nine lakhs seventy two thousand nine hundred and

ninety nine respectively for 1095 days. In such circumstances,

it cannot be said to be an inadvertent or unintentional

mistake, as is being contended on behalf of respondent No. 1.

Therefore, allowing respondent No. 1 to rectify such mistakes

after finalization of the financial bid would be highly improper

as it would have the effect of unsettling the entire tender

process.
33.
In
Patel Engineering Company Limited
(supra), this

Court had rejected a similar contention that the mistakes were

unintentional and had occurred due to fault of the computer

in the following manner:
23. The mistakes/errors in question, it is stated, are
      unintentional and occurred due to the fault of computer
      termed   as    “a   repetitive   systematic   computer
      typographical transmission failure”. It is difficult to
      accept this contention. A mistake may be unilateral or
39
mutual but it is always unintentional. If it is intentional
        it ceases to be a mistake. Here the mistakes may be
        unintentional but it was not beyond the control of
        Respondents 1 to 4 to correct the same before
        submission of the bid. Had they been vigilant in
        checking the bid documents before their submission,
        the mistakes would have been avoided. Further,
        correction   of   such mistakes     after   one-and-a-half
        months of opening of the bids will also be violative of
        clauses 24.1, 24.3 and 29.1 of the ITB.
33.1.         This Court also held that tenders are invited on the

basis of competitive bidding. On the one hand, it offers a fair

opportunity to all those who are interested in competing for

the contract and on the other hand it affords the authority a

choice to select the best of competitors on a competitive price

without prejudice to the quality of the work. Above all, it

eliminates favoritism and discrimination in allotting public

works to contractors. While benefit to the public exchequer is

certainly an important criteria in award of contract, it is

equally in public interest to adhere to the rules and conditions

subject to which bids are invited.
40
34.          This Court in
Jagdish Mandal
(supra) after referring

to earlier decisions of this Court succinctly summed up the

scope of judicial review of award of contracts and held thus:
22. Judicial review of administrative action is intended to
      prevent arbitrariness, irrationality, unreasonableness,
      bias and mala fides. Its purpose is to check whether
      choice or decision is made “lawfully” and not to check
      whether choice or decision is “sound”. When the power of
      judicial review is invoked in matters relating to tenders or
      award of contracts, certain special features should be
      borne in mind. A contract is a commercial transaction.
Evaluating    tenders   and    awarding    contracts    are
      essentially commercial functions. Principles of equity
      and natural justice stay at a distance. If the decision
      relating to award of contract is bona fide and is in public
      interest, courts will not, in exercise of power of judicial
      review, interfere even if a procedural aberration or error
      in assessment or prejudice to a tenderer, is made out.
      The power of judicial review will not be permitted to be
      invoked to protect private interest at the cost of public
      interest, or to decide contractual disputes. The tenderer
      or contractor with a grievance can always seek damages
      in a civil court. Attempts by unsuccessful tenderers
      with   imaginary    grievances,    wounded     pride   and
      business rivalry, to make mountains out of molehills of
      some technical/procedural violation or some prejudice
      to self, and persuade courts to interfere by exercising
41
power of judicial review, should be resisted. Such
      interferences, either interim or final, may hold up public
      works for years, or delay relief and succour to
      thousands and millions and may increase the project
      cost manifold. Therefore, a court before interfering in
      tender or contractual matters in exercise of power of
      judicial review, should pose to itself the following
      questions:
(i) Whether the process adopted or decision made by
         the authority is mala fide or intended to favour
         someone;
or
         Whether the process adopted or decision made is so
         arbitrary and irrational that the court can say: “the
         decision is such that no responsible authority acting
         reasonably and in accordance with relevant law
         could have reached”;
(ii) Whether public interest is affected.
If the answers are in the negative, there should be no
      interference   under
Article     226.
Cases   involving
      blacklisting or imposition of penal consequences on a
      tenderer/contractor or distribution of State largesse
      (allotment of sites/shops, grant of licences, dealerships
      and franchises) stand on a different footing as they may
      require a higher degree of fairness in action.
35.
Afcons Infrastructure Limited
(supra) is a case where

this Court reiterated the proposition that the words used in
42
the tender documents cannot be ignored or treated as

redundant or superfluous: they must be given the due

meaning and their necessary significance. The owner or a

employer of a project having authored the tender documents

is the best person to understand and appreciate its

requirements and interpret its documents. Constitutional

courts must defer to this understanding and appreciation of

the tender documents unless there is mala fides or perversity

in the understanding or appreciation or in the application of

the terms of the tender documents. It is possible that the view

taken by the owner or the employer may not be acceptable to

the constitutional courts but that by itself is not a reason for

interfering with the interpretation given. This Court held as

follows:
13. In other words, a mere disagreement with the
     decision-making    process      or   the   decision   of    the
     administrative    authority     is    no    reason    for    a
     constitutional court to interfere. The threshold of mala
     fides, intention to favour someone or arbitrariness,
     irrationality or perversity must be met before the
     constitutional court interferes with the decision-making
     process or the decision.
43
36.
In the recent case of M/s.
ABCI Infrastructures

Private Limited
(supra), this Court has dealt with a similar

issue as in the present case. In that case, appellant was

ranked as L-1 bidder with the bid price of Rs. 1,569.00 (rupees

one thousand five hundred and sixty nine only). According to

the appellant, they had quoted a bid price of Rs. 1,569 crores

but due to system error, the quoted amount appeared just as

1,569.00. After the financial bids were opened and announced,

appellant stated that it had discovered the mistake and

accordingly the mistake was informed to the respondent

authority stating that its actual bid was Rs. 1,569 crores and

not Rs. 1,569.00. Though the mistake was bald-faced, Border

Roads Organization, the respondent authority, insisted on

accepting the bid inspite of the letters from the appellant

seeking to withdraw from the tender. Ultimately Border Roads

Organization declared the appellant as a defaulter and decided

to forfeit its bid security. Consequently, the bank guarantee

was sought to be encashed. It was in that context, this Court

though   observed   that   the   mistake   was   self   evident,
44
nonetheless it agreed with the Border Roads Organization that

the appellant was at fault and had made the mistake of having

failed to add the required zeroes in the financial bid. The plea

of system glitch put forth by the appellant was not acceptable

as the others had successfully uploaded their bids without any

problem. In the facts of that case, this Court noted that there

were subsequent developments leading to fresh tender and

award   of    contract   though   at   a   lower   price.   In   the

circumstances, this Court directed the appellant to pay

Rs. 1 crore to the Border Roads Organization as a consequence

of its error and upon receipt of the same, Border Roads

Organization was directed to return appellant’s original bank

guarantee.
37.          Reverting back to the case of
Afcons Infrastructure

Limited
(supra), we find that this Court had also examined the

issue regarding impleadment of other bidders when a

challenge is made to an award of contract. This Court was of

the view that it would be appropriate for the constitutional

courts to insist on all eligible bidders being made parties to the
45
proceedings filed by an unsuccessful or ineligible bidder. It has

been held as under:
18. Before we conclude, it is necessary to point out that
     the High Court was of the opinion that the eligible
     bidders were not entitled to be either impleaded in the
     petition filed in the High Court by the ineligible bidder
     GYT-TPL JV or were not entitled to be heard. With
     respect, this is not the appropriate view to take in
     matters such as the present. There are several reasons
     for this, one of them being that there could be occasions
     (as in the present appeals) where an eligible bidder
     could bring to the notice of the owner or employer of the
     project that the ineligible bidder was ineligible for
     additional reasons or reasons that were not within the
     contemplation of the owner or employer of the project.
It was brought to our notice by Afcons Infrastructure in
     these appeals that GYT-TPL JV did not have any
     experience in the construction of a viaduct by the
     segmental    construction     method    and    that   the
     translations of documents in Mandarin language filed
     in the High Court were not true English translations.
     Submissions made by the learned counsel for Afcons
     Infrastructure in this regard are important and would
     have had a bearing on the decision in the writ petition
     filed in the High Court but since Afcons Infrastructure
     was not a party in the High Court, it could not agitate
     these issues in the writ petition but did so in the review
     petition which was not entertained. It is to avoid such a
46
situation that it would be more appropriate for the
                  constitutional courts to insist on all eligible bidders
                  being made parties to the proceedings filed by an
                  unsuccessful or ineligible bidder.
38.           In   Johra   (supra),   this   Court    reiterated    the

          fundamental principle that no order can be passed by any

          court in any judicial proceeding against any party without

          hearing and without giving such party an opportunity of

          hearing. In the facts of that case, the impugned order was set

          aside on the ground that the same was passed without hearing

          the appellant.
39.           A three-Judge Bench of this Court in CIDCO Vs.

          Shishir Realty Private Limited7, observed that when a contract

          is being evaluated, the mere possibility of more money in the

          public coffers does not in itself serve public interest. This

          Court held as follows:
61. When a contract is being evaluated, the mere
                  possibility of more money in the public coffers, does not
                  in itself serve public interest. A blanket claim by the
                  State claiming loss of public money cannot be used to
7
(2012) 16 SCC 527
47
forego contractual obligations, especially when it is not
                 based on any evidence or examination. The larger public
                 interest of upholding contracts and the fairness of
                 public authorities is also in play. The courts need to
                 have a broader understanding of public interest, while
                 reviewing such contracts.
40.            The above proposition has been followed by another

          three-Judge Bench of this Court in the recent case of
Subodh

          Kumar Singh Rathore Vs. Chief Executive Officer
8, when it

          examined the concept of public interest in administrative

          decisions relating to award of contracts. This Court held that

          even assuming for a moment that there was technical fault in

          the tender, which if rectified had the possibility of generating

          more revenue, the same by no stretch could be said to be a

          cogent reason for concealing an already existing tender. This

          Court highlighted the importance of maintaining the sanctity

          of tenders in governmental procurement processes. Public

          tenders are the cornerstone of governmental procurement

          processes, being competitive and ensuring fairness and

          transparency in the allocation of public resources. Public
8
2024 SCC Online SC 1682
48
tenders are designed to provide a level playing field for all

potential bidders, fostering an environment where competition

thrives. The integrity of this process ensures that public

projects and resources are delivered efficiently and effectively,

benefiting the society at large. Therefore, sanctity of public

tenders and contract is a fundamental principle that

underpins the stability and predictability of legal and

commercial relationships. Infact this Court put in a word of

caution that considerations of public interest should not be

narrowly confined to financial aspect only.
41.        Applying the above legal principles to the facts of

the present case, we are of the view that the Division Bench of

the High Court clearly fell in error in directing respondent No.

2 to 4 to allow rectification of the financial bid of respondent

No. 1 by treating the amount offered by it as the per day figure

and on that basis to compute the total amount for the entire

contractual period of 1095 days. Such an exercise is clearly

impermissible having regard to the terms and conditions of the

contract which are required to be understood on the anvil of

this Court’s judgments. The authority granted to the tendering
49
authority by clause 5B (v) of the Instruction to Bidders cannot

be stretched to construe the price bid of respondent No. 1 as

the per day offer, contrary to the bid declaration of respondent

No. 1 itself, and thereafter, on that basis to work out a new bid

amount for the entire contractual period making it the highest.

In the present case, respondent No. 1 was not at all vigilant;

rather, it displayed a very casual approach. In such

circumstances, clause 5B(v) cannot be invoked to resurrect the

bid of respondent No. 1 to make it H1. Clause 5B(v) of the

Instruction to Bidders has to read conjointly with clause 4(g)

of the notice inviting electronic bid.
42.        While judicial review is not excluded to assail

administrative decisions even in matters of tenders and

contract, the long line of consistent judicial pronouncements

tells us that the constitutional courts should exercise utmost

restraint in interfering with a tender process unless the

threshold of judicial review are met, as explained in
Jagdish

Mandal
(supra) and in
Afcons Infrastructure Limited
(supra).
50
43.       As is clearly discernible, appellant was a necessary

party to the proceedings before the High Court instituted by

respondent No. 1 being the H1 bidder. Impugned directions of

the High Court has adversely affected the case of the appellant,

downgrading its H1 status. The proposition that equity and

natural justice should be kept at bay during the course of

tender evaluation, while fully applicable to the case of

respondent No. 1, cannot be applied to judicial proceedings

where tender evaluation is under judicial scrutiny, fairness

and natural justice being integral to the judicial process.

Therefore, non-impleadment and consequential non-hearing

of the appellant by the High Court, has vitiated the impugned

judgment and order.
44.       The expression ‘public interest’ in the arena of

commercial transactions cannot and should not be confined to

any straight jacket definition. While benefit or accrual of more

revenue to the public exchequer is certainly an important

aspect, equally important, if not more, is adherence to the

rules and conditions of tender; sanctity of the tender process

being paramount and should be maintained at all cost.
51
45.        Thus, having regard to the above, impugned

judgment and order dated 23.02.2024 passed by the Division

Bench of the High Court in MAT No. 93 of 2024 cannot be

sustained and is hereby set aside and quashed. Respondent

Nos. 2 to 4 would be free to proceed with and finalise the award

of contract in terms of the notice inviting electronic bid dated

17.10.2023.
46.        Civil appeal is accordingly allowed. However, there

shall be no order as to cost.
……………………………J.
                                          [MANOJ MISRA]



                                      ……………………………J.
                                         [UJJAL BHUYAN]
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 12, 2025.
52