[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Airports Authority Of India vs Commissioner Of Service Tax on 23 September, 2025
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
2025 INSC 1141                                                            NON-REPORTABLE


                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 17405/2017
                         AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA                       …APPELLANT(S)


                                                                 VERSUS


                         COMMISSIONER OF SERVICE TAX                      …RESPONDENT(S)



                                                           JUDGMENT
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.   Heard Mr. Y. K. Kapur, learned counsel for the appellant

                              and Ms. Nisha Bagchi, learned senior counsel for the

                              respondent.
2.   This is an appeal under
Section 35L
of the Central Excise

                              Act, 1944, against the judgment and order dated

                              01.03.2017 pronounced by Customs, Excise & Service Tax
Signature Not Verified
Appellate Tribunal1 in Service Tax Appeal No. 913 of 20102.
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2025.09.23
17:46:52 IST
Reason:
1
In short ‘CESTAT’
2
M/s
Airport Authority of India Vs. CST, Delhi
1
3.   The appellant-Airports Authority of India, is a Government

     of India organization under the Ministry of Civil Aviation

     and is engaged in managing various airports in India. It is

     registered with the Service Tax Department for payment of

     service tax.
4.   The appellant in discharge of its duties, handle cargo on

     airports including export cargo which involves a number

     of activities like unloading, carting, X-ray, export packing,

     etc. These services are rendered from the time the cargo is

     accepted for shipment till it is placed on the aircraft.
5.   The Commissioner (Adjudication), Service Tax, Delhi vide

     order dated 17.03.2010 confirmed the service tax liability

     upon   the     appellant    for   the   period    01.10.2003    to

     31.03.2007      under      the    category   of   “Storage     and

     Warehousing Service” up to 09.09.2004 and w.e.f.

     10.09.2004 under the category “Airport Services”.
6.   The aforesaid order was assailed by the appellant in an

     appeal before the CESTAT, which has been disposed of by

     the order impugned, confirming the service tax liability

     under the category “Airport Services” with effect from

     10.09.2004.
2
7.       Mr. Y. K. Kapur, learned counsel appearing for the

                appellant, submitted that the services on which the service

                tax has been confirmed are all relating to handling of

                export cargo and as such, stand excluded under Sub-

                section (23) of Section 65 of the Finance Act,19943.
8.       Learned counsel for the appellant emphasized upon the

                Proviso to Sub-section (23) of
Section 65
of the Act to

                submit that the handling of export cargo is excluded from

                the “cargo handling service” and as such, is not covered

                under the taxable service as defined under Sub-section

                (105) of
Section 65
of the Act.
9.       At the outset, it would be pertinent to point out that
Section 65
of the Act is not the charging section but a

                provision defining various terms in connection with the

                service tax. Sub-section (23) of
Section 65
of the Act simply

                defines “cargo handling service”. It inter alia provides that

                services of loading, unloading, packing and unpacking of

                cargo including certain other services would amount to

                “cargo handling services” but would not include handling

                of export cargo. In other words, handling of export cargo
3
Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’
3
stands excluded from the definition of “cargo handling

     service”. The aforesaid provision does not speak about

     charging of service tax upon cargo handling service.
10. In order to examine whether the services rendered by the

     appellant at the airport in handling the export cargo are

     exempted from service tax, it would be prudent to first refer

     to
Section 66
of the Act, which is the charging section.
11.
Section 66
of the Act envisages levying of “Service Tax” at

     the rate of twelve per cent of the value of “taxable services”,

     as referred to in the sub-clauses therein including sub-

     clause (zzm) of Sub-section (105) of
Section 65
of the Act.
12. Initially, only three types of services were referred in the

     sub-clauses and were chargeable to service tax. With time,

     the services chargeable to service tax were increased, and

     a large number of other services were added to it.
13. “Taxable services” are defined under Sub-section (105) of
Section 65
of the Act to mean any services provided or to

     be provided to various persons, including those falling

     under sub-clause (zzm), i.e. service provided to any person

     by Airports Authority or by any other person, in any airport

     or a civil enclave.
4
14. The aforesaid sub-clause (zzm) is wide enough to cover any

     kind of service provided to any person by the Airport

     Authorities in any airport or a civil enclave. Therefore,

     whatever services are provided by the Airports Authority in

     any airport falls under “taxable service” in view of

     sub-clause (zzm).
15. The relevant portion of
Section 66
reads as under:
“There shall be levied a tax (hereinafter
           referred to as the service tax) at the rate of
           twelve per cent. of the value of taxable
           services referred to in sub-clauses
(a)……….(zzm)………of clause (105) of
section 65
and collected in such manner as
           may be prescribed.”
16. The aforesaid provision provides for levy of service tax on

     “taxable services” as referred to in sub-clause (zzm) of Sub-

     section (105) of
Section 65
of the Act.
17.
Section 65
is a section which provides for the definitions

     of certain terms including “cargo handling service” and

     “taxable service”. Cargo handling service is defined in Sub-

     section (23) whereas taxable service has been defined

     under Sub-section (105). The definition of taxable service

     read with sub-clause (zzm) means any service provided or

     to be provided to any person, by Airports Authority or by
5
any other person in any airport or a civil enclave. The

     conjoint reading of sub-clause (zzm) with Sub-section

     (105) makes it clear that taxable services are those services

     which are provided to any person by the Airports Authority

     in any airport or a civil enclave.
18. The aforesaid definition of the taxable service is very wide

     and takes into its fold any kind of service that may be

     provided to any person by the Airports Authority in any

     airport. Accordingly, all kinds of services rendered by the

     Airports Authority in any airport are taxable services and

     are chargeable to service tax under
Section 66
of the Act.
19. It may be pertinent to note that sub-clause (zzm) was

     introduced w.e.f. 10.09.2004. Accordingly, any kind of

     services whether in respect of export cargo provided by the

     Airports Authority to any person after inclusion of sub-

     clause (zzm) would be taxable service.
20. The definition of “cargo handling service” includes various

     kinds of services rendered at the airport, but it specifically

     excludes “handling of export cargo”. Thus, “handling of

     export cargo” stands excluded from the “cargo handling

     service” but that by itself would not be sufficient to exclude
6
it from the definition of taxable service under Sub-section

     (105) of
Section 65
of the Act. The services rendered by the

     Airports Authority to any person in any airport are in the

     nature of taxable service and the exclusion of “export

     cargo” from the definition of “cargo handling service”

     makes no difference as to the chargeability of service tax

     on the services so rendered falls under the taxable service.
21. This is also the intent of the charging
Section 66
of the Act,

     which provides that there shall be tax levied on the

     services referred to in sub-clauses as mentioned therein,

     including sub-clause (zzm). In short, any kind of services

     which are covered under any of the sub-clauses of
Section

     66
, including (zzm) are chargeable to tax and are taxable

     service.
22. The various circulars relied upon by Mr. Y. K. Kapur,

     learned counsel for the appellant, are of no avail, as they

     are merely circulars and cannot override the express

     statutory provisions.
23. Accordingly, we are of the opinion that the CESTAT or the

     Authorities below have not erred in taxing the services

     rendered by the appellant in relation to export cargo as
7
taxable service under sub-clause (zzm) of Sub-section

     (105) of
Section 65
of the Act with effect from 10.09.2004.
24. The appeal, as such lacks merit and is, accordingly,

     dismissed.
25. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
.............……………………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)




                          .............……………………………….. J.
(PRASANNA B. VARALE)
  NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 23, 2025.
8