[Cites
55
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Urban Infrastructure Real Estate Fund vs Neelkanth Realty Private Limited on 15 September, 2025
2025 INSC 1255                                                     REPORTABLE


                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                 EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION

             SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 26660 OF 2025
                        (Arising out of Diary No. 36398 of 2025)




    URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE REAL ESTATE FUND                          …PETITIONER(S)


                                       VERSUS


    NEELKANTH REALTY PRIVATE LIMITED & ORS.                    …RESPONDENT(S)



                                        WITH
                 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 26661 OF 2025
                        (Arising out of Diary No. 36228 of 2025)
                                     AND
                 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 26662 OF 2025
                        (Arising out of Diary No. 36232 of 2025)




                                  JUDGMENT
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.:
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the
  following parts: -
INDEX

  A. FACTUAL MATRIX .................................................................................. 4
    I. The Interim Award. ......................................................................................... 9
    II. The Decision of the Single Judge under
Section 34
of the Act, 1996. .. 12
    III. The Impugned Decision. ........................................................................ 17
  B. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER ..................... 20
  C. ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION ........................................................ 24
  D. ANALYSIS................................................................................................. 24
    I. Whether the Preliminary Issue on the question of limitation decided on
          demurrer, could have been foreclosed by the arbitrator? ...................... 24
          a. The definition, scope and nature of the term “demurrer”. ................ 24
          b. The legal position in the United States.
................................................ 30
                i.     Demurrer to Evidence ........................................................................ 32
                ii.    Demurrer to Declaration or Pleading ................................................ 40

          c. The legal position as understood in Indian jurisprudence. ............... 60
                i.     Some decisions employing the concept of demurrer and the contours
                       thereof................................................................................................. 60
                ii.    Deciding the issue of Limitation on demurrer and its similarity with
                       an application under Order VII Rule 11(d)
of the CPC
. ................... 76
                iii.   Decision of the Privy Council in
Kanhaya Lal v. The National Bank of
                       India
and that of the Calcutta High Court in Angelo Brothers......... 86

    II. Whether the Doctrine of Party Autonomy can be utilised to adopt a
          procedure which has the consequence of infringing
Section 3
of the
          Limitation Act, 1963? ..................................................................................... 98
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                                                        Page 1 of 133
III. Whether the Interim Award warranted interference by the court under
Section 34
of the Act, 1996? ........................................................................ 113
  E. CONCLUSION ....................................................................................... 133
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                                           Page 2 of 133
1.   After hearing the learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner at
       length, and upon a threadbare examination of the reasoning assigned
       by the High Court, we ordered dismissal of the Special Leave
       Petitions. However, considering the nature of the issues involved, we
       thought it appropriate to assign reasons for the same by a separate
       judgment. The order dated 15.09.2025 reads thus: -
“1. Delay condoned.
2. Heard Mr.Neeraj Kishan Kaul, the learned Senior counsel
            appearing for the petitioner at length.
3. We find no good ground to interfere with the impugned order
            passed by the High Court.
3. The Special Leave Petitions are, accordingly, dismissed.
4. Reasons to follow by a separate order.”
2.   These petitions arise from the common judgment and order dated
       02.04.2025 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in the
       Commercial Appeal Nos. 37, 38 and 40 of 2020 respectively
       (hereinafter, the “impugned decision”) by which the High Court
       dismissed the appeal filed by the petitioner herein under
Section 37
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter, the “Act,
       1996”) and thereby, affirmed the common judgment and order dated
       04.12.2019 passed by a Single Judge of the High Court interfering
       with the interim award dated 27.08.2019 and holding that the
       preliminary issue of limitation decided on the basis of demurrer
       would not preclude the Arbitral Tribunal from further examining the
       same on the basis of evidence and other materials on record, if
       tendered and if so warranted.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 3 of 133
A.   FACTUAL MATRIX
3.   The Urban Infrastructure Real Estate Fund or UIREF (hereinafter, the
       “petitioner”) is a private equity fund based in Mauritius
       incorporated as a public company. The Neelkanth Realty Private
       Limited (hereinafter, the “respondent no. 1 company”) is a private
       limited company incorporated under the
Companies Act, 2013
. The
       respondent nos. 2, 7 and 8 respectively are the Directors of the
       respondent no. 1 company, whereas the respondent nos. 3 to 6
       respectively are the legal representatives of the original respondent
       no. 3 who was also a Director of the respondent no. 1 company.
4.   The respondent no.1 company is said to have been set up for the
       purpose of undertaking an integrated township/resort/bungalow
       scheme spanning an area of about 700 acres in villages Bhukum,
       Bhugaon and Ahire/Mokarwadi respectively of Taluka Malushi and
       Taluka Haveli respectively in Pune, Maharashtra. The petitioner and
       the respondents entered into two agreements i.e., a Share
       Subscription Agreement dated 23.07.2008 (hereinafter, the “SSA”)
       and a Shareholders Agreement also dated 23.07.2008 (hereinafter, the
       “SHA”) respectively. The SSA inter alia set out the terms and
       conditions on which the petitioner had agreed to invest in the
       respondent no. 1 company. Some relevant clauses are reproduced
       hereinbelow: -
“5.2 Fulfilment of Conditions Precedent
5.2.1 The Company and the Promoters shall fulfil all the
            Conditions Precedent to Subsequent Investment under Clause
            5.1 (unless any such conditions are waived by the Investor in
            writing) within ninety (90) Business Days from the date of
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 4 of 133
execution of this Agreement or within such extended period as
            agreed to by the investor.
5.2.2 If at any time any Party becomes aware of any
            circumstances that will or is likely to give rise to the non-
            fulfilment of the Conditions Precedent then such Party shall
            immediately give to the other Parties, written particulars of any
            such circumstances and the Parties hereto shall co-operate fully
            with a view to procuring fulfilment of the relevant Conditions
            Precedent.
5.2.3 On the fulfilment of the Conditions Precedent, the
            Promoters and the Company shall submit to the Investor a
            certificate signed by duly authorised representative of the
            Company certifying fulfilment of each of the Conditions
            Precedent.
5.3 Non-Fulfilment of Conditions Precedent
            In the event of non-fulfilment of the Conditions Precedent
            under Clause 5.1 within ninety (90) Business Days from the
            date of execution of this Agreement or the extended period as
            agreed to by the Investor, then at the option of the investor, the
            Company and the promoters shall forthwith refund to the
            investor the amounts that may have been paid towards any of
            the obligations of the Investor together with interest thereon at
            the rate of 18% per annum until the date of payment and/or
            realization.
xxx            xxx           xxx

            13.2 Arbitration
13.2.1 In the event that any dispute or difference as referred to
            in Clause 13.1 is not resolved within a period of 30 (thirty) days
            from the date of reference to the representatives of the Parties for
            amicable resolution, then such dispute or difference shall be
            referred to arbitration in accordance with Clause 13.2.2 and
            Clause 13.2.3. Such arbitration shall be held in accordance with
            the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
.
13.2.2 The place of arbitration and the seat of arbitral
            proceedings shall be Mumbai, India. Any arbitral proceeding
            begun pursuant to any reference made under this Agreement
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                    Page 5 of 133
shall be conducted in English language. The decision of the
             arbitral tribunal and any award given by the arbitral tribunal
             shall be final and binding upon the Parties.
13.2.3 The arbitral tribunal shall be comprised of a sole
             arbitrator if the Parties to the dispute so agree. Failing such
             agreement, the arbitral tribunal shall comprise 3 (three)
             Arbitrators, one to be appointed by the Promoters and one to be
             appointed by the Investor and Other Investors jointly and the
             third Arbitrator shall be appointed by the two Arbitrators so
             appointed by the Promoters and the investor and Other
             Investors, which third Arbitrator shall be the Presiding
             Arbitrator. It is clarified that in the event that the Company is
             also a party to the dispute or difference, then for the purpose of
             appointment of Arbitrators, the Promoters and the Company
             shall jointly appoint one Arbitrator, the Investor and Other
             Investors shall jointly the second Arbitrator and the third
             Arbitrator shall be appointed by the two Arbitrators so
             appointed by the Parties.”
5.   In furtherance of the aforesaid agreements, the petitioner paid a sum
       of Rs. 25 Crore to the respondent no.1 company to fund the
       undertaking of the project. As per Clause 5.3 of the SSA reproduced
       hereinabove, in the event of the Conditions Precedent stipulated in
       the SSA not being fulfilled within a period of 90 days from the date
       of execution of the SSA, or the extended period as agreed to by the
       petitioner herein, then at the option of the petitioner, the respondents
       would be liable to refund the amount paid by the petitioner along
       with interest at the rate of 18% per annum till the date of payment
       and/or realisation. The said period of 90 days is said to have ended
       on 22.10.2008.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                   Page 6 of 133
6.   The Urban Infrastructure Venture Capital Limited or UIVCL, in the
       capacity of an advisor had acted on behalf of the petitioner in several
       dealings. On 21.01.2009, the UIVCL addressed a letter to the
       respondent no.1 company highlighting that no equity had been
       allotted against the investment of Rs. 25 Crore and called upon them
       to remit the said amount.
7.   The respondent no. 1 company replied to the abovementioned letter
       only to the effect that a detailed reply would soon be sent to the
       UIVCL. Thereafter, on 14.02.2009, the UICVL addressed yet another
       letter to the respondent no.1 company reiterating that no equity
       instruments had been issued to the petitioner and sought refund of
       the amount invested. Therein, several other breaches were alleged,
       including the non-fulfilment of the Conditions Precedent, at the end
       of the respondents. On 19.02.2009, the respondent no. 1 company
       replied to the letters dated 21.01.2009 and 14.02.2009 respectively,
       wherein it was mentioned that without-prejudice negotiations were
       ongoing between the parties as regards the issues between them. The
       respondent no.1 company expressed surprise that although without-
       prejudice negotiations were ongoing, yet the petitioner had chosen
       to address the letter dated 14.02.2009.
8.   It is the case of the petitioner that settlement discussions with a
       mediator were ongoing between the parties in 2011, however, those
       remained inconclusive. Subsequently, on 14.09.2016, the petitioner
       addressed yet another letter to the respondent no. 1 company calling
       upon them to rectify several alleged breaches which included
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025             Page 7 of 133
providing a suitable exit to the petitioner insofar as their investment
       was concerned, failing which they would be constrained to invoke
       arbitration. Yet again, discussions on how the issues could be
       amicably settled were initiated by the parties, but in vain. Thereafter,
       finally on 11.01.2017, the petitioner addressed a letter to the
       respondents calling upon them to compensate them in terms of the
       Clauses 3.1.14 and 5.3 of the SSA respectively, within a period of 15
       days, failing which the disputes would be referred to arbitration. In
       the said communication, the petitioners had also nominated an
       arbitrator for the aforesaid purpose.
9.   On 19.07.2017, the petitioner filed a petition under
Section 11
of the
       Act, 1996, before this Court for the appointment of an arbitrator. Vide
       order dated 15.01.2018, this Court appointed Hon’ble Mr. Justice S.N.
       Variava (Retd.) to act as the sole arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes
       between the parties.
10. On 01.10.2018, the Statement of Claim on behalf of the petitioners was
       filed before the Arbitral Tribunal. During its meeting dated
       26.06.2019, the Arbitral Tribunal proceeded to frame issues and the
       Issue No. 1 read thus – “Whether all or any of the claims made by the
       Claimant are barred by the law of limitation”. The counsel appearing on
       behalf of the respondents submitted that the Issue No. 1 be decided
       as a preliminary issue.    On the other hand, the counsel for the
       petitioner submitted that the said issue should be taken up only after
       all the evidence had been led.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 8 of 133
I.   The Interim Award.
11. Later, in the next meeting dated 27.08.2019, the arbitrator informed
       that if Issue No. 1 was to be tried as a preliminary one then it had to
       be decided on the basis of demurrer. The respondents were also told
       that, in such a scenario, they would afterwards not be able to contest
       any statement of fact stated by the claimant in the Statement of Claim
       or in their evidence, or attempt to prove the contrary. It was made
       clear that once the issue was decided, it would not be open to the
       parties to reagitate it subsequently. Over the course of the meeting,
       the counsel for the respondents seem to have acceded and submitted
       that no evidence was required to be led on their behalf in order to
       arrive at a decision insofar as the Issue No. 1 was concerned and also
       that they would be willing to proceed on the basis of demurrer.
       Hence, on the same day, the Issue No. 1 was heard on the basis of
       demurrer as a preliminary issue. The said issue came to be decided
       in favour of the petitioner herein. The relevant observations made in
       the interim award dated 27.08.2019 are reproduced as follows: -
“1. The Arbitration has been fixed today to decide whether Issue
            No. 1 should be tried as a Preliminary issue. Parties are told,
            that if Issue No. 1 is to be tried today as a Preliminary Issue,
            then it has to be decided on the basis of demurrer. Respondents
            are told that they would then not be able to contest any
            statement of fact stated by the Claimant in the Statement of
            Claim or in their Evidence or on documents annexed to the
            Statement of Claim or to attempt to prove the contrary. It is
            clarified that if this Issue proceeds to a hearing on the basis of
            demurrer, it will be answered today and then it will not be open
            to reagitate the Issue subsequently.
xxx            xxx           xxx
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 9 of 133
8. It appears that Mr Seksaria has not understood what the
            Tribunal had stated at the start. The authorities cited only deal
            with, what a Court or Tribunal can do. The question today is
            not what the Tribunal can or cannot do. Respondents have first
            to decide whether they want Issue No. 1 to be decided only on
            the basis of the Statement of Claim, documents annexed thereto
            and evidence of Claimant as they stand today. If so, it would
            necessarily mean on the basis of the demurer. What the Tribunal
            has enquired is whether the Respondents feel that any evidence
            is required on this Issue. If Respondents or any of them feel that
            evidence is necessary then they must say so at this stage. If issue
            No.1 is being argued today, it is on the basis that according to
            the Respondents no evidence is required to be led by them on
            this Issue. Therefore, this Issue will necessarily be argued today
            on the basis of a demurrer. Once the Issue is argued, this
            Tribunal is not going to leave this Issue unanswered so that
            parties can reagitate the same Issue subsequently. Therefore,
            Respondents are called upon again to state whether according
            to them this issue requires any evidence at all or whether it can
            be tried only on the basis of the pleadings. If the Respondents
            decide that this issue will require evidence, then the issue cannot
            be proceeded with today.
xxx            xxx          xxx
11. Mr. Ghelani, Mr. Seksaria and Mr. A.S. Pal state that the
            Respondents are willing to proceed on the basis of demurrer; as
            according to them, no evidence is required to decide Issue No.1.
Accordingly, Issue No. 1 is being heard on the basis of demurrer
            as a Preliminary Issue.
xxx            xxx          xxx
37. Heard the parties. As stated above, at this stage, the
            Tribunal is proceeding on the basis of demurrer. Had this issue
            been answered after all evidence had been recorded, then this
            Tribunal may have been, inclined to accept some of the
            submissions of the Respondents. But at this-stage as this Issue
            is being decided on the basis of demurrer, the averments in the
            Statement of Claim have to be taken as correct. It is clear that
            Clause 5.2.1 and 5.3 give to the Claimant a right to extend the
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 10 of 133
time for performance of the Conditions Precedent. Thus even
            though a notice may have been given, it is still open to claimant
            to extend time for performance Of Condition Precedents. Once
            time is so extended then a fresh cause of action arises if again
            there is a breach. It is not possible to accept submission that in
            paragraph 21 the claimant has only averred that it had extended
            time for payment. Such a submission is against the wording of
            the paragraph. In paragraph 21 Claimant have averred "The
            respondents requested the Claimant to consider a settlement of
            the disputes between the parties and in the meantime extend
            time for fulfilling various commitments and desist from taking
            legal action. The Claimant agreed to extend time for compliance
            of the terms of SSA in accordance with Clause 5.3 and desist
            from exercising its remedies under the SSA while the parties
            were exploring a settlement.” (Emphasis supplied). The words
            "fulfilling various commitments” can by no stretch of
            imagination refer to right of Claimant to receive refund. The
            words ''Agreed to extend time for compliance of the terms of
            SSA" cannot be read in isolation and have to be read in the
            context of the sentence stating that Respondents had requested
            for extension of time. Read as whole paragraph 21 makes it clear
            that Claimant is claiming that at the request of Respondents,
            Claimant extended time to perform the Condition Precedents.
            Thus even though a notice had been given under Clause 5.3, it
            was possible for the Claimant to thereafter extend time for
            performance of the Conditions Precedent. Mr. Seksaria is right
            the right to take any legal action on the notice dated February
            2009 would expire in 2012 and Clause 15.3 would not enable
            claimant to extend limitation once it had expired. However
            within the tenure of the SSA Claimant could extend time for
            compliance and if claimant has extended time for compliance
            then a fresh cause of action would arise and the Claimant could
            again exercise its right under Clause 5.3 when there is again a
            breach of the Condition Precedents. The Claimant has averred
            that it had extended time. At this stage this averment has to be
            accepted. As at this stage the proceeding are proceeding on the
            basis of demurrer, the statement of Claimant that It had
            extended time has to be accepted. It will therefore have to be
            held that now time only started running once the negotiations
            failed and there was a again a breach of the SSA by the
            Respondents. This was, at the earliest in 2016.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 11 of 133
38. As this issue is being decided on basis of demurer, in view
              of a plain reading of the Statement of Claim it is not possible to
              accept Mr. Geelani's' submission that time had, in fact, been
              extended only to consider how the payment/refund was to be
              made. Such a contention may have been possible if Claimants'
              witness has first been cross examined in this regard and if there
              was some evidence, to this effect, on Respondents' behalf.
39. It will therefore have to be held that the claims are therefore
              within time. Issue No. 1 is therefore answered in the negative.”

                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
12. It appears that the Arbitral Tribunal accepted the submission of the
        petitioner that as it had extended time for fulfilling the Conditions
        Precedent as per Clause 5.3 of the SSA, the claims could not be said
        to be barred by limitation. The Arbitral Tribunal re-emphasised
        saying that such a conclusion was being reached as the issue was
        being decided on the basis of demurrer and because the averments
        in the Statement of Claim had to be taken as true. It was also noted
        that - “Had this issue been answered after all evidence had been recorded,
        then this Tribunal may have been, inclined to accept some of the submissions
        of the Respondents” and also that “Such a contention may have been
        possible if Claimants' witness has first been cross examined in this regard
        and if there was some evidence, to this effect, on Respondents' behalf.”


  II.   The Decision of the Single Judge under
Section 34
of the Act, 1996.
13. Aggrieved by the aforesaid interim award, the respondent nos. 1, 2
        and 8 respectively filed separate Arbitration Petitions under
Section
        34
of the Act, 1996 before the Single Judge of the High Court alleging
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                    Page 12 of 133
that the interim award was in contravention of the fundamental
      policy of Indian law. Vide the common judgment and order dated
      04.12.2019, the Single Judge disposed of all the three petitions, by
      interfering with the interim award and observing that the
      preliminary finding as regards the Issue No. 1 i.e., the issue of
      limitation, cannot be foreclosed owing to it being a decision rendered
      on demurrer. It was observed that the Arbitral Tribunal would not
      be barred from re-examining the issue on the basis of the evidence
      that may be led by the parties before the Arbitral Tribunal and other
      materials on record. The reasoning assigned by the Single Judge may
      be summarised as follows: -
(i)   First, while examining whether the principles underlying
Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908
            (hereinafter, the “
CPC
”) could be applied to a determination
            made on demurrer, the decision of the Calcutta High Court in
Angelo Brothers Limited v. Bennett, Coleman and Co. Ltd. &
            Anr.
reported in 2017 SCC OnLine Cal 7682 was relied upon.
Therein, various judicial pronouncements on the aspect of
            demurrer vis-à-vis Order VII Rule 11 was examined and it was
            held that it is not the law in India that a motion for dismissal of
            a plaint or petition (in other words, a decision on demurrer) on
            a preliminary point would have the consequence of the
            respondent forfeiting the right to contest the case later. It would
            also not mean that adopting such a procedure would result in
            an automatic admission of the facts pleaded in such a plaint
            which was sought to be dismissed. More particularly, when the
            adjudication of such a preliminary question involves a mixed
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025             Page 13 of 133
question of fact and law, then the adjudication of that question
             would stand deferred and those points would be left to be
             determined in the course of the proceedings.
(ii)   Secondly, while applying the analogy that was being drawn
             from Order VII Rule 11(d), a pertinent question was put forth –
             Even, on the basis of bare averments made in the plaint if the
             court comes to the conclusion that the suit cannot be said to be
             barred by any law still could it be said that the court would
             then be precluded from finally looking into the question as to
             whether the suit is barred by any law after all the evidence and
             the other materials on record are examined? The answer, in the
             court’s opinion, was an emphatic ‘No’. Therefore, it was held
             that the finding of the arbitrator would remain a preliminary
             finding subject to the evidence that may be tendered in the
             course of the proceedings.
(iii) Lastly, upon a consideration of
Section 3(1)
of the Limitation
             Act, 1963, it was stated that the objection as to limitation is quite
             fundamental to any dispute. It is a substantive objection which
             goes to the root of the matter. Such an issue as regards
             limitation, being a mixed question of fact and law, it would not
             be proper for the same to be foreclosed especially upon a
             preliminary determination on maintainability which is made
             on the basis of demurrer. In other words, a decision on the basis
             of demurrer cannot preclude a final decision on merit.
The relevant observations made by the Single Judge of the High
      Court are reproduced herein below: -
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 14 of 133
“20. Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners has drawn an
            analogy of deciding an issue on the basis of demurrer with an
            application under Order VII Rule 11(d) of the Civil Procedure
            Code and contends that even if an application for rejection of
            plaint is rejected at the threshold, the same would not come in
            the way of the Court to decide whether the suit was barred by
            any law at the stage of trial when evidence would be available
            on record.
xxx            xxx          xxx
24.
In
Angelo Brothers Limited
(supra), Calcutta High Court
            examined various judicial pronouncements on the point of
            demurrer vis-a-vis
Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil
            Procedure
and came to the conclusion that it is not the law in
            India that a motion for dismissal of a plaint or petition on a
            preliminary point forfeits the right of the applicant to contest
            the case later or such a procedure results in admission of facts
            pleaded in such plaint or petition whose dismissal is sought for.
It was held that the term "demurrer” In the Indian context has
            been construed to have a connotation wider than the dictionary
            meaning and a motion for dismissal of a proceeding on a
            preliminary point has been commonly referred to as an
            application "in demurrer". Accordingly, it was held that the
            expression "demurrer" when used in connection with an
            application seeking dismissal of a petition on a preliminary or
            maintainability point would not imply automatic admission of
            facts contained in the plaint or petition whose dismissal is
            sought for by the opposing party. Principles of Order VII Rule
            11 would apply in relation to such a petition and if it is found
            that adjudication of such motion involves mixed question of fact
            and law, then adjudication of that question would stand
            deferred, and those points would be left to be determined on
            trial.
25. This Court is in respectful agreement with the above
            proposition of law as propounded by the Calcutta High Court.
26. Proceeding further, let us take a hypothetical case. It is trite
            that an application under Order VII Rule 11 can be filed at any
            stage of the suit. For examining whether the suit is barred by
            any law, the averments made in the plaint alone would be
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 15 of 133
germane. However, examination of the plaint alone under
            Order VII Rule 11 would not permit the Court to examine or
            declare upon the correctness of the contents or otherwise of the
            plaint. If there is any doubt at this stage, the benefit of doubt has
            to go to the plaintiff. If the Court comes to the conclusion that
            on the basis of the averments pleaded in the plaint, it cannot be
            said that the suit appears to be barred by any law, can it be said
            that it would preclude the Court from finally looking into the
            question as to whether the suit is barred by any law when all the
            evidence and other materials are before the Court.
27. In the considered opinion of the Court, the answer has to be
            in the negative.
28. The same principle can be applied in the present case as well.
            Issue No. l was heard as a preliminary issue on the basis of the
            statement of claim, and on that basis, finding has been recorded
            by the learned Arbitrator that the claims are within time. Being
            a preliminary issue decided on demurrer, this finding of the
            learned Arbitrator would remain a preliminary finding subject
            to the evidence that may be tendered. As a matter of fact, learned
            Arbitrator himself stated that the contention of the respondents
            (petitioners herein) might have been possible if the claimant's
            witness was first cross-examined in this regard and if there was
            some evidence to this effect on the respondents’ behalf. In fact,
            learned Arbitrator went on to observe that had this issue been
            answered after all the evidence had been recorded, then the
            Arbitral Tribunal might have been inclined to accept some of the
            submissions of the respondents (petitioners herein).
29. Considering
Section 3(1)
of the Indian Limitation Act,
            1963, it is quite clear that objection as to limitation is quite
            fundamental. It is a substantive objection which goes to the root
            of the claim. Limitation being a mixed question of fact and law,
            a preliminary finding of maintainability on the point of
            limitation decided on demurrer would not preclude a final
            determination of the question based on facts which may come on
            record through adducing of evidence, because application of law
            is on facts and not in a vacuum. A decision on the basis of
            demurrer cannot foreclose a final decision on merit.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                   Page 16 of 133
30. Therefore, in the light of the discussions made above, Court
             is of the view that the interim award dated 27.08.2019 is liable
             to be modified to the extent that the preliminary finding on issue
             No. 1 on the basis of demurrer would not foreclose the issue and
             would not preclude the Tribunal from examining this issue on
             the basis of evidence and other materials on record, if tendered
             and if so warranted. However, no opinion is expressed by the
             Court.
31. With the above modification, the three Commercial
             Arbitration Petitions are disposed of.”

                                                (Emphasis supplied)


  III. The Impugned Decision.
14. Being aggrieved with the aforesaid, the present petitioner preferred
      three appeals under
Section 37
of the Act, 1996 before the Division
      Bench of the High Court challenging the aforesaid interference to the
      interim award made by the Single Judge. However, the same came to
      be dismissed vide the common impugned judgment and order dated
      02.04.2025. The following are certain aspects which seem to have
      weighed with the Division Bench: -
(i)    First, while examining whether the grounds for interference
             under
Section 34(2)(b)(ii)
of the Act, 1996, was made out, it was
             opined that the phrase “fundamental policy of Indian law”
             would require a Court or Tribunal to adopt a ‘judicial
             approach’ and also that the decision must not be so perverse or
             irrational that no reasonable person would arrive at such a
             conclusion.
(ii)   Secondly, it was stated that although
Section 19(1)
of the Act,
             1996 provides that the Arbitral Tribunal would not be bound
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 17 of 133
by the provisions
of the CPC
or the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
,
             yet this must not be construed to mean that the Arbitral
             Tribunal would be prohibited from applying the fundamental
             principles underlying the aforesaid Acts.
(iii) Thirdly, it was held that an issue of limitation, which is
             normally a mixed question of law and fact, could be tried as a
             preliminary issue, only if the same does not require any
             evidence.
(iv)   Lastly, it was pointed out that the arbitrator, in the present
             case, had not arrived at a categorical finding that the issue of
             jurisdiction was such that the parties were not required to
             adduce any evidence at all. In such circumstances, the learned
             arbitrator could be said to have not adopted a ‘judicial
             approach’ in rendering the interim award.
The relevant observations made by the Single Judge of the High
      Court are reproduced herein below: -
“19. In the backdrop of aforementioned well settled legal
             position, we now examine whether a ground under Section
             34(2)(b)(il) for interference with the impugned interim award
             is made out. An award shall be treated to be in conflict with
             public policy of India if it is in contravention of fundamental
             policy of Indian law or is conflict with most basic notions of
             morality or justice. The phrase ‘fundamental policy of Indian
             law’ requires a Court or other authority determining the rights
             of citizen to adopt a judicial approach. The expression
             ‘fundamental policy of Indian law’ would include within its
             ambit a decision which is so perverse or irrational that no
             reasonable person would arrive at the same. Thus, the
             Arbitrator, while deciding the issue of limitation is required to
             adopt a judicial approach. Even though Section 19(1) of the
             1996 provides that arbitral tribunal shall not be bound by
the
             Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 or by the
Indian Evidence Act
,
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 18 of 133
1872, however Section 19(1) does not prohibit the arbitral
            tribunal from following the fundamental principles underlying
            the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 or the
Indian Evidence Act,
            1872
.
20. The Court or other authority dealing with the rights of
            parties has power to try the issue as a preliminary issue if the
            same relates to the jurisdiction of the Court or a bar created by
            any law for the time being in force. An issue of limitation which
            normally is a mixed question of law and fact could be tried as a
            preliminary issue only if the same does not require any evidence.
xxx            xxx           xxx
24. In the instant case, the Arbitrator has not recorded a finding
            that the issue of jurisdiction is an issue which does not require
            the parties to adduce any evidence. The Arbitrator himself in
            para 37 of the interim award has held that had parties adduced
            evidence it would have arrived at a different conclusion. In our
            opinion, the Arbitrator, while passing the impugned award has
            failed to adopt a judicial approach and has arrived at a decision
            which no reasonable person would have arrived at, especially in
            absence of any finding in the impugned award whether the issue
            of limitation is a mixed question of law and fact and whether the
            same can be decided without recording any evidence. It was
            clearly stated on behalf of respondent No.3 that issue of
            limitation should not be decided on the basis of demurrer but on
            the principles analogous to
Order XIV Rule 2 of the CPC
and
            after taking into consideration the pleadings and admitted
            evidence on record. If paragraph 2, 3, 4, 8, 10 and 11 are read
            together, the contention that the respondents had agreed t the
            decision of the issue without recording evidence does not deserve
            acceptance. Thus, it is axiomatic that the impugned award has
            been passed in violation of ‘fundamental policy of Indian law’
            and a ground for interference with the impugned award under
            Section 34(2)(b)(ii) is made out.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 19 of 133
15. In such circumstances
referred to above
, the petitioner is here before
       us with the present Special Leave Petitions.
B.   SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
16. Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, the learned Senior Counsel appearing on
       behalf of the petitioner would submit that the respondents having
       elected and insisted upon piece-meal adjudication under
Section 19
of the Act, 1996 would be estopped from challenging the same
       procedure under
Section 34
of the Act, 1996. The Minutes of Meeting
       dated 26.06.2019 indicate that it was on the request of the
       respondents that the issue of limitation was considered as a separate
       and preliminary issue. As plainly recorded in the interim award
       dated 27.08.2019, the parties had mutually consented that the
       question of limitation would be (a) decided on the basis of demurrer,
(b) without evidence and (c) would be determined finally. Therefore,
       the interim award constitutes a final decision on limitation and it
       cannot be re-opened to allow the respondent a second bite at the
       cherry. To substantiate this contention, the counsel would place
       reliance on the decision of this Court in IFFCO Ltd. v. Bhadra
       Products reported in (2018) 2 SCC 534.
17. The counsel would also submit that, party autonomy, which is the
       hallmark and bedrock of arbitration, cannot be deprived of its
       sanctity by the unsuccessful party. A bare reading of
Section 19
of the
       Act, 1996 would reveal that the Arbitral Tribunal would not be bound
       by
the CPC
and the parties to the arbitration may agree to any
       procedure; such procedure which may also differ from the standard
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025            Page 20 of 133
court processes. Therefore, having elected to adopt a certain
      procedure, the respondents cannot be allowed to cry foul when the
      decision is adverse to them. They cannot clamour for certain
      procedures which are legislatively not sanctioned for arbitrations
      and are, instead, available in the normal machinery of the courts. In
      other words, since the parties have consciously chosen to deviate
      from the traditional procedure adopted in the courts, they cannot
      challenge or reverse their agreement to the same simply because they
      are dissatisfied with the result.
18. It was also submitted that, the present case being an International
      Commercial Arbitration, the interim award could not have been
      interfered with on the ground of the arbitrator not following a
      ‘judicial approach’ since the same would fall foul of the law settled
      by this Court as regards the scope of intervention under
Section 34
of
      the Act, 1996 insofar as the awards rendered in the International
      Commercial Arbitrations are concerned.
19. Furthermore, it was submitted that the ground of non-adoption of a
      judicial approach to interfere with an arbitral award would
      tantamount to intervening in the merits of the matter, which cannot
      be sustained due to the position of law clarified by this Court in
Ssangyong Engineering & Construction Co. Ltd v. NHAI
reported in
      (2019) 15 SCC 131.
The said decision clarified that the term
      “fundamental policy of Indian Law” would be relegated to its
      understanding as determined by this Court in
Renusagar Power Co.
      Ltd. v. General Electric Co.
reported in (1994) Supp. (1) SCC 644.
It
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025          Page 21 of 133
was opined in
Ssangyong
(supra) that the decisions of this Court in
      ONGC v. Saw Pipes Ltd. reported in (2003) 5 SCC 705 and ONGC v.
      Western Geco International Ltd. reported in (2014) 9 SCC 263
      respectively, had expanded the scope of the term “public policy”
      occurring under
Section 34
of the Act, 1996 to include the aspects of
      “patent illegality” and “judicial approach”. However, such an
      expansion was effectively done away with by the 2015 Amendment
      Act to the Act, 1996.
20. Therefore, he would submit that, the observations made in the
      impugned decision, more particularly that – “In our opinion, the
      Arbitrator, while passing the impugned award has failed to adopt a judicial
      approach and has arrived at a decision which no reasonable person would
      have arrived at..”, to justify the interference with the interim award,
      would stand contrary to settled law.
21. He would further submit that the impugned decision has sought to
      set aside the award on the basis that it was passed without evidence.
      The same, as per the decision in
Ssangyong
(supra), can at most fall
      under the ambit of “patent illegality” which has been made
      unavailable as a ground for setting aside an award rendered in an
      International Commercial Arbitration.
22. As regards the applicability of
Section 3
of the Limitation Act, 1963,
      the counsel would submit that, there has neither been a waiver of the
      terms of the statute nor have the parties contracted out of the
      provisions of the
Limitation Act, 1963
. Rather, it could only be said
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 22 of 133
that the parties had agreed to a specific procedure by which the issue
      of limitation would be decided and the arbitrator had granted fair
      opportunity to both the parties to decide whether the claims raised
      by the petitioner fell within the prescribed period of limitation or not.
23. The counsel would submit that the respondents, having chosen not
      to lead evidence, cannot now claim that there has been a violation of
      the
Limitation Act, 1963
. He would place reliance on the decision of
      this Court in
Associate Builders v. DDA
reported in (2015) 3 SCC 49,
      to buttress his submission that an Arbitrator is the ultimate master of
      the evidence and the reason that an award is based on little evidence
      or such evidence that may not measure up in quality to a trained legal
      mind, would not constitute the basis for setting aside an award under
Section 34
of the Act, 1996. Therefore, even assuming that the award
      on the issue of limitation is based on insufficient evidence, the same
      would not constitute a ground for interference with the interim
      award.
24.
In the last, even if argued that interference with the interim award
      could be sustained under the ground of “basic notions of justice”, the
      counsel would submit that this Court in
Ssangyong
(supra) has
      recognised that such a ground could be invoked only in very
      exceptional circumstances when the conscience of the Court is
      shocked by the infraction caused to the fundamental notions of
      principles of justice. This must not be construed to mean that
      interference may be warranted when justice has not been done ‘in the
      opinion of the Court’. In the present case, he would submit that, no
      such exceptional circumstances are made out.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025             Page 23 of 133
25.
In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned Senior Counsel
        prayed that there being merit in his petition, notice be issued to the
        other side and the matter be heard finally. He would submit that the
        impugned judgment ultimately deserves to be interfered with.
C.    ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
26.    Having heard the learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner and
         having gone through the materials on record, the following
         questions of law fall for our consideration: -
I)     Whether the preliminary issue on the question of limitation,
                decided on the basis of demurrer, could have been
                permanently foreclosed by the arbitrator?
II)    Whether the doctrine of Party Autonomy, which is the
                bedrock of arbitration, can be utilised to decide on a
                procedure which has the consequence of infringing
Section 3
of the Limitation Act, 1963?
III)   Whether the interim award warranted interference by the
                court under
Section 34
of the Act, 1996?
D. ANALYSIS

  I.    Whether the Preliminary Issue on the question of limitation
        decided on demurrer, could have been foreclosed by the arbitrator?
a.    The definition, scope and nature of the term “demurrer”.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025            Page 24 of 133
27. The word “demurrer” is derived from the Latin word “demorari” or
      the French word “demorrer” which means to wait, stay, rest or pause.
      P. Ramantha Aiyar in his Advanced Law Lexicon elaborates that this
      term imports that the party pleading demurrer would go no further
      insofar as the case or matter is concerned, but would wait the
      judgment of the court as to whether he is bound to answer his
      opponent’s insufficient pleading. In other words, it is the term
      formerly applied to the mode of disputing the sufficiency in law of
      the pleading of the other side or saying that the pleading is yet to
      show any cause as to why the party demurring should be compelled
      by the court to proceed further.
28. Generally, a demurrer is an issue upon a matter of law. While raising
      this issue of law through the plea of demurrer, what occurs is that,
      the party pleading it confesses (or supposes for argument sake) that
      the facts as stated by the opposite party or the plaintiff/claimant are
      true, however, denies that by the law arising upon those facts, any
      injury is done to the plaintiff/claimant. To put it more simply, it is a
      method to test the sufficiency of the plaintiff’s/claimant’s case at the
      threshold. In the absence of said sufficiency, the matter will collapse
      on its own strength.
29. Demurrers are either general i.e., where no particular cause is
      assigned and the insufficiency of the pleading is stated in general
      terms, or it is special i.e., where some particular defects are pointed
      out. To put it simply, a general demurrer is a demurrer framed in
      general terms without showing specifically the nature of the
      objection. A special demurrer is a demurrer based on some defect of
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025            Page 25 of 133
form, which is specifically set forth. Therefore, demurrers may be to
      the whole or any part of a pleading. Edwin E. Bryant in his Law of
      Pleading under the Codes of Civil Procedure goes on to say that each
      party may demur to what he deems to be an insufficient pleading of
      the other. The demurrer is general when it is to a matter of substance
      and it is special when made to a matter of form. When it is special,
      the specific defect must be pointed out.
30. Craig R. Ducat in his Constitutional Interpretation, elaborates on
      the concept of demurrer and states it to be a “form of response in which
      the defendant argues that, even if the facts are as the plaintiff alleges, no
      actionable wrong has occurred”.
31. Black’s Law Dictionary defines the terms as “a pleading stating that
      although the facts alleged in the complaint may be true, they are insufficient
      for the plaintiff to state a claim for relief and for the defendant to frame an
      answer.”
32. A common theme running across these definitions or discussions of
      the term “demurrer” and its scope, is the understanding that the
      party raising this plea merely pauses and refrains from making any
      progress in his case. Instead, he requires the plaintiff/claimant to
      preliminarily establish that their case rests on a solid foundation, at
      least on the aspect that a cause of action is made out and that the
      claim is not barred by any law. At this stage, this duty could be said
      to be imposed on the plaintiff/claimant for the reason that they must
      satisfy the court, albeit on a very preliminary level, that a valid legal
      claim exists. This duty would be co-terminus with their role as the
      dominus litus. If the same is not established, then there would be no
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 26 of 133
reason to proceed further or for the defendant/respondent to pursue
      the matter. In other words, the defendant/respondent would be
      ‘bound to answer’ only if such a prima facie satisfaction that a valid
      legal claim exists is achieved. If the pleading of the plaintiff/claimant
      is insufficient in law then the matter would come to an end at the
      threshold.
33. During such an exercise, i.e., where the defendant/respondent asks
      the plaintiff to satisfy and also for the court to be satisfied of the legal
      sufficiency of the plaintiff’s case, the defendant/respondent assumes
      that the averments in the plaint are true and upon that assumption,
      raises a question of law. What must be noted is that this ‘assumption’
      is limited to the decision on demurrer and must not be taken to bind
      the defendant/respondent for all times to come. Without absolutely
      conceding to the truthfulness and veracity of the facts stated in the
      plaint, the defendant only raises an issue as regards the sufficiency of
      the plaintiffs case in law. In such a scenario, when the decision on
      demurrer goes against him, i.e., when the issue raised in law is
      answered against him, could he be said to be foreclosed from
      tendering further evidence, in the course of the proceedings, which
      dispute the truthfulness of the facts which were merely
      hypothetically ‘assumed’ as right while raising an issue in law? The
      answer must be an emphatic ‘No’.
34. We say so, also because, at the stage during which such a plea of
      demurrer is taken, the defendant bears no burden of proof. The
      plaintiff is yet to shift it to the defendant. Therefore, this ‘assumption’
      as aforementioned, must not be construed to the defedant’s
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 27 of 133
detriment. In an alternate situation, i.e., let us assume that the case
       was at a stage where the defendant was required in law to dispute a
       fact brought forth in the pleadings by way of leading witnesses or
       tendering further evidence. Now, in contravention of that
       requirement, assume that the defendant chooses to remain silent. In
       such a scenario, it could very well be said that the defendant failed to
       discharge his burden of proof and would therefore, be taken to have
       submitted to the case of the plaintiff and the truthfulness of the
       plaint’s averments. However, this is entirely different from what we
       are dealing with presently. Here is a scenario, where this plea of
       demurrer is raised at a stage when there exists no corresponding duty
       on part of the defendant to convince the court to accept his version of
       the matter. He is simply pausing or demurring and pointing out to
       the court that the sufficiency of the plaintiff’s case in law be checked
       first. Therefore, the object of the party raising this plea, at such a
       stage, is simple – to sweep away a defective pleading, by raising
       issues of law, upon an assumption that the facts stated in the
       pleading ‘may’ be true.
35. If the court agrees that the plaintiff’s case is sufficient in law, i.e., if
       the plea of demurrer remains unsuccessful, then the matter can be
       proceeded with. However, in such proceedings, the defendant must
       not be held to be strictly tethered to his stance during the proceedings
       on demurrer, at least insofar as his assumption of the truthfulness of
       the facts alleged by the plaintiff, are concerned. If he wishes to
       adduce further evidence, which was not previously available with
       the court during its decision on demurrer, he must be allowed to do
       so. In other words, the question of law, as decided during the plea of
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 28 of 133
demurrer must not be foreclosed permanently. The defendant should
      be held to have some opportunity, howsoever small or large, to
      convince the court to revisit the question of law decided on demurrer.
      This is especially so because, while deciding on the basis of demurrer,
      the court is mandated to only look at the averments in the plaint or
      claim and the documents annexed thereto. It would be entirely futile
      for the defendant to lead any evidence at that stage because the court
      would not be allowed to examine them or even taken the defendants
      version of the case into consideration while rendering a decision on
      demurrer.
36. Having said so, the aforesaid scope to revisit must not be construed
      as giving the defendant an endless leeway or a free-pass on
      completely rehashing the same question of law from scratch. He
      must not be allowed to upend the decision merely on his whims. He
      must convince the court that an interference may be warranted and
      also tender evidence which the court did not have the benefit of
      looking into. If unable to do so, it is obvious that the arbitrator will
      be compelled to arrive at a conclusion similar to the one arrived at
      during his adjudication on demurrer.
37. In rendering a decision on demurrer, all that the Court does is declare
      that, if the facts be as such, then the question of law would remain
      answered as such. However, this by no means, must foreclose any
      opportunity that a party may have, to prove by leading evidence, that
      the facts are different from the version that has been put forth in the
      plaint/complaint. Herein, the dismissal of the case of the plaintiff is
      sought on a maintainability point, without adverting to the merits of
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025            Page 29 of 133
the case. Ergo, since the decision on demurrer is not an adjudication
       on merits, there arises no question of foreclosing any issue against
       the party taking the plea of demurrer.
38. This rationale is what is adopted in Indian jurisprudence and the
       same shall be elaborated upon in the latter parts of this judgment.
b.   The legal position in the United States.
39. At this juncture, we find it relevant to discuss the nature of the
       concept of demurrer as understood in the U.S. since there seem to be
       several decisions which uniformly hold that an applicant seeking
       dismissal of a plaint by way of a plea by demurrer would be bound
       to the facts which are pleaded in the plaint. It is necessary for us to
       dissect under what circumstances such an assertion may be true and
       even if true, whether the legal position in India is any different.
40. Only a few states in the U.S., more particularly California and
       Virginia, still use the demurrer, while most of the other states and the
       federal government seem to have replaced it with the functionally
       equivalent “motion to dismiss” for failure to state a claim.
41. The concept of demurrer is well-entrenched in the civil procedure
       system of the aforementioned States in the U.S. It is a valid method
       through which any party can reply to the averments of another.
       Generally, such a route is adopted when the exists no issue of fact to
       be tried in the cause.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025             Page 30 of 133
42. Before discussing some decisions in this regard, it would be apposite
      for us to look into the Civil Procedure Code governing civil actions
      in the States of California and Virginia respectively, in order to
      understand the legislative framework under which a plea of
      demurrer can be raised.
43. In Virginia, in any suit in equity or action at law, the contention that
      a pleading does not state a cause of action or that such pleading fails
      to state facts upon which the relief demanded can be granted, may be
      made by demurrer. However, all such demurrers shall be in writing
      and shall specifically state the grounds on which the demurrant
      concludes that the pleading is insufficient in law. In such a case, no
      grounds other than those specifically stated by the demurrant in the
      demurrer shall be considered by the court.
44. Moreover, § 8.01-235 of the Code of Virginia on Civil Remedies and
      Procedure, specifically states that if a party seeks to raise an objection
      that the action is not commenced within the limitation period
      prescribed by law, the same must only be raised as an affirmative
      defense specifically set forth in a responsive pleading and not by way
      of demurrer. The relevant provision is reproduced as thus: -
“§ 8.01-235. Bar of expiration of limitation period raised
            only as affirmative defense in responsive pleading.
            The objection that an action is not commenced within the
            limitation period prescribed by law can only be raised as an
            affirmative defense specifically set forth in a responsive
            pleading. No statutory limitation period shall have
            jurisdictional effects and the defense that the statutory
            limitation period has expired cannot be set up by demurrer. This
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 31 of 133
section shall apply to all limitation periods, without regard to
             whether or not the statute prescribing such limitation period
             shall create a new right.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
45. In California,
the Code of Civil Procedure
under § 430.10 – 430.90
       provides for Objections to Pleadings and provides for two ways in
       which a party against whom a complaint or cross-complaint has been
       filed may go about with raising their objections i.e. One, by demurrer
       and/or, two, by answer. When an answer is filed by the objecting
       party, the other party is also free to object to the answer by way of
       demurrer. Such a demurrer may be taken either to the whole of the
       complaint, cross-complaint or answer or to any of the causes of action
       or defenses stated therein. However, it is required that a demurrer
       distinctly specify the grounds upon which any of the objections to the
       complaint, cross-complaint, or answer are taken. Unless it does so,
       the demurrer may be disregarded. Each such ground of demurrer
       must also be in a separate paragraph. Furthermore, a party filing
       demurrer must serve and also file therewith a notice of hearing that
       must specify a hearing date. After this, demurrers are set for hearing
       not more than 35 days following the filing of the demurrer or on the
       first date available to the court thereafter. On good cause being
       shown, this can be preponed or postponed. After the decision on
       demurrer, i.e., after either overruling or sustaining the demurrer, the
       court may, in its discretion, also allow the party in fault to plead anew
       or amend on such terms as may be just.
i.   Demurrer to Evidence
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                Page 32 of 133
46. Several decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States touch
      upon the concept of demurrer. One of those is the decision in Fowle
      v. Common Council of Alexandria reported in 24 U.S. 320 delivered
      in the year 1826. Before delving into this decision, a key procedural
      aspect involved in raising a plea of demurrer to evidence, must be
      brought to notice. When a demurrer is offered by one party, the
      adverse party “joins” with him in demurrer, and the answer which
      he makes is called a “joinder in demurrer”. In a joinder in demurrer,
      the adverse party essentially agrees with the legal challenge posed
      by the demurrer and joins in arguing only the point of law raised in
      demurrer. In other words, both parties clearly agree that there is only
      an issue of law which remains to be adjudicated. Without such a
      joinder in demurrer entered on the record, the court would not
      proceed to give judgment upon the demurrer. Another pertinent
      aspect here is that such a joinder in demurrer ought not to be required
      or permitted if there was “any matter of fact in controversy between the
      parties”. This reinforces that a decision in demurrer can only be on a
      question of law.
47. In the aforesaid context, let us look into the decision in Fowle (supra).
      Therein, after both parties had introduced a good deal of evidence
      for the purpose of supporting or repelling the presumption of a fact,
      the defendants demurred to the evidence of the plaintiff as
      insufficient to maintain their action and the court proceeded to give
      judgment upon the demurrer in favour of the defendants. While
      reversing the judgment and ordering a new trial through a new jury
      panel, the Supreme Court elaborated as follows: -
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025             Page 33 of 133
(i)    First, that the Circuit Court totally misunderstood the nature
             of proceedings upon demurrer to evidence. It was clarified that
             the object of such proceedings in demurrer was not to bring
             before the court, an investigation into the facts in dispute or
             task the court with weighing the force of the testimonies or the
             presumptions arising from the evidence. The true and proper
             object is simple – to refer to the court the law arising from facts,
             facts which are already admitted and ascertained. Nothing
             remains except for the court to apply the law to those facts.
(ii)   Secondly, that no party could insist upon the other party
             joining in demurrer without distinctly admitting, upon record,
             every fact and every conclusion which the evidence conduced
             to prove. If there is a joinder without such admission i.e., the
             facts are left unsettled and indeterminate, this would constitute
             sufficient reason for the court to refuse judgment upon
             demurrer, and the judgment rendered, if any, is liable to be
             reversed for error.
(iii) Lastly, it was stated, in the facts of the case, that the demurrer
             by the defendant had been so incautiously framed, that there
             was no manner of certainty in the state of facts, upon which any
             judgment can be founded. The demurrer was so framed as to
             rebut what the plaintiff aimed to establish and to overthrow the
             presumptions       arising     therefrom      through      counter
             presumptions. In such a circumstance, it was the duty of the
             Circuit Court to overrule the demurrer as incorrect and
             untenable in principle, more particularly because the question
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 34 of 133
referred by the demurrer to the court ended up being a
            question of fact instead of one in law.
The relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow: -
“Indeed, the nature of the proceedings upon a demurrer to
            evidence, seems to have been totally misunderstood in the
            present case. It is no part of the object of such proceedings, to
            bring before the Court an investigation of the facts in dispute,
            or to weigh the force of testimony or the presumptions arising
            from the evidence. That is the proper province of the jury. The
            true and proper object of such a demurrer is to refer to the Court
            the law arising from facts. It supposes, therefore, the facts to be
            already admitted and ascertained, and that nothing remains but
            for the Court to apply the law to those facts. This doctrine is
            clearly established by the authorities, and is expounded in a very
            able manner by Lord Chief Justice Eyre in delivering the
            opinion of all the Judges in the case of Gibson v. Hunter, before
            the House of Lords. (2 H. Bl. Rep. 187.) It was there held, that
            no party could insist upon the other party's joining in
            demurrer, without distinctly admitting, upon the record, every
            fact, and every conclusion, which the evidence given for his
            adversary conduced to prove. If, therefore, there is parol
            evidence in the case, which is loose and indeterminate, and may
            be applied with more or less effect to the jury, or evidence of
            circumstances, which is meant to operate beyond the proof of the
            existence of those circumstances, and to conduce to the proof of
            other facts, the party demurring must admit the facts of which
            the evidence is so loose, indeterminate, and circumstantial,
            before the Court can compel the other side to join therein. And
            if there should be such a joinder without such admission,
            leaving the facts unsettled and indeterminate, it is a sufficient
            reason for refusing judgment upon the demurrer; and the
            judgment, if any is rendered, is liable to be reversed for error.
            Indeed, the case made for a demurrer to evidence, is, in many
            respects, like a special verdict. It is to state facts, and not merely
            testimony which may conduce to prove them. It is to admit
            whatever the jury may reasonably infer from the evidence, and
            not merely the circumstances which form a ground of
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                    Page 35 of 133
presumption. The principal difference between them is, that,
            upon a demurrer to evidence, a Court may infer, in favour of the
            party joining in demurrer, every fact of which the evidence
            might justify an inference; whereas, upon a special verdict,
            nothing is intended beyond the facts found.
Upon examination of the case at bar, it will be at once perceived,
            that the demurrer to evidence, tried by the principles already
            stated, is fatally defective. The defendants have demurred, not
            to facts, but to evidence of facts; not to positive admissions, but
            to mere circumstances of presumption introduced on the other
            side. The plaintiff endeavoured to prove, by circumstantial
            evidence, that the defendants granted a license to Marsteller as
            an auctioneer. The defendants not only did not admit the
            existence of such a license, but they introduced testimony to
            disprove the fact. Even if the demurrer could be considered as
            being exclusively taken to the plaintiff's evidence, it ought not
            to have been allowed without a distinct admission of the facts
            which that evidence conduced to prove. But when the demurrer
            was so framed as to let in the defendants' evidence, and thus to
            rebut what the other side aimed to establish, and to overthrow
            the presumptions arising therefrom, by counter presumptions,
            it was the duty of the Circuit Court to overrule the demurrer,
            as incorrect, and untenable in principle. The question referred
            by it to the Court, was not a question of law, but of fact.
This being, then, the posture of the case, the next consideration
            is, what is the proper duty of this Court, sitting in error. It is;
            undoubtedly, to reverse the judgment, and award a venire facias
            de novo. We may say, as was said by the Judges in Gibson v.
            Hunter, that this demurrer has been so incautiously framed,
            that there is no manner of certainty in the state of facts, upon
            which any judgment can be founded. Under such a
            predicament, the settled practice is, to award a new trial, upon
            the ground that the issue between the parties, in effect, has not
            been tried.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 36 of 133
48. The foremost aspect bearing significance in the decision in Fowler
      (supra) was the emphasis that if, in the opinion of the court, there
      appears to be a dispute as to certain facts between the parties, then a
      decision on demurrer must not be proceeded with. There must be a
      clear admission of the facts which the plaintiff’s evidence conduced
      to prove, on part of the defendant, for a valid plea of demurrer. Upon
      such a clear admission, there remains no doubt that the defendant
      raising the plea of demurrer would be bound by the facts whose
      veracity was admitted on demurrer.
49. In Slocum v. New York Life Ins. Co. reported in 228 U.S. 364, the
      Supreme Court discussed ‘demurrer to evidence’ in a similar manner
      as elaborated in Fowle (supra) and observed that: -
(i)    First, that a demurrer to evidence is a proceeding whereby the
             court is called upon to declare what the law is “upon the facts
             shown in evidence”.
(ii)   Secondly, such a demurrer would be permissible only when it
             is (a) proposed by one party, (b) joined in by the other, and (c)
             allowed by the court. The demurrer to evidence must contain
             an express and distinct admission by the demurrant ‘of every
             fact’ which the evidence of his adversary ‘conduces to prove’.
Otherwise, he would not be able to insist that the adversary join
             him in the demurrer.
(iii) Thirdly, once a demurrer to evidence is made, for the
             admission to be effective, the admission must be of the facts
             and not merely the evidence from which their existence is
             inferable. In other words, the defendant must demur to facts
             and not to evidence of facts; must demur to positive admissions
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025            Page 37 of 133
and not to mere circumstances of presumption introduced by
             the other side. A demurrer to evidence is to state facts and not
             merely agree to the testimony which may conduce to prove
             such facts. To put it simply, it would be to admit whatever the
             jury may reasonably infer from the evidence, and not just the
             circumstances which form a ground of presumption of facts.
(iv)   Fourthly, only when the matter of fact is so ascertained and
             shown in the demurrer, the case can be deemed to be ripe for
             judgment pertaining to a question of law. Therefore, a
             demurrer to evidence must not be allowed or admitted when
             the demurring party refuses to admit the facts which the other
             side attempts to prove and more so, when the demurring party
             offers contradictory evidence or attempts to establish
             inconsistent propositions.
(v)    Lastly, if it is concluded by the appellate court that the
             judgment which was given for one party on a demurrer to
             evidence must instead have been in favour of the other, such
             an error can simply be corrected by directing the proper
             judgment. This is because the error was confined to the
             judgment and did not affect/reach the facts as ascertained and
             shown in the demurrer. However, if the appellate court comes
             to the conclusion that there was an error in allowing the
             demurrer itself, it would mean that there were no ascertained
             facts at all on which a judgment could have been based.
             Therefore, in this scenario, directing a new trial is the only
             option.
The relevant observations are thus: -
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025           Page 38 of 133
“The leading English cases dealing with demurrers to evidence
            as employed at common law are Middleton v. Baker, Cro. Eliz.
            752; Wright v. Pindar, Aleyn, 18; S.C., Style, 34, and Gibson
            v. Hunter, 2 H. Bla. 187, 205. The last, which adhered to the
            principle of the other two, was much considered in the House of
            Lords, and the opinion delivered by Lord Chief Justice Eyre, who
            spoke for all the judges, was to the following effect: (a) A
            demurrer to the evidence is a proceeding whereby the court,
            whose province it is to answer all questions of law, is called
            upon to declare what the law is "upon the facts shown in
            evidence," and, "in the nature of the thing, the question of law
            to arise out of the fact, cannot arise until the fact is ascertained."
(b) Such a demurrer is permissible only when proposed by one
            party, joined in by the other and allowed by the court. It must
            contain an express and distinct admission by the demurrant of
            every fact which the evidence of his adversary conduces to prove,
            else he cannot insist that the latter join in the demurrer; and the
            admission, to be effective to that end, must be of the facts, and
            not merely the evidence from which their existence is inferable.
(c) When the matter of fact is so ascertained and shown in the
            demurrer, the case is deemed ripe for judgment in matter of law,
            and the jury properly may be discharged from giving a verdict.
This statement of the true office and use of a demurrer to
            evidence was both accepted and applied by this court in Fowle
            v. Alexandria, 11 Wheat. 320, decided in 1826. There the court
            below had sustained such a demurrer, which merely set forth
            and admitted the evidence as introduced at the trial, as well the
            testimony of witnesses as written documents. […]

                             xxx             xxx           xxx

            And that this was not a new doctrine in this court is shown
            in Young v. Black, 7 Cranch, 565, 568, decided thirteen years
            before, where, in declining to disturb the action of the court
            below in refusing to compel a joinder in a demurrer to the
            evidence, it was said: The party demurring is bound to admit as
            true, not only all the facts proved by the evidence introduced by
            the other party, but also all the facts which that evidence legally
            may conduce to prove. It follows that it [the demurrer] ought
            never to be admitted where the party demurring refuses to admit
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                    Page 39 of 133
the facts which the other side attempts to prove; and it would be
             as little justifiable where he offers contradictory evidence, or
             attempts to establish inconsistent propositions."
xxx            xxx          xxx

             At common law, if on a demurrer to the evidence judgment was
             given for one party when it should have been for the other, the
             error was corrected in the appellate tribunal by directing the
             proper judgment, and this because the error was confined to the
             judgment, and did not reach the facts as ascertained and shown
             in the demurrer. But when the reversal was for error in allowing
             the demurrer, the latter necessarily went for naught, and, as
             there remained no ascertained facts on which to base a
             judgment, a new trial was deemed essential. Thus in Gibson v.
             Hunter, supra, one of the questions was, whether, considering
             the state of the evidence and the admissions in the demurrer, the
             plaintiff was obliged to join in it. The question was resolved in
             the negative, and, as this eliminated the demurrer on which
             judgment had been given in the court of King's Bench, the
             judgment of reversal was accompanied by a direction for a new
             trial. And in Fowle v. Alexandria, supra, where this court ruled
             that the demurrer ought not to have been allowed, the judgment
             rendered thereon was reversed with a like direction. So, in the
             present case when the verdict was set aside there remained no
             ascertained facts on which a judgment might be rested, and that
             made a new trial necessary.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)


  ii.   Demurrer to Declaration or Pleading
50. In Aurora City v. W. reported in 74 U.S. 82, the question involved
        was whether a judgment on demurrer to a declaration or pleading
        would be a bar to any subsequent action between the same parties
        for the same cause of action. Answering in the affirmative, the
        Supreme Court elaborated as thus: -
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 40 of 133
(i)    First, it was stated that it cannot be denied that the effect of a
             demurrer to a declaration or other pleading, is that it admits all
             such matters of fact as are sufficiently pleaded. This is a rule
             universally acknowledged. The foundation of this rule is that
             the party demurring, has had the option to either plead or
             demur, and therefore, in choosing to adopt the latter
             alternative, he shall be considered to have admitted or
             conceded that he had no ground for denial.
(ii)   Secondly, it was held that, in principle, it would make no
             difference whether the facts upon which the court proceeded
             with its adjudication on merits, were proved by competent
             evidence, or whether they were admitted by the parties. An
             admission by way of demurrer to a pleading in which the facts
             are alleged, must be held to be the same as though an
             admission of fact had been made before a competent jury.
Therefore, a judgment rendered on demurrer settles every
             matter which was well alleged in the pleadings of the plaintiff.
(iii) Lastly, it was stated that upon the overruling of a demurrer
             and when the judgment is rendered in favour of one party, it is
             final only “if the merits are involved”. Only in such judgments on
             merits, which are although rendered on demurrer, it would
             mean that every material matter of fact which was sufficiently
             pleaded, was admitted.
The relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow: -
“First. They contend that a judgment on demurrer is not a bar
             to a subsequent action between the same parties for the same
             cause of action, unless the record of the former action shows that
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 41 of 133
the demurrer extended to all the disputed facts involved in the
            second suit, nor unless the subsequent suit presents
            substantially the same questions as those determined in the
            former suit. Where the second suit presents no new question,
            they concede that the judgment in the former suit, though
            rendered on demurrer, may be a bar to the second suit, but they
            maintain that it can never be so regarded, unless all those
            conditions concur.
xxx           xxx          xxx

            [...] They were not only put in issue but they were determined,
            unless it be denied that the effect of a demurrer to the declaration
            or other pleading, is that it admits all such matters of fact as are
            sufficiently pleaded. Such a denial, if made, would be entitled to
            no weight, as it is a rule universally acknowledged.
Foundation of the rule is that the party demurring, having had
            his option to plead or demur, shall be taken, in adopting the
            latter alternative, to admit that he has no ground for denial or
            traverse.
On the overruling of a demurrer, the general rule is that
            judgment for the plaintiff is final if the merits are involved, but
            a judgment that a declaration is bad, cannot be pleaded as a bar
            to a good declaration for the same cause of action, because such
            a judgment is in no just sense a judgment upon the merits.
            Other exceptional cases might be named, but it is unnecessary,
            as none of them can have any bearing on this case.
Taken as a whole, the pleadings of the defendants in the
            respective cases amounted to a demurrer to the respective
            declarations, and the substantial import of the decision of the
            court in each case, was that the declaration was sufficient to
            entitle the plaintiffs to judgment. Beyond question they were
            judgments on the merits, although rendered on demurrer; and
            in such case the well-settled rule is that every material matter
            of fact sufficiently pleaded is admitted.
Objection was taken in the case of Bouchaud v. Dias, that the
            former judgment between the parties could not be a bar to the
            subsequent action, because it was rendered on demurrer to the
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 42 of 133
defendant's plea, but the court held that it made no difference in
            principle whether the facts upon which the court proceeded were
            proved by competent evidence, or whether they were admitted
            by the parties; and they also held that an admission, by way of
            demurrer to a pleading, in which the facts are alleged, must be
            just as available to the opposite party as though the admission
            had been made are tenus before a jury.
Reference to cases decided in other jurisdictions, however, is
            unnecessary, as this court decided, in the case of Clearwater v.
            Meredith, that on demurrer to any of the pleadings which are in
            bar of the action, the judgment for either party is the same as it
            would have been on an issue of fact joined upon the same
            pleading, and found in favor of the same party.
Defence of a former judgment rendered upon general demurrer
            to the declaration was also set up in the case of Goodrich v. The
            City, and this court held that it was a good answer to the suit,
            although the appellant insisted that it was not, because the
            judgment was rendered on demurrer.
xxx            xxx           xxx

            Judgment in a writ of entry is not a bar to a writ of right; but
            the meaning of the rule is, that each species of judgment is
            equally conclusive upon its own subject-matters by way of bar
            to future litigation for the thing thereby decided. Hence, the
            verdict of a jury, followed by a judgment or a decree in chancery,
            as held by this court, puts an end to all further controversy
            between the parties to such suit, and it has already appeared that
            a judgment for either party on demurrer to a pleading involving
            the merits, is the same as it would have been on an issue in fact,
            joined upon the same pleading, and found in favor of the same
            party.
xxx             xxx         xxx
            Better opinion is, that the estoppel, where the judgment was
            rendered upon the merits, whether on demurrer, agreed
            statement, or verdict, extends to every material allegation or
            statement which, having been made on one side and denied on
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 43 of 133
the other, was at issue in the cause, and was determined in the
            course of the proceedings.
[...] Applying that rule to the case at bar it is clear that a
            judgment rendered on demurrer settles every matter which was
            well alleged in the pleadings of the opposite party.”

                                             (Emphasis supplied)
51. Although the decision in Aurora City (supra) has given a finding that
      a party pleading demurrer admits the facts as stated in the plaint or
      the declaration to which he demurs, yet it places importance on the
      kind and nature of the adjudication made upon the demurrer. It is
      emphasized that a “decision on merits” rendered as a consequence of
      the demurrer would admit the facts of the declaration demurred to.
      In other words, the decision on demurrer must be a “final
      adjudication” between the parties for it to have the effect of barring
      the demurring party from raising the issue subsequently. Such an
      observation is made also as a consequence of the stage at which the
      plea of demurrer is raised and the object it seeks to achieve i.e.,
      whether it seeks to test the maintainability of the suit/claim or
      whether it seeks to have an impact on the final decision on merits.
52. In the former situation, i.e., while the court is tasked with testing
      whether the suit or action is simply maintainable or not, or not barred
      by any law, the defendant could not be said to have elected to demur
      ‘instead of’ pleading. Having chosen to demur, he could not be said
      to have foregone the option to plead and thereby, admitted or
      conceded that he has no grounds for denial at all. There is simply no
      requirement for the defendant to plead at this stage since it is the
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 44 of 133
plaintiff who must satisfy the court that the action is maintainable.
On the other hand, when tasked with the obligation to plead in the
      course of the proceedings, if a party choses to demur, then this choice
      would imply an admission to the facts sufficiently pleaded by the
      other. Therefore, a key distinction as regards the consequences of
      demurrer could be said to lie depending on the stage at which such
      a plea of demurrer is raised, and also the nature of the finding on
      demurrer.
53. In Gould v. Evansville & C.R. Co. reported in 91 U.S. 526, the
      Supreme Court reiterated certain principles pertaining to demurrer
      and stated as follows: -
(i)    First, that in any civil action, if the defendant choses to appear
             in the matter, he has two options in most jurisdictions i.e.,
             either to elect to plead or demur. This is subject to the condition
             that if the defendant chooses to plead to the declaration of the
             plaintiff, then the plaintiff would also have the choice to either
             reply to the defendant’s plea or to demur. The general rule is
             that, in both the aforementioned scenarios, if the other party
             joins in demurrer, then it becomes the duty of the court to
             determine the question of law presented. If such a decision by
             the court involves the merits of the controversy and it is
             determined in favour of the demurring party, and if the other
             party does not amend, then the judgment rendered is final.
(ii)   Secondly, that a judgment which is rendered upon demurrer to
             a declaration or to a material pleading which sets forth the
             facts, would be equally conclusive of the matters confessed by
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 45 of 133
the demurrer, similar to a verdict finding the same facts. This
             is because the matters in controversy are established in the
             former scenario as well as in the latter, by a matter of record.
Therefore, the facts thus established can never be contested
             between the same parties or those in privity with them,
             afterwards.
(iii) Thirdly, it was, however, stated that, if the plaintiffs fails on
             demurrer in his first action due to an omission of an essential
             allegation in his declaration and the same is fully supported in
             the second suit, then the judgment in the first suit would not be
             a bar to the second suit despite the fact that both the respective
             actions are instituted to enforce the same right. This is because
             the merits of the cause, as is being disclosed in the second
             declaration, were not decided and heard in the first action.
(iv)   Lastly, that, a demurrer admits only the facts which are ‘well
             pleaded’. For instance, it cannot be said to admit to the accuracy
             of a wrong construction of an instrument, especially when the
             alleged construction is not supported by the terms of the
             instrument which is also produced on the record. In other
             words, the mere averments of a legal conclusion cannot be said
             to be admitted by a demurrer, unless, the facts and
             circumstances set forth are sufficient to sustain the allegation.
The relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow: -
“Due service of process compels the defendant to appear, or to
             submit to a default; but, if he appears, he may, in most
             jurisdictions, elect to plead or demur, subject to the condition,
             that, if he pleads to the declaration, the plaintiff may reply to his
             plea, or demur; and the rule is, in case of a demurrer by the
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                    Page 46 of 133
defendant to the declaration, or of a demurrer by the plaintiff to
            the plea of the defendant, if the other party joins in demurrer, it
            becomes the duty of the court to determine the question
            presented for decision; and if it involves the merits of the
            controversy, and is determined in favor of the party demurring,
            and the other party for any cause does not amend, the judgment
            is in chief; [...]
                               xxx           xxx           xxx
            From these suggestions and authorities two propositions may
            be deduced, each of which has more or less application to certain
            views of the case before the court: (1.) That a judgment rendered
            upon demurrer to the declaration or to a material pleading,
            setting forth the facts, is equally conclusive of the matters
            confessed by the demurrer as a verdict finding the same facts
            would be, since the matters in controversy are established in the
            former case, as well as in the latter, by matter of record; and the
            rule is, that facts thus established can never after be contested
            between the same parties or those in privity with them. (2.) That
            if judgment is rendered for the defendant on demurrer to the
            declaration, or to a material pleading in chief, the plaintiff can
            never after maintain against the same defendant, or his privies,
            any similar or concurrent action for the same cause upon the
            same grounds as were disclosed in the first declaration; for the
            reason that the judgment upon such a demurrer determines the
            merits of the cause, and a final judgment deciding the right
            must put an end to the dispute, else the litigation would be
            endless. Rex v. Kingston, 20 State Trials, 588; Hutchin v.
            Campbell, 2 W. Bl. 831; Clearwater v. Meredith, 1 Wall. 43;
            Gould on Plead., sect. 42; Ricardo v. Garcias, 12 Cl. & Fin. 400.
Support to those propositions is found everywhere; but it is
            equally well settled, that, if the plaintiff fails on demurrer in his
            first action from the omission of an essential allegation in his
            declaration which is fully supplied in the second suit, the
            judgment in the first suit is no bar to the second, although the
            respective actions were instituted to enforce he same right; for
            the reason that the merits of the cause, as disclosed in the second
            declaration, were not heard and decided in the first
            action. Aurora City v. West, 7 Wall. 90; Gilman v. Rives, 10
            Pet. 298; Richardson v. Barton, 24 How. 188.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                   Page 47 of 133
Viewed in the light of that suggestion, it becomes necessary to
            examine the third proposition submitted by the plaintiff; which
            is, that the demurrer to the declaration in the former suit was
            sustained because the declaration was materially defective, and
            that the present declaration fully supplies all such imperfections
            and defects.
xxx            xxx           xxx

            Tested by these considerations, it is clear that the proposition
            that the defects, if any, in the declaration in the former suit were
            supplied by new allegations in the present suit, is not supported
            by a comparison of the two pleadings. Should it be suggested
            that the demurrer admits the proposition, the answer to the
            suggestion is, that the demurrer admits only the facts which are
            well pleaded; that it does not admit the accuracy of an alleged
            construction of an instrument when the instrument is set forth
            in the record, if the alleged construction is not supported by the
            terms of the instrument. Ford v. Peering, 1 Ves. Jr. 78; Lea v.
            Robeson, 12 Gray, 280; Redmond v. Dickerson, 1 Stockt. 507;
            Green v. Dodge, 1 Ham. 80.
Mere averments of a legal conclusion are not admitted by a
            demurrer unless the facts and circumstances set forth are
            sufficient to sustain the allegation. Nesbitt v. Berridge, 8 Law
            Times, N.S. 76; Murray v. Clarendon, Law Rep. 9 Eq. 11;
            Story's Eq. Plead. 254 b; Ellis v. Coleman, 25 Beav. 662; Dillon
            v. Barnard, 21 Wall. 430.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
54. While clarifying some general principles pertaining to demurrer, the
      decision in Gould (supra), emphasised that the general rule that a
      demurrer has the consequence of accepting the facts as stated in the
      declaration would hold good only if the facts are “well pleaded”.
55. In Alley v. Nott reported in 111 U.S. 472, the State Court had
      overruled the demurrers of four individual defendants. However,
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 48 of 133
leave was granted to the demurring defendants to withdraw their
      demurrers and answer the complaint of the plaintiff within twenty
      days, on the failure of which, a final judgment would be rendered
      against them for the relief to which the plaintiff was entitled. After
      this, the defendants has filed a petition for removal of the matter from
      the State Court and into the Circuit Court. While deciding that this
      petition for removal was not filed within the time required by the
      statute, the Supreme Court made certain pertinent observations on
      the concept of demurrer: -
(i)    First, that a demurrer to a complaint on the ground that it does
             not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action would be
             equivalent to a general demurrer to a declaration at common
             law. This raises an issue, which when tried, would finally
             dispose of the case on merits, unless the court grants leave to
             amend or plead over to the party who is unsuccessful in the
             decision on demurrer.
(ii)   Secondly, that if a final judgment is entered on the basis of the
             demurrer, it will be a final determination of the rights of the
             parties which can then, in turn, be pleaded as a bar to any other
             suit instituted for the same cause of action.
The relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow: -
“A demurrer to a complaint because it does not state facts
             sufficient to constitute a cause of action, is equivalent to a
             general demurrer to a declaration at common law, and raises an
             issue which, when tried, will finally dispose of the case as stated
             in the complaint, on its merits, unless leave to amend or plead
             over is granted. The trial of such an issue is the trial of the cause
             as a cause, and not the settlement of a mere matter of form in
             proceeding. There can be no other trial except at the discretion
             of the court, and if final judgment is entered on the demurrer, it
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                    Page 49 of 133
will be final determination of the rights of the parties which can
            be pleaded in bar to any other suit for the same cause of action.
            [...] In effect, when this case was heard on the demurrer, the
            issue made by the pleadings, and on which the rights of the
            parties depended, was submitted to the court for judicial
            determination. This issue the court decided, but, before entering
            final judgment, granted a new trial, with leave to amend
            pleadings. The situation of the case at this time, for the purposes
            of removal, was precisely the same as it would be if the trial,
            instead of being on an issue of law involving the merits, had
            been on an issue of fact to the jury, and the court had, in its
            discretion, allowed a new trial after verdict. We can hardly
            believe it would be claimed that a removal could be had in the
            last case, and, in our opinion, it cannot in the first.”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
56. The aforesaid decision in Alley (supra) had thrown light on the aspect
      that even if a decision on demurrer is rendered, the unsuccessful
      party could be granted leave to amend or otherwise plead over i.e.
      file answers to the complaint of the plaintiff, in the discretion of the
      court. In other words, there remains some scope for manoeuvring
      before the decision on demurrer could bind the defendant forever in
      the form of a final determination of the lis between the parties.
57. In Bissell v. Spring Valley Township reported in 124 U.S. 225, the
      Supreme Court was, yet again, faced with the same question –
      whether the litigation is any less concluded because the fact upon
      which the judgment rested was established by demurrer? The answer
      was an emphatic ‘No’. In answering thus, the Court drew a fine
      distinction between when a judgment rendered on demurrer can and
      cannot be a bar to a future action as follows: -
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 50 of 133
(i)    First, it was acknowledged that there are many scenarios in
             which a final judgment rendered upon demurrer will not
             conclude as to a future action. For instance, there may be a
             demurrer which may go to the form of the action, to a defect of
             pleading or to the jurisdiction of the court. In all such instances,
             the judgment thereon will not preclude future litigation ‘on the
             merits of the controversy’ in a court of competent jurisdiction,
             upon proper pleadings.
(ii)   Secondly, in a scenario where a demurrer goes both, to the
             defects of form and also to the merits, and a judgment is
             rendered, if the judgment does not designate or specify which
             of the two grounds of demurrer has been sustained or
             overruled, then such a judgment will be presumed to rest on
             the former ground i.e., on the demurrer to defects of form. In
             other words, benefit would be given such that there is still
             scope for the parties to adjudicate the merits by taking a plea of
             answer.
(iii) Thirdly, however, if the demurrer is to a pleading which sets
             forth distinctly, the specific facts touching upon the merits of
             the action or defence, and a final judgment is rendered thereon,
             only then it would be said that the facts thus admitted would
             be considered as fully established as if found by a jury, or
             admitted in open court.
(iv)   Fourthly, if a party against whom a ruling is made on
             demurrer, wants or wishes to avoid the effect of that demurrer
             as an admission of the facts in the pleading demurred to, then
             he has scope to seek to amend his pleading or answer, as the
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 51 of 133
case may be. If such a request is made, leave for that purpose
            will seldom be refused by the court, if the party states that he
            can controvert the facts by evidence which he can produce.
Only if he does not ask for such a permission, it will be
            presumed that he is unable to produce any more evidence on
            the issue and that the fact is, indeed, as is alleged in the
            pleading. In other words, only in such a scenario, it could be
            stated that he would be estopped and bound by the facts
            confessed by the demurrer.
(v)   Lastly, it was emphasised that courts are not established to
            determine what the law might be upon possible facts, but to
            adjudge the rights of the parties upon existing facts. Therefore,
            some certainty must exist that the parties are pleading the
            actual and not the supposable facts touching upon the matters
            in controversy.
The relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow: -
“Is the litigation any the less concluded because the fact upon
            which the judgment rested was established by the demurrer?
            There are undoubtedly many cases where a final judgment upon
            a demurrer will not conclude as to a future action. The demurrer
            may go to the form of the action, to a defect of pleading, or to the
            jurisdiction of the court. In all such instances the judgment
            thereon will not preclude future litigation on the merits of the
            controversy in a court of competent jurisdiction upon proper
            pleadings. And it has been held that where a demurrer goes both
            to defects of form and also to the merits, a judgment thereon, not
            designating between the two grounds, will be presumed to rest
            on the former. But where the demurrer is to a pleading setting
            forth distinctly specific facts touching the merits of the action or
            defence, and final judgment is rendered thereon, it would be
            difficult to find any reason in principle why the facts thus
            admitted should not be considered for all purposes as fully
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 52 of 133
established as if found by a jury, or admitted in open court. If
            the party against whom a ruling is made on a demurrer wishes
            to avoid the effect of the demurrer as an admission of the facts
            in the pleading demurred to, he should seek to amend his
            pleading or answer, as the case may be. Leave for that purpose
            will seldom be refused by the court upon a statement that he can
            controvert the facts by evidence which he can produce. If he does
            not ask for such permission, the inference may justly be drawn
            that he is unable to produce the evidence, and that the fact is as
            alleged in the pleading. Courts are not established to determine
            what the law might be upon possible facts, but to adjudge the
            rights of parties upon existing facts; and when their jurisdiction
            is invoked, parties will be presumed to represent in their
            pleadings the actual, and not supposable, facts touching the
            matters in controversy.
The law on this subject is well stated in Gould's Treatise on
            Pleading, a work of recognized merit in this country, as follows:
"A judgment, rendered upon demurrer, is equally conclusive
            (by way of estoppel) of the facts confessed by the demurrer, as a
            verdict finding the same facts would have been; since they are
            established, as well in the former case as in the latter, by way of
            record. And facts, thus established, can never afterwards be
            contested, between the same parties, or those in privity with
            them." Chap. IX, part 1, sec. 43.
[...] A distinction was suggested between the cases on the
            ground that the former judgment between the parties was
            rendered on a demurrer to the defendant's plea. But the court
            answered that "it can make no difference, in principle, whether
            the facts upon which the court proceeded were proved by deeds
            and witnesses, or whether they were admitted by the parties.
            And an admission by way of demurrer to a pleading, in which
            the facts are alleged, must be just as available to the opposite
            party as though the admission had been made ore tenus before a
            jury. If the plaintiff demurred for want of form, or if for any
            other reason he wished to controvert the facts alleged in the plea,
            he might, after learning the opinion of the court, have asked
            leave to withdraw the demurrer and reply. But he suffered a
            final judgment to be entered against him. He probably thought
            that the facts were truly alleged in the plea, and therefore did
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 53 of 133
not wish to amend. But however that may be, the judgment is a
            bar to this action." p. 244. See also Coffin v. Knott, 2 Greene,
            (Iowa,) 582; Birckhead v. Brown, 5 Sandford, Sup. Ct. N.Y.
134.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
58. In Bissell (supra), the Court highlighted yet another important aspect
      – the duty of the court to reasonably ensure that the judgment
      rendered is upon actual facts and not on supposable ones.
59. In Nalle v. Oyster reported in 230 U.S. 165, the Supreme Court threw
      light to the general rule that provided that, after a demurrer is
      overruled, i.e., after the party demurring is unsuccessful, leave is
      generally given by the court to instead plead or answer. Now, when
      the demurring party pleads or answers the pleading that he initially
      demurred to, he would be considered to have waived the initial
      demurrer and took it out of the record. This leeway given to the
      demurring party was also pointed out in Alley (supra). In the facts of
      Nalle (supra), this general rule was modified by law, to the extent
      that, the demurring party would have the right to plead over, but
      without waiving his demurrer. Irrespective, the aspect deserving
      consideration for the purposes of our inquiry is that the right to
      answer or plead over, given to the demurring party, remained intact.
      The relevant observations are thus: -
“Sec. 1533 of the District Code provides that in all cases where
            a demurrer to a declaration or other pleading shall be overruled,
            the party demurring shall have the right to plead over, without
            waiving his demurrer. This is obviously designed to modify the
            former rule that where after demurrer overruled, leave was
            given to plead, and the demurring party pleaded to the pleading
            demurred to, he waived the demurrer, and took it out of the
            record, so that it did not appear in the judgment roll. Young v.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                Page 54 of 133
Martin, 8 Wall. 354, 357; Stanton v. Embry, 93 U.S. 548,
             553; Del., Lack. & West. R. Co. v. Salmon, 39 N.J. Law (10
             Vr.), 299, 301. The section has no bearing upon the case where
             a demurrer is sustained.”
                                              (Emphasis supplied)
60. A conspectus of this elaborate legal discussion on the position of law
      as regards the concept of ‘demurrer’ in the Unites States is as follows: -
(i)    The Civil Procedure Code in those States of the U.S. which still
             employ demurrer as a concept have detailed instructions on
             how such a plea or objection may be raised by one party. It is a
             legislatively sanctioned method of replying to the averments
             and raising objections to the pleadings of another party.
(ii)   The State of Virginia, for example, requires that all demurrers
             be made in writing and specifically state the grounds through
             which the demurring party alleges that the pleading is
             insufficient in law. No other grounds other than those that are
             written in the demurrer would be considered by the Court. In
             California, as well, the Civil Code requires that the demurrer
             filed, distinctly specify the grounds upon which any of the
             objections to the complaint, cross-complaint, or answer are
             taken. The party filing the demurrer also files a notice of
             hearing and after the decision on demurrer is taken at the
             hearing, the court may, in its discretion, also allow the party in
             fault to plead anew or amend on such terms, as may be just.
(iii) It must be noted that even in Virginia, which endorses the
             practice of demurrer, if a party seeks to raise an objection that
             the action is not commenced within the limitation period
             prescribed by law, the same must only be raised as an
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 55 of 133
affirmative defense specifically set forth in a responsive
             pleading and not by way of demurrer.
(iv)   What assumes significance in the aforementioned practice
             adopted in the U.S. is that, a party raising a plea of demurrer
             has the opportunity to meet with every averment made by the
             plaintiff in the plaint/claim specifically and either deny or
             agree with them as they file a demurrer. This is simply because
             it’s a recognised method of pleading just like the filing of a
             written statement in India.
(v)    On facts that the parties disagree on, a decision on demurrer
             can never be rendered. Only on the facts agreed upon, if a pure
             issue of law arises, the situation can be directed for a decision
             on demurrer.
(vi)   It is only in this background that it is stated that a decision
             taken on demurrer has the consequence of the party raising the
             plea of demurrer admitting to the facts as stated in the plaint or
             original claim. Therefore, it can be seen that procedurally, the
             concept is wholly different.
(vii) When a plea of demurrer to evidence is raised, again, things are
             slightly different. To elaborate further, in such a scenario, when
             a demurrer is offered by one party, the adverse party has to
             “join” with him in demurrer, and the answer which he makes
             is called a “joinder in demurrer”. In a joinder in demurrer, the
             adverse party essentially agrees with the legal challenge posed
             by the demurrer and joins in arguing only the point of law
             raised in demurrer. In other words, both parties clearly agree
             that there is only an issue of law which remains to be
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025             Page 56 of 133
adjudicated. Without such a joinder in demurrer entered on the
             record, the court would not proceed to give judgment upon the
             demurrer. Such a joinder in demurrer ought not to be required
             or permitted by the court if there was “any matter of fact in
             controversy between the parties”.
(viii) In the aforesaid context, the decision in Fowle (supra) observed
             that the object of the proceedings in demurrer would be to only
             apply the law to facts, those facts which are already admitted
             or ascertained. If the facts are left unsettled and indeterminate,
             then there would be no ‘joinder’ and the court would refuse
             judgment on demurrer. In short, it would be no demurrer if it
             ends up raising question(s) of facts instead of one in law. Only
             if the ‘joinder’ was proper, then the defendant raising the plea
             of demurrer would be bound by the facts whose veracity was
             admitted on demurrer.
(ix)   In a similar manner, the decision in Slocum (supra) agreed that
             when the demurring party refuses to admit the facts which the
             other side attempted to prove and more so, when the
             demurring party offered contradictory evidence or attempted
             to   establish   inconsistent   propositions,   this   cannot   be
             considered to be a valid demurrer and any consequential
             decision rendered on demurrer would be liable to be reversed
             for error. This is for the reason that there were no ascertained
             facts at all on which a judgment could have been based.
(x)    Another aspect pointed out by Aurora City (supra) is that, in
             the U.S., the party has an “option” to plead or demur. In other
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025             Page 57 of 133
words, one can demur even while the matter is to be decided
             on merits.
(xi)   Therefore, in choosing to adopt the latter alternative, he shall
             be considered to have admitted or conceded that he had no
             ground for denial by way of a proper pleading, even on merits.
In such a situation, a demurrer is merely a shortcut to admit the
             facts which the party would anyway not seek to dispute at trial;
             in that sense, there is no difference whether the facts upon
             which the court proceeded with, in its adjudication on merits,
             were proved by competent evidence, or whether they were
             admitted by the parties by way of demurrer.
(xii) Hence, it is only when the ‘merits’ of the matter are decided
             upon the overruling of a demurrer, could it be said that every
             material matter of fact which was sufficiently pleaded, was
             admitted.
(xiii) To summarize, a key distinction as regards the consequences of
             demurrer could also be said to lie depending on the stage at
             which such a plea of demurrer is raised, and also the nature of
             the finding on demurrer i.e., whether it is on the merits of the
             matter or not.
(xiv) The decision in Gould (supra) reinforced the ratio of Aurora
             City (supra) and added that the general rule that a demurrer
             has the consequence of accepting the facts as stated in the
             declaration would hold good only if the facts are “well
             pleaded”.
(xv) The decision in Alley (supra) pointed out that the party who is
             unsuccessful in the decision on demurrer, may also be granted
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025            Page 58 of 133
leave by the court to amend or plead over afresh. Seldom will
            such a leave be refused, if the party states that he can controvert
            the facts, which he initially demurred to, by evidence which he
            can produce. In other words, there remains some scope for
            manoeuvring before the decision on demurrer could bind the
            demurring party in the form of a final determination of the lis
            between the parties.
(xvi) The decision in Bissell (supra) highlighted one another
            important aspect – that courts are not established to determine
            what the law might be upon possible facts, but to adjudge the
            rights of the parties upon existing facts. This could be said to
            bring forth a corresponding duty of the court to reasonably
            ensure that the judgment rendered is upon actual facts and not
            on supposable ones.
61. The aforesaid summary of the position in the United States brings to
      the fore one conclusion – that the understanding of the concept of
      demurrer in American jurisprudence cannot be directly imported to
      ours. Their version of the idea of demurrer is heavily rooted in the
      civil procedure that they follow, the stage at which the demurrer is
      made and the nature of the decision which is rendered on demurrer.
62. Even assuming that we could directly borrow from their
      interpretation of the scope and ambit of the concept of demurrer, it
      is plainly obvious that when there is an issue of fact, a decision on
      demurrer, even if rendered by the court, cannot be proper and is
      liable to be reversed for error. Therefore, courts or forums, even in
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025             Page 59 of 133
the U.S. must be careful to ensure that there is no fact in controversy
       between the parties before they proceed to give a decision on
       demurrer.
c.   The legal position as understood in Indian jurisprudence.
63. In contradistinction to the legal system and jurisprudence in the
       Unites States, the concept of ‘demurrer’ has not found a direct
       mention in any of our statute books. Such an idea remains alien
       insofar as
the CPC
is concerned. However, several decisions of this
       Court have referred to and have also employed this concept.
i.   Some decisions employing the concept of demurrer and the contours
       thereof.
64.
In
O.N. Bhatnagar v. Rukibai Narsindas and Others
reported in
       (1982) 2 SCC 244, one of the many questions that this Court was faced
       with pertained to the issue of jurisdiction i.e., whether it is the Small
       Causes Court under Section 28(1)(a) of the Bombay Rent Act, 1947 or
       the Registrar under
Section 91(1)
of the Maharashtra Cooperative
       Societies Act, 1960 which would have the jurisdiction to hear the
       matter. This determination was dependant on the nature of the jural
       relationship in which the parties stood i.e., whether they had a
       landlord-tenant relationship or that of licensor-licensee. In this
       background, this Court observed that the appellant-licensee had
       raised the objection to jurisdiction in the nature of demurrer i.e., that
       the issue of jurisdiction had to be determined by adverting to the
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 60 of 133
allegations contained in the statement of claim made by the
      respondent no. 1 in the proceedings before the Registrar. Those
      allegations must be taken to be true. Upon a perusal of the averments
      it was evident that the respondent no. 1 had unequivocally asserted
      that the parties stood in a licensor-licensee relationship and that fact
      was also clearly borne out from the terms of the agreement of leave
      and licence between the parties.
65. However, after observing as aforesaid, this Court in
O.N. Bhatnagar
(supra) also observed that when the respondent no. 1 did not admit
      to a relationship which would attract the provisions of the Bombay
      Rent Act, 1947, the appellant-defendant cannot by his mere plea on
      demurrer force the plaintiff-respondent no.1 to go to a forum which
      is clearly different from the averments made by the respondent no. 1
      in the statement of claim and where the claim simply does not lie. It
      was added that the burden rested on the appellant-licensee to
      establish that he had the status of a “tenant” within the meaning of
      the Bombay Rent Act, 1947 and that “he had failed to discharge that
      burden”.
66. The aforesaid observations in
O.N. Bhatnagar
(supra) must be
      understood in the right context.
The decision in
O.N. Bhatnagar
(supra) does not say that when a plea of demurrer as regards
      jurisdiction was raised by the appellant-licensee, the appellant-
      licensee was also simultaneously required to discharge his burden of
      proof and prove that he was a tenant as was claimed by him. That
      would be absurd for the reason that, when only the averments made
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025            Page 61 of 133
in the plaint/complaint are being looked at, there cannot be any
      burden of proof resting on the opposite party or the defendant which
      then has to be discharged. In the aforesaid case, when the plea of
      jurisdiction was raised by way of demurrer, the averments made by
      the respondent no.1 in the statement of claim along with the terms of
      the leave and licence agreement were looked at and it was decided
      that it was the Registrar who had jurisdiction over the matter.
      However, even as the matter progressed before the Registrar and
      evidence was taken, the defendant failed to prove that he was a
      “tenant” as so staunchly averred by him. This is the reason why this
      Court had observed that the defendant had failed to discharge his
      burden. This clarification is important for two reasons – (a) When a
      plea of demurrer is being decided, the party raising the plea could
      only be said to be pausing or waiting. The question raised on
      demurrer would not be ‘finally’ decided when it is decided against
      the party raising the plea by way of demurrer; and (b) The issue can
      be said to be finally decided and can also be ‘foreclosed’ only at a
      stage when the party who raised the plea by way of demurrer was,
      by law, required to discharge his burden of proof and he failed to do
      so.
67. The relevant observations made in
O.N. Bhatnagar
(supra) are
      reproduced as under: -
“5. [...] Again, the appellant asked for a de novo trial, but in
            view of the provisions of Section 91-A(4) his application was
            rejected. Respondent 1 was however re-summoned for further
            cross-examination and thereafter the appellant's evidence was
            recorded. In August 1977 there was a change of the Judge of the
            Cooperative Court and the appellant repeated his prayer for a de
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 62 of 133
novo trial but this application of his was also rejected. The
            learned Judge of the Cooperative Court by his judgment dated
            April 28, 1978, made an award against the appellant for
            possession of the flat in dispute and for arrears of rent and mesne
            profits amounting to Rs 30,000. Against the award the
            appellant filed an appeal before the Cooperative appellate court
            but it was dismissed in January 1979. Thereafter the appellant
            filed a writ petition in the High Court in February 1979 and it
            was dismissed in March 1981 by a learned Single Judge. The
            appellant unsuccessfully preferred a letters patent appeal which
            was dismissed by a Division Bench on April 21, 1981.
xxx            xxx           xxx
9. The two enactments deal with two distinct and separate fields
            and therefore the non obstante clause in
Section 91(1)
of the Act
            and that in
Section 28
of the Rent Act operate on two different
            planes. The two legislations pertain to different topics of
            legislation. It will be noticed that
Section 28
of the Rent Act
            proceeds on the basis that exclusive jurisdiction is conferred on
            certain courts to decide all questions or claims under that Act
            as to parties between whom there is or was a relationship of
            landlord and tenant. It does not invest those courts with
            exclusive power to try questions of title, such as between the
            rightful owner and a trespasser or a licensee, for such questions
            do not arise under the Act. The appellant having raised a plea
            in the nature of demurrer, the question of jurisdiction had to be
            determined with advertence to the allegations contained in the
            statement of claim made by Respondent 1 under
Section 91(1)
of the Act and those allegations must be taken to be true.
Respondent 1 unequivocally asserts that the parties stood in the
            relation of licensor and licensee and that fact is clearly borne out
            by the terms of the agreement of leave and licence as between the
            parties. The burden was on the appellant to establish that he had
            the status of a “tenant” within the meaning of
Section 5(11)
of
            the Rent Act, as it then stood, and that burden he has failed to
            discharge. If, therefore, plaintiff in the plaint does not admit a
            relationship which would attract any of the provisions of the Act
            on which the exclusive jurisdiction given in Section 28 depends,
            the defendant cannot by his plea force the plaintiff to go to a
            forum where on averments the claim does not lie.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 63 of 133
xxx            xxx           xxx
21. [...] But where the parties admittedly do not stand in the
            jural relationship of landlord and tenant, as here, the dispute
            would be governed by
Section 91(1)
of the Act. No doubt, the
            appellant acquired a right to occupy the flat as a licensee, by
            virtue of his being a nominal member, but in the very nature of
            things, his rights were inchoate. In view of these considerations,
            we are of the opinion that the proceedings under
Section 91(1)
of the Act were not barred by the provisions of
Section 28
of the
            Rent Act.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
68.
In
Exphar SA and Another v. Eupharma Laboratories Ltd. and
      Another
reported in (2004) 3 SCC 688, the question pertained to
      whether the High Court could exercise jurisdiction under
Section
      62(2)
of the Copyright Act, 1957 to entertain the suit. In this context,
      it was held that when an objection is taken by way of demurrer and
      not at trial, the objection must be proceeded with on the basis that the
      facts which are pleaded by the initiator of the proceedings are true.
      For that objection to succeed, it must be shown that granted those
      facts, the question of law must be answered against the initiator of
      the proceedings. The relevant observations are thus: -
“9. Besides, when an objection to jurisdiction is raised by way
            of demurrer and not at the trial, the objection must proceed on
            the basis that the facts as pleaded by the initiator of the
            impugned proceedings are true. The submission in order to
            succeed must show that granted those facts the court does not
            have jurisdiction as a matter of law. In rejecting a plaint on the
            ground of jurisdiction, the Division Bench should have taken
            the allegations contained in the plaint to be correct. [...]”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 64 of 133
69. This Court in
Man Roland Druckimachinen AG v. Multicolour Offset
      Ltd. and Another
reported in (2004) 7 SCC 447, was concerned with
      an objection made in the nature of a demurrer. Therein, the
      respondent no. 1 had filed an application before the Commission set
      up under the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969
(hereinafter, the “Act, 1969”), complaining of unfair trade practices
      and had also made a claim for compensation. The appellant, had
      raised objections to the Commission’s jurisdiction to entertain the
      respondent’s application on two grounds, the first of which was that,
      in the event of any dispute, the parties had agreed that the applicable
      law would be German law. It was also said to have been agreed that
      the disputes between the parties should be resolved either by
      proceedings brought in German Courts or alternatively, through
      arbitration conducted in accordance with the International Chamber
      of Commerce Rules. The second ground was that the appellant being
      incorporated under German law and having its registered office in
      Germany, neither provided any service nor carried on any trade or
      trade practice in India for the purposes of the Act, 1969 and the
      printing machine in question was also sold to the respondent no. 1
      outside India.
70. While arriving at the conclusion that the jurisdictional clause in the
      contract between the parties would only determine the manner and
      forum in which rights under the contract would be enforced,
Man
      Roland
(supra) stated the such a clause would not act as a bar to
      proceedings under the Act, 1969 which provides for statutory
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025           Page 65 of 133
remedies in respect of statutorily defined offences. Observing so, this
      Court made a few observations on demurrer as follows: -
(i)    First, that an objection to jurisdiction can be taken in two ways
             – (a) by way of demurrer, or (b) by raising it as a preliminary
             issue. If taken by way of demurrer, the objection is essentially
             decided on the basis of the allegations contained in the
             complaint itself by taking them to be true. If raised as a
             preliminary issue, it has to be adjudicated upon after the parties
             are given an opportunity to lead evidence.
(ii)   Secondly, that the Commission wrongly proceeded on the
             footing that both the objections to the maintainability of the
             complaint were raised by way of demurrer. It was clarified that
             the first objection which was based on a clause in the agreement
             was indeed in the nature of a demurrer and could also be
             decided as such. However, the second objection must have
             been determined only after the taking of evidence. Therefore,
             the appeal was disposed with a direction that the Commission
             deal with the second objection on the basis of evidence which
             may be adduced by either party.
The relevant observations are thus: -
“18. An objection to jurisdiction can either be taken by way of
             demurrer or raised as an issue in the proceeding. In the first case
             the objection will have to be decided on the basis of the
             allegations contained in the complaint, taking the statements
             contained therein to be correct. Otherwise an objection to the
             jurisdiction of a court may be raised as a preliminary issue. In
             such event, the issue would have to be adjudicated upon after
             giving the parties an opportunity to lead evidence. The
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                   Page 66 of 133
Commission proceeded on the basis that both the objections
            raised by the appellant, were by way of demurrer.
19. The appellant's first objection to the Commission's
            jurisdiction based on the clause in the agreement was in fact in
            the nature of a demurrer and could be decided as such. But in
            our opinion the second objection to the jurisdiction of the
            Commission was not. It would have to be determined on
            evidence.
xxx            xxx           xxx
26. We, therefore, dispose of the appeal by directing the
            Commission to deal with the second aspect of the preliminary
            objection on evidence which may be adduced by either party and
            in the light of the legal issues determined by us. It is clarified
            that in the event the Commission finds on evidence that the
            appellant does not carry on business in India through
            Respondent 2 and that the alleged unfair trade practice did not
            take place in India, the Commission will dismiss Respondent 1's
            complaint without deciding the matter on merits. The appeal is
            accordingly disposed of without any order as to costs.”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
71. The aforesaid observations made in
Man Roland
(supra) must be
      scrutinised closely. To reiterate, it was observed that – “The appellant's
      first objection to the Commission's jurisdiction based on the clause in the
      agreement was in fact in the nature of a demurrer and could be decided as
      such.” This Court had cleared the misconception of the Commission
      and stated that both the preliminary objections could not be
      considered to have been taken by demurrer. The reason behind
      observing that the first objection could be taken in the nature of a
      demurrer was because it only involved a contractual clause. In such
      a scenario, when objection to jurisdiction is taken by drawing the
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 67 of 133
attention of the court to a clause in the contract, there is no complexity
      involved in deciding the objection to jurisdiction since both the
      parties did not question the vires of the clause per say or contend that
      the contract was entered into due to fraud or misrepresentation. In
      situations like this, the task is simple. The court does not need any
      additional evidence to be led by the parties because it can decide the
      question of jurisdiction by solely resorting to an examination of the
      clause. This is the reason why it was understood that the first
      objection was taken by way of demurrer.
72. Due emphasis must also be placed on the words “and could be decided
      as such”. This reveals that the court or forum which is deciding an
      objection must be reasonably convinced that such an objection does
      not require evidence. This is the incumbent duty of the court or
      forum before which the dispute is brought. The objection must be
      such that it is inherently capable of being decided without evidence.
      Taking this into consideration, and examining the nature of the
      second objection, this Court held that, contrary to the first objection,
      the second objection required to be decided as a preliminary issue
      after evidence was led by the parties. The second objection was
      intertwined with several questions of fact which had to be
      established by the parties, i.e., whether the appellant carried on
      business in India through the respondent no. 2 and if the alleged
      unfair trade practice even took place in India. This Court was alive to
      the fact that the parties were at loggerheads insofar as these questions
      was concerned and therefore, relegated its determination to be on the
      basis of a preliminary issue and not by way of demurrer. In other
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025             Page 68 of 133
words, both parties wanted to rebut what the other side aimed to
      establish and lead evidence to the contrary. There was no consensus
      and the court was cognisant of such a disagreement. In such a
      scenario, it would be the responsibility of the court or forum deciding
      the matter, to require the parties to lead evidence and decide the
      objection thereafter.
73.
In
Indian Mineral & Chemical Co. and Others v. Deutsche Bank
reported in (2004) 12 SCC 376, this Court was concerned with the
      order of the High Court revoking leave which was earlier granted to
      the appellants under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent, 1865 to institute
      a suit. This was done on the ground that no part of the cause of action
      as pleaded in the plaint had arisen within the original jurisdiction of
      the court. While the Single Judge dismissed the application for
      revocation of leave, the Division Bench had allowed it. The Division
      Bench had conducted a scrutiny into the veracity or plausibility of
      the averments made in the plaint and examined whether those
      averments were borne out by the documents which were annexed to
      the plaint. Disagreeing with the Division Bench of the High Court,
      this Court observed that leave was wrongly revoked since in
      determining whether a leave granted is liable to be revoked, one
      must look at the assertions made in the plaint and must assume them
      to be true. In other words, the decision must be taken on demurrer.
74. While observing so in
Indian Mineral & Chemical Co.
(supra), it was
      stated that, it might have been open to the Division Bench to hold
      that what was alleged to be a part of the cause of action did not form
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025           Page 69 of 133
a part of the cause of action at all, i.e., that after assuming the
      averments are true, the question of law as to whether the cause of
      action was made out could have been answered against the plaintiffs.
      However, this was not done. What was done was that a contrary
      factual conclusion was arrived at by the Division Bench and this was
      impermissible while rendering a decision on demurrer since it has to
      be determined ex-facie the plaint.
75. What must also be noted is that, in
Indian Mineral & Chemical Co.
(supra), the defendants had submitted that the High Court did not
      have jurisdiction because UCO bank, Calcutta was not authorised to
      receive the documents and that the payment under the letter of credit
      was to be made, not in Calcutta, but in Düsseldorf, Germany.
      However, this Court acknowledged that the role that the Calcutta
      branch of UCO Bank played in the transaction was a mixed question
      of law and fact and therefore, these contentions of the defendants
      would have to be decided on the basis of evidence and not in an
      application for revocation of leave under Clause 12 of the Letters
      Patent. To put it simply, although this Court, on assuming that the
      averments in the plaint are true, stated that leave was rightly granted,
      yet it left it open for the defendants to agitate the issue of jurisdiction
      after evidence was taken since the question involved was a mixed
      one of both law and fact. In other words, the issue of jurisdiction
      decided in favour of the plaintiffs on the basis of demurrer was not
      foreclosed.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 70 of 133
76. The relevant observations made in Indian Mineral & Chemical Co.
(supra) are reproduced hereinbelow: -
“8. On 30-8-1999, the respondent made an application for
            revocation of leave under clause 12 of the Letters Patent on the
            ground that no part of the cause of action arose within the
            jurisdiction of the Calcutta High Court. The learned Single
            Judge dismissed the application.
9. The Division Bench accepted the submission of the
            respondent that although the pleadings in the plaint showed
            that the Calcutta High Court had jurisdiction to entertain the
            suit, the averments in the plaint were not borne out by the letter
            of credit which was annexed to the plaint. The Division Bench
            also accepted the respondents' contention that the letter of credit
            was to be honoured by payment “at sight” and that if the terms
            and conditions of credit were fully complied with, the
            respondent would credit the account of UCO Bank, Düsseldorf
            Branch upon presentation of the documents indicated in the
            letter of credit. Payment “at sight” was therefore to be made at
            Düsseldorf and not in Calcutta as claimed in the plaint and as
            such no part of cause of action had arisen within the jurisdiction
            of the High Court.
10. We are of the opinion that the learned Judges erred in
            revoking leave under clause 12 of the Letters Patent in view of
            the clear assertions made in the plaint, and the assertions in a
            plaint must be assumed to be true for the purpose of determining
            whether leave is liable to be revoked on a point of demurrer
            [See
Abdulla Bin Ali v. Galappa
, (1985) 2 SCC 54;
Roop Lal
            Sathi v. Nachhattar Singh Gill
, (1982) 3 SCC 487;
Ritu
            Sachdev v. Anita Jindal
, AIR 1982 Cal 333 and Secy. of
            State v. Golabrai Paliram, AIR 1932 Cal 146] . In the plaint the
            jurisdiction of the High Court was claimed on the ground that:
(1) UCO Bank's branch, which was within the Court's
            jurisdiction, intimated the plaintiffs that the letter of credit had
            been issued by the respondent;
(2) the documents were presented by the plaintiffs to the said
            branch of UCO Bank; and
            (3) payment was to be received by the plaintiffs from the said
            branch of UCO Bank.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 71 of 133
11. The Division Bench could have held that what was alleged
            to be a part of the cause of action did not form part of the cause
            of action at all. This the Division Bench did not do. It was not
            open to the Division Bench to come to a contrary factual
            conclusion in respect of any of these three grounds. The appeal
            is, therefore, liable to be allowed on this ground alone.
xxx             xxx           xxx
14. [...] What the role of UCO Bank in fact was is a mixed
            question of law and fact. At present, since we have to determine
            the court's jurisdiction ex facie the plaint, we cannot proceed on
            the assumption that UCO Bank was not authorised to receive
            the documents or that the payment under the letter of credit was
            to be made, as far as the appellants are concerned, at Düsseldorf.
            Ultimately it will depend upon whether UCO Bank was acting
            for the respondent or the appellants. All these matters will have
            to be decided on evidence and cannot be decided on an
            application for revocation of leave under clause 12 of the Letters
            Patent.
15. The observations of Rankin, C.J. in
Secy. of
            State v. Golabrai Paliram [ See Abdulla Bin Ali
v. Galappa,
            (1985) 2 SCC 54;
Roop Lal Sathi v. Nachhattar Singh Gill
,
            (1982) 3 SCC 487;
Ritu Sachdev v. Anita Jindal
, AIR 1982 Cal
            333 and Secy. of State v. Golabrai Paliram, AIR 1932 Cal 146]
            correctly represents the law as to how the Court should
            approach an application for revocation of leave: (AIR p. 147)

                 “I do really protest against questions of difficulty and
                 importance being dealt with by an application to
                 revoke the leave under clause 12 of the Letters Patent
                 and to take the plaint off the file. Normally it is well
                 settled that the proper way to plead to the jurisdiction
                 of the court is to take the plea in the written statement
                 and as a substantive part of the defence. Except in the
                 clearest cases that should be the course.”
16. In the circumstances, we are of the view that the learned
            Single Judge was justified in rejecting the respondent's
            application for revocation of leave. The Division Bench should
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 72 of 133
not have allowed the respondent's appeal. The impugned
              decision is accordingly set aside and the appeal allowed with
              costs. The High Court is requested to dispose of the suit as
              expeditiously as is conveniently possible.”

                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
77.
In another decision of this Court in
State of Haryana v. State of
      Punjab and Another
reported in (2004) 12 SCC 673, it was held that
      the question whether the plaint must be rejected should be decided
      on the basis of the allegations contained in the plaint and by way of
      demurrer and observed as follows: -
“29. The application under Order 23 Rule 6 of the Rules is by
              way of demurrer. The question whether the plaint should be
              rejected must, therefore, be decided on the basis of the allegations
              contained in the plaint [See
D. Ramachandran v. R.V.
              Janakiraman
, (1999) 3 SCC 267, 271].”

                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
78. Meaning thereby, that while deciding an application for rejection of
      plaint, the averments contained in the plaint must be assumed as
      true.
79.
In
J.P. Srivastava & Sons (P) Ltd. and Others v. Gwalior Sugar Co.
      Ltd. and Others
reported in (2005) 1 SCC 172, this Court was
      concerned with the maintainability of the petition under
Sections 397
and
398
of the Companies Act, 1956 respectively alleging oppression
      and mismanagement. The petition would be maintainable only if
      filed by persons having a requisite percentage of shares. The
      petitioner’s case was that petitioner no. 3 also represented the family
      trust which held some shares, thereby fulfilling the criteria to
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                    Page 73 of 133
maintain their petition. However, the petition was dismissed as not
      maintainable on the ground that the trust had not consented to the
      filing of the petition on its behalf by the petitioner no.3. In this
      background, this Court observed that if the objection by the
      respondents to the maintainability of the petition is taken by way of
      demurrer, then the Company Law Board could decide the issue on
      the basis of the averments contained in the petition alone, while
      accepting the pleas stated therein as correct.
80. While stating so, it was also observed in
J.P. Srivastava
(supra) that
      when the Board had taken into consideration certain facts outside the
      petition, then an opportunity must also be given to the petitioners to
      support their case as stated in petition on the basis of further evidence
      i.e., evidence which may have not been annexed to the petition. This
      observation must, again, be understood in the right manner.
When
      an objection is decided by way of demurrer, and the objection
      succeeds (as in
J.P. Srivastava
(supra)), the matter would come to a
      end, of course with the exception that the petitioner can further
      appeal this decision taken by way of demurrer before an appellate
      forum. Therefore, when we say the matter would come to a halt, we
      mean that the suit would not progress any further.
In
J.P. Srivastava
(supra), what had occurred was that, the Board had taken into
      consideration the allegations contained in one of the respondent’s
      application as well – in essence, they did not proceed on the basis of
      demurrer. Therefore, this Court had held that the unsuccessful
      petitioner must not be prevented from adducing further evidence
      and the issue must not be foreclosed. This observation must, by no
      means, be understood as laying down the proposition of law that
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025             Page 74 of 133
when a plea of demurrer is taken by a respondent/defendant and the
      court, rightly proceeding on the correct understanding of the concept
      of demurrer, rejects the objection of the respondent/defendant taken
      by way of demurrer, then the issue would be permanently foreclosed.
      In other words, it must not be understood to mean that it is only the
      petitioner who can enjoy the benefit of the issue not being foreclosed
      and that this benefit would not accrue to the respondent/defendant
      who takes the plea by way of demurrer.
81. The relevant observations in
J.P. Srivastava
(supra) are as follows:
“11. The hearing in the matter was concluded by CLB and
            judgment reserved two days after the last affidavit was filed. [...]
            However, CLB upheld the contention of Respondent 8 that the
            application under Sections 397 and 398 was not maintainable
            on the ground that the petitioner did not hold the requisite 10
            per cent shares. CLB proceeded on the basis that the Trust held
            1029 shares in the Company but that it had not consented to the
            filing of the petition under Sections 397, 398 by Nini
            Srivastava. [...]
                             xxx            xxx           xxx
40. Given these powers in CLB, we cannot hold that non-
compliance with one of the requirements in Sl. No. 27 in Ann.
            III of Regulation 18 goes to the very root of the jurisdiction of
            CLB to entertain and dispose of a petition under Sections 397,
398. All that Regulation 18 requires by way of filing of
            documents, is proof that the consent of the supporting
            shareholders had in fact been obtained prior to the filing of the
            petition in terms of Section 399(3). It cannot be gainsaid that it
            is open to the persons opposing the application under Sections
            397 and 398 to question the correctness of an assertion as to
            consent made by the petitioner. It is equally open to the
            petitioner to provide evidence in support of the plea taken in the
            petition. If of course the objection to the maintainability is taken
            by way of demurrer, CLB can decide the issue on the basis of the
            averments contained in the petition alone, accepting the pleas
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 75 of 133
therein as correct. But where CLB takes into consideration facts
             outside the petition as it has done in this case, it cannot foreclose
             the petitioner from supporting its case in the petition on the
             basis of evidence not annexed thereto. Since CLB calculated the
             total shareholding of the Company including preference shares
             based on the allegations contained in Respondent 8's
             application, it was for CLB to determine the issue of actual prior
             consent on evidence. This view finds support from Regulation
             24 which says:
“24. Power of the Bench to call for further
                  information/evidence.—The Bench may, before
                  passing orders on the petition, require the parties or
                  any one or more of them, to produce such further
                  documentary or other evidence as the Bench may
                  consider necessary—
(a) for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the truth
                  of the allegations made in the petition; or
(b) for ascertaining any information which, in the
                  opinion of the Bench, is necessary for the purpose of
                  enabling it to pass orders on the petition.”
                              xxx             xxx           xxx
43. The finding of CLB and the High Court to the effect that the
             petition of the appellant deserved to be rejected only because the
             letters of consent had not been annexed to the petition was
             therefore incorrect. What CLB and the High Court should have
             done was to have satisfied themselves that the consent had in
             fact been given prior to the filing of the petition. There is
             nothing either in the orders of CLB or the High Court which
             could even remotely be construed as a rejection of the affidavits,
             resolution, etc. filed by Nini Srivastava to show that prior
             consent had in fact been obtained. [...]”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)

  ii.   Deciding the issue of Limitation on demurrer and its similarity with
        an application under Order VII Rule 11(d)
of the CPC
.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                    Page 76 of 133
82. The decision of this Court in
Ramesh B. Desai and Others v. Bipin
      Vadilal Mehta and Others
reported in (2006) 5 SCC 638 delved into
      an in-depth analysis of whether the question of limitation can be
      determined as a preliminary issue by way of demurrer or after
      evidence has been led by both the parties. Therein, the application of
      the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, to dismiss the company
      petition for being barred by limitation was allowed by the Company
      Judge and also affirmed by the Division Bench of the High Court.
      However, while allowing the appeal and directing the High Court to
      decide the company petition afresh, this Court observed as follows: -
(i)    First, attention was drawn to sub-rule (2) of Order XIV Rule 2
             which provides that where issues of both law and fact arise in
             the same suit, and the court is of the opinion that the case or
             any part thereof may be disposed of on an issue of law only,
             then it may try that issue first if it related to (a) the jurisdiction
             of the court, or (b) a bar to the suit created by any law for the
             time being in force. In other words, the court may postpone the
             settlement of issues of fact until after the issues of law have
             been determined.
(ii)   Secondly, that the route as aforesaid must be adopted only
             when, in the opinion of the court, the whole suit may be
             disposed of on the issue of law alone. The
CPC
must not be
             construed as conferring jurisdiction upon a court to try a suit
             on mixed issues of law and fact as preliminary issues. When the
             issues of law and fact in the suit are so intertwined i.e., when
             the issues of law in the suit depend upon a decision on issues
             of fact in the suit, trying the mixed questions of law and fact as
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                Page 77 of 133
a preliminary issue would result in a lopsided trial of the suit,
            because it is normally the duty of the court to try and decide all
            issues.
The relevant observations are thus: -
“13. Sub-rule (2) of
Order 14 Rule 2 CPC
lays down that where
            issues both of law and of fact arise in the same suit, and the court
            is of the opinion that the case or any part thereof may be disposed
            of on an issue of law only, it may try that issue first if that issue
            relates to (a) the jurisdiction of the court, or (b) a bar to the suit
            created by any law for the time being in force. The provisions of
            this Rule came up for consideration before this Court in
Major
            S.S. Khanna v. Brig
. F.J. Dillon [(1964) 4 SCR 409 : AIR 1964
            SC 497] and it was held as under: (SCR p. 421)

                 “Under Order 14 Rule 2,
Code of Civil Procedure
where issues both of law and of fact arise in the same
                 suit, and the court is of opinion that the case or any
                 part thereof may be disposed of on the issues of law
                 only, it shall try those issues first, and for that
                 purpose may, if it thinks fit, postpone the settlement
                 of the issues of fact until after the issues of law have
                 been determined. The jurisdiction to try issues of law
                 apart from the issues of fact may be exercised only
                 where in the opinion of the court the whole suit may
                 be disposed of on the issues of law alone, but the Code
                 confers no jurisdiction upon the court to try a suit on
                 mixed issues of law and fact as preliminary issues.
                 Normally all the issues in a suit should be tried by the
                 court; not to do so, especially when the decision on
                 issues even of law depend upon the decision of issues
                 of fact, would result in a lopsided trial of the suit.”

            Though there has been a slight amendment in the language of
Order 14 Rule 2 CPC
by the amending Act, 1976 but the
            principle enunciated in the above quoted decision still holds
            good and there can be no departure from the principle that the
            Code confers no jurisdiction upon the court to try a suit on
            mixed issues of law and fact as a preliminary issue and where
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                    Page 78 of 133
the decision on issue of law depends upon decision of fact, it
            cannot be tried as a preliminary issue.”
                                             (Emphasis supplied)
83. What must be pointed out from the aforementioned ratio in
Ramesh
      B. Desai
(supra) is that, while deciding an issue of law as to whether
      the court has jurisdiction or whether the suit is barred by any law,
      including that of limitation, the court must be convinced that it is a
      pure question of law alone.
84. Thereafter, the aforementioned decision also holds that when the
      issues of law and fact in the suit are so intertwined i.e., when the
      issues of law in the suit depend upon a decision on issues of fact in
      the suit, trying the mixed questions of law and fact as a preliminary
      issue would result in a lopsided trial of the suit. This must be
      understood in the right context.
In
Ramesh B. Desai
(supra), the
      question as to whether the company petition was within limitation
      was dependant on ‘when’ the petitioners obtained knowledge of the
      alleged fraud as well as whether the alleged fraud was sufficiently
      pleaded and could be said to have been committed in the first place.
      Therefore, the question of limitation was in itself a mixed question of
      law and fact while also being dependant on the decision on other
      issues of law and fact. In such a scenario, it was stated that when the
      issues of law and fact ‘in the entire suit’ are so intertwined, courts
      must not resort to deciding the issue of limitation as a preliminary
      issue. However, what if the issue of limitation is not a pure question
      of law; it is a mixed question of law and fact; but it is also at the same
      time divorced from other issues of fact and law? In such a situation,
      could it be decided as a preliminary issue? The answer would be in
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025             Page 79 of 133
the affirmative. But can such a preliminary issue be decided by way
      of demurrer? This answer must be in the negative.
85. As elaborated previously, a preliminary issue can be decided in two
      ways, (a) by way of demurrer, or (b) after the parties have lead
      evidence confined to the preliminary issue. The decision in
Ramesh
      B. Desai
(supra) elaborated on the concept of demurrer and stated
      that: -
(i)       First, the plea of demurrer is an act of objecting or taking
                exception or a protest. It is a pleading made by one party which
                assumes the truth of the matter as alleged by the opposite
                party, but sets up that it is insufficient in law to sustain his
                claim, or that there is some other defect in the pleadings which
                constitutes a legal reason as to why the suit must not be allowed
                to proceed further. In other words, that even assuming those
                facts as pleaded are true, the court does not have jurisdiction as
                a matter of law.
(ii)      Secondly, such a plea of demurrer was equated with the
                principle underlying Order VII Rule 11(d)
CPC
. Rule 11(d)
                speaks of rejection of the plaint, if it appears from the statement
                of the plaint that it is barred by any law. Disputed questions
                cannot, as a matter of rule, be decided while considering an
                application filed under Order VII Rule 11(d). What has to be
                decided is whether on the face of it, the averments made in the
                plaint, without any doubt or dispute, show that the suit is or is
                not barred by limitation or any other law in force. Therefore,
                the averments in the plaint are assumed to be correct, and
                without looking at the pleas raised in the written statement or
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 80 of 133
any other piece of evidence, the fate of the application under
            Order VII Rule 11(d) must be decided.
The relevant observations are thus: -
“14. The plea raised by the contesting respondents is in fact a
            plea of demurrer. Demurrer is an act of objecting or taking
            exception or a protest. It is a pleading by a party to a legal action
            that assumes the truth of the matter alleged by the opposite
            party and sets up that it is insufficient in law to sustain his
            claim or that there is some other defect on the face of the
            pleadings constituting a legal reason why the opposite party
            should not be allowed to proceed further.
In
O.N.
            Bhatnagar v. Rukibai Narsindas
[(1982) 2 SCC 244] (SCC
            para 9) it was held that the appellant having raised a plea in the
            nature of demurrer, the question of jurisdiction had to be
            determined with advertence to the allegations contained in the
            statement of claim made by Respondent 1 under
Section 91(1)
of the Act and those allegations must be taken to be true.
In
Roop Lal Sathi v. Nachhattar Singh Gill
[(1982) 3 SCC 487]
            (SCC para 24) it was observed that a preliminary objection that
            the election petition is not in conformity with
Section 83(1)(a)
of the Act i.e. it does not contain the concise statement of the
            material facts on which the petitioner relies, is but a plea in the
            nature of demurrer and in deciding the question the Court has
            to assume for this purpose that the averments contained in the
            election petition are true.
Reiterating the same principle
            in
Abdulla Bin Ali v. Galappa
[(1985) 2 SCC 54] it was said
            that there is no denying the fact that the allegations made in the
            plaint decide the forum and the jurisdiction does not depend
            upon the defence taken by the defendants in the written
            statement.
In
Exphar       SA v. Eupharma         Laboratories
            Ltd.
[(2004) 3 SCC 688] (SCC para 9) it was ruled that where
            an objection to the jurisdiction is raised by way of demurrer and
            not at the trial, the objection must proceed on the basis that the
            facts as pleaded by the initiator of the impugned proceedings are
            true. The submission in order to succeed must show that
            granted those facts the court does not have jurisdiction as a
            matter of law. In this case the decision of the High Court on the
            point of the jurisdiction was set aside as the High Court had
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                   Page 81 of 133
examined the written statement filed by the respondents in
            which it was claimed that the goods were not at all sold within
            the territorial jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court and also that
            Respondent 2 did not carry out business within the jurisdiction
            of the said High Court.
Following the same principle in
Indian
            Mineral & Chemicals Co. v. Deutsche Bank
[(2004) 12 SCC
            376] (SCC paras 10 and 11), it was observed that the assertions
            in a plaint must be assumed to be true for the purpose of
            determining whether leave is liable to be revoked on the point of
            demurrer.
15. The principle underlying clause (d) of Order 7 Rule 11 is no
            different. We will refer here to a recent decision of this Court
            rendered in
Popat and Kotecha Property v. State Bank of India
            Staff Assn.
[(2005) 7 SCC 510] where it was held as under in
            para 10 of the report: (SCC p. 515)

                 “10. Clause (d) of Order 7 Rule 7 (sic) (Rule 11)
                 speaks of suit, as appears from the statement in the
                 plaint to be barred by any law. Disputed questions
                 cannot be decided at the time of considering an
                 application filed under
Order 7 Rule 11 CPC
. Clause
(d) of Rule 11 of Order 7 applies in those cases only
                 where the statement made by the plaintiff in the
                 plaint, without any doubt or dispute shows that the
                 suit is barred by any law in force.”
16. It was emphasised in para 25 of the report that the statement
            in the plaint without addition or subtraction must show that it
            is barred by any law to attract application of
Order 7 Rule 11
            CPC
. The principle is, therefore, well settled that in order to
            examine whether the plaint is barred by any law, as
            contemplated by clause (d) of
Order 7 Rule 11 CPC
, the
            averments made in the plaint alone have to be seen and they
            have to be assumed to be correct. It is not permissible to look
            into the pleas raised in the written statement or to any piece of
            evidence. Applying the said principle, the plea raised by the
            contesting respondents that the company petition was barred by
            limitation has to be examined by looking into the averments
            made in the company petition alone and any affidavit filed in
            reply to the company petition or the contents of the affidavit
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 82 of 133
filed in support of Company Application No. 113 of 1995 filed
            by the respondents seeking dismissal of the company petition
            cannot at all be looked into.”
                                           (Emphasis supplied)
86. After laying down the aforesaid background and drawing parallels
      between a plea of demurrer and an application made under Order
      VII Rule 11(d), this Court in
Ramesh B. Desai
(supra) went on to
      discuss the nature of a plea of limitation. It was stated that “a plea of
      limitation cannot be decided as an abstract principle of law divorced from
      facts, as in every case, the starting point of limitation has to be ascertained,
      which is entirely a question of fact”. Therefore, it is reiterated that a plea
      of limitation would be a mixed question of law and fact. Therefore,
      more often than not, there may arise situations wherein it cannot be
      decided whether the suit could be dismissed as being barred by
      limitation or not without the aid of proper pleadings, the framing of
      an issue of limitation and the taking of evidence. In other words, it
      cannot be decided ex-facie the plaint. Therefore, it was observed that,
      “unless it becomes apparent from the reading of the company petition that
      the same is barred by limitation, the petition cannot be rejected under Order
      VII Rule 11(d)
CPC
”. The relevant observations are thus: -
“19. A plea of limitation cannot be decided as an abstract
            principle of law divorced from facts as in every case the starting
            point of limitation has to be ascertained which is entirely a
            question of fact. A plea of limitation is a mixed question of law
            and fact. The question whether the words “barred by law”
            occurring in Order 7 Rule 11(d)
CPC
would also include the
            ground that it is barred by law of limitation has been recently
            considered by a two-Judge Bench of this Court to which one of
            us was a member (Ashok Bhan, J.) in Balasaria Construction
            (P) Ltd. v. Hanuman Seva Trust [(2006) 5 SCC 658, below] it
            was held: (SCC p. 661, para 8)
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 83 of 133
“8. After hearing counsel for the parties, going
                 through the plaint, application under Order 7 Rule
                 11(d)
CPC
and the judgments of the trial court and
                 the High Court, we are of the opinion that the present
                 suit could not be dismissed as barred by limitation
                 without proper pleadings, framing of an issue of
                 limitation and taking of evidence. Question of
                 limitation is a mixed question of law and fact. Ex facie
                 in the present case on the reading of the plaint it
                 cannot be held that the suit is barred by time.”

            This principle would be equally applicable to a company
            petition. Therefore, unless it becomes apparent from the reading
            of the company petition that the same is barred by limitation the
            petition cannot be rejected under Order 7 Rule 11(d)
CPC
.”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
87. Upon such a situation arising, i.e., when a mixed question of fact and
      law arises in deciding an application under Order VII Rule 11(d),
      what must be the approach adopted by the court? The suit must be
      allowed to proceed and the application under Order VII Rule 11(d)
      must be rejected for the reason that the issue needs a more elaborate
      consideration by the court and that the court is not convinced that
      the matter be kicked out at the threshold. The same is borne out of
      the decision of this Court in
Pawan Kumar v. Babulal
reported in
      (2019) 4 SCC 367 which observed as follows: -
“13. In the present case, the controversy has arisen in an
            application under
Order 7 Rule 11 CPC
. Whether the matter
            comes within the purview of
Section 4(3)
of the Act is an aspect
            which must be gone into on the strength of the evidence on
            record. Going by the averments in the plaint, the question
            whether the plea raised by the appellant is barred under
Section
            4
of the Act or not could not have been the subject-matter of
            assessment at the stage when application under
Order 7 Rule
            11 CPC
was taken up for consideration. The matter required
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 84 of 133
fuller and final consideration after the evidence was led by the
            parties. It cannot be said that the plea of the appellant as raised
            on the face of it, was barred under the Act. The approach must
            be to proceed on a demurrer and see whether accepting the
            averments in the plaint the suit is barred by any law or not. We
            may quote the following observations of this Court in
Popat and
            Kotecha Property v. SBI Staff Assn. [Popat
and
Kotecha
            Property v. SBI Staff Assn.
, (2005) 7 SCC 510] : (SCC p. 515,
            para 10)

                 “10. Clause (d) of Order 7 Rule 7 speaks of suit, as
                 appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred
                 by any law. Disputed questions cannot be decided at
                 the time of considering an application filed under
Order 7 Rule 11 CPC
. Clause (d) of Rule 11 of Order
                 7 applies in those cases only where the statement
                 made by the plaintiff in the plaint, without any doubt
                 or dispute shows that the suit is barred by any law in
                 force.”
14. We, therefore, allow this appeal, set aside the view taken by
            the courts below and dismiss the application preferred by the
            second defendant under
Order 7 Rule 11 CPC
. Since the suit
            has been pending since 2006, we direct the trial court to expedite
            the matter and dispose of the pending suit as early as possible
            and preferably within six months from today. Needless to say
            that the merits of the matter will be gone into independently by
            the trial court.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
88.
In
Pawan Kumar
(supra), the question related to whether the suit was
      barred by the provisions of
Section 4(3)
of the Benami Transactions
      (Prohibition) Act, 1988 and it was opined that this aspect must be
      gone into on the strength of the evidence on record and it cannot be
      subject to assessment at the stage when an application under Order
      VII Rule 11(d)
CPC
was taken up for consideration. The matter
      required a “fuller and final consideration” after evidence was led.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 85 of 133
However, on the face of it, and proceeding on the basis of demurrer,
      it was held that the suit could not be said to be barred by any law.
89. Therefore, it is inherent in the nature of a decision as regards the
      rejection of a plaint that, if the court deems it fit to not reject the plaint
      at the threshold upon an examination of the averments in the plaint,
      the ground that the suit is still barred by any law can be taken by the
      defendant in the course of the suit proceedings, after leading
      evidence. This is because the defendant is not given an opportunity
      to place his defence as regards the issue that the suit is barred by any
      law, on record, during the Order VII Rule 11(d) stage. Even if he does,
      the court would not look into the defendant’s written statements or
      any evidence which he may want to adduce. Therefore, a decision
      which goes against him, without giving him an opportunity to
      properly defend it, must not be to his detriment. Since a plea of
      demurrer is akin to an application made under Order VII Rule 11(d),
      the same principles must apply.
iii. Decision of the Privy Council in
Kanhaya Lal v. The National Bank
      of India
and that of the Calcutta High Court in Angelo Brothers.
90. The nuanced issue with which we are presently concerned has been
      answered by the decision of the Privy Council in
Kanhaya Lal v. The
      National Bank of India Ltd.
reported in 1913 SCC OnLine PC 4.
      Therein, the plaintiff instituted an action claiming return of money
      paid to the defendant bank under protest along with damages for the
      alleged illegal acts of the bank. The bank filed certain preliminary
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 86 of 133
pleas in objection, of which, the foremost was that the plaint discloses
      no cause of action. The Privy Council held that the necessary
      consequence of the nature of the objection or plea raised by the
      defendant bank was that it be decided by way of demurrer i.e., by
      assuming, for the sake of argument, that the defendant admits to the
      allegations of the plaintiff in his plaint as true in manner and form.
      While the decision on the objection or the plea raised would be given
      assuming as such, the Privy Council clarified that, the defendant, in
      doing so, would reserve the right to show that these allegations are
      either wholly or partially false in the further stages of the action,
      should his objection be overruled. However, insofar as the decision
      on the objection which is raised as a preliminary point is concerned,
      everything stated in the plaint would be taken as true. In other
      words, the Privy Council had unequivocally and clearly stated that a
      decision on a mixed point of law and fact, taken by way of demurrer,
      would not be foreclosed in a situation where the party taking such a
      plea is unsuccessful.
91. The lucid observations made in
Kanhaya Lal
(supra) are as thus: -
“In reply to the above plaint the Respondent Bank filed certain
            preliminary pleas relating to the claim for the return of the
            money paid under protest, of which it is only necessary to cite
            the first, which was that “the suit as framed will not lie”. It is
            admitted that this plea is in substance identical with the more
            usual form of plea, viz., that “the plaint discloses no cause of
            action.”
                             xxx           xxx          xxx

            The question raised by this Appeal is therefore a pure point of
            law. Both the District Judge and the Chief Court have clearly
            stated that the decisions which they have given are based on the
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 87 of 133
allegations in the plaint, and that for the purposes of such
            decisions these allegations must be taken to be true in fact. This
            is a necessary consequence of the nature of the plea, and the same
            understanding must apply to the present judgment. In asking
            the Court to decide an issue like the present (which is essentially
            a demurrer by whatever name it may be called) the Defendants
            must be taken to admit for the sake of argument that the
            allegations of the Plaintiff in his plaint are true modo et forma.
            In so doing they reserve to themselves the right to show
            that these allegations are wholly or partially false in the
            further stages of the action, should the preliminary point
            be overruled, but so far as the decision on the preliminary
            point is concerned everything contained in the plaint
            must be taken to be true as stated.
xxx            xxx          xxx

            In their Lordships' opinion, therefore, the Chief Court ought to
            have given judgment in favour of the Plaintiff in his appeal
            against the order of the 18th November, 1902. The consequence
            of such a decision would have been that the case would have
            gone back to the District Judge to be tried on the facts.
As has already been stated, the decision of this Board does not
            affect or prejudice any contention of either party with regard to
            the facts or any other contention of law not covered by the
            present judgment.”
                                              (Emphasis supplied)
92. The decision of the Calcutta High Court in
Angelo Brothers
(supra),
      further built on the position as aforementioned and stated that: -
(i)   First, it cannot be stated that an application or plea by way of
            demurrer constitutes an admission of the facts in the suit or the
            application, whose dismissal is sought for, for all times to come.
In other words, a motion for dismissal of a plaint or a petition
            on a preliminary point cannot be said to have the consequence
            of such an applicant forfeiting his right to contest the case later.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 88 of 133
Such an assertion cannot be made by adverting to the principles
             contained in Order VIII because a decision is sought for on a
             point of maintainability and not on the merits of the matter.
             Therefore, when the expression “demurrer” is used in
             connection with an application seeking dismissal of a petition
             on a preliminary or maintainability point, it shall not imply an
             “automatic admission of the facts” contained therein by the
             party seeking dismissal.
(ii)   Secondly, reliance was placed on the decision of a Coordinate
             Bench of the Calcutta High Court in
Himungsu Kumar Basu v.
             Sudhangsu Kumar Basu
reported in AIR 2004 Cal 217 to
             buttress that a point can be decided on demurrer when there is
             no need for investigation of fact and it is only a point of law
             that needs to be resolved.
(iii) Thirdly, the principle of Order VII Rule 11(d) would apply in
             relation to such petitions and if it is found that the adjudication
             of such a motion involves mixed questions of fact and law, then
             the adjudication would stand deferred to be determined on
             trial.
(iv)   Lastly, the practice as regards the concept of demurrer which
             has been followed in the United States and England has not
             been accepted as a part of Indian jurisprudence. The law in
             India proceeds on a different trajectory on this aspect.
The relevant observations are thus: -
“14. Mr. Kar in course of hearing before me has indeed taken a
             stand that his application is in the nature of demurrer, but his
             case is that in Indian jurisprudence, an application in the nature
             of demurrer retains the characteristic of an application for
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 89 of 133
rejection of plaint, and the import of the noun "demurrer" in
            the Indian legal context cannot be given the same meaning it
            has in the U.S. or English jurisdiction. His further submission
            is that the provisions of Order VIII of the Code could apply only
            after filing of written statement or when the defendant foregoes
            the right to file written statement, but in this case his client has
            assailed the recall petition on the ground of maintainability
            alone and has not abandoned its right to contest the applications
            on merit. On this point, he has relied on a judgment of the
            Supreme Court in the case of
Ramesh B. Desai & Ors. v. Bipin
            Vadilal Mehta and Ors.
[(2006)5 SCC 638].
xxx            xxx           xxx
16. In the aforesaid judgment, the Supreme Court applied the
            principles of Order 7 Rule 11 in relation to the petition for
            dismissal, but allowed the appeal against judgment of the High
            Court by which the dismissal plea was upheld. The High Court
            was directed to hear the company petition afresh. [...]
17. The point of demurrer has been used interchangeably with
            motion for dismissal of a suit on preliminary issue in a
            judgment of a Coordinate Bench of this Court in the case of
Himungsu Kumar Basu v. Sudhangsu Kumar Basu
(AIR 2004
            Cal 217). In paragraph 10 of the Report, a learned Single Judge
            of this Court held:-
"... Even I have no doubt or hesitation in my mind
                 about such principle by whatever name it may be
                 called. Similarly I do believe that the explanation as
                 made by Mr. Bagchi in this case is not very clear. The
                 principal point is demurrer as a preliminary issue can
                 be decided as the earliest when there is no need of
                 investigation of fact. Such analytical aspect of the
                 judgment has to be appreciated. The real import is
                 that when there is availability of two possibilities the
                 point of demurrer can be taken as a point of law and
                 it has to be determined as a preliminary point."
18.
Saleem Bhai and Ors. v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
[(2003)1 SCC 557] is an authority for the proposition of law
            that an application under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code can be
            taken out at any stage of the suit.
The Bombay High Court also
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 90 of 133
has taken the same view in
P.R. Sukeshurla v. Dr. Devadatta
            V.S. Kerkar
(AIR 1995 Bom 227).
In
Ramesh B. Desai
(supra),
            it was held that for examining whether a plaint is barred under
            law, the averments made in the plaint alone have to be seen and
            they have to be assumed correct.
Same view was taken by the
            Supreme Court in the cases of
Man Roland Druckimachinen
            AG v. Multicolour Offset Ltd. & Anr.
[(2004)7 SCC 447] as
            also
Popat and Kotecha Property
(supra).
In the case of
ABN-
            AMRO Bank v. Punjab Urban Planning and Development
            Authority
(AIR 2000 P & H44), a view was taken that under
            Order 7 Rule 11, there is no concept of partial rejection of plaint.
            Ratio of that authority is not applicable in the facts of these
            proceedings. None of these authorities lay down the ratio that
            an application referred to as a "demurrer" constitutes
            admission of facts in the suit or application whose dismissal is
            asked for. The principles contained in the aforesaid Rules of
            Order VIII cannot be implanted in a case of this nature, in
            which dismissal of an application is sought for on
            maintainability point, without adverting to merits of the case.
Mr. Kar, on the other hand, has cited a judgment of the Bombay
            High Court in the case of
Globex Financial Services Ltd. v.
            Bakulesh T. Shah and Ors.
[2000(2) ALL MR 419]. Submission
            on this very point was rejected by a learned Single Judge of the
            Bombay High Court in this case, and it was held in the context
            of that case that when the defendant proceeded on demurrer, it
            would only mean that they are denying the contentions of the
            plaintiffs as raised in the plaint and in their view assuming
            without conceding that those contentions were to be gone into,
            the Court did not have the pecuniary jurisdiction.
19. The opinions expressed in these authorities do not lay down
            the law that a motion for dismissal of a plaint or petition on a
            preliminary point in India forfeits the right of the applicant to
            contest the case later or such a procedure results in admission
            of facts pleaded in such plaint or petition whose dismissal is
            sought for. On the other hand, in the case of
Ramesh B. Desai
(supra), the Supreme Court examined an application seeking
            dismissal of a company petition applying the principles of Order
            7 Rule 11 of the Code.
In the judgment of a Coordinate Bench
            in the case of
Himungsu Kumar Basu
(supra), the learned Judge
            has dealt with the concept of demurrer interchangeably with an
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 91 of 133
application for rejection of plaint under Order 7 Rule 11 of the
            Code. [...]
20. I accordingly hold that the expression demurrer, when used
            in connection with an application seeking dismissal of a petition
            on a preliminary or maintainability point shall not imply
            automatic admission of facts contained in the plaint or petition
            whose dismissal is sought for by opposing party. The principles
            of Order 7 Rule 11 would apply in relation to such petitions,
            and if it is found that adjudication of such motion involves
            mixed questions of fact and law, then adjudication of that
            question would stand deferred, and those points would be left to
            be determined on trial. Though there does not appear to be a
            clear Indian authority on this point as yet, from the decisions to
            which I have referred to earlier, it is apparent that the practise
            followed in England and the US had never been accepted as a
            part of Indian jurisprudence. The term "demurrer" in the
            Indian context has been construed to have connotation wider
            than the dictionary meaning, and motions for dismissal of a
            proceeding on a preliminary point has been commonly referred
            to as applications "in demurrer". Otherwise, no statutory
            reference to this term has been brought to my notice. The U.S.
            and English principle on demurrer does not apply in the Indian
            context. Law in India proceeds on a different trajectory on this
            point, and I do not find any reason to adopt a different course
            though such a course would be compatible with the US and the
            English principles.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
93. We express our agreement with the aforementioned decisions of the
      Privy Council and the Calcutta High Court respectively on this
      aspect.
94. The aforesaid discussion on the position of law prevailing in India
      may be summarised as follows: -
(i)   The plea of demurrer is an act of objecting or taking exception
            or a protest. It is a pleading made by one party which
            “assumes” the truth of the matter as alleged by the opposite
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 92 of 133
party, but sets up that it is insufficient in law to sustain the
             claim, or that there is some other defect in the pleadings which
             constitutes a legal reason as to why the suit must not be
             allowed to proceed further. In other words, that even
             assuming those facts as pleaded are true, the court does not
             have jurisdiction as a matter of law. The party raising the plea
             challenges legal sufficiency of a complaint/plaint/action
             rather than its factual accuracy.
(ii)   To put it simply, a decision on demurrer has to be determined
             ex-facie the plaint.
(iii) The decision of this Court in
Man Roland
(supra) brought to
             the fore an important perspective – that only certain objections
             are capable of being decided by way of demurrer. Only those
             objections which do not involve questions of facts nor the
             adducing of any further evidence, could be decided by way of
             demurrer.
(iv)   The rule that when a mixed question of law and fact is decided
             on the basis of a demurrer, the issue would not be permanently
             foreclosed was also inherent in the decision of this Court in
Indian Mineral & Chemical Co.
(supra).
(v)    This Court in
Ramesh B. Desai
(supra), was directly concerned
             with the issue of limitation being decided by way of demurrer
             and it directed attention to the mandate under Order XIV Rule
             2 which provides that only if the court is of the opinion that
             the case or any part thereof may be disposed of on a pure issue
             of law alone, it may try that issue first. This issue of law can
             very well be whether the suit is barred by limitation or not,
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025            Page 93 of 133
but, provided that such a question of limitation is purely an
             issue of law.
(vi)   The parallel between an issue of limitation raised by way of
             demurrer and an application for rejection of plaint under
             Order VII Rule 11(d)
CPC
was drawn for the first time in
Ramesh B. Desai
(supra). Disputed questions cannot, as a
             matter of rule, be decided while considering an application
             filed under Order VII Rule 11(d). What has to be decided is
             whether on the face of it, the averments made in the plaint,
             without any doubt or dispute, show that the suit is or is not
             barred by limitation or any other law in force.
(vii) This Court in
Ramesh B. Desai
(supra) went on to discuss the
             nature of a plea of limitation. It was stated that “a plea of
             limitation cannot be decided as an abstract principle of law divorced
             from facts, as in every case, the starting point of limitation has to be
             ascertained, which is entirely a question of fact”. Therefore, it was
             reiterated that, more often than not, a plea of limitation would
             be a mixed question of law and fact. Therefore, there may arise
             situations wherein it cannot be decided whether the suit could
             be dismissed as barred by limitation or not without the aid of
             proper pleadings, the framing of an issue of limitation and the
             taking of evidence. In other words, it cannot be decided ex-facie
             the plaint.
(viii) Therefore, it is inherent in the nature of a decision as regards
             the rejection of a plaint that, if the court deems it fit to not reject
             the plaint at the threshold upon an examination of the
             averments in the plaint, the ground that the suit is still barred
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                  Page 94 of 133
by any law can be taken by the defendant in the course of the
             suit proceedings, after leading evidence.
(ix)   This is because the defendant is not given an opportunity to
             put forward his defence as regards the issue that the suit is
             barred by any law, on record, during the Order VII Rule 11(d)
             stage. Even if he does, the court would not look into the
             defendant’s written statements or any evidence which he may
             want to adduce. Therefore, a decision which goes against him,
             at the preliminary stage, without giving him an opportunity to
             properly defend it, must not be to his detriment. Since a plea
             of demurrer is akin to an application made under Order VII
             Rule 11(d), the same principles must apply.
(x)    It cannot be said that at the stage of rejection of plaint, the
             defendant/respondent chooses to waive his right to plead and
             instead, adopts the course of only testing the sufficiency of the
             plaint in law. At this stage, there is no choice between either
             pleading or demurring and the defendant/respondent cannot
             be taken to have elected to demur instead of pleading. This is
             simply because, there exists no burden of proof on him, at that
             stage, to plead. He can simply pause or wait for the plaintiff to
             prove the sufficiency of his claim in law, without affecting his
             right to plead or lead evidence in the future.
(xi)   In
Kanhaya Lal
(supra), the Privy Council clarified that, while
             the decision on the objection or the plea raised by way of
             demurrer would be given assuming that the averments of the
             plaint are true, the defendant, would simultaneously reserve
             the right to show that these allegations are either wholly or
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025             Page 95 of 133
partially false in the further stages of the action, should his
            objection be overruled. However, insofar as the decision on the
            objection which is raised as a preliminary point is concerned,
            everything stated in the plaint would be taken as true. In other
            words, the Privy Council had unequivocally and clearly stated
            that a decision on a mixed point of law and fact, taken by way
            of demurrer, would not be foreclosed in a situation where the
            party taking such a plea is unsuccessful.
(xii) The Calcutta High Court in
Angelo Brothers
(supra) also
            buttressed that when a defendant/respondent raises a plea by
            way of demurrer, it cannot be said that it constitutes an
            admission of the facts in the suit or the application, whose
            dismissal is sought for, for all times to come. In other words,
            the assumption made while seeking a decision on a
            preliminary point cannot be said to have the consequence of
            such an applicant forfeiting his right to contest the case later.
            Such an assertion cannot be made by adverting to the
            principles contained in Order VIII because a decision herein is
            sought for on a point of maintainability and not on the merits
            of the matter.
95. Coming back to the facts of the present case, the arbitrator, while
      passing the interim award could not have decided the issue of
      limitation, on the basis of demurrer, owing to the fact that it was a
      mixed question of law and fact. Even if he had chosen to do so, he
      could not have foreclosed the issue permanently.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025            Page 96 of 133
96. The impugned decision is correct in observing that the arbitrator has
      not even recorded a finding that the issue of jurisdiction in the
      present facts did not “require” any evidence. In other words, he did
      not state that the averments of the statement of claim and the
      documents annexed thereto would be sufficient to decide the issue of
      limitation in the circumstances of the present matter. If this
      sufficiency had been indicated and then, the issue would have been
      decided by way of demurrer, it might have been possible for us to
      attribute some merit to the argument of the present petitioner that
      the issue could be foreclosed. However, it is the arbitrator’s own
      opinion that if further evidence was adduced or witnesses were
      cross-examined, he might have leaned towards arriving at a contrary
      finding. With such an apprehension weighing on his mind, the
      arbitrator should not have foreclosed the issue of limitation
      permanently.
97. When the parties were informed that the issue of limitation would be
      decided on the basis of demurrer, there was no corresponding duty
      on the respondent to adduce any evidence because it was apparent
      that it is the maintainability of the claim which is being decided on
      principles akin to Order VII Rule 11(d). Therefore, the argument of
      the present petitioner that, the respondent was asked whether they
      wanted to lead any evidence and they consciously chose not to,
      would also not be of any avail to them, particularly to contend that
      the decision on the issue of limitation, was final. In other words, there
      would be no question of estoppel.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025             Page 97 of 133
98. The learned arbitrator seems to have directly adopted the approach
        followed in the U.S. and England, without appreciating the
        differences which exist in our legal systems on the concept of
        demurrer. Even assuming that such an approach could have been
        directly imported, the arbitrator ought to have taken note of the fact
        that it is a well-settled position even in the U.S. that questions of fact
        cannot be adjudicated by way of a decision on demurrer.
99. In our opinion, the observations made by the Single Judge, which has
        been affirmed by the impugned decision, must not be construed as
        giving unbridled scope to the respondents to re-agitate the issue. The
        specific words used by the Single Judge are that the Arbitral Tribunal
        could further examine this issue on the basis of evidence and other
        materials on record “if tendered and if so warranted”. Therefore, the
        respondents must satisfy the Arbitral Tribunal that the issue
        warrants re-visiting through cogent evidence, in the absence of
        which, the arbitrator would be compelled to arrive at the same
        conclusion, similar to the one arrived at while adjudicating on
        demurrer. To put it simply, the respondent must successfully
        discharge their burden of proof on this aspect in the course of the
        proceedings. If not, any decision finally rendered on merits could not
        be assailed on the basis that the respondents did not concede to the
        truth of the assertions made in the statement of claim.
II.   Whether the Doctrine of Party Autonomy can be utilised to adopt
        a procedure which has the consequence of infringing
Section 3
of
        the Limitation Act, 1963?
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 98 of 133
100. As elaborated by us previously, the issue of limitation is a mixed
      question of law and fact, and goes to the root of any claim that a party
      may put forward. Therefore, it is incumbent upon any Court or
      Tribunal having jurisdiction over any dispute to, first, adjudicate the
      question of limitation and dismiss the claim if found to be barred by
      limitation, even if limitation is not set up as a defence. This comes as
      a direct mandate from
Section 3
of the Act, 1963 which reads thus: -
“3. Bar of limitation.—
            (1) Subject to the provisions contained in
sections 4
to 24
            (inclusive), every suit instituted, appeal preferred, and
            application made after the prescribed period shall be dismissed,
            although limitation has not been set up as a defence.”

                                             (Emphasis supplied)
101. Therefore, there exists a positive duty upon any forum adjudicating
      any dispute to ensure that the claim is within limitation. This duty
      must be reasonably and properly discharged in a manner which is
      tailored to the facts and circumstances of each case. If the peculiar
      facts of the matter are such that, the issue of limitation cannot be
      decided sans further evidence, then the mandate of
Section 3
of the
      Act, 1963, must be understood to also empower the court or tribunal
      to require further evidence in order to adjudicate the issue. We say
      so because, the responsibility fastened upon the court or tribunal, is
      not merely to decide the issue of limitation in a superficial manner
      but to decide it properly and conscientiously, by adopting a
      procedure which adequately, appropriately and fairly decides the
      issue. Therefore, deference to this duty must not just be on the surface
      level and this obligation must be not be understood in a narrow and
      restricted manner.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 99 of 133
102.
Section 43
of the Act, 1996, which makes the Act, 1963 applicable to
      arbitrations explicitly states that, the Act, 1963 “shall” apply to
      arbitrations as it applies to proceedings in court. This is again, a
      positive mandate. Therefore, by virtue of
Section 43
of the Act, 1996,
      the Arbitral Tribunal would also be bound by the statutory mandate
      underlying
Section 3
of the Act, 1963 which requires the arbitrator to
      decide the issue of limitation in a proper and reasonable manner.
103. The question which then arises is whether parties can adopt a
      procedure which may have a direct impact on this positive obligation
      which is cast upon the Arbitral Tribunal? In other words, can party
      autonomy be exercised in a manner such that the issue of limitation
      comes to be decided inadequately or superficially? The answer
      would, again, be an emphatic ‘No’. To elaborate on why the answer
      to the aforesaid must necessarily be in the negative, one has to first
      understand the contours of the doctrine of party autonomy itself and
      the breadth of its expanse. That the doctrine of party autonomy is not
      limitless, although an unpopular premise, is a premise that finds
      backing from an apparent reading of
Section 19
of the Act, 1996
      which embodies the core of doctrine of party autonomy insofar as the
      determination of procedural rules are concerned. The Section reads
      as thus: -
“19. Determination of rules of procedure.—
            (1) The arbitral tribunal shall not be bound by
the Code of Civil
            Procedure
, 1908 (5 of 1908) or the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
(1 of 1872).
(2) Subject to this Part, the parties are free to agree on the
            procedure to be followed by the arbitral tribunal in conducting
            its proceedings.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 100 of 133
(3) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (2), the
            arbitral tribunal may, subject to this Part, conduct the
            proceedings in the manner it considers appropriate.
(4) The power of the arbitral tribunal under sub-section (3)
            includes the power to determine the admissibility, relevance,
            materiality and weight of any evidence.”
                                             (Emphasis supplied)
104. The words used at the beginning of Section 19(2) is “Subject to this
      Part”. The very insertion of this phrase indicates that the legislature
      in its wisdom wanted to circumscribe, to an extent, the undoubtedly
      expansive scope which has been afforded to the doctrine of party
      autonomy under the framework of arbitration. How this plays out
      vis-á-vis the legislative scheme of
Part I of the Act, 1996
, will be dealt
      with shortly. However, we can safely begin this discussion on the
      boundaries of the doctrine of party autonomy, after having brought
      due attention to this legislative intent.
105. It is no more res integra that parties are empowered to agree on
      certain procedures which is to be followed by the Arbitral Tribunal
      during the conduct of its proceedings. Such a procedure may also be
      at variance compared with those traditionally adopted in the court
      proceedings.
In the decision of this Court in
Centrotrade Minerals
      and Metal Inc. v. Hindustan Copper Limited
reported in (2017) 2 SCC
      228, the issue that fell for consideration was whether the parties could
      have agreed to a two-tier arbitration and if the same was prohibited
      by the provisions of the Act, 1996. While holding that party
      autonomy could be exercised in such a manner whereby the arbitral
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025            Page 101 of 133
award rendered in India could again be reconsidered by another
      arbitrator(s) by way of an appeal, this court made some observations
      as regards the doctrine of party autonomy: -
(i)    First, that party autonomy is virtually the backbone of
             arbitrations. The parties would be free to agree on the
             application of three different laws which would govern their
             entire relationship i.e., the proper law of contract, the proper
             law of the arbitration agreement and the proper law for the
             conduct of arbitration.
(ii)   Secondly, that there are four foundational pillars to an
             arbitration; The first of which is the “fair, speedy and
             inexpensive trial” by an Arbitral Tribunal and the second
             would be the exercise party autonomy in the choice of
             procedure. As a consequence of the second pillar, if a particular
             procedure is prescribed in the arbitration agreement, that
             procedure must generally be resorted to, owing to the fact that
             the parties have agreed to it.
(iii) Thirdly, the scope of party autonomy was said to extend not
             only to the choice of procedure, but to the choice of substantive
             law as well. To elaborate, parties would also be free to
             determine the substantive law or rules which would be
             applicable to the merits of the dispute. Through this, parties
             could   avoid    the   application   of   an   unfavourable   or
             inappropriate law to an international dispute. This would
             mean that the choice of jurisdiction is left to the wisdom of the
             contracting parties.
The relevant observations are thus: -
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025           Page 102 of 133
“Party autonomy
38. Party autonomy is virtually the backbone of arbitrations.
This Court has expressed this view in quite a few decisions.
In
            two significant passages in
Bharat Aluminium Co. v. Kaiser
            Aluminium Technical Services Inc. [Bharat Aluminium
            Co.
v. Kaiser Aluminium Technical Services Inc., (2016) 4 SCC
            126 : (2016) 2 SCC (Civ.) 580, Hon'ble Judges/Coram : Anil R.
            Dave, Kurian Joseph and Amitava Roy, JJ.] this Court dealt
            with party autonomy from the point of view of the contracting
            parties and its importance in commercial contracts. In para 5 of
            the Report, it was observed : (SCC p. 130)

                 “5. Party autonomy being the brooding and guiding
                 spirit in arbitration, the parties are free to agree on
                 application of three different laws governing their
                 entire contract— (1) proper law of contract, (2)
                 proper law of arbitration agreement, and (3) proper
                 law of the conduct of arbitration, which is popularly
                 and in legal parlance known as “curial law”. [...]
39.
In
Union of India v. U.P. State Bridge Corpn. Ltd. [Union
            of India
v. U.P. State Bridge Corpn. Ltd., (2015) 2 SCC 52 :
(2015) 1 SCC (Civ.) 732] this Court accepted the view [ O.P.
            Malhotra on the Law and Practice of Arbitration and
            Conciliation (3rd Edn. revised by Ms Indu Malhotra, Senior
            Advocate)] that the A&C Act has four foundational pillars and
            then observed in para 16 of the Report that : (SCC p. 64)
                 “16. First and paramount principle of the first pillar
                 is ‘fair, speedy and inexpensive trial by an Arbitral
                 Tribunal’. Unnecessary delay or expense would
                 frustrate the very purpose of arbitration.
Interestingly, the second principle which is
                 recognised in the Act is the party autonomy in the
                 choice of procedure. This means that if a particular
                 procedure is prescribed in the arbitration agreement
                 which the parties have agreed to, that has to be
                 generally resorted to.”
                                             (emphasis supplied)
40. This is also the view taken in Law and Practice of
            International Commercial Arbitration [ Chapter 6. Conduct of
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 103 of 133
the Proceedings in Nigel Blackaby, Constantine Partasides, et
            al., Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration [Sixth
            Edn., © Kluwer Law International, Oxford University Press
            2015] pp. 353-414, Para 6.07] wherein it is said:
“Party autonomy is the guiding principle in
                 determining the procedure to be followed in an
                 international arbitration. It is a principle that is
                 endorsed not only in national laws, but also by
                 international arbitral institutions worldwide, as well
                 as by international instruments such as the New York
                 Convention and the Model Law.”
41. However, the authors in Comparative International
            Commercial Arbitration [ Chapter 17 Determination of
            Applicable Law in Julian D.M. Lew, Loukas A. Mistelis, et
            al., Comparative International Commercial Arbitration (©
            Kluwer Law International, Kluwer Law International 2003) pp.
            411-437, Para 17-8] go a step further in that, apart from
            procedure, they say that party autonomy permits parties to have
            their choice of substantive law as well. It is said:
“All modern arbitration laws recognise party
                 autonomy, that is, parties are free to determine the
                 substantive law or rules applicable to the merits of the
                 dispute to be resolved by arbitration. Party autonomy
                 provides contracting parties with a mechanism of
                 avoiding the application of an unfavourable or
                 inappropriate law to an international dispute. This
                 choice is and should be binding on the Arbitration
                 Tribunal. This is also confirmed in most arbitration
                 rules.”
                                               (emphasis supplied)
42. Be that as it may, the legal position as we understand it is
            that the parties to an arbitration agreement have the autonomy
            to decide not only on the procedural law to be followed but also
            the substantive law. The choice of jurisdiction is left to the
            contracting parties. In the present case, the parties have agreed
            on a two-tier arbitration system through Clause 14 of the
            agreement and Clause 16 of the agreement provides for the
            construction of the contract as a contract made in accordance
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                Page 104 of 133
with the laws of India. We see nothing wrong in either of the
            two clauses mutually agreed upon by the parties.”

                                            (Emphasis supplied)
106. Some attention must be paid to the foundational pillars of arbitration
      which has been alluded to in
Centrotrade Minerals
(supra). The first
      foundational pillar involves ensuring a “fair” trial of the dispute
      whose resolution is sought through arbitration. Now, the question
      arises, what if there is a conflict between the aforementioned first
      pillar and the second pillar of party autonomy? To put it simply,
      whether the second pillar of party autonomy in exercising an option
      over choice of procedure could be used to undermine the idea
      fairness which is also equally fundamental to arbitrations? The
      answer must be in the negative. Moreover, the thumb rule is that the
      choice of procedure agreed to by the contracting parties must
      “generally be restored to”. Therefore, there may arise circumstances
      wherein such a choice of procedure exercised by the parties would
      stand detrimental to the fair resolution of the dispute itself and in
      such a scenario, there would be no other choice but to place the fair
      and just resolution of the dispute at the helm. Ignoring the principles
      of limitation law would result in an unfair resolution of the dispute
      and therefore, any procedure which enable this, even if agreed to by
      the parties, must not be given any impregnable or inviolable
      immunity from scrutiny.
107. One another very pertinent observation made in
Centrotrade
      Minerals
(supra), was that the two-tier arbitration mechanism agreed
      upon by the parties did not by-pass any mandatory provision of the
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025           Page 105 of 133
Act, 1996, either implicitly or explicitly. This is precisely why such an
      exercise of party autonomy, i.e., to agree to a two-tier arbitration, was
      held to be a valid and permissible exercise of party autonomy. The
      relevant observations are as follows: -
“46. [...] The parties to the contract have not by-passed any
            mandatory provision of the A&C Act and were aware, or at least
            ought to have been aware that they could have agreed upon the
            finality of an award given by the arbitration panel of the Indian
            Council of Arbitration in accordance with the Rules of
            Arbitration of the Indian Council of Arbitration. Yet they
            voluntarily and deliberately chose to agree upon a second or
            appellate arbitration in London, UK in accordance with the
            Rules of Conciliation and Arbitration of the International
            Chamber of Commerce. There is nothing in the A&C Act that
            prohibits the contracting parties from agreeing upon a second
            instance or appellate arbitration — either explicitly or
            implicitly. No such prohibition or mandate can be read into the
            A&C Act except by an unreasonable and awkward
            misconstruction and by straining its language to a vanishing
            point. We are not concerned with the reason why the parties
            (including HCL) agreed to a second instance arbitration — the
            fact is that they did and are bound by the agreement entered into
            by them. HCL cannot wriggle out of a solemn commitment
            made by it voluntarily, deliberately and with eyes wide open.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
108. Therefore, a reasonable inference which could be drawn from the
      above is that, when the exercise of party autonomy is in teeth with
      any mandatory provision of the Act, 1996, the same could not be said
      to be proper.
109. The decision of this Court in
Voestalpine Schienen GMBH v. Delhi
      Metro Rail Corporation
reported in (2017) 4 SCC 665 discussed the
      246th Report of the Law Commission, more specifically in the context
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 106 of 133
of neutrality of arbitrators and its interaction with the doctrine of
      party autonomy. The relevant portions of the Law Commission
      Report is reproduced as under: -
“Neutrality of Arbitrators
53. It is universally accepted that any quasi-judicial process,
            including the arbitration process, must be in accordance with
            principles of natural justice. In the context of arbitration,
            neutrality of arbitrators viz. their independence and
            impartiality, is critical to the entire process. [...]

                            xxx            xxx          xxx
57. The balance between procedural fairness and binding nature
            of these contracts, appears to have been tilted in favour of the
            latter by the Supreme Court, and the Commission believes the
            present position of law is far from satisfactory. Since the
            principles of impartiality and independence cannot be discarded
            at any stage of the proceedings, specifically at the stage of
            constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal, it would be incongruous
            to say that party autonomy can be exercised in complete
            disregard of these principles — even if the same has been agreed
            prior to the disputes having arisen between the parties. There
            are certain minimum levels of independence and impartiality
            that should be required of the arbitral process regardless of the
            parties' apparent agreement. A sensible law cannot, for
            instance, permit appointment of an arbitrator who is himself a
            party to the dispute, or who is employed by (or similarly
            dependent on) one party, even if this is what the parties agreed.
[...] The concept of party autonomy cannot be stretched to a
            point where it negates the very basis of having impartial and
            independent adjudicators for resolution of disputes. In fact,
            when the party appointing an adjudicator is the State, the duty
            to appoint an impartial and independent adjudicator is that
            much more onerous — and the right to natural justice cannot
            be said to have been waived only on the basis of a “prior”
            agreement between the parties at the time of the contract and
            before arising of the disputes.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 107 of 133
110. The Report emphasized that a delicate balance has to be maintained
      between procedural fairness and giving effect to contracts wherein
      the suggested arbitrator is an employee of one of the parties. It was
      stressed that party autonomy cannot be exercised in complete
      disregard of the principles of impartiality and independence which
      is crucial to arbitrations. It was added that, there are certain
      minimum levels of independence and impartiality that should be
      required of the arbitral process regardless of the parties’ apparent
      agreement. In this manner, the unduly expansive way in which the
      concept of party autonomy was being construed was criticised and
      some necessary checks and balances were deemed necessary.
111.
In yet another decision of this Court in
Lombardi Engineering
      Limited v. Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited
reported in (2024)
      4 SCC 341, where one of us (J.B. Pardiwala, J.), was a member of the
      Bench, the counsel for the respondent sought to press the argument
      that, the petitioner having consented to a pre-deposit clause, cannot
      be permitted to turn around and question its validity at the stage of
      Section 11(6) application because it would circumvent the principle
      of party autonomy. However, such an argument was rejected on the
      basis of the reasoning that, the concept of party autonomy cannot be
      stretched to an extent where it violates the fundamental rights
      guaranteed under the Constitution. The relevant observations are
      thus: -
“21. It was also argued that the petitioner having consented to
            the pre-deposit clause cannot be permitted to turn around and
            question its validity at the stage when a petition under Section
            11(6) of the 1996 Act is being considered, thereby
            circumventing the principle of “party autonomy”.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 108 of 133
xxx            xxx          xxx
83. The concept of “party autonomy” as pressed into service by
            the respondent cannot be stretched to an extent where it violates
            the fundamental rights under the Constitution. For an
            arbitration clause to be legally binding it has to be in consonance
            with the “operation of law” which includes the Grundnorm i.e.
            the Constitution. It is the rule of law which is supreme and
            forms parts of the basic structure. The argument canvassed on
            behalf of the respondent that the petitioner having consented to
            the pre-deposit clause at the time of execution of the agreement,
            cannot turn around and tell the Court in a Section 11(6)
            petition that the same is arbitrary and falling foul of
Article 14
of the Constitution is without any merit.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
112. We are not in any way trying the dilute the sanctity of the doctrine of
      Party Autonomy. It is undoubtedly, the bedrock of arbitration. The
      general rule is always that arbitrations are to be conducted on the
      basis of what the parties have agreed upon and consented to.
However, all that we are trying to convey is that, when parties wish
      to adopt procedures which strike at the root of very adjudication of
      the dispute and have the potential to upend any established principle
      of fairness which our legal system has created and nurtured over the
      years, one has to see whether such an exercise of party autonomy is
      within the confines of the Act, 1996 and within the confines of the
      doctrine of party autonomy envisaged by the Act, 1996.
      Undoubtedly, the doctrine is quite expansive, but is it expansive
      enough to strike at the most basic principles of limitation law, more
      particularly
Section 3
of the Act, 1963? - is the question that we are
      concerned with. We, are of the opinion, that it isn’t.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                Page 109 of 133
113. No doubt, Gary B. Born in his commentary on International
      Commercial Arbitration, discusses party autonomy as follows: -
“One of the principal reasons that this procedural autonomy is
            granted is to enable the parties and arbitrators to dispense with
            the technical formalities and procedures of national court
            proceedings and instead fashion procedures tailored to
            particular disputes”
114. While we are in complete agreement with the afore-stated, one must
      be able to distinguish when this procedural autonomy is used to
      dispense with mere “technical” formalities and procedures, and
      when it is wielded to dispense with certain core principles which any
      method of dispute resolution must abide by. Any procedure agreed
      upon by parties cannot and must not have the consequence of the
      matter being decided in ignorance of settled principles of law, which
      includes the principles of limitation, or have the effect of the matter
      being decided in an unfair and lopsided manner. One must be able
      to distinguish between instances when party autonomy is used to
      dispense with mere technicalities in the pursuit of a fair and speedy
      resolution of the dispute, and instances when the doctrine is being
      disguised to shorthand fairness and justice itself.
115. To buttress our view, we may look at this question from one another
      angle – a perspective to which we had alluded to briefly at the
      beginning of our discussion on this issue. Upon a careful perusal, it
      can be seen that specific words used in Section 19(2) which embodies
      the doctrine of party autonomy is – “Subject to this Part”. Therefore,
      this reinforces the idea that party autonomy cannot be wielded as a
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 110 of 133
unbridled and limitless doctrine. The same is also subject to certain
      restrictions, however limited those restrictions may be.
116. It would be apposite to point out that,
Section 43
of the Act, 1996
      which makes the law of limitation applicable to arbitrations would
      fall under the ambit of the phrase “Subject to this Part” finding
      mention under
Section 19(2)
of the Act, 1996 since Section 43 is also
      included under Part I of the larger scheme of the Act, 1996. Therefore,
      one of those few reasonable restrictions which may limit the scope of
      the doctrine of party autonomy, may very well include certain
      provisions of the
Limitation Act
as well, more particularly,
Section 3
thereof. To put it simply, the elasticity of the doctrine of party
      autonomy cannot be tested and pushed to the extent that it has the
      consequence of being at loggerheads with the duty of the Arbitral
      Tribunal which is manifest in
Section 3
of the Act, 1963.
117. The counsel for the present petitioner is right insofar as submitting
      that parties have the right to agree to procedures that differ from
      standard court processes, such as agreeing to an award without
      reasons, agreeing to a custom-made procedure for challenging the
      appointment of an arbitrator and determination of bias, or agreeing
      to a proceeding without oral hearings. However, what must be
      noticed is all the aforesaid instances in which party autonomy can be
      freely exercised are specifically laid out or delineated under some
      provision falling under
Part I of the Act, 1996
. For instance, it is
      Section 31(3) which allows the parties to dispense with the
      requirement of an award with reasons, Section 13(1) which provides
      the party the right to agree on a distinct procedure for challenging an
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025          Page 111 of 133
arbitrator’s appointment and Section 29B which allows parties to opt
      for a fast-track procedure without the requirement of oral hearings.
      Hence, the exercise of party autonomy in the aforesaid instances
      would not have any conflict with the term “Subject to this Part”
      occurring in Section 19(2). On the other hand, it would be in
      consonance with it. However, the same cannot be the case when
      party autonomy is exercised in a manner that conflicts with Section
      43 of the self-same Act and the basic, core principles of limitation law,
      especially having explained that
Section 43
of the Act, 1996 is
      couched in a mandatory language and is included within the scheme
      of
Part I of the Act, 1996
.
118. Let us look at this issue from yet another angle. There are several
      provisions which begin with the phrase “unless otherwise agreed by the
      parties” throughout the scheme of
Part I of the Act, 1996
. In all such
      provisions, the legislature in its wisdom, has given a considerable
      amount to importance to party autonomy and therefore, the parties
      may reasonably resile from the aspect elucidated upon in those
      respective provisions and chose to adopt an alternate course by
      means of an agreement with the other party. Then, there are certain
      other provisions which begin with the phrase, “the parties are free to
      agree/determine”, which, again, gives considerable priority to what the
      parties may decide to agree upon with respect to what is dealt with
      in those respective provisions. However, Section 19(2), with which
      we are directly concerned with states – “Subject to this Part, the parties
      are free to agree on the procedure…”. The use of the words, “Subject to
      this Part” in Section 19(2), must therefore, be taken to understand the
      doctrine of party autonomy as far as procedural matters are
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025            Page 112 of 133
concerned, in its right hue and light – as one with reasonable
      restrictions.
119. What we have attempted to say in so many words is that there are
      certain non-derogable provisions within the scheme of the Act, 1996
      itself, which the parties cannot ignore or attempt to bypass, even by
      agreement. Parties have the autonomy to decide their own procedure
      including the modalities of the arbitration but within the confines of
      the provisions of
Part I of the Arbitration Act, 1996
. This, by
      extension, would also mean that the chosen procedure must align
      with the underlying principles of limitation law owing to the
      mandate reflected in
Section 43
of the Act, 1996.
120. In view of the aforesaid, the defence of party autonomy would not be
      available to the present petitioner to contend that the arbitrator was
      right in finally deciding the issue of limitation, which is a mixed
      question of fact and law, on the basis of demurrer and foreclosing it
      permanently.
III. Whether the Interim Award warranted interference by the court
      under
Section 34
of the Act, 1996?
121. The law as it has evolved as regards the scope of interference with an
      arbitral award under
Section 34
of the Act, 1996, has been very
      succinctly explained by this Court in
Ssangyong
(supra). The words
      “public policy of India”, which had gradually adopted a wide import
      was circumscribed by the 2015 Amendment Act to the Act, 1996. It
      was necessarily clarified that an award would be in conflict with the
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025          Page 113 of 133
“public policy of India” only if, (a) the making of the award was
      induced or affected by fraud or corruption or was in violation of
      Section 75 or 81 of the Act, 1996 respectively; or (b) it is in
      contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or (c) it is
      in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.
122. The first ground or circumstance, as inserted by the 2015
      Amendment Act, on the occurrence of which an award would be in
      conflict with the public policy of India does not require much
      clarification. It is fairly clear as to when an award could be induced
      by fraud or corruption or when it would stand contrary to Sections
      75 or 81 of the Act, 1996 respectively. However, the second and third
      grounds are couched in such language that could prompt some
      interpretational creativity and therefore, its scope was re-clarified by
      this Court in
Ssangyong
(supra) as follows: -
(i)    First, the second ground i.e., the expression “fundamental
             policy of Indian law” would be relegated to its understanding
             in the decision of this Court in
Renusagar
(supra).
The same has
             been adequately expounded in paragraphs 18 and 27
             respectively of the decision of this Court in
Associate Builders
(supra).
(ii)   Secondly, the third ground for interference i.e., an award being
             in conflict with the “most basic notions of morality or justice”
             must be understood in line with paragraphs 36 to 39 of the
             decision of this Court in
Associate Builders
(supra). For this
             ground to be invoked, the award sought to be set aside must
             shock the conscience of the court.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025           Page 114 of 133
(iii) Lastly, perversity would not figure as a ground either
            separately or within the aforementioned two grounds
            subsumed under the larger umbrella of the phrase “public
            policy of India”. Such a decision which is perverse would
            instead amount to a “patent illegality” appearing on the face of
            the award. However, this ground of patent illegality which is
            removed from the ambit of public policy of India, would only
            be available for setting aside awards rendered in domestic
            arbitrations.
The relevant observations are reproduced as under: -
“34. What is clear, therefore, is that the expression “public
            policy of India”, whether contained in Section 34 or in Section
            48, would now mean the “fundamental policy of Indian law” as
            explained in paras 18 and 27 of
Associate Builders [Associate
            Builders v. DDA
, (2015) 3 SCC 49 : (2015) 2 SCC (Civ) 204]
            i.e. the fundamental policy of Indian law would be relegated to
            “Renusagar” understanding of this expression.
This would
            necessarily mean that Western Geco [ONGC v. Western Geco
            International Ltd., (2014) 9 SCC 263 : (2014) 5 SCC (Civ) 12]
            expansion has been done away with.
In short, Western
            Geco [ONGC v. Western Geco International Ltd., (2014) 9
            SCC 263 : (2014) 5 SCC (Civ) 12] , as explained in paras 28
            and 29 of
Associate Builders [Associate Builders v. DDA
,
            (2015) 3 SCC 49 : (2015) 2 SCC (Civ) 204] , would no longer
            obtain, as under the guise of interfering with an award on the
            ground that the arbitrator has not adopted a judicial approach,
            the Court's intervention would be on the merits of the award,
            which cannot be permitted post amendment.
However, insofar
            as principles of natural justice are concerned, as contained in
            Sections 18 and 34(2)(a)(iii) of the 1996 Act, these continue to
            be grounds of challenge of an award, as is contained in para 30
            of
Associate Builders [Associate Builders v. DDA
, (2015) 3
            SCC 49 : (2015) 2 SCC (Civ) 204].
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 115 of 133
35. It is important to notice that the ground for interference
            insofar as it concerns “interest of India” has since been deleted,
            and therefore, no longer obtains. Equally, the ground for
            interference on the basis that the award is in conflict with justice
            or morality is now to be understood as a conflict with the “most
            basic notions of morality or justice”. This again would be in line
            with paras 36 to 39 of
Associate Builders [Associate
            Builders v. DDA
, (2015) 3 SCC 49 : (2015) 2 SCC (Civ) 204] ,
            as it is only such arbitral awards that shock the conscience of the
            court that can be set aside on this ground.
36. Thus, it is clear that public policy of India is now constricted
            to mean firstly, that a domestic award is contrary to the
            fundamental policy of Indian law, as understood in paras 18 and
            27 of
Associate Builders [Associate Builders v. DDA
, (2015) 3
            SCC 49 : (2015) 2 SCC (Civ) 204] , or secondly, that such
            award is against basic notions of justice or morality as
            understood in paras 36 to 39 of
Associate Builders [Associate
            Builders v. DDA
, (2015) 3 SCC 49 : (2015) 2 SCC (Civ) 204] .
[...]
                              xxx             xxx           xxx
41. What is important to note is that a decision which is
            perverse, as understood in paras 31 and 32 of
Associate
            Builders [Associate Builders v. DDA
, (2015) 3 SCC 49 : (2015)
            2 SCC (Civ) 204], while no longer being a ground for challenge
            under “public policy of India”, would certainly amount to a
            patent illegality appearing on the face of the award. Thus, a
            finding based on no evidence at all or an award which ignores
            vital evidence in arriving at its decision would be perverse and
            liable to be set aside on the ground of patent illegality.
            Additionally, a finding based on documents taken behind the
            back of the parties by the arbitrator would also qualify as a
            decision based on no evidence inasmuch as such decision is not
            based on evidence led by the parties, and therefore, would also
            have to be characterised as perverse.
42. Given the fact that the amended Act will now apply, and
            that the “patent illegality” ground for setting aside arbitral
            awards in international commercial arbitrations will not apply,
            [...]”
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 116 of 133
(Emphasis supplied)
123. As a natural consequence of the clarification in
Ssangyong
(supra), one
      must advert to paragraphs 18, 27, 36, 37, 38 and 39 respectively of the
      decision in
Associate Builders
(supra) in order to comprehend the
      scope of the second and third grounds of “fundamental policy of
      Indian law” and the “most basic notions of justice and morality”
      respectively subsumed within the phrase “public policy of India”.
In
      the aforementioned paragraphs, the decision in
Associate Builders
(supra), has elaborated as thus: -
(i)    First, that the import of the words “public policy of India” as
             explained by this Court in
Renusagar
(supra) would include an
             award that is contrary to (a) the fundamental policy of Indian
             law, (b) the interest of India and (c) justice or morality. Option
(b) relating to the “interest of India” has now been consciously
             excluded by the 2015Amendment Act.
(ii)   Secondly, that as far as the head “fundamental policy of Indian
             law” is concerned, it is not the contravention of every statute
             which could be said to be against the fundamental policy of
             Indian law, for example, the recovery of compound interest on
             interest, would not fall within its scope. However, if provisions
             of the
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973
are contravened,
             the same would strike at the fundamental policy of Indian law
             since the statute was enacted for national economic interest in
             order to ensure that the nation does not lose foreign exchange
             which is essential for the economic survival of the country.
(iii) Thirdly, that even disregarding orders passed by the superior
             courts in India would fall within the ambit of “fundamental
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025           Page 117 of 133
policy of Indian law” for the purpose of setting aside an award
             under Section 34 or refusing enforcement under
Section 48
of
             the Act, 1996.
(iv)   Fourthly, insofar as the ground of “justice” was concerned, it
             was stated that for an award to be against justice, it must
             necessarily shock the conscience of the court. An illustration
             was given to better understand the concept in a contextual
             manner – i.e., in an arbitration, a claimant restricts his claim to
             a sum, say X, in his statement of claim and he does not at any
             point indicate that he seeks a higher amount, however, the
             award ultimately grants the claimant a sum of, say X+Y,
             without any acceptable reason or justification for the additional
             amount of Y. In such a scenario, the award would shock the
             conscience of the court and be contrary to justice itself.
(v)    Lastly, as regards the expression “morality”, the same was
             understood in the context of
Section 23
of the Indian Contract
             Act, 1872. It was stated that morality has been confined to
             sexual morality under the aforesaid Section 23. However, some
             leeway was given to expand the scope of morality in the context
             of setting aside an award beyond sexual morality. It was stated
             that the expression may also cover such agreements that are not
             illegal per say but those would not be enforced in light of the
             prevailing mores of the day. It was deemed appropriate, rightly
             so, to not further elaborate on what the prevailing mores of the
             day would be since the concept being inherently dynamic
             cannot be confined to a single definition or an exhaustive list of
             circumstances. However, it was cautioned that even for
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025            Page 118 of 133
invoking the ground of “morality” for the purpose of setting
            aside an award, it must qualify as something which shocks the
            conscience of the court.
The relevant observations are thus: -
“18.
In
Renusagar Power Co. Ltd. v. General Electric
            Co. [Renusagar Power Co. Ltd.
v. General Electric Co., 1994
            Supp (1) SCC 644] , the Supreme Court construed
Section
            7(1)(b)(ii)
of the Foreign Awards (Recognition and
            Enforcement) Act, 1961:
“7. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards.—
                 (1) A foreign award may not be enforced under this
                 Act—
                 ***
(b) if the Court dealing with the case is satisfied
                 that—
                 ***
(ii) the enforcement of the award will be contrary to
                 the public policy.”
            In construing the expression “public policy” in the context of a
            foreign award, the Court held that an award contrary to (i) The
            fundamental policy of Indian law, (ii) The interest of India, (iii)
            Justice or morality, would be set aside on the ground that it
            would be contrary to the public policy of India. It went on
            further to hold that a contravention of the provisions of the
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act
would be contrary to the
            public policy of India in that the statute is enacted for the
            national economic interest to ensure that the nation does not
            lose foreign exchange which is essential for the economic
            survival of the nation (see SCC p. 685, para 75). Equally,
            disregarding orders passed by the superior courts in India could
            also be a contravention of the fundamental policy of Indian law,
            but the recovery of compound interest on interest, being
            contrary to statute only, would not contravene any
            fundamental policy of Indian law (see SCC pp. 689 & 693, paras
            85 & 95).
Fundamental Policy of Indian Law
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                Page 119 of 133
27. Coming to each of the heads contained in Saw Pipes [(2003)
            5 SCC 705 : AIR 2003 SC 2629] judgment, we will first deal
            with the head “fundamental policy of Indian law”. It has already
            been     seen    from Renusagar [Renusagar       Power       Co.
Ltd. v. General Electric Co.
, 1994 Supp (1) SCC 644] judgment
            that violation of the
Foreign Exchange Act
and disregarding
            orders of superior courts in India would be regarded as being
            contrary to the fundamental policy of Indian law. To this it
            could be added that the binding effect of the judgment of a
            superior court being disregarded would be equally violative of
            the fundamental policy of Indian law.
Justice
36. The third ground of public policy is, if an award is against
            justice or morality. These are two different concepts in law. An
            award can be said to be against justice only when it shocks the
            conscience of the court. An illustration of this can be given. A
            claimant is content with restricting his claim, let us say to Rs
            30 lakhs in a statement of claim before the arbitrator and at no
            point does he seek to claim anything more. The arbitral award
            ultimately awards him Rs 45 lakhs without any acceptable
            reason or justification. Obviously, this would shock the
            conscience of the court and the arbitral award would be liable to
            be set aside on the ground that it is contrary to “justice”.
            Morality
37. The other ground is of “morality”. Just as the expression
            “public policy” also occurs in
Section 23
of the Contract Act,
            1872 so does the expression “morality”. Two illustrations to the
            said section are interesting for they explain to us the scope of the
            expression “morality”:
“(j) A, who is B's Mukhtar, promises to exercise his
                 influence, as such, with B in favour of C,
                 and C promises to pay 1000 rupees to A. The
                 agreement is void, because it is immoral.
(k) A agrees to let her daughter to hire to B for
                 concubinage. The agreement is void, because it is
                 immoral, though the letting may not be punishable
                 under the Penal Code, 1860.”
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                 Page 120 of 133
38.
In
Gherulal Parakh v. Mahadeodas Maiya
[1959 Supp (2)
            SCR 406 : AIR 1959 SC 781] , this Court explained the concept
            of “morality” thus : (SCR pp. 445-46 : AIR pp. 797-98)
                 “Re. Point 3 — Immorality : The argument under
                 this head is rather broadly stated by the learned
                 counsel for the appellant. The learned counsel
                 attempts to draw an analogy from the Hindu law
                 relating to the doctrine of pious obligation of sons to
                 discharge their father's debts and contends that what
                 the Hindu law considers to be immoral in that context
                 may appropriately be applied to a case under
Section
                 23
of the Contract Act. Neither any authority is cited
                 nor any legal basis is suggested for importing the
                 doctrine of Hindu law into the domain of contracts.
Section 23
of the Contract Act is inspired by the
                 common law of England and it would be more useful
                 to refer to the English law than to the Hindu law texts
                 dealing with a different matter. Anson in his Law of
                 Contracts states at p. 222 thus:
‘The only aspect of immorality with which
                      courts of law have dealt is sexual
                      immorality….’

                 Halsbury in his Laws of England, 3rd Edn., Vol. 8,
                 makes a similar statement, at p. 138:
‘A contract which is made upon an
                      immoral consideration or for an immoral
                      purpose is unenforceable, and there is no
                      distinction in this respect between immoral
                      and illegal contracts. The immorality here
                      alluded to is sexual immorality.’
                 In the Law of Contract by Cheshire and Fifoot, 3rd
                 Edn., it is stated at p. 279:
‘Although Lord Mansfield laid it down that
                      a contract contra bonos mores is illegal, the
                      law in this connection gives no extended
                      meaning to morality, but concerns itself
                      only with what is sexually reprehensible.’
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 121 of 133
In the book on the
Indian Contract Act
by Pollock and
                 Mulla it is stated at p. 157:
‘The epithet “immoral” points, in legal
                      usage, to conduct or purposes which the
                      State, though disapproving them, is unable,
                      or not advised, to visit with direct
                      punishment.’
                 The learned authors confined its operation to acts
                 which are considered to be immoral according to the
                 standards of immorality approved by courts. The case
                 law both in England and India confines the operation
                 of the doctrine to sexual immorality. To cite only some
                 instances : settlements in consideration of
                 concubinage, contracts of sale or hire of things to be
                 used in a brothel or by a prostitute for purposes
                 incidental to her profession, agreements to pay money
                 for future illicit cohabitation, promises in regard to
                 marriage for consideration, or contracts facilitating
                 divorce are all held to be void on the ground that the
                 object is immoral.
The word ‘immoral’ is a very comprehensive word.
                 Ordinarily it takes in every aspect of personal
                 conduct deviating from the standard norms of life. It
                 may also be said that what is repugnant to good
                 conscience is immoral. Its varying content depends
                 upon time, place and the stage of civilisation of a
                 particular society. In short, no universal standard can
                 be laid down and any law based on such fluid concept
                 defeats its own purpose. The provisions of
Section 23
of the Contract Act indicate the legislative intention
                 to give it a restricted meaning. Its juxtaposition with
                 an equally illusive concept, public policy, indicates
                 that it is used in a restricted sense; otherwise there
                 would be overlapping of the two concepts. In its wide
                 sense what is immoral may be against public policy,
                 for public policy covers political, social and economic
                 ground of objection. Decided cases and authoritative
                 textbook writers, therefore, confined it, with every
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 122 of 133
justification, only to sexual immorality. The other
                 limitation imposed on the word by the statute,
                 namely, ‘the court regards it as immoral’, brings out
                 the idea that it is also a branch of the common law like
                 the doctrine of public policy, and, therefore, should be
                 confined to the principles recognised and settled by
                 courts. Precedents confine the said concept only to
                 sexual immorality and no case has been brought to
                 our notice where it has been applied to any head other
                 than sexual immorality. In the circumstances, we
                 cannot evolve a new head so as to bring in wagers
                 within its fold.”
39. This Court has confined morality to sexual morality so far
            as
Section 23
of the Contract Act, 1872 is concerned, which in
            the context of an arbitral award would mean the enforcement of
            an award say for specific performance of a contract involving
            prostitution. “Morality” would, if it is to go beyond sexual
            morality necessarily cover such agreements as are not illegal but
            would not be enforced given the prevailing mores of the day.
However, interference on this ground would also be only if
            something shocks the court's conscience.”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
124. What is apparent from the aforesaid is that the phrase “public policy
      of India” must be construed narrowly and an undue expansion of the
      grounds of “fundamental policy of Indian law” and “most basic
      notions of justice or morality” respectively, cannot be countenanced.
125. The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner is right
      insofar as two things are concerned. First, that the ground of patent
      illegality which was earlier subsumed within the expression public
      policy of India, has now been removed and has instead, been granted
      as a separate ground through which awards rendered in domestic
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                Page 123 of 133
arbitrations can be assailed. The same is evident from a bare reading
      of
Section 34(2A)
of the Act, 1996. Therefore, the ground of “patent
      illegality” would not be available for setting aside awards rendered
      in international commercial arbitrations. Secondly, that the ground
      relating to the adoption of a ”judicial approach” or the lack thereof,
      was understood to be a part of the phrase “fundamental policy of
      Indian law” prior to the 2015 Amendment Act only as a result of the
      decision in Western Geco (supra). It was the decision in Western Geco
      (supra) that added three other distinct juristic principles which was to
      be understood as a part and parcel of fundamental policy of Indian
      law, which included the aspect of judicial approach. This expansion
      has now been done away with since it was considered as amounting
      to an intervention in the merits of the matter.
126. Therefore, we agree with the learned Senior Counsel that the non-
      adoption of a “judicial approach” cannot form a valid ground for the
      purpose of justifying an interference to the present interim award
      under
Section 34
of the Act, 1996. However, what must be noted is
      that, the decision of the Single Judge was rendered before this Court
      had the opportunity to clarify the scope of the 2015 Amendment Act
      in relation to
Section 34
of the Act, 1996, in
Ssangyong
(supra).
127.
In
Ssangyong
(supra), on the aspect of “most basic notions of justice”,
      this Court observed that – “what is referred to is, substantively and
      procedurally, some fundamental principle of justice which has been breached,
      and which shocks the conscience of the Court.”. We are not denying that
      this ground can only be attracted under very exceptional
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 124 of 133
circumstances where the conscience of the court is shocked by the
      infraction of the most fundamental notions or principles of justice.
128. Having said so and having agreed with the contention that “judicial
      approach” is not available as a ground for interference under Section
      34, we are nevertheless of the view that the award was liable to be
      partially set-aside.
129. A constitutional Bench decision of this Court in Gayatri Balasamy v.
      M/s ISG Novasoft Technologies Limited reported in (2025) 7 SCC 1,
      had the occasion to decide the question whether the power to set-
      aside an award under
Section 34
of the Act, 1996 also included the
      power to partially set-aside the award. It was elaborated that the
      power conferred on the courts under the proviso to Section 34(2)(a)(iv)
      is only clarificatory in nature. In other words, that the power of
      severance is inherent in the court’s jurisdiction when setting aside an
      award. In this context, the doctrine of omne majus continent in se minue
      i.e., “the greater power includes the lesser” was used to state that the
      power to set aside would encompass the power to also set aside the
      award in part, rather than in its entirety. However, it was cautioned
      that such an exercise of partially setting-aside must be undertaken
      only when the valid and invalid portions are not interdependent or
      intertwined and are capable of being severed. To put it simply, there
      must be no correlation between the valid and invalid parts. The
      relevant observations of the majority opinion are reproduced
      hereinbelow: -
“II. Severability of awards
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025          Page 125 of 133
xxx            xxx          xxx
33. We hold that the power conferred under the proviso to
            Section 34(2)(a)(iv) is clarificatory in nature. The authority to
            sever the “invalid” portion of an arbitral award from the “valid”
            portion, while remaining within the narrow confines of Section
            34, is inherent in the Court's jurisdiction when setting aside an
            award.
34. To this extent, the doctrine of omne majus continet in se
            minus—the greater power includes the lesser—applies
            squarely. The authority to set aside an arbitral award
            necessarily encompasses the power to set it aside in part, rather
            than in its entirety. This interpretation is practical and
            pragmatic. It would be incongruous to hold that power to set
            aside would only mean power to set aside the award in its
            entirety and not in part. A contrary interpretation would not
            only be inconsistent with the statutory framework but may also
            result in valid determinations being unnecessarily nullified.
35. However, we must add a caveat that not all awards can be
            severed or segregated into separate silos. Partial setting aside
            may not be feasible when the “valid” and “invalid” portions are
            legally and practically inseparable. In simpler words, the
            “valid” and “invalid” portions must not be interdependent or
            intrinsically intertwined. If they are, the award cannot be set
            aside in part.
36. [...] Thus, the power of partial setting aside should be
            exercised only when the valid and invalid parts of the award can
            be clearly segregated—particularly in relation to liability and
            quantum and without any corelation between valid and invalid
            parts.”
                                              (Emphasis supplied)
130. The dissenting opinion in Gayatri Balasamy (supra) authored by one
      of us, K.V. Viswanathan, J., had also conceptually clarified the scope
      of the doctrine of severance and agreed that courts do possess the
      power to sever and partially set-aside an award, subject to the
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 126 of 133
conditions compatible with severability being fulfilled. The
      dissenting opinion elaborated as follows: -
(i)    First, that the word “sever” would mean to separate or disjoin.
(ii)   Secondly, it was agreed that severance as a concept was
             recognised under the proviso to Section 34(2)(a)(iv) which
             allows the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration to be
             separated from those not submitted.
(iii) Thirdly, having said so, another question was put forth i.e.,
             when several claims, all of which fall within the scope of
             submission to arbitration, are decided, and if the award on a
             few claims falls foul of Section 34, then, can the decision on
             those claims which fall foul of Section 34 be set aside while
             keeping the decision on the other claims intact? While
             answering in the affirmative, it was stated that such standalone
             claims can be set-aside, provided that they are capable of being
             severed.
The relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow: -
“Severability under Section 34
239. If there was one aspect on which there was a chorus among
             the rival factions, it was on the aspect of Section 34 Court
             having power to sever that part of the award which fell foul of
             Section 34 from the good part.
240. According to P. Ramanatha Aiyar's Advanced Law
             Lexicon (3rd Edn.):
“Sever — ‘to separate; to insist upon a plea distinct
                  from that of other co-defendants; to disjoin and
                  severable — ‘capable of being separated’,”
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 127 of 133
241. A bare perusal of Section 34 indicates that the power to
            sever an award is recognised in Section 34(2)(a)(iv) which reads
            as under:
“34. (2)(a)(iv) the arbitral award deals with a dispute
                 not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of
                 the submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions
                 on matters beyond the scope of the submission to
                 arbitration:
Provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted
                 to arbitration can be separated from those not so
                 submitted, only that part of the arbitral award which
                 contains decisions on matters not submitted to
                 arbitration may be set aside;”
242. A reading of the above sub-section reveals that where the
            arbitral award deals with disputes not contemplated by or not
            falling within the terms of the submission to arbitration or it
            contains decision on matters beyond the scope of the submission
            to arbitration, the award can be set aside.
243. However, the proviso states that if the decisions on matters
            submitted to arbitration can be separated from those not so
            submitted, only that part of the arbitral award which contains
            decisions on matters not submitted to arbitration may be set
            aside.
244. So, severance as a concept is recognised intrinsically in
            Section 34 itself on the aspect mentioned hereinabove. But the
            question is when there are several claims adjudicated and if
            awards on a few claims fall foul of Section 34 and if each of the
            claims which fall foul of Section 34 are capable of separation
            could the awards on those claims be set aside? This issue was
            not discussed in Hakeem [NHAI v. M. Hakeem, (2021) 9 SCC
            1 : (2021) 4 SCC (Civ) 437]. However, the consistent view of
            this Court has been that such standalone claims falling foul of
            Section 34 can be set aside as long as they are capable of being
            severed without affecting the other parts of the award. In other
            words, if the claims falling foul of Section 34 are not inseparably
            intertwined with the good portion of the award, the award can
            be severed.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                Page 128 of 133
xxx            xxx          xxx
250. A learned Single Judge of the Delhi High Court addressing
            the issue of severability in NHAI v. Trichy Thanjavur
            Expressway Ltd. [NHAI v. Trichy Thanjavur Expressway
            Ltd., 2023 SCC OnLine Del 5183] , set out the principle thus:
(SCC OnLine Del paras 38-42 & 87)
                 […]
                 “L. The power to partially sever an offending part of
                 the award would ultimately depend on whether the
                 said decision is independent and distinct and whether
                 an annulment of that part would not disturb or
                 impact any other finding or declaration that may have
                 been returned by the AT. The question of severability
                 would have to be decided bearing in mind whether the
                 claims are interconnected or so intertwined that one
                 cannot be segregated from the other. This for the
                 obvious reason that if the part which is sought to be
                 set aside is not found to stand independently, it would
                 be legally impermissible to partially set aside the
                 award. A partial setting aside should not lead to a
                 component of the award being rendered vulnerable or
                 unsustainable. It is only when the award relates to a
                 claim which is found to stand on its own and its
                 setting aside would not have a cascading impact that
                 the Court could consider adopting the aforesaid mode.
M. The Court is thus of the firm opinion that the
                 power to set aside an award in part would have to
                 abide by the considerations aforenoted mindful of the
                 imperatives of walking a line which would not
                 dislodge or disturb another part of the award.
                 However, as long as the part which is proposed to be
                 annulled is independent and stands unattached to
                 any other part of the award and it could be validly
                 incised without affecting the other components of the
                 award, the recourse to partial setting aside would be
                 valid and justified.”
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025               Page 129 of 133
251. The views expressed in the judgment, referred to
            hereinabove, are correct and the power to set aside will include
            the power to partially set aside and sever the portions of the
            award which fall foul of Section 34 subject to the riders
            engrafted hereinabove.”
                                              (Emphasis supplied)
131. Therefore, when undertaking the exercise of severing an award, it
      must be ascertained whether the illegality is such that it affects the
      award as a whole. If not, then that portion of the award which does
      not suffer from any infirmity could be upheld. While severing, the
      courts must be vigilant to ensure that the good or viable part(s) of the
      award is not rendered vulnerable or unsustainable as a direct
      consequence of the severing. Therefore, while employing the doctrine
      of severance, one must walk the tight rope of not dislodging the good
      part of the award.
132. In the present facts and circumstances, the arbitrator has effectively
      done two things - first, held that although his decision on the issue of
      limitation would be rendered by way of demurrer, yet the same
      would be final and binding and; secondly, that after a perusal of the
      facts as averred in the statement of claim along with the materials
      annexed thereto, the claims are within limitation. Insofar as the
      second aspect i.e., the finding on demurrer is concerned, we are not
      expressing any disagreement with the learned arbitrator. What the
      respondents were aggrieved with, was the decision on the first aspect
      i.e., that the decision on demurrer would have the consequence of
      altogether foreclosing the issue of limitation forever.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025              Page 130 of 133
133. This observation as regards the finality of the decision rendered on
      demurrer is capable of being severed from the rest of the interim
      award such that the viable part is not made unsustainable or
      vulnerable. Therefore, the present interim award is capable of being
      partially set-aside, provided the grounds for interference under
      Section 34 are made out.
134. What has occurred in the present facts and circumstances of the
      matter is that the very understanding of the concept of demurrer, on
      part of the arbitrator, did not align with the well-established
      principles of law in India as elaborated by us in the preceding
      paragraphs of this judgment. The arbitrator’s view on the concept of
      demurrer cannot in any manner be justified in law. At the stage of
      demurrer, it is only the statement of claim which is to be looked into
      to decide whether the matter must be thrown out at the threshold or
      not. The respondent is not required to put forth his version of the case
      at this stage and there rests no burden on him. Therefore, there arises
      no question of deciding an issue ‘finally’ on the basis of demurrer.
      The fact that it was the issue of limitation which was decided as such,
      causes all the more reason for alarm. The question of limitation
      cannot be decided in such a manner, especially if there exists some
      disputed questions of fact. In the present matter, the parties were at
      logger-heads as to whether time was extended for the fulfilment of
      conditions precedent or for the payment of refund i.e., there existed a
      serious disputed question of fact and therefore, the finding on
      demurrer was incapable of achieving finality without having looked
      at further evidence in that regard. If an approach such as the one
      adopted by the arbitrator is approved, a substantial miscarriage of
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025          Page 131 of 133
justice could occur because claims which may otherwise be barred by
      limitation would be decided hurriedly and foreclosed, with no
      recourse whatsoever to the respondent to assail it in an appropriate
      manner if the decision is adverse to him. Such a procedural fallacy, in
      our opinion, was fundamentally wrong and has shocked the
      conscience of this Court.
135. There is no gainsaying that the Arbitral Tribunal is neither required
      to conduct arbitration proceedings strictly like a civil court nor that
      the provisions
of the CPC
and
Evidence Act
respectively do not apply
      stricto sensu to arbitral proceedings. However, it cannot be denied that
      any procedure adopted in the arbitral proceedings must subscribe to
      and not be at variance with the underlying principles of justice.
136. We are not laying down a rule as to how evidence must be led or in
      what manner the arbitrator is supposed to weigh the evidence
      brought on record. This is clearly within the domain and wisdom of
      the arbitrator who is the master of the evidence. However, all that we
      are saying is that, the issue of the limitation being one of both fact and
      law, could not have been ‘finally’ decided on the basis of demurrer,
      at the risk of stale claims being entertained. At a stage when the
      respondent is required to adduce some evidence, if they choose not
      to, then the arbitral award cannot be assailed for being passed
      without any evidence or with little evidence and any decision which
      follows would be binding on both parties. However, this is not the
      situation that we are faced with.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025            Page 132 of 133
137. In view of the above, the arbitrator’s decision that the finding on the
       question of limitation by way demurrer would be ‘final’ and hence,
       the issue would be ‘foreclosed’, has offended the most basic notions
       of justice and must be set-aside. However, we must clarify that the
       remaining portion of award would remain intact.
E.   CONCLUSION
138. For all the foregoing reasons, we have reached the conclusion that the
       interim award dated 27.08.2019 warranted interference under
Section
       34
of the Act, 1996 and it was rightly held that the preliminary issue
       of limitation decided on the basis of demurrer could be further
       examined by the Arbitral Tribunal on the basis of evidence and other
       materials on record, if tendered and if so warranted.
139. The Registry shall forward one copy each of this judgment to all the
       High Courts.
.................................................. J.
(J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                              .................................................. J.
(K.V. VISWANATHAN)
       New Delhi,
       15th September, 2025.
Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 26660-26662 of 2025                     Page 133 of 133