[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Paramjeet Singh vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 15 September, 2025
2025 INSC 1118
                                                                           NON-REPORTABLE


                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE/ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                    OF 2025
                            (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.3415 of 2024)

                  PARAMJEET SINGH                                           …APPELLANT

                                       VERSUS

                  STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH
                  & OTHERS                                                  …RESPONDENTS

                                                         WITH

                                   WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 217/2025




                                                  JUDGMENT
NAGARATHNA, J.
Leave granted.
2.          This appeal arises out of order dated 02.01.2024 passed by

                  the Himachal Pradesh High Court in Cr.MMO No.288/2023
Signature Not Verified
NEETU SACHDEVA dismissing the application filed under Section 482 of Code of
Digitally signed by
Date: 2025.09.15
16:45:02 IST
Reason:
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter ‘
CrPC
’ for short) preferred by
Page 1 of 15
the accused-appellant, Paramjeet Singh and refusing to quash the

proceedings arising out of FIR No.11/2023 dated 14.02.2023 that

was filed by Kushal K. Rana, the complainant/respondent No.3-

proprietor of M/s Soma Stone Crusher.
3.   Writ Petition (Criminal) No.217/2025 has been preferred by

accused-petitioner,   Sarabjit   Singh,   being   aggrieved   by   the

chargesheet submitted on 27.07.2023 arising out of the very same

FIR No.11/2023 before the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate,

Jaisinghpur, Kangra District, Himachal Pradesh wherein both

Paramjeet Singh and Sarabjit Singh were arraigned as accused and

charged under
Section 420
read with
Section 120B
of the Indian

Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter, “
IPC
’ for short). In the said Writ

Petition, the petitioner has prayed for quashing of FIR No.11/2023

and all the subsequent proceedings emanating from it.
4.   Since both the appeal and writ petition arise from the same

facts and circumstances, they have been heard together and are

being disposed of by this common judgment. The appellant and the

writ petitioner shall henceforth be referred to as the ‘appellants’.
Page 2 of 15
5.   Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the appellants are

brothers running business firms dealing in stone crushing.

Appellant Paramjeet Singh runs a proprietorship M/s Sardara

Singh & Sons having GST No.:03AYQPS7151J3ZV. Petitioner

Sarabjit Singh runs a proprietorship M/s Saini Engineering Works

having GST No.:03BVHPS8462D1ZG.
6.   On 12.12.2017, a sale and purchase agreement was entered

into by M/s Soma Stone Crusher with M/s Saini Engineering

Works for the purchase of a 20X40 ‘sand ruula machine’ and

conveyor and structures for a consideration of Rs.9,12,912/-. In

pursuance of the said agreement, a cheque bearing No.024210

dated 13.01.2018 for an amount of Rs.5,00,000/- was drawn by

M/s Soma Stone Crusher in favour of M/s Saini Engineering Works

at Punjab National Bank, Jalsinghpur, Kangra, Himachal Pradesh.
7.   Upon presentation of the said cheque for encashment, the

same was returned by the bank with a remark: ‘Stop Payment’.

Aggrieved by the same, M/s Saini Engineering Works, through

Special Power of Attorney Paramjeet Singh (appellant herein), filed

a complaint in April, 2018 under
Section 138
of Negotiable

Instruments Act, 1881, (“the Act”, for short) being NACT/306/2018
Page 3 of 15
against      M/s      Soma       Stone      Crusher      and        the

complainant/respondent No.3.
8.     Thereafter, after five years from the sale-purchase agreement

dated 12.12.2017, an FIR No.11 dated 14.02.2023 was lodged at

Police Station Lambagaon under
Section 420
IPC at the instance of

the complainant/respondent No.3 against the appellant. The

allegations in the said FIR can be crystallized as under:
i.    Upon assurances of the appellant-accused Paramjeet Singh, a

      ruula body 20X40 of approximate 14 tons was purchased from

      M/s Saini Engineering Works and consequently an advance

      payment of Rs.5,00,000/- was made through cheque bearing

      No.024210.
ii.   It was assured by the appellant that in case the said ruula set

      fitting was not found as per the above said specification, the

      same shall be replaced by him.
iii. It was also agreed by him that the said cheque of Rs.5,00,000/-
shall be presented only after complete satisfaction of the

      complainant/respondent No.3 that the said ruula set fitting

      was as per the specifications as agreed upon.
Page 4 of 15
iv. It was found that the weight of the said ruula set fitting was

     only 12 tons instead of the promised 14 tons and the output of

     the same was only 500 feet per hour instead of 1000 ft. to 1200

     ft. per hour.
v.   Due to the delivery of a product with wrong specifications and

     failure   to    replace   the   same   by   the   appellant,   the

     complainant/respondent No.3 has suffered a loss of Rs. 50

     lakhs and hence liable for the offence of breach of trust.
9.    Upon completion of the investigation with respect to the FIR,

a final police report was submitted before the court of Chief

Judicial Magistrate, Jaisinghpur charging the appellants of

offences under Section 420 read with
Section 120B
IPC. Thereafter,

Paramjeet Singh preferred a petition before the High Court under
Section 482
of CrPC as Cr. MMO No.288/2013 praying for the relief

of quashing of all the proceedings arising out of FIR No. 11/2023.

The High Court by the impugned order dated 02.01.2024

dismissed the said application.
Page 5 of 15
10. Hence, the present appeal and the writ petition.
11. Heard the learned counsel for the appellants and learned

counsel   for   the   respondent-State   as   well   as   respondent-

complainants. We have perused the material on record.
12. We have given our thorough consideration to the arguments

advanced at the bar and the material on record.
13. The contents of the FIR as well as the chargesheet would have

to be read in light of the ingredients of
Section 420
IPC and the law

settled by this Court through various judicial dicta. On perusal of

FIR No.11 dated 14.02.2023 and the subsequent proceedings

emanating from it, it is noted that the appellants are accused of

offences under Section 420 and
Section 120B
IPC. For ease of

reference, the aforesaid Sections are extracted as under:
“420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of
    property.- Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly
    induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any
    person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part
    of a valuable security, or anything which is signed or
    sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a
    valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of
    either description for a term which may extend to seven
    years, and shall also be liable to fine.
xxx
Page 6 of 15
120B. Punishment of criminal conspiracy.- (1) Whoever
    is a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence
    punishable with death, imprisonment for life or rigorous
    imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards, shall,
    where no express provision is made in this Code for the
    punishment of such a conspiracy, be punished in the same
    manner as if he had abetted such offence.
(2) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy other than
    a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable as
    aforesaid shall be punished with imprisonment of either
    description for a term not exceeding six months, or with
    fine or with both.”
14.
In
Inder Mohan Goswami vs. State of Uttaranchal
, (2007)

12 SCC 1, (“Inder Mohan Goswami”) while dealing with
Section

420
IPC, this Court observed thus:
“42. On a reading of the aforesaid section, it is manifest
    that in the definition there are two separate classes of acts
    which the person deceived may be induced to do. In the
    first class of acts he may be induced fraudulently or
    dishonestly to deliver property to any person. The second
    class of acts is the doing or omitting to do anything which
    the person deceived would not do or omit to do if he were
    not so deceived. In the first class of cases, the inducement
    must be fraudulent or dishonest. In the second class of
    acts, the inducing must be intentional but need not be
    fraudulent or dishonest. Therefore, it is the intention
    which is the gist of the offence. To hold a person guilty of
    cheating it is necessary to show that he had a fraudulent
    or dishonest intention at the time of making the promise.
    From his mere failure to subsequently keep a promise, one
    cannot presume that he all along had a culpable intention
    to break the promise from the beginning.”
Page 7 of 15
15. In light of facts and circumstances of the present case, we

find that the complainant/respondent No.3 has failed to make out

a case that satisfies the basic ingredients of the offence under
Section 420
IPC. We fail to understand as to how the allegations

against the appellants herein could be brought within the scope

and ambit of the aforesaid
Section 420
IPC. On a bare perusal of

the FIR as well as the charge-sheet, we do not find that the offence

of cheating as defined under
Section 420
IPC is made out at all and

we do not find that there is any cheating and dishonest inducement

to deliver any property of a valuable security involved in the instant

case.
16. It is settled law that for establishing the offence of cheating,

the complainant/respondent No.3 was required to show that the

appellants had a fraudulent or dishonest intention at the time of

making a promise or representation of buying the said ‘ruula set

fitting’. Such a culpable intention when the promise was made

cannot be presumed but has to be supported with cogent facts. In

the facts of the present case, there is a clear absence of dishonest

and fraudulent intention on the part of the appellants as regards

the sale and purchase agreement. We must hasten to add that
Page 8 of 15
there is no allegation in the First Information Report or the

chargesheet indicating either expressly or impliedly any intentional

deception or fraudulent/dishonest intention on the part of the

appellants right from the time of making the promise or

misrepresentation.    Nothing   has   been    said   on   what    the

misrepresentations were and how the appellants intentionally

deceived   the   complainant/    respondent    No.3.   Mere   vague

allegations by the complainant/ respondent No.3 that the

appellants failed to provide a product of a particular specification

and failed to replace the faulty machines do not satisfy the test of

dishonest inducement to deliver a property or part with a valuable

security as enshrined under
Section 420
IPC.
17. At this point, we must hasten to add that the impugned FIR

was filed after a delay of nearly five years. The learned counsel for

the complainant/respondent No.3 has not been able to state before

us the reason for the delay and this further raises suspicion about

the bona fides of the complainant. The delay in lodging of the FIR,

coupled with the vague allegations do not inspire the confidence of

this Court to allow the criminal proceedings to continue against

the appellants. The complainant had an alternative remedy of filing
Page 9 of 15
a civil suit claiming damages for the alleged violation of his

contractual rights but a route through criminal proceedings, when

no ingredient of offence is made out, cannot be permitted. Criminal

law ought not become a platform for initiation of vindictive

proceedings   to settle personal scores      and vendettas. The

appellants, in our view, could not be attributed any mens rea and

therefore, the allegations levelled by the prosecution against the

appellants are unsustainable.
18. This Court, in the case of
Vesa Holdings P. Ltd. vs. State of

Kerala
, (2015) 8 SCC 293, had observed and held that every

breach of contract would not give rise to an offence of cheating but

the cases of breach of contract would amount to cheating only

where there was any deception played at the very inception. It was

further observed that for the purpose of constituting an offence of

cheating, the complainant is required to show that the accused had

a fraudulent or dishonest intention at the time of making a promise

or representation. It was further observed that even in a case where

allegations are made in regard to failure on the part of the accused

to keep his promise, in the absence of a culpable intention at the

time of making initial promise being absent, no offence under
Page 10 of 15
Section 420
IPC can be said to have been made out and that the

real test is, whether, the allegations in the complaint disclose the

criminal offence of cheating.
19. Furthermore, in the case of Inder Mohan Goswami, it was

held by this Court that the Court must ensure that criminal

prosecution is not used as an instrument of harassment or for

seeking private vendetta or with an ulterior motive to pressurise

the accused. It was further held by this Court that it is neither

possible nor desirable to lay down an inflexible rule that would

govern the exercise of inherent jurisdiction. In view of the above

and for the reasons stated above, we are of the firm opinion that to

continue the criminal proceedings against the appellants herein

would cause undue harassment to them because, as observed

hereinabove, no prima facie case for the offence under
Section 420
IPC is made out.
20.
In this regard, it would be apposite to rely on the judgment in

the case of
State of Haryana vs. Bhajan Lal
, 1992 Suppl (1)

SCC 335 (“Bhajan Lal”) with particular reference to paragraph

102 therein, where this Court observed:
Page 11 of 15
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various
relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of
the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series
of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary
power Under
Article 226
or the inherent powers Under
Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted and
reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases
by way of illustration wherein such power could be
exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it
may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly
defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list
of myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be
exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information
report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face
value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the
Accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and
other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not
disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by
police officers Under Section 156(1) of the Code except
under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of
Section 155(2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR
or complaint and the evidence collected in support of the
same do not disclose the commission of any offence and
make out a case against the Accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable
offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated Under
Section 155(2) of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are
so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which
Page 12 of 15
no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that
    there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the
    Accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of
    the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under
    which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution
    and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is
    a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
    providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the
    aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended
    with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously
    instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance
    on the Accused and with a view to spite him due to private
    and personal grudge.”
21. On a careful consideration of the aforementioned judicial

dictum, we find that none of the offences alleged against the

appellants herein is made out. In fact, we find that the allegations

of criminal intent and other allegations against the appellants

herein have been made with a mala fide intent and therefore, the

judgment of this Court in the case of Bhajan Lal and particularly

sub-paragraphs 1, 3, 5 and 7 of paragraph 102, extracted above,

squarely apply to the facts of this case. It is neither expedient nor

in the interest of justice to permit the present prosecution to

continue.
Page 13 of 15
22. At this juncture, we find it apposite to mention the

observations of this Court in
Vishal Noble Singh vs. State of

Uttar Pradesh
, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 1680 wherein it was

observed that in recent years, the machinery of criminal justice is

being misused by certain persons for their vested interests and for

achieving their oblique motives and agenda. Courts have therefore

to be vigilant against such tendencies and ensure that acts of

omission and commission having an adverse impact on the fabric

of our society must be nipped in the bud. We say so for the reason

that while the complainant has made allegations against the

appellants herein and a charge-sheet has also been filed, he has

failed to justify the same before this Court. Such actions would

create significant divisions and distrust among people, while also

placing an unnecessary strain on the judicial system, particularly

the criminal courts.
23. In the aforementioned circumstances, the impugned order of

the High Court is set aside and consequently, the FIR No.11/2023

dated 14.02.2023 at Police Station Lambagaon, the chargesheet

dated 27.07.2023 and all consequent proceedings initiated

pursuant thereto stand quashed.
Page 14 of 15
24. The appeal and the writ petition are allowed in the aforesaid

terms.
…………………………………..J.
                                   (B.V. NAGARATHNA)




                                    …………………………………..J.
                                   (R. MAHADEVAN)


NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 15, 2025.
Page 15 of 15