[Cites
45
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Haryana Through Secretary ... vs Jai Singh And Ors.Etc. Etc on 16 September, 2025
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
B.R. Gavai
2025 INSC 1122                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6990 OF 2014


                   THE STATE OF HARYANA                                     …APPELLANT(S)

                                                        VERSUS

                   JAI SINGH AND OTHERS                                  …RESPONDENT(S)
INDEX

                            I.    BACKGROUND                                    Paras 1 to 3

                            II.   SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES                    Paras 4 to 23

                         III.     CONSIDERATION                                 Paras 24 to 62
(a)      Consideration of the Constitution Bench       Para 24 to 53
                                  Judgments of this Court in Ranjit Singh,
                                  Ajit Singh and Bhagat Ram
(b)      Consideration of the judgment of the Full     Para 54 to 57
                                  Bench of the High Court in impugned
                                  judgment and final order referring its
                                  earlier judgment in Gurjant Singh and
                                  several other judgments
(c)      Applicability of the doctrine of stare decisis Para 58 to 62
                                  to the facts of the present case.
IV.      CONCLUSIONS                                   Para 63 to 64
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
POOJA SHARMA
Date: 2025.09.16
18:12:25 IST
Reason:
1
JUDGMENT


B.R. GAVAI, CJI.


I.     BACKGROUND
1.     This appeal takes exception to the judgment and final

order passed by a Full Bench of the High Court of Punjab and

Haryana at Chandigarh1 in Civil Writ Petition No. 5877 of 1992

wherein the High Court partly allowed the writ petition

preferred      by     the    proprietors/landowners,   (Respondents

herein), challenging the amendments carried out in the Punjab

Village Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 19612, as inserted by

the Haryana Act No. 9 of 1992, published on 11th February

1992 after the assent of the President of India.
2.     The facts which give rise to the present proceedings are

as follows:
2.1 The State of Haryana, by way of Government Gazette

Notification dated 11th February 1992 inserted sub-clause (6)

to Section 2(g) of the 1961 Act along with an Explanation to



1 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘High Court’.
2 Hereinafter referred to as ‘1961 Act’.
2
the said sub-clause, which received the assent of the President

on 14th January 1992. Sub-clause (6) to Section 2(g) of the

1961 Act reads thus:
“2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires-
xxx xxx xxx
(g) “shamilat deh” includes-
xxx xxx xxx
          (6) lands reserved for the common
          purposes of a village under
Section 18
of
          the East Punjab Holdings (Consolidation
          and Prevention of Fragmentation) Act,
          1948 (East Punjab Act 50 of 1948), the
          management and control whereof vests in
          the Gram Panchayat under
section 23-A
of
          the aforesaid Act.
Explanation - Lands entered in the
          column of ownership of record of rights as
          “Jumla Malkan Wa Digar Haqdaran Arazi
          Hassab Rasad”, “Jumla Malkan” or
          “Mushtarka Malkan” shall be shamilat
          deh within the meaning of this section.”

2.2 The respondent-landowners along with several other

similarly-situated landowners who held land in various villages

and had contributed a share of their holdings to form a

common pool of land called ‘shamilat deh’, which was meant

exclusively for the common purposes of the village inhabitants,

filed Writ Petitions before the High Court being aggrieved by

the aforementioned amendment.
3
2.3 When the batch of Writ Petitions first came up before the

High Court, upon considering the important questions of law

involved in the matter, which were likely to arise in a large

number of cases and affect a huge chunk of land, the Division

Bench which was seized of the matter vide order dated 1st

June, 1993 directed the papers of the case to be placed before

the Hon’ble Chief Justice for constituting a Full Bench of the

High Court for determination of the vires of the Haryana Act

No. 9 of 1992. Thereafter, a Full Bench of the High Court heard

the matter at length and vide judgment dated 18th January

1995, reported as
Jai Singh and Others v. State of

Haryana3
, allowed the writ petitions and struck down the

amendments carried out by way of the Haryana Act No. 9 of

1992.
2.4 The State of Haryana4, Appellant herein, challenged the

decision of the Full Bench of the High Court before this Court

vide Civil Appeal No. 5480 of 1995 titled as
State of Haryana

v. Jai Singh5
. This Court by order dated 6th August, 1998 held

that certain essentials of
Article 31-A
of the Constitution of
3 CWP No. 5877 of 1992.
4 Hereinafter referred to as ‘appellant-State’.
5 1998 SCC OnLine SC 8
4
India had been overlooked and accordingly, the civil appeal

came to be allowed and the matter was remanded to the High

Court for reconsideration of the issues in light of
Article 31-A
of the Constitution of India.
2.5 Accordingly, a Full Bench of the High Court by way of the

impugned judgment and final order, examined the legality of

sub-clause (6) of
Section 2(g)
of the 1961 Act as inserted by the

Haryana Act No. 9 of 1992 and partly allowed the writ petitions

preferred by the respondent-landowners. The Full Bench of the

High Court vide the impugned judgment and final order also

issued certain consequential directions with regard to certain

mutation entries made by the Revenue Authorities.

2.6 Being aggrieved thereby, the appellant-State filed a Civil

Appeal No. 6990 of 2014 before this Court. Vide judgment and

order dated 7th April 2022, this Court allowed the civil appeal

in the following terms:
“128.Consequently, we hold that Act 9 of 1992, the
     amending Act is valid and does not suffer from any
     vice of constitutional infirmity. The entire land
     reserved for common purposes by applying pro rata
     cut had to be utilised by the Gram Panchayat for the
     present and future needs of the village community
     and that no part of the land can be re-partitioned
     amongst the proprietors.
5
129. With the aforesaid discussion and findings, the
     appeals filed by the State and Panchayats are allowed
     and those filed by the proprietors are dismissed.
Consequently, the writ petitions filed before the High
     Court shall also stand dismissed.”


2.7 Seeking review of the aforementioned judgment of this

Court, one Karnail Singh, being Respondent No. 28 in the

present proceedings, preferred Review Petition (C) No. 526 of

2023 before this Court.
2.8 After a thorough consideration of the issue at hand, this

Court vide order dated 16th May 2024 allowed the Review

Petition in the following terms:
“69. In the result, we pass the following order:
The Review Petition is allowed.
The judgment and order of this Court
          dated 7th April 2022 in Civil Appeal No.
          6990 of 2014 is recalled and the appeal is
          restored to the file.
The appeal is directed to be listed for
          hearing peremptorily on 7th August 2024
          at Serial No.1”


2.9 After the review was allowed, we have heard the appeals

afresh.
6
3.     We have heard Shri Vinay Navare, learned Senior

Counsel, appearing on behalf of the appellant-State as well as

Shri    Manoj   Swarup,   Shri   Narender     Hooda    and   Shri

Rameshwar Singh Malik, learned Senior Counsel, appearing

on behalf of the respondent-landowners.
II.    SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
4.     Shri Navare appearing for the appellant-State submitted

that the impugned judgment and final order of the High Court

is self-contradictory in nature. He submitted that despite

holding that lands reserved for common purposes as per the

consolidation scheme, whether utilized or not, would vest with

the State or Gram Panchayat, the High Court directed

cancellation of mutations made in favour of the appellant-
state. He further submitted that in light of a categorical finding

to the effect that the amended provisions were merely

elucidations of the already existing provisions, the High Court

ought not to have cancelled or set aside the mutations which

were a necessary consequence of Haryana Act No. 9 of 1992

which amended the 1961 Act.
5.     The learned Senior Counsel further submitted that the

liberty granted by the High Court to the State or Gram
7
Panchayat to file an application for eviction or title suit for

those lands which had been earmarked for common purposes,

would run contrary to the very purpose and objective of the

Haryana Act No. 9 of 1992 and would introduce the same

mischief which the said Act sought to do away with. He,

therefore, submitted that the impugned judgment and final

order being self-contradictory and erroneous to the above

extent deserves to be set aside and/or modified.
6.    Shri Navare further submitted that the lands contributed

by the respondent-landowners on pro-rata basis during

consolidation proceedings as carried out under the East

Punjab       Holdings        (Consolidation          And        Prevention   of

Fragmentation) Act, 19486 would fall within the definition of

‘shamilat deh’ under the Haryana Act No. 9 of 1992. Such

lands, he submitted, would vest in the State or Gram

Panchayat, irrespective of whether they have been reserved for

common purposes or not. He submitted that vesting of such

lands in the State or Gram Panchayat is complete as soon as

the consolidation scheme attains finality and once so vested,



6 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘Consolidation Act of 1948’.
8
the proprietors lose all rights and interests. Shri Navare further

submitted that once the land has been recorded as ‘shamilat

deh’, there would be no need to prove as to whether it had been

earmarked or used for common purposes.
7.   Shri Navare submitted that since the Haryana Act No. 9

of 1992 did not exclude unutilized lands i.e. bachat lands, the

said lands could not be given back to the respondent-

landowners. He submitted that before the High Court, the only

claim raised by the respondent-landowners was qua land

reserved for the income of the Gram Panchayat as well as land

which had been reserved for common purposes but had not

been utilized. The learned Senior Counsel submitted that all

such lands which had been reserved for common purposes

vested with the Gram Panchayat and further that, the

concomitant Rule 16(ii) of the Consolidation Rules would cover

all such lands which had been taken over for common

purposes as per the consolidation scheme under the

Consolidation Act of 1948. Therefore, Shri Navare submitted,

the High Court had erred in holding that bachat lands not

reserved for common use would remain with the proprietors in

proportion to their contribution.
9
8.     Shri Navare further submitted that Haryana Act No. 9 of

1992 did not alter or affect the rights of the respondent-

landowners, as their ownership had already been extinguished

under the Consolidation Act of 1948 and its concomitant Rules

upon     the   finalization    of   the   consolidation proceedings

thereunder. He submitted that the Haryana Act No. 9 of 1992,

enacted as an agrarian reform to strengthen Gram Panchayat

control, is merely clarificatory and does not divest proprietors

of any ownership rights and therefore, it would not be hit by

the rigours of
Articles 31-A
and
300A
of the Constitution of

India.
9.     With regard to the decision of this Court in Bhagat Ram

and Others v. State of Punjab and Others7, Shri Navare

submitted that the judgment supports the proprietors only to

the extent that land cannot be reserved solely to generate

income for the Gram Panchayat. However, he submitted that

this Court deliberately refrained from ordering the return of

land to proprietors to avoid disrupting the consolidation

scheme under the Consolidation Act of 1948. He submitted



7 1966 SCC OnLine SC 264 : (1967) 2 SCR 165
10
that returning bachat land to the proprietors would cause

fragmentation and reverse the landholding structure to a pre-

1948 scenario, which the Act expressly prohibits. Therefore, he

submitted, what the Supreme Court consciously avoided in

Bhagat Ram (supra) could not have been directed by the High

Court. To substantiate his contention, Shri Navare placed

reliance on the decisions of this Court in the cases of Sarat

Chandra Mishra and Others.
v.
State of Orissa and

Others8, Ramesh Chand Daga v. Rameshwari Bai9
and
Gajraj Singh and Others v. State of U.P. and Others10
to

submit that a judgment cannot be read as a statute and it may

be presumed that the same has been rendered in accordance

with law.
10. In the result, Shri Navare submitted that the civil appeals

deserve to be allowed and the High Court’s order ought to be

set aside only to the extent that it directs the cancellation of

mutations made in the appellant’s favour.




8 (2006) 1 SCC 638
9 (2005) 4 SCC 772
10 (2001) 5 SCC 762
11
11. Per contra, Shri Manoj Swarup, learned Senior Counsel,

appearing on behalf of some of the respondent-landowners

submitted that the concerned land has been in their

possession and under their cultivation from the very inception.

As such, he submitted that, the respondent-landowners are

the absolute owners of the land and they could not have been

deprived of their proprietary rights without acquisition of the

land through due process of law.
12. Shri Swarup submitted that the insertion of Clause 2(g)(6)

with the Explanation in the 1961 Act, by way of the Haryana

Act No. 9 of 1992, arbitrarily expanded the definition of

‘shamilat deh’. He submitted that the land of the respondent-

landowners was neither reserved under the provisions of

Section 18 of the Consolidation Act of 1948 for utilization for

common purposes nor used for common purposes, but

remained under their cultivation making them the absolute

owners of the land. He, therefore, submitted that the

amendment amounts to compulsory acquisition without

compensation,    thereby   violating
Article   31-A
of   the

Constitution of India.
12
13. He further submitted that the unutilized land i.e. bachat

land ought to be revested with the respondent-landowners as

such land does not fall within the ambit of ‘shamilat deh’. He

submitted that the management and control of the bachat land

would also not vest with the Gram Panchayat under the

provisions of Sections 18 and 23-A of the Consolidation Act of

1948 and Rule 16(ii) of the Concomitant Consolidation Rules.

The learned Senior Counsel further clarified that before the

High Court, the respondent-landowners had only joined issues

with regard to unutilized lands, since after an exchange of

affidavits, the appellant-State had taken a similar stance. He,

therefore, submitted that since the land has neither been

utilized nor reserved for any specific common purpose, it ought

to revest with the proprietors. To bolster his submission, Shri

Swarup placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in the

case of Bhagat Ram (supra) which has been relied upon by

the High Court in the impugned judgment and final order.
14. Even insofar as the direction of the High Court with

regard to vesting of utilized or unutilized land with the Gram

Panchayat is concerned, Shri Swarup submitted that it has

been set aside by a judgment passed by a 5-Judge Bench of
13
the High Court dated 22nd July 2016 in
Suraj Bhan and

Others v. State of Haryana and Another
in CWP No. 314 of

2001, which has otherwise upheld the judgment of the Full

Bench impugned before us, in toto.
15. Shri Swarup, in the result, submitted that decision of the

High Court be upheld and the civil appeals be dismissed with

costs.
16. Shri Narender Hooda, learned Senior Counsel appearing

on behalf of some of the respondent-landowners submitted

that though the right to property is no more a fundamental

right, it is still a constitutional right. It is submitted that in

view of the law
laid down by
this Court in the cases of
Ajit

Singh v. State of Punjab and Another11 and Bhagat Ram
(supra), the land cannot be acquired where the beneficiary is

the State. He submits that where the reservation of land is for

the purpose of generating revenue for the State, it constitutes

taking away the land for the State and attracts protection

granted under the second proviso to
Article 31A
of the

Constitution mandating payment of compensation at market



11 1966 SCC OnLine SC 192 : (1967) 2 SCR 143
14
value.    It is, therefore, submitted that the High Court has

rightly considered this legal position and held that the lands

which are not earmarked for a particular purpose would revest

in the proprietors.
17. Shri Hooda further submitted that the Constitution

Bench of this Court in the case of
K.T. Plantation Private

Limited and Another v. State of Karnataka12
has

reaffirmed the legal position that even after the deletion of
Articles 19(1)(f)
and
31(2)
of the Constitution of India, the

deprivation of a property of a citizen must conform to

foundational constitutional requirements. He submits that the

Constitution Bench of this Court has clearly held that the

public purpose is a precondition for deprivation of a person

from his property under
Article 300-A
and that the State has

to justify both - the public purpose as well as compensation for

such deprivation.
18. He submits that the Constitution Bench has further held

that the statutes authorizing deprivation of property are

amenable to judicial review, and must satisfy constitutional



12 (2011) 9 SCC 1
15
standards of non-arbitrariness, proportionality, and the rule of

law.
19. Shri Hooda further submitted that the Constitution

Bench held that though a full market value compensation may

be no longer a constitutional mandate, the obligation to pay

compensation - whether nominal, partial or otherwise - still

exists. He further submitted that such a compensation has to

be “just, fair and reasonable” within the meaning of
Articles 14
and
21
of the Constitution of India.
20. Shri Hooda further submitted that this Court in the

Constitution Bench Judgments in the cases of
Ranjit Singh

and Others v. State of Punjab and Others13, Ajit Singh
(supra) and Bhagat Ram (supra) on an interpretation of the

Consolidation Act of 1948, in unequivocal terms, held that the

lands whose possession was never given in implementation of

the Consolidation Scheme do not vest in the Gram Panchayat

but continue to belong to the original proprietors. It has further

been held that such lands which have not been earmarked for

any specific purpose under the Scheme, which are commonly



13 1964 SCC OnLine SC 182 : (1965) 1 SCR 82
16
known as bachat lands, must revert to the proprietors. He

submitted that the doctrine of stare decisis, when the aforesaid

legal position has been in vogue for a long period, would not

permit the same to be reversed.
21. Shri Hooda further submitted that the Consolidation

proceedings in the State of Haryana happened in and around

1960.   It is submitted that, over the past 65 years, the

possession of the bachat land remained undisturbed, despite

earmarking, with the proprietors. He submitted that in some

instances, the original proprietors remained         in settled

occupation. In many cases, bona fide transactions have taken

place through registered sale deeds. In several other instances,

statutory authorities have effected partitions between joint

owners and/or vendees. It is submitted that these persons

have invested labour, capital and generations of time on the

footing that their possession was lawful and secure.         He

submitted that, disturbing such long-settled rights would be

manifestly unjust. He, therefore, submits that it would be just

and necessary in the interests of justice that even if such

bachat lands are earmarked for some purposes but their

possession has not been taken for long years, they need to be
17
protected, and such lands need to be revested in the

proprietors.
22. Shri Rameshwar Singh Malik, learned Senior Counsel

appearing on behalf of some of the other respondent-

proprietors submitted that, the case of the respondent-

proprietors is squarely covered by the decisions of this Court

in the cases of
Ajit Singh
(supra), Bhagat Ram (supra) and
State of Punjab v. Gurjant Singh14
.
23. In light of the same, he submitted that the civil appeals

be dismissed and the States of Punjab and Haryana and the

UT of Chandigarh be directed to re-partition the bachat land

amongst the respondent-proprietors in the same proportion in

which they had contributed their land during the consolidation

proceedings.
III. CONSIDERATIONS
(a)   Consideration of the Constitution Bench Judgments
      of this Court in
Ranjit Singh
(supra),
Ajit Singh
(supra) and Bhagat Ram (supra)
24. For considering the controversy, a reference to three

Constitution Bench Judgments of this Court would be
14 Civil Appeal Nos. 5709-5714 of 2001
18
necessary.
25. The first one is in the case of
Ranjit Singh
(supra). In the

said case, the Constitution Bench of this Court was concerned

with the consolidation proceedings in which portions of land

from those commonly owned by the appellants therein as

proprietors, had been reserved for the village Panchayat and

handed over to it for diverse purposes; whereas, other portions

had been reserved either for non-proprietors or for the common

purposes of the villages. In the said case, in the village Virk

Kalan, 270 kanals and 13 marlas had been given to the village

Panchayat for management and realization of income, even

though the ownership was still shown in village papers as

‘shamilat deh’ in the names of the proprietors; 10 kanals and

3 marlas had been reserved for abadi to be distributed among

persons entitled thereto, and 3 kanals and 7 marlas had been

reserved for manure pits. Similarly, in village Sewana, certain

lands were set apart for the village Panchayat for extension of

the abadi and to enable grants of certain land to be made to

each family of non-proprietors and certain lands had been

reserved for a primary school and some more for a phirni.

Similarly, in village Mehnd, land had been reserved for the
19
village Panchayat, a school, tanning ground, hospital,

cremation ground and for non-proprietors.       The proprietors

were not paid compensation for the lands and as such, taking

away and allotment of the lands was the subject matter of

challenge in those appeals in the said case.
26. The appeals before this Court were heard and closed for

judgment on 27th April 1964. The judgment had to be

postponed till after the vacation. However, before the Court

could reassemble after the vacation on 20th July 1964, the
Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964
received the

assent of the President i.e. on 20th June, 1964. Vide the said

Amendment, a new sub-clause (a) in clause (2) of
Article 31-A
was substituted retrospectively and added a proviso to clause

(1). The appeals were set down to be mentioned on July 20/23,

1964, and counsel were asked if, in view of the amendment,

they wished to say anything.        However, neither of parties

wished to argue. The appeals were thus decided on the old

arguments, though it was clear to the Court that the

amendment of
Article 31-A
, which had a far-reaching effect,

and it must have affected one or other of the parties. The

Constitution Bench upheld the judgment of the High Court
20
which had held that the transfer of ‘shamilat deh’ owned by the

proprietors to the village Panchayat for the purposes of

management and the conferral of proprietary rights on non-

proprietors in respect of lands in abadi deh was not ultra vires

of
Article 31
inasmuch as, no compensation was payable.
27. It must be noted that the judgment of the High Court was

rendered by interpreting
Article 31-A
as it existed prior to the
Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964
. This Court

though called upon the parties to address the Court on the

effect of the
Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964
,

no arguments were advanced.         As such, in
Ranjit Singh
(supra), this Court did not have the occasion to consider the

effect of the
Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964
by which the second proviso was added to
Article 31-A
of the

Constitution of India.
In that view of the matter, the judgment

of the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Ranjit Singh
(supra)

will not have a bearing on the present matter.
28.
In the case of
Ajit Singh
(supra), again the challenge was

to the scheme made under the provisions of the Consolidation

Act of 1948. One of the grounds raised before the High Court
21
as well as this Court was that the compensation must be paid

to the appellant for the land reserved in the scheme for various

purposes in accordance with the second proviso to
Article 31-

A(1)
inserted by the
Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment)

Act, 1964
.
29. It will be relevant to refer to the following paragraphs in
Ajit Singh
(supra):
“6. Coming now to the third point raised by Mr
     Iyenger, we may first mention that it was held by this
     Court in
Ranjit Singh v. State of Punjab
[(1965) 1 SCR
     82] that the Act was protected from challenge by
     Article 31-A. It is necessary to set out the relevant
     constitutional provisions. The relevant portion of
Article 31-A
reads as under:
“31-A. (1) Notwithstanding anything
             contained in
Article 13
, no law providing
             for—
(a) the acquisition by the State of any
               estate or of any rights therein or the
               extinguishment or modification of
               any such rights……….
shall be deemed to be void on the
               ground that it is inconsistent with, or
               takes away or abridges any of the
               rights conferred by
Article 14
,
Article
               19
or
Article 31:
Provided that * * *
                  Provided further that where any
               law makes any provision for the
               acquisition by the State of any estate
               and where any land comprised
               therein is held by a person under his
22
personal cultivation, it shall not be
  lawful for the State to acquire any
  portion of such land as is within the
  ceiling limit applicable to him under
  any law for the time being in force or
  any building or structure standing
  thereon or appurtenant thereto,
  unless the law relating to the
  acquisition of such land, building or
  structure, provides for payment of
  compensation at a rate which shall
  not be less than the market value
  thereof.
(2)(b) the expression ‘rights’ in
  relation to an estate shall include any
  rights vesting in a proprietor, sub-
proprietor, under-proprietor, tenure-
  holder, raiyat, under-raiyat or other
  intermediary and any rights or
  privileges in respect of land revenue.”
    Relevant portions of
Articles 19
and
31
may also be set out because
  the learned counsel have laid stress
  on the language employed therein.
“19. (1) All citizens shall have the right—
(f) to acquire, hold and dispose of
  property.
31. (1) No person shall be deprived of
  his property save by authority of law.
(2) No property shall be compulsorily
  acquired or requisitioned save for a
  public purpose and save by authority
  of a law which provides for
  compensation for the property so
  acquired or requisitioned and either
  fixes    the    amount      of   the
  compensation or specifies the
  principles on which, and the manner
  in which, the compensation is to be
23
determined and given; and no such
        law shall be called in question in any
        court on the ground that the
        compensation provided by that law is
        not adequate.
(2-A) Where a law does not provide
        for the transfer of the ownership or
        right to possession of any property to
        the State or to a corporation owned
        or controlled by the State, it shall not
        be deemed to provide for the
        compulsory         acquisition        or
        requisitioning       of       property,
        notwithstanding that it deprives any
        person of his property.”
7. It would be noticed that
Article 31-A(1)(a)
mentions four categories; first acquisition by the
State of an estate; second, acquisition by the State of
rights in an estate; third, the extinguishment of
rights in an estate, and, fourthly, the modification of
rights in an estate. These four categories are
mentioned separately and are different. In the first
two categories the State “acquires” either an estate or
rights in an estate. In other words, there is a
transference of an estate or the rights in an estate to
the State. When there is a transference of an estate
to the State, it could be said that all the rights of the
holder of the estate have been extinguished. But if
the result in the case of the extinguishment is the
transference of all the rights in an estate to the State,
it would properly fall within the expression
“acquisition by the State of an estate”. Similarly, in
the case of an acquisition by the State of a right in an
estate it could also be said that the rights of the
owner have been modified since one of the rights of
the owner has been acquired.
8. It seems to us that there is this essential difference
between “acquisition by the State” on the one hand
and “modification or extinguishment of rights” on the
other that in the first case the beneficiary is the State
24
while in the latter case the beneficiary of the
modification or the extinguishment is not the State.
For example, suppose the State is the landlord of an
estate and there is a lease of that property, and a law
provides for the extinguishment of leases held in an
estate. In one sense it would be an extinguishment of
the rights of a lessee, but it would properly fall under
the category of acquisition by the State because the
beneficiary of the extinguishment would be the State.
9. Coming now to the second proviso to
Article 31-A
,
it would be noticed that only one category is
mentioned in the proviso, the category being
“acquisition by the State of an estate”. It means that
the law must make a provision for the acquisition by
the State of an estate. But what is the true meaning
of the expression “acquisition by the State of an
estate”. In the context of
Article 31-A
, the expression
“acquisition by the State of an estate” in the second
proviso to
Article 31-A(1)
must have the same
meaning as it has in clause (1)(a) to Article 31-A. It is
urged on behalf of the respondents before us that the
expression “acquisition by the State of any estate” in
Article 31-A(1)(a)
has the same meaning as it has in
Article 31(2-A).
In other words, it is urged that the
expression “acquisition by the State of any estate”
means transfer of the ownership or right to
possession of an estate to the State. Mr. Iyengar on
the other hand urges that the expression “acquisition
by the State” has a very wide meaning and it would
bear the same meaning as was given by this Court
in
State of West Bengal v. Subodh Gopal Bose
[(
1964)
SCR       587]      , Dwarkadas        Shrinivas       of
Bombay v. Sholapur Spinning & Weaving Co.
Ltd.
[(1953) 2 SCC 791 : (1954) SCR 674] Saghir
Ahmad v. State of U.P. [(1955) 1 SCR 707]
and Bombay Dyeing and Manufacturing Co.
Ltd. v. State of Bombay
[(1958) SCR 1122] . In these
cases this Court had given a wide meaning to the
word “acquisition”.
In
Dwarkadas Shrinivas of
Bombay v. Sholapur Spinning & Weaving Co.
25
Ltd.
[(1953) 2 SCC 791 : (1954) SCR 674] Mahajan,
J., observed at p. 704 as follows:
“The word ‘acquisition’ has quite a wide
    concept, meaning the procuring of
    property or the taking of it permanently or
    temporarily. It does not necessarily imply
    the acquisition of legal title by the State in
    the property taken possession of.”
    He further observed at p. 705:
“I prefer to follow the view of the
       majority of the Court, because it
       seems to me that it is more in
       consonance with juridical principle
       that possession after all is nine-
       tenths of ownership, and once
       possession is taken away, practically
       everything is taken away, and that in
       construing the Constitution it is the
       substance and the practical result of
       the act of the State that should be
       considered rather than its purely
       legal aspect.”
    Bose, J., observed at p. 734 as follows:
“In my opinion, the possession and
       acquisition referred to in clause (2)
       mean the sort of ‘possession’ and
       ‘acquisition’   that   amounts      to
       ‘deprivation’ within the meaning of
       clause (1). No hard and fast rule can
       be laid down. Each case must
       depend on its own facts. But if there
       is substantial deprivation, then
       clause (2) is, in my judgment,
       attracted. By substantial deprivation
       I mean the sort of deprivation that
       substantially robs a man of those
       attributes of enjoyment which
       normally accompany rights to, or an
       interest in, property. The form is
26
unessential. It is the substance that
        we must seek.”
10. Let us now see whether the other part of the
second proviso throws any light on this question. It
would be noticed that it refers to ceiling limits. It is
well known that under various laws dealing with land
reforms, no person apart from certain exceptions can
hold land beyond a ceiling fixed under the law.
Secondly, the proviso says that not only the land
exempted from acquisition should be within the
ceiling limit but it also must be under personal
cultivation. The underlying idea of this proviso seems
to be that a person who is cultivating land personally,
which is his source of livelihood, should not be
deprived of that land under any law protected by
Article 31-A
unless at least compensation at the
market rate is given. In various States most of the
persons have already been deprived of land beyond
the ceiling limit on compensation which was less
than the market value. It seems to us that in the light
of all the considerations mentioned above the words
“acquisition by the State” in the second proviso do
not have a technical meaning, as contended by the
learned counsel for the respondent. If the State has
in substance acquired all the rights in the land for its
own purposes, even if the title remains with the
owner, it cannot be said that it is not acquisition
within the second proviso to
Article 31-A.
11. But the question still remains whether even if a
wider meaning is given to the word “acquisition” what
has been done by the scheme and the Act is
acquisition or not within the meaning of the second
proviso. In other words, does the scheme only modify
rights or does it amount to acquisition of land? The
scheme is not part of the record, but it appears that
89B-18B-11B (Pukhta) of land was owned by the
Gram Panchayat prior to consolidation, which was
used for common purposes. Some further area was
reserved for common purposes as khals, paths,
khurrahs, panchayat ghars and schools etc. after
27
applying cut upon the rightholders on pro-rata basis.
It does not appear that any land, apart from what was
         already owned by the Panchayat, was reserved for
         providing income to the Panchayat. Therefore, in this
         case we are not concerned with the validity of
         acquisition for such a purpose.”
30. A perusal of the aforesaid paragraphs would reveal that

in paragraph 6, this Court reproduced the provisions of
Article

31-A
, as amended.
31. In paragraph 7, this Court carved out 4 categories

covered by
Article 31-A
as under:
(i)      acquisition by the State of an estate;
(ii)     acquisition by the State of rights in an estate;
(iii)    the extinguishment of rights in an estate; and
(iv)     the modification of rights in an estate.
32. Analysing the said provision, the Constitution Bench held

that, in the first two categories, the State “acquires” either an

estate or rights in an estate i.e., there is a transference of an

estate or the rights in an estate to the State. The Constitution

Bench held that when there is a transference of an estate to

the State, it could be said that all the rights of the holder of the

estate have been extinguished. It further held that, if the result
28
in the case of the extinguishment is the transference of all the

rights in an estate to the State, it would properly fall within the

expression “acquisition by the State of an estate”. It further

held that, in the case of an acquisition by the State of a right

in an estate it could also be said that the rights of the owner

have been modified since one of the rights of the owner has

been acquired.
33. In paragraph 8, the Constitution Bench carved out the

difference between “acquisition by the State” on the one hand

and “modification or extinguishment of rights” on the other. It

held that in the first case, the beneficiary is the State while in

the latter case the beneficiary of the modification or the

extinguishment is not the State.
34. In paragraph 9, this Court recorded that in the second

proviso to
Article 31-A
, only one category is mentioned i.e.,

“acquisition by the State of an estate”. It observed that the law

must make a provision for the acquisition by the State of an

estate. It went on to analyze the true meaning of the expression

“acquisition by the State of an estate”. It was sought to be

urged before this Court, that the expression “acquisition by the
29
State” has a very wide meaning and it would bear the same

meaning as was given by this Court in a catena of judgments.
35. In paragraph 10, this Court recorded that the second

proviso to
Article 31-A
refers to ceiling limits. It was further

observed that the proviso provides that, not only the land

exempted from acquisition should be within the ceiling limit

but it also must be under personal cultivation. The Court held

that the underlying idea of this proviso was that a person who

is cultivating land personally, which is his source of livelihood,

should not be deprived of that land under any law protected by
Article 31-A
unless at least compensation at the market rate is

given. The Court held that the words “acquisition by the State”

in the second proviso cannot be given a technical meaning, as

was contended on behalf of the State. It held that, if the State

has in substance acquired all the rights in the land for its own

purposes, even if the title remains with the owner, it cannot be

said that it is not acquisition within the second proviso to
Article 31-A.
36. In paragraph 11, this Court recorded the facts in the said

case. It recorded that some of the lands were owned by the
30
Gram Panchayat prior to consolidation, which was used for

common purposes.       Some further area was reserved for

common purposes as khals, paths, khurrahs, panchayat ghars

and schools etc., after applying a cut upon the rightholders on

pro-rata basis. It observed that apart from what was already

owned by the Panchayat, no other land was reserved for

providing income to the Panchayat. As such, the Court was

not concerned with the validity of acquisition for such a

purpose.
37. It will also be relevant to refer to the following paragraphs

of
the said judgment
in
Ajit Singh
(supra):
“12. Rule 16 (ii) of the Punjab Holdings
     (Consolidation and Prevention of Fragmentation)
     Rules, 1949, provides:
“In an estate or estates where during
           consolidation      proceedings   there   is
           no shamlat Deh land or such land is
           considered inadequate, land shall be
           reserved for the Village panchayat and for
           other common purposes, under
Section
           18(c)
of the Act, out of the common pool of
           the village at a scale prescribed by the
           Government       from     time   to   time.
Proprietary rights in respect of land so
           reserved (except the area reserved for the
           extension of abadi of proprietors and non-
           proprietors) shall vest in the proprietary
           body of estate or estates concerned and it
           shall be entered in the column of
31
ownership of record of rights as (Jumla
     Malkan wa Digar Haqdaran Arazi Hasab
     Rasad Raqba). The management of such
     land shall be done by the Panchayat of the
     estate or estates concerned on behalf of
     the village proprietary body and the
     panchayat shall have the right to utilise
     the income derived from the land so
     reserved for the common needs and
     benefits of the estate or estates
     concerned.”
     It will be noticed that the title still vests in
     the property body (sic), the management
     of the land is done on behalf of the
     proprietary body, and the land is used for
     the common needs and benefits of the
     estate or estates concerned. In other
     words a fraction of each proprietor's land
     is taken and formed into a common pool
     so that the whole may be used for the
     common needs and benefits of the estate,
     mentioned       above.    The      proprietors
     naturally would also share in the benefits
     along with others.
13.
In
Attar Singh v. State of U.P.
[(1959) Supp 1 SCR
928 at p 938] Wanchoo J., speaking for the Court,
said this of the similar proviso in a similar Act,
namely, the
U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act (U.P.
Act
5 of 1954) as amended by the U.P. Act 16 of 1957:
“Thus the land which is taken over is a
     small bit, which sold by itself would
     hardly fetch anything. These small bits of
     land    are   collected    from    various
     tenureholders and consolidated in one
     place and added to the land which might
     be lying vacant so that it may be used for
     the purposes of Section 14(1)(ee). A
     compact area is thus created and it is
     used for the purposes of the tenure-
     holders themselves and other villagers.
32
Form CH-21 framed under Rule 41(a)
     shows the purposes to which this land
     would be applied, namely, (1) plantation
     of trees, (2) pasture land, (3) manure pits,
     (4) threshing floor, (5) cremation ground,
     (6) graveyards, (7) primary or other school,
     (8) playground, (9) Panchayatghar, and
     (10) such other objects. These small bits
     of land thus acquired from tenure-holders
     are consolidated and used for these
     purposes, which are directly for the
     benefit of the tenure-holders. They are
     deprived of a small bit and in place of it
     they are given advantages in a much
     larger area of land made up of these small
     bits and also of vacant land.”
     In other words, a proprietor gets
     advantages which he could never have got
     apart from the scheme. For example, if he
     wanted a threshing floor, a manure pit,
     land for pasture, khal etc. he would not
     have been able to have them on the
     fraction of his land reserved for common
     purposes.
14. Does such taking away of property then amount
to acquisition by the State of any land? Who is the
real beneficiary? Is it the Panchayat? It is clear that
the title remains in the proprietary body and in the
revenue records the land would be shown as
belonging to “all the owners and other right holders
in proportion to their areas”. The Panchayat will
manage it on behalf of the proprietors and use it for
common purposes; it cannot use it for any other
purpose. The proprietors enjoy the benefits derived
from the use of land for common purposes. It is true
that the non-proprietors also derive benefit but their
satisfaction and advancement enures in the end to
the advantage of the proprietors in the form of a more
efficient agricultural community. The Panchayat as
such does not enjoy any benefit. On the facts of this
33
case it seems to us that the beneficiary of the
     modification of rights is not the State, and therefore
     there is no acquisition by the State within the second
     proviso.
15. In the context of the 2nd proviso, which is trying
     to preserve the rights of a person holding land under
     his personal cultivation, it is impossible to conceive
     that such adjustment of the rights of persons holding
     land under their personal cultivation in the interest
     of village economy was regarded as something to be
     compensated for in cash.”
38. In paragraph 12, after reproducing Rule 16(ii) of the

Consolidation Rules, this Court observed that the title still

vests in the proprietary body. However, the management of

the land is done on behalf of the proprietary body, and the land

is used for the common needs and benefits of the estate or

estates concerned. It further held that a fraction of each

proprietor's land is taken and formed into a common pool so

that the whole area may be used for the common needs and

benefits of the estate, mentioned above. It further held that the

proprietors naturally would also share in the benefits along

with others.
39. In paragraph 14, this Court held that it was clear that the

title remains in the proprietary body and in the revenue

records the land would be shown as belonging to “all the
34
owners and other right holders in proportion to their areas”.

This Court held that the Panchayat would manage it on behalf

of the proprietors and use it for common purposes and that it

cannot use it for any other purpose. This Court held that the

proprietors also enjoy the benefits derived from the use of land

for common purposes. It observed that the non-proprietors

also derive benefit but their satisfaction and advancement

enures in the end to the advantage of the proprietors in the

form of a more efficient agricultural community. The

Panchayat as such does not enjoy any benefit. This Court held,

in light of the facts of the said case, that the beneficiary of the

modification of rights was not the State, and therefore there

was no acquisition by the State within the meaning of the

second proviso.
40. In paragraph 15, this Court, referring to second proviso,

held that it is impossible to conceive that such adjustment of

the rights of persons holding land under their personal

cultivation in the interest of village economy was regarded as

something to be compensated for in cash.
35
41. It can thus be seen that in
Ajit Singh
(supra), this Court

was considering the portion of lands which was taken from the

proprietors; formed into a common pool and used for common

needs and benefits of the estate or estates concerned. It was

held that the said land could not be used for any other

purpose. It has further affirmed that the proprietors also enjoy

the benefits derived from the use of land for common purposes.
42. It is further pertinent to note that in
Ajit Singh
(supra),

this Court held that the words “acquisition by the State” in the

second proviso cannot be given a technical meaning. It has

been held that if the State has in substance acquired all the

rights in the land for its own purposes, even if the title remains

with the owner, it cannot be said that it is not acquisition

within the ambit of the second proviso to
Article 31-A.
43. Justice M. Hidayatullah (as his Lordship then was) in his

minority judgment disagreed with the majority view. He held

that when the State acquires almost the entire bundle of rights,

it is acquisition within the meaning of the second proviso and

compensation at market rates must be given.
36
44. The third judgment of the Constitution Bench of this

Court is in the case of Bhagat Ram (supra), which would be

the most relevant for the present purpose.
45. It will be relevant to note that judgments in both
Ajit

Singh
(supra) and Bhagat Ram (supra) were delivered on the

very same day.
46. In the said case i.e. Bhagat Ram (supra), the Court was

considering the question, as to whether the reservation of land

for income of the Panchayat is acquisition of land by the State

within the ambit of the second proviso to
Article 31-A?
47. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of

the Constitution Bench of this Court in Bhagat Ram (supra)

in the judgment delivered by S.M. Sikri, J (as his Lordship then

was):
“2. The first question that arises is whether the
        scheme insofar as it makes reservations of land for
        income of the Panchayat is hit by the second proviso
        to Article 31-A. The scheme reserves lands for phirni,
        paths, agricultural paths, manure pits, cremation
        grounds, etc., and also reserves an area of 100
        kanals 2 marlas (standard kanals) for income of the
        Panchayat. We have already held in
Ajit Singh
case [(1967) 2 SCR 143] that acquisition for the
        common purposes such as phirnis, paths, etc., is not
        acquisition by the State within the second proviso to
        Article 31-A. But this does not dispose of the
37
question whether the reservation of land for income
of the Panchayat is acquisition of land by the state
within the second proviso to Article 31-A. We held
in
that case
that there was this essential difference
between “acquisition by the State” on the one hand
and “modification or extinguishment of rights” on the
other that in the first case the beneficiary is the State
while in the latter case the beneficiary of the
modification or the extinguishment is not the State.
Here it seems to us that the beneficiary is the
Panchayat which falls within the definition of the
word “State” under
Article 12
of the Constitution. The
income derived by the Panchayat is in no way
different from its any other income. It is true that
Section 2(bb)
of the East Punjab Holdings
(Consolidation and Prevention of Fragmentation) Act,
1948, defines “common purpose” to include the
following purposes:
“… providing income for the Panchayat of
     the village concerned for the benefit of the
     village community.”
Therefore, the income can only be used for the benefit
of the village community. But so is any other income
of the Panchayat of a village to be used. The income
is the income of the Panchayat and it would defeat
the whole object of the second proviso if we were to
give any other construction. The Consolidation
Officer could easily defeat the object of the second
proviso to
Article 31-A
by reserving for the income of
the Panchayat a major portion of the land belonging
to a person holding land within the ceiling limit.
Therefore, in our opinion, the reservation of 100
kanals 2 marlas for the income of the Panchayat in
the scheme is contrary to the second proviso and the
scheme must be modified by the competent authority
accordingly.”
38
48. It can thus be seen that, this Court held that there was

an essential difference between “acquisition by the State” on

the one hand and “modification or extinguishment of rights”

on the other hand. It was held that in the first case, the

beneficiary was the State while in the latter case, the

beneficiary of the modification or the extinguishment was not

the State. This Court held that since the Panchayat would fall

within the definition of the word “State” under
Article 12
of the

Constitution, if the acquisition is for the purposes of providing

income to the Panchayat, it would defeat the whole object of

the second proviso. This Court held that the Consolidation

Officer could easily defeat the object of the second proviso to
Article 31-A
by reserving for the income of the Panchayat a

major portion of the land belonging to a person holding land

within the ceiling limit.
49. The second argument which was advanced before this

Court in Bhagat Ram (supra) was that acquisition had already

taken place before the
Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment)

Act, 1964
came into force and therefore the scheme was not

hit by the second proviso to Article 31-A. It was sought to be

argued that the requirements as contemplated under Sections
39
23, 24 and 21(2) of the Consolidation Act of 1948 were already

complete and as such, the acquisition had already taken place

before the
Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964
.
50. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of

this Court, in the majority judgment in Bhagat Ram (supra)

while rejecting the aforesaid submissions:
“4. It is clear from this affidavit that possession has
     not been transferred in pursuance of the repartition.
     The learned Counsel for the petitioners relies on this
     fact and says that in view of Section 23-A and
Section
     24
the “acquisition” does not take place till all the
     persons entitled to possession of holdings under the
     Act have entered into possession of the holdings.
Sections 23-A and
24
read as follows:
“23-A. As soon as a scheme comes into
           force, the management and control of all
           lands assigned or reserved for common
           purposes of the village under Section 18,
           shall vest in the Panchayat of that village
           which shall also be entitled to appropriate
           the income accruing therefrom for the
           benefit of the village community, and the
           rights and interest of the owners of such
           lands    shall     stand   modified    and
           extinguished accordingly.
24. (1) As soon as the persons entitled to
           possession of holdings under this Act
           have entered into possession of the
           holdings respectively allotted to them, the
           scheme shall be deemed to have come into
           force and the possession of the allottees
           affected by the scheme of consolidation,
           or, as the case may be, by repartition,
           shall remain undisturbed until a fresh
40
scheme is brought into force or a change
          is ordered in pursuance of provisions of
          sub-section (2), (3) and (4) of
Section 21
or
          an order passed under
Section 36
or 42 of
          this Act.
(2) A Consolidation Officer shall be
          competent to exercise all or any of the
          powers of a Revenue Officer under the
Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887
(Act 17 of
          1887), for purposes of compliance with
          the provisions of sub-section (1).”
5. It seems to us clear from these provisions that till
     possession has changed under
Section 24
, the
     management and control does not vest in the
     Panchayat under Section 23-A. Not only does the
     management and control not vest but the rights of
     the holders are not modified or extinguished till
     persons have changed possession and entered into
     the possession of the holdings allotted to them under
     the scheme. Mr Gossain, the learned Counsel for the
     State, tried to meet this point by urging that by virtue
     of repartition under
Section 21
, the rights to
     possession of the new holdings were finalised and
     could be enforced. This may be so; but this cannot
     be equivalent to “acquisition” within the second
     proviso to
Article 31-A.
6. In the result we hold that the scheme is hit by the
     second proviso to
Article 31
A insofar as it reserves
     100 kanals 2 marlas for the income of the Panchayat.
     We direct the State to modify the scheme to bring it
     into accord with the second proviso as interpreted by
     us, proceed according to law. There would be an
     order as to costs.”
51. It can thus clearly be seen that the Constitution Bench of

this Court in Bhagat Ram (supra) held that, upon reading of

Sections 23-A and 24 of the Consolidation Act of 1948 it was
41
clear that, till possession has changed under
Section 24
, the

management and control does not vest in the Panchayat under

Section 23-A of the Consolidation Act of 1948. It further held that

not only does the management and control not vest but the rights

of the holders are not modified or extinguished till persons have

changed possession and entered into the possession of the

holdings allotted to them under the scheme. Though the counsel

for the State tried to urge that, by virtue of repartition under
Section 21
, the rights to possession of the new holdings were

finalized and could be enforced, this Court held that this cannot

be equivalent to “acquisition” within the second proviso to
Article

31-A
of the Constitution of India.
52. The Full Bench of the High Court in the impugned

judgment and final order attempted to draw a distinction

between the land reserved for common purposes under Section

18(c) of the Consolidation Act of 1948 which might become part

and parcel of a Scheme framed under Section 14, for the areas

reserved for common purposes, though they have actually not

been put to any common use and may be put to common use

in a later point of time on one hand and the lands which might

have been contributed by the proprietors on pro-rata basis but
42
have not been reserved or earmarked for common purposes in

the Scheme.    It will be relevant to refer to the following

observations of the Full Bench of the High Court:
“The land reserved for common purposes under
          Section 18(c), which might become part and
          parcel of a scheme framed under Section 14, for
          the areas reserved for common purposes, vests
          with the Government or Gram Panchayat, as
          the case may be, and the proprietors are left
          with no right or interest in such lands meant for
          common purposes under the scheme. There is
          nothing at all mentioned either in the Act or the
          rules or the scheme, that came to be framed,
          that the proprietors will lose right only with
          regard to land which was actually put to any use
          and not the land which may be put to common
          use later in point of time. In none of the sections
          or Rules, which have been referred to by us in
          the earlier part of scheme envisages only such
          lands which have been utilized. That apart, in
          all the relevant sections and the rules, words
          mentioned are ‘reserved or assigned’. Reference
          in this connection may be made to sub-section
          (3) of Section 18 and Section 23-A.             The
          provisions of the statute, as referred to above,
          would, thus, further fortify that reference is to
          land reserved or assigned for common use,
          whether utilized or not.
***    ***   ***
          The lands which, however, might have been
          contributed by the proprietors on pro-rata
          basis, but have not been reserved or earmarked
          for common purposes in a scheme, known as
          Bachat land, it is equally true, would not vest
          either with the State or the Gram Panchayat
          and instead continue to be owned by the
          proprietors of the village in the same proportion
43
in which they contribute the land owned by
them. The Bachat land, which is not used for
common purposes under the scheme, in view of
provisions contained in
Section 22
of the Act of
1948, is recorded as Jumla Mustarka Malkan
Wa Digar Haqdaran Hasab Rasad Arazi Khewat
but the significant differences is that in the
column of ownership proprietors are shown in
possession in contrast to the land which vests
with the Gram Panchayat which is shown as
being used for some or the other common
purposes as per the scheme.
We might have gone into this issue in all
its details but in as much as the point in issue
is not res-integra and in fact stands clinched by
string of judicial pronouncements of this Court
as well as Hon’ble Supreme Court, there is no
necessity at all to interpret the provisions of the
Act and the rules any further on this issue.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Bhagat
Ram and ors. Vs. State of Punjab and ors. AIR
1967 Supreme Court 927, dealt with
reservation of certain area in the consolidation
scheme for income of the Panchayat. Brief facts
of the case aforesaid would reveal that a scheme
made in respect of consolidation of village
Dolike Sunderpur was questioned on the
ground that in as much as it makes reservation
of land for income of the Gram Panchayat, it is
hit by second proviso to
Article 31-A
of the
Constitution of India. The scheme in question
reserved lands for phirni, paths, agricultural
paths, manure pits, cremation grounds etc. and
also reserved an area of 100 kanals 2 marlas
(standard kanals) for income of the Panchayat.
It was held as under:
“The income derived by the Panchayat is in no
way different from its any other income. It is
true that
Section 2(bb)
of the East Punjab
Holdings (Consolidation and Prevention of
44
Fragmentation) Act, 1948, defines “common
purpose” to include the following purposes:
“… providing income for the
     Panchayat of the village concerned
     for the benefit of the village
     community.”


Therefore, the income can only be used for the
benefit of the village community. But so is any
other income of the Panchayat of a village to be
used. The income is the income of the
Panchayat and it would defeat the whole object
of the second proviso if we were to give any other
construction. The Consolidation Officer could
easily defeat the object of the second proviso to
Article 31-A
by reserving for the income of the
Panchayat a major portion of the land belonging
to a person holding land within the ceiling limit.
Therefore, in our opinion, the reservation of 100
kanals 2 marlas for the income of the Panchayat
in the scheme is contrary to the second proviso
and the scheme must be modified by the
competent authority accordingly.”
      The ratio of the judgment aforesaid would
clearly suggest that it is the land reserved for
common purposes under the scheme which
would be saved, which, otherwise, would be hit
by second proviso to
Article 31-A
of the
Constitution of India. Surely, if the land, which
has not been reserved for common purposes
under the scheme and is Bachat or surplus
land, i.e., the one which is still left out after
providing the land in scheme for common
purposes, if it is to vest with the State or Gram
Panchayat, the same would be nothing but
compulsory acquisition within the ceiling limit
of an individual without payment of
compensation and would offend second proviso
to
Article 31-A
of the Constitution of India.”
45
53. We have therefore no hesitation in holding that no error

could be noticed in the impugned judgment and final order of

the Full Bench of the High Court to the extent that it holds that

the lands which have not been earmarked for any specific

purpose do not vest in the Gram Panchayat or the State.
(b)   Consideration of the judgment of the Full Bench of
      the High Court in the impugned judgment and final
      order referring its earlier judgment in
Gurjant Singh
(supra) and several other judgments.
54. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of

the Full Bench of the High Court in the impugned judgment

and final order:
“Division Bench of this Court, in which one of us
      (V.K. Bali, J.) was a member, after referring to case
      law on the subject from 1967 to 1997 in
Bhagat Ram
      vs. State of Punjab
, (
1967) 69, PLR, 287, Des Raj vs.
      Gram
sabha of Village Ladhot, 1981 PLJ, 300,
      Chhajju Ram vs. The Joint Director, Panchayats,
      (1986-1) 89, PLR, 586, Gram Panchayat, Gunia Majri
      vs. Director Consolidation of Holdings, (1991-1) 99
      PLR, 342, Gram Panchayat Sahara (formerly Dhuma)
      vs. Baldev Singh, 1977
PLJ, 276, Baj Singh vs. State
      of Punjab
(
1992-1) 101 RLR, 10, Kala Singh vs.
      Commissioner
, Hisar Division, 1984 PLJ, 169,
      Joginder Singh vs. The Director Consolidation of
      Holdings (1997-2) 116 PLR 116, Bhagwan Singh vs.
      The Director Consolidation of Holdings, Punjab,
      (
1997-2) 116 PLR, 472 and Gram Panchayat, Village
      Bhedpura vs. The Additional Director, Consolidation
,
      (1997-1) 115 PLR, 391, held that the Bachat land,
46
i.e., land which remains unutilized after utilizing the
land for the common purposes so provided under the
consolidation scheme vests with the proprietors and
not with the Gram Panchayat”. It was further held
that “the unutilized land after utilizing the land
earmarked for the common purposes, has to be
redistributed amongst the proprietors according to
the share in which they had contributed the land
belonging to them for common purposes”. There is
no need to give facts of the judicial precedents relied
upon in Gurjant Singh’s case (supra) as the same
stand mentioned already therein and reiteration
thereof would necessarily burden this judgment.
The decision of Division Bench of this Court in
Gurjant Singh’s case (supra) was tested, at the
instance of the State of Punjab, in Civil Appeal No.
5709-5714 of 2001. Only, the general directions
given in the judgment recorded in Gurjant Singh’s
case (supra) for distribution of land to the proprietors
were set aside and that too on the concession of
learned counsel, who represented the Respondents
in the case aforesaid. Order passed by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court on August 27, 2001, reads thus:-
“Leave granted.
Mr. Harsh N. Salve, learned Solicitor
     General, submitted that the State of
     Punjab takes objection only in regard to
     the following observations made in the
     impugned judgment:-
“This exercise, it appears, has not
        been done throughout the State of
        Punjab and Haryana and villages
        forming part of Union Territory,
        Chandigarh, even though there is a
        specific provision for doing that.
This    exercise     be     done   as
        expeditiously    as    possible   and
        preferably    within    six    months
        proceedings for repartition must
47
commence. Liberty to apply in the
event of non-compliance of directions
             referred to above.”
          Learned counsel for the Respondent
          submits that they had no objection in
          deleting the aforesaid portions from the
          impugned judgment.      We allow these
          appeals to be extent of deleting of the
          above said passage from the impugned
          judgment.
These    appeals      are     disposed     of
          accordingly.”
55. It is thus clear that the Full Bench of the High Court has

referred to the judgment of the Division Bench of the said Court

in the case of
Gurjant Singh
(supra).
56. It is pertinent to note that in the case of
Gurjant Singh
(supra), the Division Bench of the High Court had noted a

series of judgments delivered by the said High Court relying on

the law
laid down by
the Constitution Bench of this Court in

Bhagat Ram (supra). All these decisions had held that the

land which remains unutilized after utilizing the land for the

common purposes so provided under the consolidation scheme

vests with the proprietors and not with the Gram Panchayat.
It was further held that the unutilized land i.e., the bachat

land, left after utilizing the land earmarked for the common
48
purposes, has to be redistributed amongst the proprietors

according to the share in which they had contributed the land

belonging to them for common purposes.
57. It is to be noted that in Civil Appeal Nos. 5709-5714 of

2001, which was preferred by the State challenging the

judgment in the case of
Gurjant Singh
(supra), the State had

objected only with regard to the observations wherein the time

limit was provided for effecting redistribution of bachat land

amongst the proprietors according to their share. It would thus

be clear that the State itself did not press the appeals with

regard to the directions for redistribution of the bachat land

amongst the proprietors according to their share. It appears

that the only grievance of the State was with regard to the

directions to do it within a specified period of time.
(c)   Applicability of the doctrine of stare decisis to the
      facts of the present case.
58. The Full Bench of the High Court in the impugned

judgment and final order in the alternative held that, a

consistent view has been taken in more than 100 judgments

by the Punjab and Haryana High Court and applying the

doctrine of stare decisis, such a view cannot be upset.
49
59. The doctrine of stare decisis lays importance on stability

and predictability in the legal system and mandates that a view

consistently upheld by courts over a long period must be

followed, unless it is manifestly erroneous, unjust or

mischievous.
60.
In the case of
Maganlal Chhaganlal (P) Ltd. v.

Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay15
, this Court

observed thus:
“A view which has been accepted for a long period of
      time should not be disturbed unless the Court can
      say positively that it was wrong or unreasonable or
      that it is productive of public hardship or
      inconvenience.”
61. Similarly, in the case of
Waman Rao v. Union of India16
,

this Court observed thus:
“40. It is also true to say that for the application of
      the rule of stare decisis, it is not necessary that the
      earlier decision or decisions of longstanding should
      have considered and either accepted or rejected the
      particular argument which is advanced in the case
      on hand. Were it so, the previous decisions could
      more easily be treated as binding by applying the law
      of precedent and it will be unnecessary to take resort
      to the principle of stare decisis. It is, therefore,
      sufficient for invoking the rule of stare decisis that a
      certain decision was arrived at on a question which
      arose or was argued, no matter on what reason the
      decision rests or what is the basis of the decision. In
15 (1974) 2 SCC 402
16 AIR 1981 SC 271
50
other words, for the purpose of applying the rule of
      stare decisis, it is unnecessary to enquire or
      determine as to what was the rationale of the earlier
      decision which is said to operate as stare decisis.
Therefore, the reason why
Article 31-A
was upheld in
      the earlier decisions, if indeed it was, are not
      germane for the purpose of deciding whether this is
      a fit and proper case in which to apply that rule.”
62. We find no error in the judgment of the Full Bench of the

High Court in applying the doctrine of stare decisis to the facts

of the present case inasmuch as it followed the law which was

consistently applied in more than 100 judgments.

IV.   CONCLUSION
63. In the result we find no merit in the appeal of the State.

The same is accordingly dismissed.
64. In the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be

no order as to costs. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand

disposed of.
..............................CJI
                                                        (B.R. GAVAI)

                                ……..……..............................J
                                (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)

                                ……..……..............................J
                                      (K.V. VISWANATHAN)
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 16, 2025
51