[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Shiv Steels vs The State Of Assam on 11 September, 2025
2025 INSC 1126

                                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                     CIVIL APPEAL        NO. 4440 OF 2014



                   M/S. SHIV STEELS                                            APPELLANT(S)


                                                         VERSUS


                   THE STATE OF ASSAM & ORS.                                  RESPONDENT(S)



                                                  WITH


                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.4441 OF 2014



                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4442 OF 2014



                                                  O R D E R
1.       Since    the    issues   raised       in   all    the   captioned

                   appeals are same, the parties are also the same and the

                   challenge is also to the self same judgment and order
Signature Not Verified
passed    by     the    High   Court,    those      were   taken   up   for
Digitally signed by
CHANDRESH
Date: 2025.09.17
18:30:44 IST
Reason:
1
hearing analogously and are being disposed of by this

common order.
2.   For the sake of convenience, we take up the Civil

Appeal No. 4440 of 2014 as the lead matter.
3.   This    appeal     arises   from   the   common    judgment    and

order passed by the Gauhati High Court dated 21.09.2012

in WP(C) No. 3178 of 2011 by which the Writ Petition

filed by the appellant herein came to be dismissed by

which the Order of reassessment dated 31.3.2011 passed

under the provisions of the
Assam General Sales Tax Act,

1993
(for short, “the Act, 1993”) was set aside and the

matter was remitted to the Assessing Officer for fresh

consideration.
3.   In   the   present    case,   we   are   concerned      with   the

assessment      years    2003-2004,     2004-2005      and   2005-2006

respectively.
4.   It is the case of the appellant that the assessments

undertaken for all these years were time barred. The
2
learned counsel appearing for the appellant would argue

that the authority concerned having regard to the time

limit   prescribed    under
Section   19
of   the   Act,   1993

declared the assessments for all the assessment years to

be time barred. However, later the department obtained

the sanction of the Commissioner and invoked
Section 21
of the Act, 1993 to bring the fresh assessment within

the period of limitation.
5.   The   petitioner    being    dissatisfied    by    the    fresh

assessment challenged the same before the High Court.
6.   The High Court dismissed the writ petition holding

as under:-
“6. Learned counsel for the Revenue submits
             that the reassessment was within limitation
             under
Section 21
of the Act which provides for
             outer limit of seven years if reassessment was
             made with the sanction of the Commissioner. In
             the present case, sanction was duly granted by
             the Commissioner on 21.03.2011 and therefore,
             reassessment was within time. It was also
             submitted that quashing of earlier assessment
             as barred by limitation in absence of grant of
             sanction by the Commissioner did not debar the
             assessment being made after the sanction was
             granted. It was further submitted that as far
             as ex-parte assessment is concerned, grievance
             of the Petitioner could be considered by the
             assessing authority.
3
7. On due consideration, we are unable to find
            any merit in the first two submissions in view
            of sanction having been duly granted on
            21.03.2011 under
Section 21
of the Act. Thus,
            the assessment cannot be held to be barred by
            limitation nor quashing of earlier order debar
            fresh assessment being made in accordance with
            law after the sanction was granted. As regards
            giving of proper hearing to the Petitioner, in
            view of stand of learned counsel for the
            revenue the assessing authority can consider
            the view point of the Petitioner and then
            finalize the assessment and may not give
            effect to the ex parte assessment.
8. Accordingly, we dispose of these petitions
            with a direction that earlier ex parte
            assessment may not be acted upon and fresh
            assessment be made after giving hearing to the
            Petitioner. The Petitioner may appear before
            the Assessing Authority for the purpose on
            December 17, 2012.”
7.   In   such    circumstances,       referred      to   above,    the

appellant is here before this Court with the present

appeal.
8.   We   heard   Mr.   Manish      Goswami,   the   learned     senior

counsel   appearing     for   the    appellant    and     Mr.   Chinmoy

Pradip Sharma, the learned senior counsel appearing for

the State of Assam.
9.   The short point that falls for our consideration is

whether the High Court was right in taking the view that
4
although the    earlier assessments     for the    three years

referred to above were held to be time-barred, yet, the

revenue having obtained appropriate sanction from the

Commissioner,    the   limitation     thereafter     would   be

governed by
Section 21
of the Act, 1993.
10.
Section 19
of the Act, 1993 reads thus:-
“19. Time limit for completion of assessment
       and re-assessments.
(1) No assessment shall be made under
section 17
after the expiry of three years from the end of the
       year in respect of which of part of which the
       assessment is made or, in a case where the dealer
       has furnished a return or a revised return under
       sub-section (4) of
section 16
after the expiry of
       two years in which such, return or revised return
       is received by the Assessing Officer, whichever is
       later:
Provided that in a case falling under sub-section
       (6) of
section 17
, the assessment may be made at
       any time before the expiry of eight years from the
       end of the year in respect of which or part of
       which the assessment is made under that sub-
section.
2) No re-assessment under
section 18
shall be made
-
(a)In a case falling under clause (1) of that
       section, after the expiry of three years; and
(b)In a case falling under clause (b) of that
       section after the expiry of one year from the end
       of the year in which the notice under that section
       is served on the dealer.
(3)Notwithstanding  anything   contained  in   sub-
       section (1) or sub-section (2) an assessment, re-
       assessment or re-computation to give effect to any
       order   or  direction   in   appeal,  revision   or
5
references, may be made at any time before the
         expiry of two years from the end of the year in
         which the order in appeal, revision or reference is
         communicated to the Assessing Officer.
           Explanation. - In computing the period of
         limitation for the purposes of sub-section (1) or
         sub-section (2), the period during which the
         assessment proceeding is stayed by an order or
         injunction of any court or other authority, shall
         be excluded and such proceeding may be completed
         within one year from the end of the year in which
         the stay was vacated as if the limitation period
         had not expired.”
11.
Section 21
of the Act, 1993 reads thus:-
“21. Assessment in certain cases.
Where [***] no assessment has been made under
            any of the foregoing provisions within the time
            limits   specified    in
section    19
then,
            notwithstanding anything contained in that
            section the assessment shall be made within four
            years from the date of expiry of the limitation
            period    with   prior    sanction   from    the
            Commissioner:
Provided that the powers of the Commissioner to
            accord sanction for assessment as aforesaid
            shall not be delegated by him to any person
            appointed to assist him under sub-section (1)
            of
section 3
.”
12.   The   plain   reading    of
Section    21
of   the    Act,     1993,

referred to above, would indicate that in cases where no

assessment has been made under any of the provisions within

the    time    limits     specified        in
Section         19
,      then,

notwithstanding     anything        contained   in    that      Section     the

assessment would be permissible within four years from the
6
date of expiry of the limitation period with prior sanction

from the Commissioner.
13.    Here is a case wherein the assessments undertaken for

the three years were already held to be invalid because of

being time barred, in view of
Section 19
of the Act, referred

to above. Later, by virtue of obtaining sanction from the

Commissioner, the revenue could not have taken recourse to
Section 21
of the Act to say that the reassessment within

four    years   is    permissible     with   prior    sanction      from   the

Commissioner.
Section 21
would apply only in cases where no

assessment has been made under any of the provisions of the

Act    within   the   time   limits   specified      in
Section    19
.   The

interpretation of the two provisions of the Act at the end of

the High Court is completely incorrect.
14.    In   construing   fiscal   statutes    and    in   determining      the

liability of a subject to tax one must have regard to the

strict letter of law. If the revenue satisfies the court that

the case falls strictly within the provisions of the law, the

subject can be taxed. If, on the other hand, the case is not

covered within the four corners of the provisions of the

taxing statute, no tax can be imposed by inference or by

analogy or by trying to probe into the intentions of the
7
legislature and by considering what was the substance of the

matter.
15.   In view of the aforesaid, the present appeal, along with

the   two   connected   appeals   stands   allowed   and   the   common

judgment and order passed by the High Court is hereby set

aside.
16.   Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.
……………………………………………J.
                                                   [J.B. PARDIWALA]



                                                ……………………………………………J.
                                                    [SANDEEP MEHTA]

New Delhi
11th September, 2025
cd
8