[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Uttarakhand vs Anil on 18 September, 2025
2025 INSC 1170
                                                                                            NON-REPORTABLE


                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.736-738/2015

                   THE STATE OF UTTARAKHAND                                                  Appellant(s)

                                                            VERSUS

                   ANIL & ORS.                                                              Respondent(s)



                                                        J U D G M E N T
There is no representation on behalf of respondent Nos.1

                   and 2. On perusal of the Office Report, it is noted that

                   learned counsel, Mustaq Ahmed for respondent No.1 has since

                   passed away. There is no alternative arrangement made. As far

                   as respondent No.2 - Mohd. Imaran is concerned, there is no

                   representation on his behalf. In the circumstances, we request

                   learned counsel, Smt. Sangeeta Kumar and Smt. Manjeet Chawla

                   to       serve   as    Amicis        Curiae       for   respondent       Nos.1   and    2

                   respectively          in    these    appeals      since   they     are    appearing    on

                   behalf of the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee presently

                   representing respondent Nos.3 and 4 respectively.
2.       The State of Uttarakhand has filed these appeals assailing

                   the Common Judgment dated 02.05.2013 passed by the Division
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
RADHA SHARMA
Date: 2025.09.26
15:58:53 IST
Bench of the High Court of Uttarakhand in Criminal Appeal
Reason:
No.95/2009,       Criminal          Appeal    No.97/2009     and    Criminal     Appeal
1
No.98/2009. Those appeals were preferred by the respondent-

accused(s), Anil, Imran, Wasif and Pappu. Vide the impugned

judgment, the High Court has allowed the criminal appeals and

acquitted Anil and Imran who were in jail, and ordered them to

be released. The accused Wasim and Pappu who are on bail were

discharged    from   their   bail   bonds       and   sureties.    By     the

impugned judgment, the High Court has set aside the judgment

of conviction and sentence of life imprisonment in the case of

accused Nos.1 and 2 and sentence of one year imprisonment plus

fine in the case of accused Nos.3 and 4 imposed by judgment

dated 04.06.2009 in ST No.50/2003.
3.   We have heard learned counsel for the appellant-State of

Uttarakhand and learned senior counsel and learned counsel for

the respondent-accused(s).
4.   Learned counsel for the appellant-State made a two-fold

submission: firstly, she contended that even without going into

the merits of the case, the manner and tenor of the judgment

may be considered; that this is a judgment of a High Court

which was considering a first appeal against a judgment and

order   of   conviction   against       which    appeals   were   filed    by

respondents - accused; that in a cryptic manner, the judgment

has been delivered by the High Court acquitting the respondents

– accused. That this Court in a catena of cases has observed

that even if a judgment confirming the judgment of a Sessions
2
Court is to be rendered by the High Court, thereby dismissing

the first appeal which has been preferred under
Section 374
of

the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, “
CrPC
”), the

appeal would have to be considered based on the evidence on

record and thereafter possibly the High Court could dismiss

such an appeal. But here is a case where the High Court has

reversed the judgment of the Sessions Court inasmuch as the

judgment and sentence of life imprisonment has been set aside

and a complete acquittal given to the respondents - accused

without there being any reasons and marshalling of the facts

and   the   evidence     on   record.    In    this   regard,   she    drew   our

attention to paragraphs 2 and 3 of the impugned judgment and

submitted that the findings in paragraph 3 of the impugned

judgment are de hors any basis in the absence of there being a

discussion    of   the    facts    and       evidence   on   record.    In    the

circumstances, she submitted that if this Court is so inclined,

may consider remanding of the matter without going into the

merits of the case.
5.    The second submission of learned counsel for the appellant

is, in the event this Court is not inclined to accept the first

submission, then the appeal can be taken up on merits. Learned

counsel submitted that even on merits, the High Court could not

have given a judgment of acquittal by reversing the judgment of

the Sessions Court. She therefore submitted that the impugned
3
judgment may be set aside and the judgment of the Sessions

Court may be restored.
6.    Per contra, learned senior counsel and learned counsel

appearing for the respondents-accused who have been acquitted,

vehemently contended that there is no merit in the submissions

made by the appellant’s counsel. They drew our attention to the

fact that the High Court may have given the judgment pithily

but it is not without substance. Merely because the impugned

judgment is short and not a lengthy one cannot make it an

erroneous judgment as the reasoning is evident and there is a

basis for the findings arrived at. In the circumstances, this

Court may not accept the first contention of the appellant and

hence, they contended that they are ready to argue the matter

on merits so that this Court could confirm the judgment of

acquittal passed by the High Court.
7.    In view      of the   nature of    grievances expressed      by the

appellant-State and the tenor of the submissions advanced, it

is not necessary to narrate the facts of the case giving rise

to these appeals in detail.
8.    We observe that while hearing appeals under
Section 374(2)
of   the   CrPC,    the   High   Court   is   exercising   its   appellate

jurisdiction. There has to be an independent application of

mind in deciding the criminal appeal against conviction. It is
4
the duty of an appellate court to independently evaluate the

evidence     presented    and     determine           whether       such    evidence    is

credible. Even if the evidence is deemed reliable, the High

Court     must     further     assess        whether         the     prosecution       has

established its case beyond reasonable doubt. The High Court,

though being an appellate Court, is akin to a Trial Court and

must    be   convinced        beyond    all       reasonable         doubt     that     the

prosecution's case is substantially true and that the guilt of

the accused has been conclusively proven while considering an

appeal against conviction.
9.     As the first appellate court, the High Court is expected

to    evaluate     the   evidence       including           the    medical     evidence,

statement of the victim, statements of the witnesses and the

defence version with due care. While the judgment need not be

excessively lengthy, it must reflect a proper application of

mind to crucial evidence. Albeit the High Court does not have

the    advantage    to   examine       the       witnesses        directly,    the     High

Court    should,    as   an    appellate          Court,     re-assess       the    facts,

evidence on record and findings to arrive at a just conclusion

in     deciding    whether      the     Trial         Court        was     justified     in

convicting the accused or not. We are also cognizant of the

large pendency of cases bombarding our courts. However, the

same    cannot    come   in    the     way       of   the    Court’s       solemn     duty,

particularly, when a person's liberty is at stake.
5
10.    This    Court,   in
State   of   Uttar   Pradesh   vs.   Ambarish
,

(2021) 16 SCC 371 held that while deciding a criminal appeal

on merits, the High Court is required to apply its mind to the

entirety of the case, including the evidence on the record

before arriving at its conclusion.
In this regard, we may also

refer to the orders passed by this Court in
Shakuntala Shukla

vs. State of Uttar Pradesh
, (
2021) 20 SCC 818 and State Bank

of India vs. Ajay Kumar Sood
, (2023) 7 SCC 282.
11.    We find that the High Court ought to have considered the

evidence on record in light of the arguments advanced at the

bar and thereafter ascertained whether the Sessions Court was

justified in passing the judgment of conviction and imposing

the sentence. The same being absent in the impugned judgment,

for that sole reason, we set aside the same. In fact, the High

Court has not even referred to the case number and the trial

court from which the appeals had arisen.
12.    We therefore find that the first contention advanced by

the learned counsel for the appellant-State has to be accepted

for the reason that the respondents-accused in these appeals

respectively would also have another opportunity in the appeals

that    they     had    filed   before     the    High   Court.    In   the

circumstances, while holding that the impugned judgment of the

High Court is cryptic and de hors any reasoning in coming to

the findings in paragraph 3 of
the said judgment
, we set aside
6
the said judgment
without expressing anything on the merits of

the case.
13.   We   allow     the   appeals      filed    on     the   aforesaid    limited

ground.
14.   The matters are remanded to the High Court of Uttarakhand

at Nainital.
15.   The High Court is requested to rehear the appeals filed by

the respondents/accused respectively in these appeals by also

giving an opportunity to the appellant-State herein to make its

submission in the said appeals as well as the accused to make

this submission in the matter.
16.      We   once    again    clarify        that     we   have   not   made    any

observations on the merits of the matter.
17.        All contentions on both sides are left open to be

advanced before the High Court.
18.      Since the incident is of the year 2002 and the impugned

judgment is dated 02.05.2013 and we are remanding the matter to

the High Court, we request the High Court to dispose of the

appeal as expeditiously as possible.
19.      Since we have set aside the judgment dated 02.05.2013

passed by the High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital in Criminal

Appeal     Nos.95    of    1997;   97    of     1997    and   98   of    1997,   the
7
accused Anil and Imran shall remain on bail. However, the said

accused shall appear before the concerned Principal District

and Sessions Judge, Haldwani and execute fresh bonds for a sum

of Rs.15,000/- each with two like sureties each and subject to

other conditions imposed by the concerned Principal District

and Sessions Judge, Haldwani.
20.   In view of the above, the judgment dated 02.05.2013 passed

in Criminal Appeal No.95/2009, Criminal Appeal No.97/2009 and

Criminal   Appeal   No.98/2009   are   set   aside,   the   matters   are

remanded to the High Court of Uttarakhand by restoring the

aforesaid appeals on the file of the said High Court. The High

Court is requested to rehear these appeals in order to decide

upon the correctness or otherwise of the judgment and sentence

imposed by the Sessions Court and to dispose of the appeals in

accordance with law.
21.   The appeals are allowed and disposed of in the aforesaid

terms.
22.   It is needless to observe that the High Court shall issue

notice to all the parties and thereafter shall rehear the

appeals upon service of notice to the respondents.
8
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
………………………………………………………,J.
(B.V. NAGARATHNA)



                                      ………………………………………………………,J.
(R. MAHADEVAN)
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 18, 2025.
9
ITEM NO.124                COURT NO.5                SECTION II-B


                S U P R E M E C O U R T O F      I N D I A
                        RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

                CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 736-738/2015

THE STATE OF UTTARAKHAND                            Appellant(s)

                                 VERSUS

ANIL & ORS.                                         Respondent(s)
Date : 18-09-2025 These appeals were called on for hearing
today.
CORAM :
HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE B.V. NAGARATHNA
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE R. MAHADEVAN

For Appellant(s)    Mr. Sudarshan Singh Rawat, AOR
                    Ms. Saakshi Singh Rawat, Adv.

For Respondent(s)   Ms. Mridula Ray Bharadwaj, AOR

                    Ms. Sangeeta Kumar, AOR
                    Mrs. Vithika Garg, Adv.
Ms. Vidushi Garg, Adv.
Mr. A. Shirajudeen, Sr. Adv.
Ms. Manjeet Chawla, AOR
                    Ms. Kiran Bala Agarwal, Adv.
Ms. Shaik Soni Ahamed, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel, the Court made the following
                             O R D E R

    The appeals are allowed and disposed of in terms of the

signed non-reportable judgment which is placed on the file.

    Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
(RADHA SHARMA)                                    (DIVYA BABBAR)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                        COURT MASTER (NSH)
10