[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Govindappa Gounder @ Govindasamy vs K.Vijay Kumar And Ors on 10 September, 2025
2025 INSC 1134
                                                                                            REPORTABLE



                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                          CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 7464-7466 OF 2011


        GOVINDAPPA GOUNDER @ GOVINDASAMY (DEAD)                                      …APPELLANT(S)


                                                            VERSUS

        K.VIJAYAKUMAR AND ORS.                                                       …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                                WITH

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 7467-7469 OF 2011



                                                     J U D G M E N T
1.   Since the issues raised in both the captioned appeals are

                            same and the challenge is also to the self same judgment and

                            order passed by the High Court, those were taken up for hearing

                            analogously and are being disposed of by this common judgment

                            and order.
2.   For the sake of convenience, we treat the Civil Appeal Nos.

                            7464-7466/2011, which are notified today at Serial No.103 of the

                            cause list as the lead matter.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
POOJA SHARMA
3.   These appeals arise from the common judgment and order
   Date: 2025.09.20
   14:08:24 IST
   Reason:
passed   by   the    High   Court    of    Judicature   at   Madras   dated
1
18.11.2009,         by    which        the       Second      Appeal     filed     by    the

respondents         herein        (original            plaintiffs)       came     to     be

allowed thereby set asiding the judgment and decree dated

18.12.2002 passed by the First Appellate Court in Appeal

Suit    No.    15/2001         arising       from      the    judgment     and    decree

dated 24.11.2000 passed in Original Suit No. 491/1994 by

the     Court       of     the         II    Additional          District         Munsif,

Coimbatore.
4.     This     litigation            has    a    long       drawn     history.         The

appellants before us are the original defendants and the

respondents are the original plaintiffs.
5.     During       the    pendency          of    the       present    appeals,       the

appellant Govindappa Gounder @ Govindasamy passed away. In

such circumstances, we have permitted his legal heirs to

be brought on record. Some of the respondents have also

died.
6.     It     is    the        case     of       the    appellants       herein        that

Govindappa Gounder @ Govindasamy was lawfully cultivating

the suit land bearing Survey Nos. 169-170 respectively,

situated      in    Village       Pichanoor,            Taluk    Coimbatore       South,

Tamil Nadu, admeasuring 6 Acres & 98 Cents.                                 Since the

respondents herein claiming to be the lawful owners of the

suit property were trying to interfere with the peaceful

possession         of    the    appellants         herein,      Original        Suit    No.
2
1363/1993     came   to    be   instituted     praying    for    permanent

injunction restraining the land owners from interfering

with his possession and cultivation of the subject land.

The Original Suit No. 1363/1993 was allowed.                      The same

came to be decreed.         The Trial Court ordered that the land

owners   shall   not      disturb   or   interfere    with      the   lawful

possession of the tenant except in accordance with law.

We are informed that against the said judgment and decree

passed   by    the   Trial      Court    in   the   Original     Suit   No.

1363/1993, appeal was also filed and the said appeal also

came to be dismissed.
7.   We now proceed to look into one another proceedings.

It   appears     from     the     materials    on    record      that   the

respondents herein claiming to be the lawful owners of the

subject land instituted the Original Suit No. 491/1994 in

the Court of District Munsif, Coimbatore seeking permanent

injunction against the appellants herein restraining them

from cutting trees or from causing any damage or waste to

the subject property.           The Plaintiffs in Original Suit No.

491/1994 also prayed for awarding adequate damages for the

alleged loss caused by cutting trees etc.                It appears that

the Original Suit Nos. 1363/1993 and 491/1994 respectively

were ordered to be consolidated, since the parties were

the same and by and large the issues were also the same.
3
Common      evidence     was        recorded.       The     Original       Suit    No.

491/1994 came to be allowed.                 The relief prayed for in the

said     suit    was    granted.        The        appellants         herein      being

dissatisfied with the judgment and decree passed in the

Original Suit No. 491/1994, preferred a First Appeal in

the District Court.            The First Appeal came to be allowed

and the judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court was

ordered to be set aside.
8.     In    such      circumstances              referred       to    above,       the

respondents      herein      i.e.      the        original      plaintiffs,        went

before the High Court in Second Appeal.                         The Second Appeal

came to be allowed.            The High Court set aside the judgment

and    decree    passed        by     the     First       Appellate       Court    and

restored the original decree passed by the Trial Court.
9.     In    such      circumstances              referred       to    above,       the

appellants –(legal heirs), are here before us with the

present appeals.
10.    We   heard      Mr.     T.V.     George,          the     learned       counsel

appearing for the appellants, Mr. P. V. Yogeswaran, the

learned     counsel     appearing           for    the    respondent       no.1    and

Mr. Kamlesh Kumar Mishra, the learned counsel appearing

for the respondent no.4.
11.    It appears that the judgment and decree that came to

be    passed    in   the     Original        Suit     No.      491/1994    lead    the
4
respondents herein in preferring the Original Petition No.

16/2001 before the Assistant Commissioner, Revenue Court,

Tiruchirapalli. The said proceedings came to be instituted

by the respondents under the provisions of the
Tamil Nadu

Cultivating Tenants Protection Act, 1955
(for short, “the

Act 1955”) for eviction of the appellants on the ground

that they caused damage to the suit land by felling trees

etc.    It appears that the Revenue Court relied upon the

report of the Commissioner appointed by the Civil Court in

the suit proceedings and proceeded to pass an order dated

21.11.2008 allowing the Original Petition and directing

eviction    of   the   appellants      from   the   suit   land.    While

disposing   of   the   Original       Petition,     the   Revenue   Court

observed as under:
“On behalf of the petitioner Ex.P.2 Court
       commissioner's Report was marked. The said
       report was marked in O.S. 491 of 1994 on the
       file of District Munsif Court, Coimbatore. In
       the suit was stated that the respondent has
       cut the trees and its branches also caused
       damages to the lands by digging pits therefore
       they sought for damages of Rs.10,000/- and
       also    sought    for   permanent   injunction
       restraining the respondent from cutting the
       trees and committing acts of waste, the Trial
       Court also decreed the suit and the said
       decree is marked as Ex.P.3.
Regarding this case it is accepted by both
       sides, that the petitioner was land lord and
       respondent    was    tenant,   Ex.P.2    Court
       Commissioner, in his Report stated that trees
       and branches were cut down and pits also dug
       up in the lands. In Ex.P.3 District Munsif
5
Courts order also it is found that the trees
        and branches were cut off and pits were dug
        up.
Hence, the respondent has dug up the pits
        and cut down the trees and branches is proved.
        The respondent without cultivating the lands.
        Since cut down the trees and branches has
        caused damages to the land is proved. The
        Respondents were given the property for
        cultivation only. Since he has committed
        damages without cultivating lands he cost the
        tenancy rights and therefore losing the right
        as tenant.
Hence the respondent is directed to be
        evicted from the lands and to hand over the
        possession. To facilitate Executive Revenue
        Inspector to execute the order. The petitioner
        is to approach the Executive Revenue Inspector
        by Registered Post addressed to respondent and
        Village Administrative Officer.”
12.   The       order    passed      by   the    Revenue     Court      lead   the

appellants in filing of the Civil Revision Petition No.

4052/2008 in the High Court. When the Second Appeal was

taken up for hearing by the High Court, the revision was

also heard together and a common order came to be passed.
13.   At    this       stage,   we    must      talk   about    the     connected

appeals, which are notified at Serial No. 103.1 being the

Civil Appeal Nos.7467-7469/2011. These appeals have been

filed      by    one     another      branch     of    the     family    of    the

respondent no.1 claiming to be the lawful heirs and owners

of the suit property.                They also seek to challenge the

very same judgment and order passed by the High Court.
6
However, we need not look into these appeals as they have

already instituted the Original Suit No. 302/2009 in the

Civil Court at Coimbatore, wherein the respondents herein

are    the       original     defendants.            The    Original     Suit       no.

302/2009 shall be decided by the trial Court on its own

merits.
14.    In the present litigation, we are only concerned with

the    order      of   eviction      that    came     to     be   passed       by   the

Revenue Court on the strength of the decree that the Civil

Court       passed     in   the     Original    Suit        No.   491/1994.         It

appears that the Revenue Court relying on Ext. P.2 i.e.

the Court Commissioner’s report, recorded a finding that

the appellants herein are responsible for cutting of trees

etc., thereby causing damage to the suit land.                                 It was

also    alleged         that      the   appellants           digged      pits       and

constructed huts in the suit land.                    This, according to the

Revenue      Court,     was    in    violation        of    the    provisions       of
Section 3(2)(b)
of the Act 1955.
15.    In    the     aforesaid      context,     we        must   look   into       the

provisions of law.
The Act
1955 came to be enacted for

the purpose of protection from eviction of the cultivating

tenants      in    certain     areas    in     the    State       of   Tamil    Nadu.
Section      3
provides     in    what    circumstances         the   landlords

shall not evict the cultivating tenants.
Section 3(2)(b)
7
reads thus:””

      “3.   Landlords       not      to    evict       cultivating
      tenants:-
(2)subject  to   the next  succeeding  sub-
section(1) shall not apply to a cultivating
      tenant-
(b) Who has done any act or has been guilty of
      any negligence which is destructive of, or
      injurious to, the land or any crop thereon or
      has altogether ceased to cultivate the land;”
16.   A plain reading of
Section 3
would indicate that no

cultivating tenant can be evicted from its holdings or any

part thereof at the instance of his landlord whether in

execution of a decree or order of a Court or otherwise,

but the same is subject to sub-Section (b).                    Sub-Section
(b) provides that whoever has done any act or has been

guilty     of    any   negligence,      which    could    be   termed    as

destructive of, or injurious to, the land or any crop

thereon, then, such a tenant is liable to be evicted and

he would not stand protected under the provisions of the

Act 1955.
Section 3(2)(b)
also provides that even if the

tenant has stopped cultivating the land, he would lose the

protection and would be liable to eviction.
17.   The short point for our consideration is whether there

is any cogent material or evidence to indicate that the

appellants       had   indulged   in      cutting   of    trees    or   its

branches    or    digging   up    the     land   and     thereby   causing
8
substantial damage so as to bring the case within the

ambit of
Section 3(2)(b)
of the Act 1955.
18.   We have already reproduced the findings recorded by

the Revenue Court.    We shall now look into the findings

recorded by the High Court in this regard. Paragraphs 17,

18 and 19 respectively of the impugned judgment of the

High Court reads thus:
“17.
Section 3
of Tamil Nadu Cultivating
      Tenants' Protection Act, 1955 prohibits the
      eviction   of   cultivating  tenants  by   the
      landlords and one of the exceptions in
Section
      3(2)(b)
goes thus:
"(b) who has done any act or has been
          guilty of any negligence which is
          destructive of, or injurious to, the
          land or any crop thereon or has
          altogether ceased to cultivate the
          land."
18. The civil court has rendered a finding to
      the effect that by means of the commissioner's
      report it has been shown that the nature of the
      property has been altered by cutting branches of
      several trees digging pits, put up new huts,
      constructing a water tank by embedding pipes in
      the suit land. The prescribed authority under
      the Act viz., the Revenue Court has exercised
      its jurisdiction in an appropriate manner in
      passing eviction order on the ground of causing
      destructive and injurious activities to the
      leasehold land. As far as the order passed by
      the revenue Court challenged before this Court
      is concerned, the fact placed by the appellants
      before the said court has been thoroughly and
      appropriately appreciated and eviction order has
      been passed.
19. It is urged on the side of the first
      respondent that there was no landlord and tenant
      relationship between the appellants and the
9
first respondent. The court has to bear in mind
      that only on behalf of Kuppusamy Gounder and
      Palani Gounder, who were then minors, Palaniappa
      Gounder leased the properties to Chinnaiah and
      after he left the properties with them, they
      took responsibility of the affairs of the suit
      property the fact that they are owners of the
      property having been known by the tenants and
      the undertaking on the part of the first
      respondent to the effect that he is ready and
      willing to attorn the tenancy in favour of valid
      title holder would go a long way to show that
      there is landlord tenant relationship existing
      between the parties.”
19.    We take notice of the fact that against the order

passed by the Revenue Court referred to above, a revision

lies directly in the High Court as provided under
Section

6(B)
of the Act 1955, which reads thus:
“6-B. Revision by High Court - The Revenue
      Divisional Officer shall be deemed to be a
      Court subordinate to the High Court for the
      purposes of
Section 115
of the Code of Civil
      Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908) and his
      orders shall be liable to revision by the High
      Court under the provisions of the Section.”
20.   We have reached the conclusion having regard to the

materials on record that there is nothing to indicate that

the appellants were negligent in any manner or had done

any act by which they could be said to have caused damage

to the suit land or could be said to have done something,

which could be said to be injurious to the land or any

crop thereon.    We should not overlook the fact that the

appellants had been cultivating the suit land since 1955-
10
1960.        They    would      be     more    concerned        or    interested     to

protect       the    land,      more     particularly          their    crops      they

cultivate. Assuming for a moment that there is something

to indicate that the trees were pruned by itself would not

bring the case within the ambit of
Section 3(2)(b)
of the

Act 1955.          It appears that the Revenue Court mechanically

relied upon the Commissioner’s report and passed the order

of    eviction.        The      High    Court     also    in     exercise     of   its

revisional jurisdiction under
Section 115
of the Code of

Civil    Procedure,          1908,      affirmed        the    order    in    a    very

slipshod manner passed by the Revenue Court.
21.    In such circumstances referred to above, we are of the

view that the High Court committed an error in allowing

the Second Appeal filed by the respondents and thereby

interfering         with   the       findings     of    fact     recorded     by   the

First Appellate Court in favour of the appellants herein.
22.
The    Act
1955      was     enacted      solely      to    protect     the

interest of the cultivating tenants.                          In other words, the

object       in    enacting      the     said     Act    was     to    protect     the

cultivating         tenants      from    forcible        dispossession        by    the

landlords.          In such circumstances, the provisions of the

Act    should       also   be    interpreted         accordingly.            In   other

words,       the    provisions        should    be     interpreted       in   such    a

manner that the tenants are ultimately protected and are
11
not thrown out at the instance of the landlords who are

always interested to see that the tenants leave.                     It is

only when there is cogent, credible and reliable evidence

on record of gross violation of the provisions of
Section

3(2)(b)
of the Act 1955 that the Revenue Court may be

justified in ordering eviction of the tenant under the Act

1955.
23.    The enactments like the Act 1955 are really meant for

the purposes proclaimed by them. The obvious effect of

such statutory provisions cannot be taken away or whittled

down    by    forensic     sophistry.        Courts   should   not   allow

themselves to become tools for defeating clearly expressed

statutory intentions. [See:
G. Ponniah Thevar v/s Nalleyam

Perumal Pillai & Ors.
reported in (1977)1 SCC 500]
24.    Beneficent   construction           involves   giving   the   widest

meaning possible to the statutes. When there are two or

more possible ways of interpreting a section or a word,

the meaning which gives relief and protects the benefits

which are purported to be given by the legislation, should

be chosen. A beneficial statute has to be construed in its

correct      perspective    so   as    to    fructify   the    legislative

intent.
The Act, 1955
seeks to protect cultivating tenants

from unjust evictions and it is a cardinal principle of

law that in case of doubt, such Acts should be interpreted
12
to lean in favour of tenants.
25.   In the result, these appeals succeed and are hereby

     allowed.   The impugned order passed by the High Court in

     the Civil Revision Petition No. 4052/2008 is hereby set

     aside. Consequently, the original order of Revenue Court

     also stands set aside.
26.   We direct that the respondents shall not interfere

     with the possession of the appellants, save and except in

     accordance with law.
27.   In view of the disposal of Civil Appeal Nos. 7464-

     7466/2011, the connected Civil Appeal Nos. 7467-7469/2011

     also stand disposed of.
28.   Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed

     of.
..................J.
                                                 [ J.B. PARDIWALA ]




                                               ..................J.
                                                  [ SANDEEP MEHTA ]
NEW DELHI
SEPTEMBER 10, 2025
13