[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Jameela vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 15 September, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 1121                                                              NON-REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.3641-3642 OF 2025


            JAMEELA & ORS.                                                  … APPELLANTS

                                                         VS.

            THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                                     …RESPONDENT



                                                      JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
1.              Sheikh Akhtar1 (since deceased) was convicted by the Sessions Court

                            in S.T. No.378/2005 for commission of offence punishable under
sections 305
and
506-B
, Indian Penal Code 18602 and sentenced to

                            rigorous imprisonment for ten years and two years, respectively, with

                            fine together with default stipulations vide judgment and order dated

                            28th March, 2007.
2.              The judgment of conviction and order on sentence was carried in

                            appeal before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Principal Bench, at

                            Jabalpur3 under
section 374(2)
, Code of Criminal Procedure 19734 by
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
rashmi dhyani pant
Date: 2025.09.16
Reason: 1  Akhtar
   18:07:18 IST
2
IPC
3
High Court
4
Cr.PC
1
Akhtar in 2007 itself. During the pendency of the appeal, Akhtar

        passed away on 23rd April, 2015.
3.      Prior to conviction, Akhtar was a public servant. He was the ‘Naib

        Nazir’ in the local court. He suffered an order of termination of service

        soon after the aforesaid conviction. In the normal course, the appeal

        preferred by Akhtar should abate in view of
section 394
, Cr.PC.

        However, the widow of Akhtar (Jameela) and their children (Amreen

        Khan, Naaz Khan, Aftab, and Shreen Khan) continued the appeal with

        the fervent hope that should the conviction and sentence be set aside,

        they would be entitled to the terminal benefits which had accrued to

        Akhtar by reason of his rendering more than 30 years of service.
4.      Upon hearing the parties, the High Court vide its judgment and order

        dated 25th April, 2024 held that Akhtar cannot be held guilty for

        commission of offence under
section 305
IPC; however, by reason of

        his acts of threatening the victim (a minor girl), Akhtar was guilty of

        the offence under
section 195-A
IPC. Accordingly, while setting aside

        the conviction under
section 305
IPC, the High Court convicted Akhtar,

        in the alternative, under
section 195-A
IPC as well as section 506-B

        thereof and maintained the sentence imposed by the Sessions Court.

        The appeal was, accordingly, disposed of.
5.      An application5 for modification of the judgment and order dated 25th

        April, 2024 did not meet success. It was dismissed by an order dated

        2nd August, 2024.
5
I.A. No.12367 of 2024
2
6.        Aggrieved by the outcome of the appeal and the application before

          the High Court, the widow and children of Akhtar appealed to this

          Court whereupon leave was granted by us on 19th August, 2025.
7.        We have heard learned counsel for the appellants and the respondent-
State at some length.
8.        The offence alleged in the First Information Report 6 lodged by the

          victim’s mother (PW-4) is that the victim had been molested by co-

          convict Munna; that, Akhtar along with Munna, Bhadde and Mamu

          Gudda had been threatening the victim with dire consequences if she

          deposed in court against Munna; that, Akhtar, Munna, Bhadde, and

          Mamu Gudda had threatened to kill the victim and her father, unless

          they compromised the matter; and that, the victim could not bear and

          withstand such threat for which she took the extreme step of putting

          an end to her life to save her father by setting herself ablaze on 19th

          February, 1999. The victim, unfortunately, passed away on 23rd

          February, 1999. While in hospital, the victim’s dying declaration was

          recorded by the local Deputy Tehsildar (PW-2). The dying declaration

          is, however, not on record.
9.        From the version of PW-2, we find that the victim was threatened

          between 10-11 am of 19th February, 1999, while she was on the way

          to the court by Akhtar and the co-convicts.
10. According to PW-4, who was accompanying the victim while on the

          way to the court, Akhtar, Munna, Bhadde, and Mamu Gudda
6
FIR
3
threatened them around 11 am. This matches with the version of the

     victim as spoken by her to PW-2 and supposedly recorded in the dying

     declaration. However, PW-4 went a step further. She deposed that

     while she had been away from the court to call a witness (Khima bai)

     leaving the victim alone in the court and ultimately brought Khima bai

     – in the interregnum, Akhtar and the co-convicts had again

     threatened the victim. This was heard by PW-4 from the victim later,

     after she set herself ablaze.
11. It was further in the evidence of PW-4 that since the court had

     adjourned proceedings, she had returned home with the victim and

     had left to go to a shop after a while. PW-4 was informed by one Bhuri

     bai that the victim had suffered burn injury. Having heard it, PW-4

     immediately returned home and saw the victim lying on the ground

     with burns. At that point, the disclosure as aforesaid of the victim

     having been threatened a second time by Akhtar, Munna, Bhadde, and

     Mamu Gudda was made to PW-4 by the victim. The victim was

     threatened to change her statement or else she and her father would

     be killed. Since the victim did not want her father to die, she had set

     herself on fire.
12. This second incident of threat spoken to by PW-4, however, does not

     appear in the FIR.
13. PW-3, the victim’s elder sister, had also deposed at the trial. When

     the victim had set herself ablaze and attempt was being made to

     douse the fire, she had told PW-3 that while going to appear in the
4
court and while returning, Akhtar, Munna, Bhadde, and Mamu Gudda

     stopped her and threatened her that compromise must be made

     otherwise they would kill her and her father; and it is due to this threat

     that the victim set herself on fire to end her life and, thereby, save

     her father.
14. Learned counsel for the appellants has argued before us that there is

     gross inconsistency in the version of PW-4, as recorded in the FIR, the

     victim’s dying declaration recorded by PW-2 and the depositions of

     PWs 3 and 4 as regards the number of times the victim was

     threatened on 19th February, 1999.
15. True it is, PW-4 did not refer to the second act of threatening in the

     FIR. However, the omission is not considered too material. PW-4, we

     can presume, must have been under severe emotional stress when

     information of the offence was given to the police. That apart, it is not

     the requirement of law that an FIR while disclosing a cognizable

     offence must also reveal all facts preceding and following the incident

     of offence with precision. Having considered the contentions and

     looking at the materials on record, we do not see reason to hold that

     the inconsistency, as pointed out, is such that the same would lead us

     to discredit the evidence of PWs 3 and 4 that Akhtar, along with the

     co-convicts, had not threatened the victim.
16. Next, it has been urged on behalf of the appellants that although the

     victim, PW-3 and PW-4 had spoken about Akhtar and the other co-

     convicts having threatened the victim, the versions of the other
5
prosecution witnesses (PWs 5, 6 and 7) is that the victim had taken

     the names of Munna, Bhadde, and Mamu Gudda but not Akhtar as

     those who had also threatened her.
17. Having read the evidence of PWs 3 and 4 as well as considering what

     was recorded by PW-2 as the dying declaration of the victim, we have

     no hesitation to overrule this contention. Merely because PWs 5, 6

     and 7 had not taken the name of Akhtar while referring to what they

     heard the victim say about the identity of those who had threatened

     her would in no way render the version of the victim, as recorded by

     PW-2, unreliable. In fact, narration of the version of the victim in the

     dying declaration by PW-2 finds support from the evidence of PWs 3

     and 4.
18. Next, it has been contended on behalf of the appellants that the High

     Court grossly erred in convicting Akhtar under
section 195-A
IPC. The

     incident which resulted in unfortunate death of the victim, as noticed

     earlier, occurred on 19th February, 1999.
Section 195-A
IPC was

     inserted by Act No.2 of 2006 with effect from 16th April, 2006. As on

     date of the offence,
section 195-A
IPC was not on the statute book.

     The High Court, therefore, fell in error in not noticing the date of

     offence and the date of insertion of
section 195-A
in the
IPC
and

     proceeded to hold Akhtar guilty under that section in clear breach of

     clause (1) of
Article 20
of the Constitution of India.
19. Learned counsel appearing for the respondent-State, while not

     making any attempt to justify the High Court’s conviction of Akhtar
6
under
section 195-A
IPC, pointed out to us that Akhtar was held guilty

     of the offence under
section 506-B
IPC and the finding of the trial

     court, since affirmed by the High Court in this regard, does not suffer

     from any infirmity.
20. We are in agreement with learned counsel for the appellants that the

     High Court could not have found Akhtar guilty of
Section 195-A
IPC.

     However, what cannot be ignored is that Akhtar was also found guilty

     of an offence under
section 506(B)
IPC.
21. We have found from the memo of appeal filed before the High Court

     that the convictions recorded both under
sections 305
and
506-B
IPC

     were under challenge in the appeal. In the entirety of the appellate

     judgment and order, impugned before us, we do not find any

     discussion made by the High Court in respect of the conviction

     recorded against Akhtar under
section 506-B
IPC. We are inclined to

     the view that since the High Court had embarked on a process of

     reasoning to convict Akhtar under
section 195-A
IPC, it did not

     consider it necessary to make any further discussion regarding the

     offence under
section 506-B
IPC. Had we upheld the conviction under
section 195-A
IPC, obviously the omission of the High Court to

     independently deal with the offence under section 506-B thereof with

     reference to the evidence on record would not have been rendered

     vulnerable. However, in the changed circumstances where we are

     unable to uphold the conviction under
section 195-A
IPC, the omission

     does assume significance and requires us to independently examine
7
whether, on the evidence on record, the offence under
section 506-B
IPC stands proved.
22. Considering the evidence on record and in view of our discussions as

     above relatable to the evidence of PWs 2, 3 and 4, we have no

     hesitation in holding that Akhtar was one of four who threatened the

     victim and, therefore, his conviction under section 506-B warrants no

     interference.
23. At this stage, as a last-ditch effort, learned counsel for the appellants

     has invited our attention to one other aspect.
24. Referring to the evidence of a staff of the court where Akhtar was

     posted (DW-4), it was sought to be highlighted that DW-4 had spoken

     of Akhtar, the Naib Nazir, to be present in the court for the entire day

     on 19th February, 1999. According to DW-4, Akhtar usually came to

     court at about 10 am and returned at 6/6.30 pm without leaving the

     court. It was also his specific version that on the fateful day, i.e., 19th

     February, 1999, Akhtar had come to the court at about 10 am and

     had returned at around 6/6.30 pm; also, that Akhtar and DW-4 did

     not go anywhere during the duty hours on that day.
25. The evidence of DW-3, the Deputy Nazir of the concerned court, would

     also reveal that he had produced the attendance register from August

     1997 to April 1999 to show that on 19th February, 1999, Akhtar was

     at his work place.
26. According to learned counsel for the appellants, for whatever it is

     worth, the defence evidence of DWs 3 and 4 should have been
8
considered by the High Court. He sounded critical of the omission of

     the High Court to spare a single sentence in regard to the defence

     evidence.
27. We had the occasion to peruse the judgment of conviction of the

     Sessions Court. The depositions of DWs 3 and 4 were noted in

     paragraphs 34 and 35 in the judgment and the Sessions Court appears

     to have assigned good reasons as to why the defence evidence did

     not appeal to him to be creditworthy for discrediting the versions of

     PWs 2, 3 and 4 and for returning a finding of acquittal in favour of

     Akhtar. We need not advert to the reasons assigned here, having also

     noted that there is not a single ground urged in the memo of appeal

     filed by Akhtar in the High Court assailing the reasoning of the

     Sessions Court in this regard. It is quite possible that in course of

     hearing of the appeal before the High Court too, no point of objection

     was raised with regard to evaluation and assessment by the Sessions

     Court of the evidence of DWs 3 and 4 for which the High Court did

     not consider it necessary to discuss such evidence.
28. There is, therefore, no strong reason for which the recording of

     conviction of Akhtar for the offence under
section 506-B
IPC in the

     judgment passed by the Sessions Court can be faulted; and, by

     extension, we do not see reason to interfere with the judgment and

     order of the High Court affirming such conviction.
29. In our view, conviction of Akhtar under
section 506-B
IPC cannot be

     interfered with on any valid ground, although his conviction under
9
section 195-A
IPC by the High Court is unsustainable in law. Also, the

     respondent-State not having carried acquittal of Akhtar for the offence

     under
section 305
IPC in appeal, such acquittal has attained finality.
30. Having regard to the nature of offence proved to have been committed

     by Akhtar and also bearing in mind the evidence on record revealing

     that a minor girl, to save her father, had to take the extreme step of

     doing away with her own life, we could not have in the present

     circumstances extend the provisions relating to release on probation

     to Akhtar, had he been alive. Dismissal of the appeal, albeit setting

     aside the conviction under
section 195-A
IPC but maintaining the

     conviction under section 506-B thereof, is the obvious result. We order

     accordingly.
31. However, unfortunately, Akhtar is no longer alive. He left behind him

     the appellants as his surviving heirs. The appellants have brought the

     lis to this Court only for the purpose of staking a claim to the terminal

     benefits that had accrued to Akhtar for rendering three decades of

     service.
32. Akhtar’s service was terminated on consideration of his conviction not

     only for the offence under
section 506-B
IPC but also the graver

     offence under
section 305
thereof. Since the High Court has set aside

     the conviction under
section 305
IPC and the alternative conviction

     under
section 195-A
thereof too stands set aside by us, only the

     conviction against Akhtar for the offence under
section 506-B
IPC

     survives. In such circumstances, we are of the considered opinion that
10
interests of justice would be best served if the respondent-State

     considers the matter of termination of service of Akhtar de novo and

     decides, whether for his conviction only under
section 506-B
IPC, the

     right to terminal benefits accruing for rendering three decades of

     service would stand forfeited for all times to come.
33. Accordingly, while disposing of these appeals, we request the

     appropriate department in the Government of Madhya Pradesh to

     effect consideration of the matter as indicated in the preceding

     paragraph upon taking into account the financial status of the

     appellant no.1 and her liability, if any, adopting a humanitarian

     approach. Such consideration may be effected as early as possible,

     but preferably within three months from date.
34. Connected applications, if pending, shall also stand disposed of.
……………….…………………………J.
                                                (DIPANKAR DATTA)



                                         ……………………..…………………..J.
                                          (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)

  NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 15, 2025.
11