[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Kailas vs The State Of Maharashtra on 15 September, 2025
2025 INSC 1117                                                                      REPORTABLE


                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                          OF 2025
                                     (Arising out of SLP (Criminal) No.4646 of 2025)


                            KAILAS S/O BAJIRAO PAWAR                            … APPELLANT(S)


                                                            VERSUS


                            THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                            … RESPONDENT(S)


                                                   JUDGMENT
MANOJ MISRA, J.
1.    Leave granted.
2.    This appeal arises from a judgment and order of the

                            High Court1, dated 25.10.2024, in Criminal Appeal Nos.

                            449 of 2023 and 457 of 2024, whereby the appeals filed by

                            the appellant and another, against the order of conviction

                            and sentence dated 29.04.2023 of the Trial Court2 in

                            Special Sessions Trial No. 34 of 2020, were partly allowed,

                            the order of conviction was set aside and the case was
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Nirmala Negi
Date: 2025.09.15
17:01:39 IST
Reason:
1
The High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Nagpur Bench, Nagpur
2
Additional Sessions Judge Akot, District Akola
Page 1 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
remanded to the Trial Court for a re-trial coupled with a

        direction that the accused shall stand remanded to

        judicial custody.
Facts
3.      Appellant and three others were tried for offences

        punishable    under     Section   8(c)   read   with   Section

        20(b)(ii)(C) of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances

        Act, 19853. Prosecution case is based on a search and

        seizure operation leading to recovery of contraband (i.e.,

        Ganja). It is alleged that on receipt of information that

        accused No. 1 - Kailas (the appellant) and accused No. 2 –

        Raju Motiram Solanke have stocked Ganja for sale in a

        hut, after entering the information in the Diary, sending

        information to senior officer vide written letter (Exh. No.69)

        and seeking permission (Exh. No.70), a raid was organized

        after arranging two panch witnesses, a photographer, a

        gazetted officer and a weighing scale. The hut was located.

        Two persons, namely, accused nos.1 and 2, were found

        sitting there. After necessary formalities, the hut was

        searched. Upon search, in the presence of panchas, 18
3
NDPS Act
Page 2 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
plastic packets, kept in a sack, containing Ganja, weighing

     39 kilograms, were recovered; from which samples were

     drawn and sealed. On disclosure by the aforesaid two

     accused, complicity of accused No.3 came to light.

     Thereafter, raid was conducted at the residence of accused

     No. 3, who was not found present. However, during house

     search, five sacks with packets containing Ganja, weighing

     107.90 kilogram, were recovered. When accused No. 3 was

     arrested, complicity of accused No. 4 came to light as the

     person who transported the contraband.
4.      After investigation all four were charge-sheeted and

     tried. During trial, prosecution examined seven witnesses,

     namely, S.W. No. 1 – Vinayak Rajabhau Shinde i.e.,

     witness of spot and seizure panchnama; S.W. No. 2 –

     Santosh Ashok Solanke i.e., photographer who took video

     as well as photographs of the raid proceedings; S.W. No. 3

     – Sajid Khan Rajulla Khan i.e., person who weighed the

     contraband; S.W. No. 4 – Gopal Ukhardu Patil i.e., one of

     the members of the raiding party; S.W. No. 5 – Mohammed

     Umar Anisoddin i.e., panch witness of seizure panchnama

     of accused no.4’s vehicle, who was declared hostile; S.W.
Page 3 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
No. 6 – Gopalsingh Narsingh Daberao i.e., driver-cum-
Police Constable, who took Ganja samples to forensic

     laboratory, Amravati for chemical analysis; and S.W. No.

     7 – Sagar Ashokrao Hatwar i.e., Chief of the raiding party.
5.      Trial Court convicted accused Nos.1 and 2 and

     acquitted the other two accused.
6.      In its judgment, the Trial Court, inter alia, relied on

     the video recording of the raid to corroborate the

     substantive       evidence       led    during       trial.     Relevant

     observations qua appreciation of evidence including the

     video recording are found in paragraphs 40 to 48 of the

     judgment, which are reproduced below:
“40. Santosh (SW No.2) has stated in his
             examination in chief that, he himself videographed
             the entire procedure and he himself made the
             compact disc of the said video film. He also
             personally gave the necessary certificate to the
             police in that behalf. He has included all the
             technical details in the said certificate. It is the same
             certificate as Exh. No.32.
41. The certificate on Exh. No.32 is given by Santosh
             (SW No.2). That is, of course as per
section 65 B (4)
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. In the said
             certificate Santosh (SW No.2) has mentioned the
             entire details such as the business of photography
             the witness is involved in, the camera he uses for
             that purpose, its particulars such as Sony company
             camera model number 450 H.D. camera etc and he
             has proven the certificate that he has issued
Page 4 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
personally (Exh. 32) on all the legal and technical
             criteria.
42. The video film of the proceedings of the raid
             conducted by the police and its compact disc made
             by Santosh (S.W. No. 2) is produced in the court and
             it was seen in the court on the laptop by the court
             (myself), the concerned clerk, the learned counsels
             for the accused, the learned counsels for the
             prosecution and all the accused. The said compact
             disc is assigned property No.27. There is no dispute
             regarding the video film in the said compact disc
             raised by the defense. This important fact is to be
             taken into consideration and kept in our collective
             conscious (sic).
43. All of us saw when the said CD was played in
             this court that the panch witnesses, police officers,
             staff members, the weighing scale operator, sub-
             divisional officer, both the accused No.1, Kailas, No.
             2 Raju could be seen in the video film (i.e., in the
             video shooting in the CD) in the compact disc
             marked as property No.27.
44. There is no reason whatsoever to take any doubt
             regarding the veracity of the video film in the said
             property No.27. There is no place whatsoever to
             raise any doubt regarding the reliability of Santosh
             No.2 doing the video shooting. There is also no
             reason whatsoever to raise any doubts regarding
             this certificate exhibit No.32 issued as per
section
             65-B (4)
of the Indian Evidence Act 1872. No one has
             raised any dispute whatsoever in the recognition or
             identification of the panch witnesses, police officials,
             staff members, accused seen in the said video hence
             all these facts stand proven.
45. In this way the originally reliable contentions
             made in the oral statements and examination in
             chief by all the witnesses such as Vinayak (SW
             No.1), Santosh (SW No.2), Sajid Khan (SW No.3),
             Gopal (SW No.4) and Shri Hatkar (SW No.7) that, on
             the date, time and place of occurrence the accused
Page 5 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
No.1, Kailas, and accused No.2, Raju, were found in
             possession of Ganja weighing 39 kilograms are
             strongly and undisputedly supported by the video
             film and photographs in the compact disc of
             property No.27 on record of the court. There is no
             reason whatsoever to refute the said proofs. As
             mentioned earlier the said video film in the said CD
             has also not been contested on behalf of the accused
             No.1 and 2.
46. In the said video film and in some still
             photographs (i.e., in the photographs in exhibit
             No.36, 37, 38 on record of this court) an unknown
             person in yellow T-shirt and who has dyed his color
             can be seen. The learned counsel Shri Sharma for
             the accused No.1 and 2 attempted to create a big
             controversy during the cross examination of the
             witnesses in that behalf.
47. All the witnesses have clearly dismissed the
             suggestions made by the learned counsel for the
             accused number 1 and 2 to the witnesses in their
             cross examination that the Hut behind the Mari
             Mata temple at Adgaon is owned by the unknown
             person in those photographs and the Ganja also
             belongs to him. Shri Hatwar (S.W. No.7) has clearly
             stated in his cross examination (Exh. No.61), page
             No.14, Para No.67) that the person wearing the
             yellow T-shirt is the associate of the weighing scale
             operator Sajid Khan (SW No.3).
48. It is quite possible that some bystanders,
             overzealous persons then enter as intruders while
             any such proceedings are in progress. Just because
             he was seen in one of such photographs and in some
             part of the video film, the cogent, reliable and
             undisputed proof of all the remaining witnesses,
             public prosecution does not and should not get
             nullified. The identification of the unknown person
             seen in the said photograph and the video film is not
             the point of contention in this case. It is
             unnecessary and irrelevant, and it is not sufficient
Page 6 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
at all to nullify all the other reliable evidence
             produced by the prosecution.”
                                           (Emphasis supplied)
7.      Aggrieved by Trial Court’s judgment and order, the

     two convicts filed criminal appeals before the High Court.

     Criminal Appeal No. 449 of 2023 was by the appellant

     whereas the other i.e., Criminal Appeal No. 457 of 2024,

     was by Raju Motiram Solanke.
8.      The High Court partly allowed the appeals, set aside

     the conviction and sentence, however, remanded the

     matter for a re-trial with a direction that the accused shall

     stand remanded to judicial custody. Aggrieved by the

     direction for a re-trial with judicial remand, this appeal

     has been filed.
High Court’s observations
9.      The reasons for which High Court directed a re-trial

     can be found in paragraphs 12 to 19 of its judgment,

     reproduced below:
“12. It is to be noted that the entire process of raid
             at the hut as well as at the house of Shatrughna was
             video recorded with the help of the photographer.
             The photographer has been examined. Panch
             witness has supported the case of the prosecution.
             PW-1 Vinayak Shinde, the panch witness, has
             deposed in great detail about the raid, search,
             seizure and sampling. He has stated that, in his
Page 7 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
presence, the entire process was video recorded by
             the photographer. PW-2 Santosh Solanke is the
             photographer. He has deposed about the video
             recording of the entire process of search, seizure,
             sampling and apprehension of the appellant. PW-7
             Sagar Hatwar, the investigating officer, has deposed
             in his evidence that the entire process of the raid
             was video-graphed. The CD of the video recording is
             at Exh. 27. In this context, it would be necessary to
             consider the evidence of the photographer (PW-2). At
             Para No. 7, he has stated that on last date the CD
             was played on the computer of the Court by the
             clerk. The APP and the Advocates for the appellants
             had seen the recording. Perusal of the evidence of all
             the witnesses does not show that the learned Judge,
             while recording their evidence, had played the CD in
             the Court and personally saw it.”
13. In this background, it is necessary to consider
             the observations made by the learned Judge in his
             judgment. Para No. 42 would be relevant. Learned
             Judge has noted that he had personally seen the
             video recording. Similarly, it was seen by the
             concerned clerk, APP and the advocates for the
             appellants. Learned Judge has noted that the
             advocates for the appellants had no dispute about
             the contents of the CD. In my view, this observation
             is against the appellants. It is to be noted that the
             CD has been admitted in the evidence. It is marked
             as Exh. 27. The question is whether the evidence
             adduced before the Court is sufficient to prove the
             contents of the CD or not. If the Court comes to the
             conclusion that this evidence is not sufficient to
             prove the contents, then the question is as to how
             the same could be used against the appellant.”
14. It is to be noted that we are in the era of
             technology. The technology is now being used for the
             purpose of investigation. This is a good sign for the
             criminal justice administration. Electronic evidence
             collected with the assistance of the technology,
             which may be audio recording, video recording,
             photography or the data from the memory card,
Page 8 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
cannot be admitted in the evidence as it is. Before
             such material is admitted as an evidence, proper
             care and procedure is required to be followed. Such
             material has to be converted into a legally
             admissible evidence. The law prescribes the
             procedure. The prosecutor, the presiding officer and
             the advocates must be well versed with the
             procedure, while recording the evidence of the
             witness with regard to the contents of the video
             recording or CCTV footage. If there is a lack of
             procedural knowledge to convert such material into
             legally admissible evidence collected during the
             course of investigation, then the very purpose of the
             video recording or collection of the CCTV footage
             capturing the incident will be frustrated. The video
             recording or CCTV footage without proper evidence
             to prove the contents of the video recording cannot
             be made use of against the accused. It needs to be
             stated that with the advent of technology and use of
             the technology during the investigation, all
             concerned are required to keep themselves abreast
             with the law and procedure. A great care is required
             to be taken while recording the evidence when such
             electronic evidence is produced before the court. It
             is the duty of the court and other stakeholders to
             see that it is converted into legally admissible
             evidence. If there is a failure on the part of the
             prosecutor and the presiding officer, on account of
             some misconception related to the subject, then it
             can cause miscarriage of justice. It needs to be
             stated that in this case on account of procedural
             error, apparent lacuna has crept in, and which has
             resulted in miscarriage of justice. It has caused
             prejudice not only to the appellant but to the
             prosecution as well. It needs to be mentioned that in
             this case, on this count, there is an imminent flaw,
             which has caused prejudice not only to the
             appellants but to the prosecution as well.
15. It is to be noted that the video recording of the
             entire process was the best evidence in the
             possession of the prosecution. The question that
             was required to be addressed by the learned Judge
Page 9 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
while recording such evidence was as to how it has
             to be converted into legally admissible evidence. The
             learned Judge and the learned prosecutor have
             committed a procedural error. The proper procedure
             has not been followed. In this case, the main
             witnesses     are    the     panch     witnesses,   the
             photographer, other members of the raiding party
             and the investigating officer. If the evidence consists
             of a video recording of the particular incident or part
             of the incident, the recorded incident must be
             proved through the concerned witness. As far as the
             video recording or recorded CCTV footage is
             concerned, the witness who is an eyewitness to the
             incident or acted as a panch witness or in the other
             capacity, must describe the incident on oath before
             the Court. In such a case, at the time of recording
             the evidence of the concerned witness, the video
             recording, either recorded in the CD or pen drive or
             any other electronic gadget, must be played on the
             screen. The witness, after playing the CD, must
             describe or translate the video recording or the
             contents of the recording in his own words on oath
             before the Court. If it is an audio recording, then the
             part of the audible conversation must be transcribed
             and placed on record under the signature of the
             investigating officer. Unless and until the recorded
             video or CCTV footage is played at the stage of
             evidence of the witness, the witness would not be
             able to describe or narrate the incident in his or her
             own words on oath before the Court. In this way, at
             the stage of recording of evidence, each and every
             witness concerned with the video recording of the
             incident or any part of the incident must describe or
             narrate the incident in his or her own words on oath
             before the Court. If it is not so done, then it would
             be very difficult to understand or read that video
             recording by the presiding officer, prosecutor or
             Advocate. This procedure has to be scrupulously
             followed. This has not happened in this case. The
             CD was not played while recording the evidence of
             the panch witnesses, the photographer, the other
             members of the raiding party and the investigating
             officer. It is therefore apparent that the legally
Page 10 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
admissible evidence as to the contents of the
             recording/CD has not at all been recorded.
16. The CD is a part of the record. At the stage of
             the arguments in these appeals, the CD was played
             in the Court. It is evident that the video recording
             commenced with the apprehension of the appellant.
The CD contains the recording of the inspection of
             hut, recovery of the substance, the description of the
             substance and further part of the proceedings. The
             CD further contains the recording of the raid and
             recovery at the house of Shatrughna. The learned
             Judge was required to play the CD at the time of
             recording evidence of each witness and record the
             contents appearing on the screen with the help of
             the concerned witness. If this procedure had been
             followed, then the contents of the CD would have
             become legally admissible evidence. This procedure
             had not been followed. This has caused prejudice to
             the appellants as well as to the prosecution. The
             important evidence collected in the form of the video
             recording has not been converted into legally
             admissible evidence. In order to verify the correct
             factual position, at the stage of the argument of the
             appeals, the video recording was played. It was very
             difficult to understand the contents of the CD. If the
             evidence of the witnesses had been recorded on
             playing the video recording at the time of the
             evidence, then the oral testimony of the witnesses
             on oath, as to the contents of the CD would have
             been part of the record.
17. It is evident that in this case the detailed
             description of the Ganja has not been recorded in
             the panchnama. Similarly, the detailed description
             of the Ganja has not been stated by the witnesses.
             The substance seized from the possession of the
             appellant can be seen from the video recording. It
             was necessary to show this part of the recording to
             the witnesses and record the description of the
             substance in detail through each and every witness.
             In my view, this is a fundamental flaw in this case.
             The appellants could not be held responsible for this
Page 11 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
mistake or rather a mess. It was the responsibility
             of the learned prosecutor to insist before the learned
             Judge to play the CD when the witnesses were in the
             witness box. It was not done by the learned
             Prosecutor/In-charge of the case. Similarly, the
             learned Judge did not follow this procedure
             scrupulously. It seems that the learned Judge did
             not act diligently while recording the evidence of the
             witnesses with regard to the incident or a part of the
             incident video-graphed by the investigating officer.
             Learned Judge has observed in his judgment that
             there was no objection as such on the part of the
             appellants to this CD. In my view, this observation
             is totally perverse. This observation is not only
             against the appellants, but it is also against the
             prosecution. In this case, the required evidence as
             to the contents of the video recording or CD has not
             been properly recorded. There is a procedural error.
             It was the duty of the Court to give justice to the
             hard work put in by the police officer, while
             conducting the raid and ensuring the video
             recording of the entire proceedings. The video
             recording is the most important and vital evidence
             in this case. It can reflect upon the credibility and
             authenticity of the raid. Similarly, the description of
             the substance, which can be seen from the video
             recording, would be of immense importance. It
             cannot be excluded from consideration, if it is
             proved properly. This is one flaw in this case. It has
             caused prejudice to the appellants as well as to the
             prosecution.
18. The next important flaw which can be seen is
             the failure of the prosecution to examine the CA. It
             is noticed that in the Vidarbha region, in the trials
             under the
NDPS Act
, the CA is not examined. In my
             view, this is a serious mistake on the part of the
             prosecution. It needs to be placed on record that in
             Greater Mumbai, in every case under the
NDPS Act
,
             the CA is examined. In Vidarbha region, while
             deciding the appeals against the conviction and
             sentence in NDPS cases, it is noticed that this aspect
             is taken for granted by the prosecution. It needs to
Page 12 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
be stated that in Vidarbha region, the majority of the
             cases under the
NDPS Act
are with regard to the
             seizure of the Ganja. The examination of the CA, in
             the case of the analysis of Ganja, is very important
             because, in the report of the CA the description of
             the substance in detail is recorded invariably. The
             description of the substance, seized as Ganja, is
             required to be proved to bring it within the ambit of
             the definition of Ganja under
Section 2(iii)(b)
of the
             NDPS Act. In this case, the prosecution has failed to
             examine the CA. In this case, the learned prosecutor
             did not produce remnant samples received from the
             office of CA. Similarly, the prosecutor did not
             produce the representative samples drawn at the
             time of the seizure on the spot as well as drawn in
             presence of the learned Magistrate at the time of the
             inventory. The remnant samples are required to be
             shown to the CA to bring on record the nature of the
             narcotic drug and the description of the drugs.
             Similarly, the representative samples are required to
             be opened before the Court at the time of the
             evidence of the concerned witness. The presiding
             officer is required to note down the description of the
             narcotic drug/substance found in the sample
             packets. It is further pertinent to mention that if the
             seized drug is not destroyed, then the same shall
             also be produced before the Court while recording
             the evidence of the witness. The description of the
             substance found in the packets/sacks shall also be
             recorded. The learned presiding officer is required to
             record this part of the evidence very meticulously
             and note down the description of substance.
19. I am conscious of the fact that under
Section
             293
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the reports
             of certain Government scientific experts may be
             used as evidence in an inquiry, trial or other
             proceedings. The record shows that no specific order
             was passed by the learned Judge, while admitting
             the CA report. It is to be noted that, in cases under
             the
NDPS Act
, as and when a CA report is tendered,
             the Court shall insist the prosecutor to examine the
             CA. If the CA is available, then the learned Judge
Page 13 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
shall not exhibit the report without examining the
             CA. The trial of the offences under the
NDPS Act
cannot be taken lightly. The trial for the offences
             under the
NDPS Act
has to be conducted very
             carefully. It needs to be mentioned that in such a
             trial, the Court has to deal with so many technical
             aspects and issues.
The NDPS Act
provides for
             checks and balances while conducting the
             investigation in the crime so as to avoid false
             implication of innocent persons. The act provides for
             stringent punishment for a proved offence.
             Therefore, the Court has to be very careful while
             recording the evidence. In this case, the required
             care was not taken.”
10.     After    the       above   discussion,   the    High      Court

     proceeded to consider whether a re-trial of the case would

     be necessary and, in Paragraph 26, the High Court opined

     that re-trial is necessary. Paragraph 26 of the impugned

     judgment is extracted below:
“26. It is to be noted that in this case, for the
             purpose of proving the contents of the CD, the recall
             of all the witnesses would be necessary. The
             witnesses were the members of the raiding party.
             Each and every witness would be required to
             describe /translate the contents of the CD/video
             recording. Similarly, the prosecution would be
             required to examine the CA. Therefore, in this case,
             the option of recording additional evidence may not
             be appropriate. Even after recording the additional
             evidence, the further procedure with regard to the
             recording of 313 statement of the accused would be
             required to be gone into. In this case, in my view, the
             re-trial would be the best option in the interest of
             the appellants as well as the prosecution. In the
             facts and circumstances, in this case, I am opting to
             order a re-trial.”
Page 14 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
11.       Having held that re-trial is necessary the High Court

        set aside the Trial Court judgment and ordered re-trial of

        accused nos.1 and 2. However, since there was no appeal

        against acquittal of accused nos.3 and 4, the High Court

        observed that accused nos. 3 and 4 shall not have to face

        re-trial.
12.       Aggrieved by the direction for holding a re-trial, one

        of the accused, namely, Kailas, is in appeal before us.

        Submissions on behalf of the Appellant
13.       On behalf of the appellant, it is submitted that a re-

        trial can be directed in exceptional circumstances as laid

        down by a Constitution Bench of this Court in
Ukha

        Kolhe versus State of Maharashtra4
, which has been

        consistently followed, and recently followed by a three

        Judge Bench of this Court in
Nasib Singh versus State

        of Punjab and Another5
.             Relying on the aforesaid

        decisions, it was urged that re-trial is not to be ordered

        just to enable the prosecution to lead evidence which it

        could but did not care to lead either on account of

        insufficient appreciation of the nature of the case or for
4
AIR 1963 SC 1531
5
(2022) 2 SCC 89
Page 15 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
other reasons. It was urged that if the High Court was not

        satisfied with the prosecution’s evidence on record, the

        appropriate course for the High Court was to order

        acquittal of the appellant. Accordingly, it is urged that the

        order of the High Court directing for a re-trial be set aside

        and the appellant be acquitted.
Submissions on behalf of Respondent-State
14.        Per contra, on behalf of the State, it was urged that

        the High Court erred in holding that the video was not

        admissible. The same was admissible as a document

        under Section 65B of the Indian Evidence Act, 18726 in

        view of there being a certificate under sub-section (4) of

        Section 65B from its creator (SW No.2). Moreover, there

        was substantive oral evidence of the members of the

        raiding party who witnessed the recovery. Additionally,

        there were documents in the form of seizure memo,

        inventory of the consignment of Ganja prepared by

        Magistrate, produced as Exh. No.84, evidencing the

        recovery. Besides above, during trial, the video was played

        in Court in the presence of the presiding officer of the
6
Evidence Act
Page 16 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
Court, the accused persons and their respective counsels.
No dispute as regards the identity of accused and

           members of raiding party as seen in the video was raised

           before the trial court. Therefore, the view of the High Court

           that video was not admissible, because it was not played

           while recording statement of each witness and its

           transcript was not prepared, is misconceived. Moreover, it

           was urged, transcript of a visual input cannot be prepared.

           As regards non-examination of Chemical Examiner, it was

           urged, it would not have a material bearing on the

           admissibility of its report because, under
Section 293
of

           the   Code   of   Criminal   Procedure,   19737,   Chemical

           Examiner is a scientific expert, and its report is ipso facto

           admissible. In such circumstances, it was urged, there

           was no necessity to direct for a re-trial; and if the High

           Court found it difficult to understand the video, it had

           power to accept additional evidence on record under
Section 391
CrPC but in no case a re-trial was required. It

           was thus prayed on behalf of the State that the order of
7
CrPC
Page 17 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
the High Court be set aside, and the appeal be restored on

     the file of the High Court for fresh consideration.



     Discussion
15.     Having considered the rival submissions, the

     principal question that falls for our consideration is

     whether the High Court was justified in ordering a re-trial?

     If not, then what would be the appropriate order that may

     be passed in this appeal?
16.     Before we proceed further, it would be useful to

     survey the judicial precedents as to in what circumstances

     a re-trial is to be directed and what are the consequences

     of such a direction.
In
Ukha Kolhe Versus State of

     Maharashtra
(supra), this Court observed that:
“An order for the re-trial of a criminal case is
             made in exceptional cases, and not unless the
             appellate court is satisfied that the Court trying the
             proceeding had no jurisdiction to try it or that the
             trial was vitiated by serious illegalities or
             irregularities or on account of misconception of the
             nature of the proceedings and on that account in
             substance there had been no real trial or that the
             Prosecutor or an accused was, for reasons over
             which he had no control, prevented from leading or
             tendering evidence material to the charge, and in the
             interest of justice the appellate court deems it
             appropriate, having regard to the circumstances of
             the case, that the accused should be put on his trial
Page 18 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
again. An order of re-trial wipes out from the record
             the earlier proceeding, and exposes the person
             accused to another trial which affords the
             prosecutor an opportunity to rectify the infirmities
             disclosed in the earlier trial, and will not ordinarily
             be countenanced when it is made merely to enable
             the prosecutor to lead evidence which he could, but
             has not cared to lead either on account of
             insufficient appreciation of the nature of the case or
             for other reasons.”
17.        Following the aforesaid decision, in
Nasib Singh

  versus State of Punjab and Another
(supra), this Court

  summarized the principles governing re-trial as follows:
“33. The principles that emerge from the decisions
             of this Court on re-trial can be formulated as under:
33.1 The appellate court may direct a re-trial only
             in “exceptional” circumstances to avert a
             miscarriage of justice.
33.2 Mere lapses in the investigation are not
             sufficient to warrant a direction for retrial. Only if
             the lapses are so grave so as to prejudice the rights
             of the parties, can a re-trial be directed.
             33.3 A determination of whether “shoddy”
             investigation /trial has prejudiced the party, must
             be based on the facts of each case pursuant to a
             thorough reading of the evidence.
33.4 It is not sufficient if the accused/prosecution
             makes a facial argument that there has been a
             miscarriage of justice warranting a re-trial. It is
             incumbent on the appellate court directing a re-trial
             to provide a reasoned order on the nature of the
             miscarriage of justice caused with reference to the
             evidence and investigatory process.
             33.5 If a matter is directed for re-trial, the evidence
             and record of the previous trial is completely wiped
             out.
33.6 The following are some instances, not
             intended to be exhaustive, of when the Court could
Page 19 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
order a re-trial on the ground of miscarriage of
             justice:
(a)    The trial court has proceeded with the trial in
             the absence of jurisdiction;
(b)    The trial has been vitiated by an illegality or
             irregularity based on a misconception of the nature
             of the proceedings; and
(c)    The prosecutor has been disabled or
             prevented from adducing evidence as regards the
             nature of the charge, resulting in the trial being
             rendered a farce, sham or charade.”
18.       In the instant case, the High Court ordered a re-trial

   citing following reasons:
(a)   Video-recording       of    search     and     seizure

                   operation was the best evidence, but the same

                   was not converted into admissible evidence

                   inasmuch as, (i) video was not played while

                   recording statement of each witness so as to

                   enable the witness to explain the video in his

                   own words in his deposition; (ii) no transcript of

                   video was prepared; and (iii) when it was played

                   in Court, in absence of explanatory statement of

                   witnesses qua the video, its content could not

                   be understood.
(b) The Chemical Examiner / Analyst (for short CA)

                   was not produced as a witness.
Page 20 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
(c) The prosecutor did not produce remnant

                  samples received from the office of CA.
(d) The       prosecutor   did   not   produce    the

                  representative samples drawn at the time of the

                  seizure from the spot as well as drawn in

                  presence of the learned Magistrate at the time

                  of making the inventory.
19.       As far as admissibility of video recording i.e.,

   Compact Disc (CD) is concerned, the author of the video i.e.,

   SW No.2 not only deposed that he recorded the video, but

   he also gave a certificate, as contemplated under sub-

   section (4) of
Section 65B
of the Evidence Act, to make the

   CD admissible in evidence. Interestingly, the High Court did

   not dispute that the electronic record was duly exhibited as

   there existed a certificate envisaged under sub-section (4) of

   Section 65B. However, strangely, the High Court opined

   that the video would become relevant only if it is played

   during deposition of each witness so that the witness could

   explain its contents in his own words resulting in a

   transcript of the video. In our view, this is a strange and

   unacceptable reasoning for the simple reason that the CD
Page 21 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
is an electronic record and once the requirement of Section

   65B is fulfilled it becomes an admissible piece of evidence,

   like a document, and the video recorded therein is akin to

   contents of a document which can be seen and heard to

   enable the Court to draw appropriate inference(s).         No

   doubt, there may be an occasion where to appreciate

   contents of a video an explanatory statement may be

   needed, but that would depend on the facts of a case.

   However, it is not the requirement of law that the contents

   of the video would become admissible only if it is reduced to

   a transcript in the words of a witness who created the video

   or is noticed in the video. Besides that, in the instant case,

   the search and seizure operation was sought to be proved

   by oral evidence of witnesses. The video, therefore, was

   perhaps to corroborate the oral testimony. Even the

   judgment of the trial court makes it clear that the video was

   played in court in the presence of all accused as well as both

   sides counsels and the presiding officer, upon seeing the

   video, could spot and confirm the presence of witnesses as

   well as the accused at the time of search and seizure. In
Page 22 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
such circumstances, in our view, a re-trial is not required

    only to explain the video.
20.          We are conscious of the law that while exercising

    appellate power the record must be perused8 and, therefore,

    if the High Court, as an appellate court, had difficulty in

    understanding the contents of the video, which was part of

    the record, it could have called for the presence of the

    accused as well as the witnesses or their respective lawyers

    to explain to the Court the significance of what appears in

    that video. Besides, the power to take additional evidence is

    there under
Section 391
of CrPC.                               However, to merely

    understand the video, in our view, there is no justification

    to order a re-trial and fresh recording of evidence. For the

    reasons above, reason (a) supra assigned by the High Court

    for ordering a re-trial is totally misconceived and baseless.
21.          As far as non-production of Chemical Examiner as

    a witness is concerned, under
Section 2939
of CrPC, report
8
See:
Section 386
CrPC
9
Section 293. Reports of certain Government scientific experts. --- (1) Any document purporting
to be a report under the hand of a government scientific expert to whom this section applies, upon
any matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination or analysis and report in the course of any
proceeding under this Code, may be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under
this Code.
(2). The court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine any such expert as to the subject matter of
his report.
(3). Where any such expert is summoned by a court and he is unable to attend personally, he may,
unless the court has expressly directed him to appear personally, depute any responsible officer
Page 23 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
of a Chemical Examiner is admissible even if he is not

    produced as a witness though, the Court may summon and

    examine him as to the subject matter of the report. Nothing

    is there in High Court’s judgment to show that before the

    trial court any application was moved to summon the

    Chemical Examiner but the same was rejected.                                                  In

    paragraph 19 of its judgment, the High Court records that

    no specific order was passed by the trial judge while

    admitting the CA (Chemical Analyst) report. The High Court

    thereafter goes on to observe that in cases under
NDPS Act
as and when a CA report is tendered, the Court must insist

    the prosecutor to examine the CA. In our view, there is no

    such requirement of law that Chemical Examiner would

    have to be called in each NDPS case to prove the report

    when it is otherwise admissible under sub-section (1) of




working with him to attend the court, if such officer is conversant with the facts of the case and can
satisfactorily depose in Court on his behalf.
(4). This section applies to the following Government scientific experts, namely:-
(a) any Chemical Examiner or Assistant Chemical Examiner to Government;
(b) the Chief Controller of Explosives;
(c) the Director of the Finger Print Bureau;
(d) the Director, Haffkeine Institute, Bombay;
(e) the Director, Deputy Director or Assistant Director of a Central Forensic Science Laboratory or a
State Forensic Science Laboratory;
(f) the Serologist to the Government.
(g) any other Government scientific experts specified, by notification, by the Central Government for
this purpose.
Page 24 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
Section 293
of CrPC. Moreover, from the judgment of the

       trial court it appears that the Chemical Examiner’s report

       was admitted in evidence as Exh Nos.81 and 82. Nothing is

       there in High Court’s judgment that any objection was

       raised in respect of exhibiting the Chemical Examiner’s

       report. In such circumstances, reason (b) supra assigned

       by the High Court for ordering re-trial is not sustainable.
22.        As far as reasons (c) and (d) (supra) assigned for

       ordering a re-trial are concerned, they are linked to each

       other and shall, therefore, be discussed simultaneously.

       Before we discuss the same, it would be useful to survey

       judicial pronouncements as to why production of the seized

       contraband may be important and in what manner recovery

       of contraband may be proved.
23.        In Jitendra and Another v. State of M. P.10 the

       Charas and Ganja alleged to have been seized from the

       possession of the accused were not produced before the trial

       court to connect them with the sample sent to the forensic

       science laboratory (FSL). The High Court noticed the lacuna

       but brushed it aside by observing that non-production of
10
(2004) 10 SCC 562
Page 25 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
those articles before the court is not fatal to the prosecution

       when the defense had not insisted during trial that those be

       produced. While observing so, the High Court relied on
Section 465
CrPC to hold that non-production of the

       material object was a mere procedural irregularity and did

       not cause prejudice to the accused. Rejecting the aforesaid

       reasoning, this Court held:
“6. In our view, the view taken by the High Court is
                  unsustainable. In the trial it was necessary for the
                  prosecution to establish by cogent evidence that the
                  alleged quantities of charas and ganja were seized
                  from the possession of the accused. The best
                  evidence would have been the seized materials
                  which ought to have been produced during the trial
                  when marked as material objects. There is no
                  explanation for this failure to produce them. Mere
                  oral evidence as to their features and production of
                  panchnama does not discharge the heavy burden
                  which lies on the prosecution, particularly where the
                  offense is punishable with a stringent sentence as
                  under the
NDPS Act
. …”
24.        The aforesaid view was followed by this Court in
Ashok v. State of M.P.11
, wherein this Court, inter alia,

       emphasized upon the necessity of maintaining proper

       custody of the seized contraband from the date of its seizure

       till obtaining of FSL report including production in Court

       because for the prosecution to succeed it is imperative that
11
(2011) 5 SCC 123
Page 26 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
there must be evidence to connect the forensic report with

       the substance that was seized from the possession of the

       accused.
Similar was the view taken by this Court in
Vijay

       Jain v. State of M.P.12
25.
In
Noor Aga v. State of Punjab13
, the accused, an

       Afghan national, was apprehended with 1.4 kg heroin

       concealed in layered wall of a carton carrying grapes. The

       contraband articles were produced before the Magistrate.

       Evidence, however, was not clear regarding the purpose of

       such production and there was no evidence that order was

       passed       in   respect   of   its   destruction.   Moreover,   no

       application for destruction was filed. During trial, the seized

       contraband was not produced. Submission, on behalf of

       accused, inter alia, was that prosecution having not

       produced the physical evidence of the seizure before the

       court, particularly the sample of the purported contraband

       material, no conviction could have been based thereupon.

       On behalf of the prosecution, submission was that the

       contraband was destroyed under orders of the Magistrate.

       This Court found that there was no cogent evidence that
12
(2013) 14 SCC 527
13
(2008) 16 SCC 417
Page 27 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
guidelines in respect of destruction of contraband articles

       were followed. Relevant observations are extracted below:
“96. Last but not the least, physical evidence
                  relating to three samples taken from the bulk
                  amount of heroin was also not produced. Even if it
                  is accepted for the sake of argument that the bulk
                  quantity was destroyed, the samples were essential
                  to be produced and proved as primary evidence for
                  the purpose of establishing the fact of recovery of
                  heroin as envisaged under
Section 52-A
of the Act.”


       25.1. After observing as above, this Court proceeded to

       notice several discrepancies in the evidence produced and

       held:
“100. Physical evidence of a case of this nature being
                  the property of the court should have been treated
                  to be sacrosanct. Non-production thereof would
                  warrant drawing of a negative inference within the
                  meaning of
section 114 (g)
of the Evidence Act. While
                  there are such a large number of discrepancies, if a
                  cumulative effect thereto is taken into consideration
                  on the basis whereof the permissive inference would
                  be that serious doubts are created with respect to
                  the prosecution’s endeavor to prove the fact of
                  possession of contraband by the appellant.”
26.        Following the decision in
Noor Aga
(supra), this

       Court, in
Union of India v. Jaroopram14
, laid emphasis on

       the production of the bulk quantity of seized contraband in
14
(2018) 4 SCC 334
Page 28 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
absence of there being evidence of its disposal. The relevant

   observations are extracted below:
“10. Omission on the part of the prosecution to
             produce the bulk quantity of seized opium would
             create a doubt in the mind of the court on the
             genuineness of the samples drawn and marked as
             A, B, C, D, E, F from the allegedly seized contraband.
             However, the simple argument that the same had
             been destroyed, cannot be accepted as it is not clear
             that on what authority it was done. Law requires
             that such an authority must flow from an order
             passed by the Magistrate. On a bare perusal of the
             record, it is apparent that at no point of time any
             prayer had been made by the prosecution for
             destruction of the said opium or disposal thereof
             otherwise. The only course of action the prosecution
             should have resorted to is for its disposal is to obtain
             an order from the competent court of Magistrate as
             envisaged under
section 52A
of the Act. It is
             explicitly made under the Act that as and when such
             an application is made, the Magistrate may, as soon
             as may be, allow the application.
11. There is no denial of the fact that the
             prosecution has not filed any such application for
             disposal /destruction of the allegedly seized bulk
             quantity of contraband material nor was any such
             order passed by the Magistrate. Even no notice has
             been given to the accused before such alleged
             destruction /disposal. It is also pertinent here to
             mention that the trial court appears to have believed
             the prosecution's story in a haste and awarded
             conviction to the respondent without warranting the
             production of bulk quantity of contraband. But, the
             High Court committed no error in dealing with this
             aspect of the case and disbelieving the prosecution
             story by arriving at the conclusion that at the trial,
             the bulk quantities of contraband were not exhibited
             to the witnesses at the time of adducing evidence.”
Page 29 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
27.
In
Baldev Singh v. State of Haryana15
, a three-
Judge Bench of this Court, following the decisions in

     Jitendra (supra),
Vijay Jain
(supra)
Ashok
(supra) and
Noor Aga
(supra), allowed the appeal of a convict on the

     ground that the seized contraband was not produced and

     there was no satisfactory evidence regarding proper custody

     of the contraband.
28.
In
Vijay Pandey v. State of U.P.16
, this Court laid

     emphasis on the existence of evidence to correlate the seized

     sample with the one that was tested. The relevant

     observations are reproduced below:
“8. The failure of the prosecution in the present case
                to relate the seized sample with that seized from the
                appellant makes the case no different from failure to
                produce the seized sample itself. In the
                circumstances the mere production of a laboratory
                report that the sample tested was narcotics cannot
                be conclusive proof by itself. The sample seized and
                that tested have to be correlated.”
29.
In
State of Rajasthan v. Sahi Ram17
, the High

     Court acquitted the accused on the ground that muddamal

     (i.e., case property or seized goods) were not produced. The

     High Court held that in absence of production of seized
15
(2021) 18 SCC 523
16
(2019) 18 SCC 215
17
(2019) 10 SCC 649
Page 30 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
goods the prosecution failed to lead primary evidence of the

   seizure and thus, the entire evidence of the prosecution

   leading to recovery had to be discarded.
This Court did not

   accept the verdict of the High Court and, while allowing the

   appeal and restoring conviction recorded by the trial court,

   after discussing earlier decisions in Jitendra (supra),
Noor

   Aga
(supra),
Ashok
(supra),
Vijay Jain
(supra) and
Vijay

   Pandey
(supra), held that in none of the decisions of this

   Court non-production of the contraband material before the

   court has singularly been found to be sufficient to grant the

   benefit of acquittal. After holding so, the law on the point

   was summarized in the following terms:
“18. If the seizure of the material is otherwise proved
             on record and is not even doubted or disputed, the
             entire contraband material need not be placed
             before the court. If the seizure is otherwise not in
             doubt, there is no requirement that the entire
             material ought to be produced before the court. At
             times, material could be so bulky, for instance as in
             the present material when those 7 bags weighed 223
             Kg that it may not be possible and feasible to
             produce the entire bulk before the Court. If the
             seizure is otherwise proved, what is required to be
             proved is the fact that the samples taken from and
             out of the contraband material were kept intact, that
             when the samples was submitted for forensic
             examination the seals were intact, that the report of
             the forensic experts shows the potency, nature and
             quality of the contraband material and that based
Page 31 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
on such material the essential                            ingredients
                 constituting an offense are made out.”
30.         At this stage, we may refer to the provisions of
Section 52-A18
of NDPS Act. This section, inter alia, enables

     preparation of inventory of seized contraband, drawing of

     samples therefrom, taking of photographs, etc., as well as

     its disposal. Sub-section (4) of
Section 52-A
is important. It

     provides that every court shall treat the inventory, the

     photographs of the contraband and any list of samples
18
Section 52-A
. Disposal of seized narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. – (1) The Central
Government may, having regard to the hazardous nature, vulnerability to theft, substitution,
constraint of proper storage space or any other relevant consideration, in respect of any narcotic
drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify such narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or
conveyance or class of narcotic drugs, class of psychotropic substances, class of controlled
substances or conveyances, which shall, as soon as may be after their seizure, be disposed of by
such officer and in such manner as that Government may, from time to time, determine after
following the procedure hereinafter specified.
(2) Where any narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances has
been seized and forwarded to the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station or to the officer
empowered under
section 53
, the officer referred to in sub-section (1) shall prepare an inventory of
such narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances containing
such details relating to their description, quality, quantity, mode of packing, marks, numbers or such
other identifying particulars of the narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances
or conveyances or the tracking in which they are packed, country of origin and other particulars as
the officer referred to in sub-section (1) may consider relevant to the identity of the narcotic drugs,
psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances in any proceedings under this Act
and make an application, to any magistrate for the purpose of --
(a) certifying the correctness of the inventory so prepared; or
(b) taking in the presence of such Magistrate, photographs of such drugs, substances or
         conveyances and certifying such photographs as true; or
(c) allowing to draw representative samples of such drugs or substances, in the presence of
         such Magistrate and certifying the correctness of any list of samples so drawn
(3) Where an application is made under sub-section (2), the Magistrate shall, as soon as may be,
allow the application.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
(1 of 1872) or the
Code of
Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974), every court trying an offense under this Act, shall treat the
inventory, the photographs of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or
conveyances and any list of samples drawn under sub-section (2) and certified by the Magistrate, as
primary evidence in respect of such offence.
Page 32 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
drawn under sub-section (2) and certified by the Magistrate,

   as primary evidence in respect of such offence.
31.        In the light of the discussion above, in our view,

   mere non-production of the seized contraband during trial

   may not be fatal if there is reliable evidence in respect of its

   seizure, drawing of samples therefrom, and FSL report

   relating to the sample drawn from the seized material.

   However, to ensure that no adverse inference is drawn

   against the prosecution for non-production of the seized

   contraband, documents prepared in terms of the provisions

   of
Section 52-A
, inter alia, evidencing preparation of

   inventory of seized contraband and drawing of samples

   therefrom, would have to be brought on record. Likewise,

   evidence should be there that the sample drawn from the

   inventory was sent to FSL in a sealed container/ envelop,

   as per guidelines, and that the seal was found intact at the

   end of FSL. This is to obviate any doubt regarding sample

   being tampered in transit. Similarly, FSL’s report along with

   the sample tested by it is to be placed on record so that there

   remains no doubt regarding the sample tested.
Page 33 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
32.       In the instant case, trial court in its judgment has

   observed as follows:
“55. Shri Hatwar (SW No.7) has also stated in his
             examination in chief that, I sent a letter (Exh No.83)
             to the First Class Judicial Magistrate, Akota for
             getting the inventory of the consignment of Ganja
             that was found in possession of the accused no.1
             and 2 made and, accordingly, the said court
             prepared the inventory as per Exh. No.84.
56. Going through the inventory at Exh. No.84, it
             appears that, it was made by the First Class Judicial
             Magistrate, Court No.2, Akot on dated 25.9.2020
             i.e., immediately on the day following the date of
             occurrence i.e., dated 23.9.2020. Basically, the
             hearing proceedings appear to be going on till the
             midnight of dated 23.9.2020 i.e., from 00.26 till 1.09
             hours on dated 24.9.2020. Therefore, one day after
             24th i.e., immediately on the following day i.e., on
             dated 25.9.2020 the court appears to have made the
             inventory of Exh. No.84.
57. Accordingly, the said court has mentioned in
             Exh. No.84 that the entire consignment was found
             properly sealed, samples were sealed and were
             sealed again, its weight of 39.180 kilos was noted
             correctly and in detail. It was also mentioned in it
             that the entire consignment was properly sealed and
             the seal was intact and it has been resealed. Later it
             was also mentioned in it that the First Class Judicial
             Magistrate of the said court and the panchas and
             the witnesses have signed the said inventory.
58. The driver Gopal Singh (SW No.6) has stated in
             his examination in chief that, he had taken such
             properly sealed samples to the Forensic Laboratory,
             Amravati for chemical analysis and for examination.
The chemical analysis report of the said substance
             given by the said laboratory after examining it are
             on record at Exh. No.81 and 82. It is clearly
             mentioned in the said report that the sample of the
Page 34 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
said substance is nothing but Ganja. It is mentioned
             in the report that the said samples were brought to
             the said laboratory through Gopal Singh (SW No.6)
             the police constable, batch number 2140. The seal
             of the wrapping on the samples were intact and it is
             mentioned in Exh. No.81.
59. From the above it stands indisputably proven
             beyond all possible doubts that, the accused no.1
             Kailas and accused no.2 Raju were found in
             possession of Ganja weighing 39 kilograms in the
             hut that is located behind the Mari Mata Temple at
             Adgaon on dated 23.9.2020. There is not even a
             word of clarification except denial in the statement
             recorded under
section 313
of CrPC of the accused
             in this behalf.”
33.        From above, prima facie, there existed material to

   indicate that the seized contraband was sent in a sealed

   condition for preparation of inventory. Thereafter, inventory

   was prepared, samples were drawn and sealed; and the

   samples were sent to FSL in a sealed condition, which found

   the seal intact. The High Court, however, observed that the

   representative sample was not opened before the Court at

   the time of recording of statement of the concerned witness.

   Be that as it may, this was not a ground to direct for a re-

   trial when the appellate court has power to take additional

   evidence under
Section 391
of CrPC, which, inter alia, can

   be exercised to exhibit a document or material already on

   the record of the Court. And if those defects are fatal to the
Page 35 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
prosecution, the appellate court is free to take its decision

   as may be warranted in the facts of the case. But, in any

   event, it cannot be a ground to direct a re-trial.
34.       We are therefore of the view that even for reasons (c)

   and    (d)   (supra),        direction   for a   re-trial     cannot    be

   countenanced. We shall now consider as to what would be

   the appropriate relief to the appellant, that is, should he be

   acquitted      or   the       appeals    be   restored      for   a   fresh

   consideration by the High Court in accordance with law.
35.       In our view, a direction for restoration of appeals

   before the High Court for a fresh decision would be more

   appropriate, reasons being: (a) neither the High Court nor

   the Trial Court has enlisted the entire evidence available on

   record therefore it is difficult for us to take a decision with

   precision as to whether the prosecution has been successful

   in bringing home the charge against the accused; (b) the

   High Court’s judgment does not address the entire evidence

   on record, rather it is swayed by an erroneous view that the

   video-record was the best evidence available which was not

   converted into legally admissible evidence; and (c) the

   parties would lose the right of appeal if we take a decision
Page 36 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
on the merits more so when the High Court has not taken a

   final call on merits. In our view, therefore, ends of justice

   would be served if the appeal(s) are restored on the file of

   the High Court for a fresh decision in accordance with law.
36.       Consequently, the appeal is allowed. The impugned

   order of the High Court is set aside. Both the appeals (i.e.,

   one filed by the appellant, being Criminal Appeal No.449 of

   2023, and the other by the co-accused Raju Motiram

   Solanke, being Criminal Appeal No.457 of 2024), are

   restored on the file of the High Court for a fresh decision in

   accordance with law, preferably, within six months from the

   date this order is communicated to the High Court.
37.       We also direct that the appellant, who was released

   on bail by an order of this Court dated 05.05.2025, shall

   continue to remain on bail during the pendency of the

   appeal subject to the condition that he shall cooperate in

   the hearing of the appeal(s) by the High Court. The other

   accused Raju Motiram Solanke who had not filed appeal

   against the order of the High Court would be at liberty to

   apply to the High Court for suspension of sentence and bail,

   which shall be considered on its own merit.
Page 37 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025
38.        At this stage, we would like to clarify that we have

   not expressed opinion on the merit of the appeals filed by

   the appellant and the other co-accused before the High

   Court. Our discussion in this judgment was with a view to

   assess whether in the facts and law a re-trial is necessitated

   or not.
39.        Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed

   of.
......................................J.
                                                     (MANOJ MISRA)



                                      ......................................J.
                                                   (UJJAL BHUYAN)
     NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 15, 2025
Page 38 of 38
SLP Criminal No. 4646 of 2025