[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Kisan Vithoba Aakhade (D) Th Lrs vs Suresh Tukaram Nerkar on 9 September, 2025
Author:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
2025 INSC 1092



                                                                                Non-Reportable

                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                       Civil Appeal No. 720 of 2015

                                  Kisan Vithoba Aakhade (D)
                                  Through LRs. and Others
                                                                                  …Appellants
                                                                 Versus
                                  Suresh Tukaram Nerkar
                                                                                 …Respondent


                                                             JUDGMENT
K. VINOD CHANDRAN, J.
The concurrent findings on facts as entered into

                                  by the trial court and the first appellate court, to reject

                                  the suit filed, was overturned by the High Court in

                                  Second Appeal holding, the reading of the document

                                  establishing title; of the plaintiff and the findings on
Signature Not Verified         possession; of the defendants, perverse.
Digitally signed by
VARSHA MENDIRATTA
Date: 2025.09.09
17:50:21 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 11
Civil Appeal No. 720 of 2015
2.         Shri Satyajit A. Desai, learned counsel for the

      appellants argued that the sale deed exhibited at Ext. 81,

      was produced by the plaintiff. Though it showed the

      extent of 150 square metres, actually as per the revenue

      records produced by the defendants, as on the date of

      sale deed the vendor of the plaintiff had possession only

      of 109.70 square metres. The balance portion was an

      open space which was in the possession of the deceased

      1st appellant, the 8th defendant in the suit. The revenue

      records were corrected after the written statement was

      filed by the defendants. Despite assertion of possession

      by the plaintiff, in the Commission taken out by the

      plaintiff it was found with the 9th defendant. Even then the

      plaintiff did not seek for recovery of possession. It is

      argued that there was no question of law arising in the

      Second Appeal and the High Court erred in reversing the

      concurrent finding on facts of the trial court and the first

      appellate court.
Page 2 of 11
Civil Appeal No. 720 of 2015
3.         Shri Gagan Sanghi, learned counsel for the

      respondent No. 1/ plaintiff read to us the reliefs sought in

      the plaint, which was a declaration of ownership and

      possession with consequential injunction. The plaintiff

      was in possession of the entire property wherein

      admittedly there was a building. The disputed land was

      lying contiguous to the plot in which the building was

      constructed. The defendants were dumping waste in the

      property and keeping manure thereon, which was

      objected to. On objections raised there was a threat

      levelled and hence the suit was filed. The mere finding of

      manure and waste on the property cannot lead to a

      finding of possession. The appellate court wrongly found

      that the title deed showed only a lower extent which was

      found to be a mistake of fact amounting to perversity by

      the High Court.
4.         The plaint was filed for declaration of ownership

      and possession and consequential injunction from
Page 3 of 11
Civil Appeal No. 720 of 2015
interference with the open space, lying adjacent to the

      residential building. The property as covered by Ext. 81

      title deed was more fully described in the 1st paragraph

      of the plaint, for which the declaration was sought insofar

      as the ownership and possession as also consequential

      permanent injunction against the defendants from

      interfering with the ownership and possession of the

      plaintiff. The plaint averments clearly indicate that the

      suit was necessitated since the defendants failed to give

      heed to the objections raised by the plaintiff against the

      defendants using the property to keep manure and dump

      waste.
5.         The suit was compromised insofar as the

      defendants 1 to 7 are concerned. Defendants 8 to 12 went

      to trial but with only a written objection to the IA for

      temporary injunction by the 9th defendant. On a query

      being put to the learned counsel appearing for the

      appellants, it was asserted that the 8th defendant
Page 4 of 11
Civil Appeal No. 720 of 2015
adopted the objection filed by the 9th defendant to the I.A

      praying temporary injunction, which was adopted as the

      written statement of the 9th defendant also. However, we

      notice from the judgment of the trial court itself that the

      8th defendant failed to file a written statement, and the 9th

      defendant alone contested the matter and adopted the

      objection filed to the IA praying injunction, as the 9th

      defendant’s written statement. Defendants 10 to 12

      remained           ex-parte.   We   are   surprised   with    the

      submission made by the learned counsel for the

      appellants to the specific query made by us, clearly

      contrary to the records. We find that the suit has not been

      contested by the 8th defendant or the defendants 10 to 12

      and they have chosen to file an appeal from the order in

      second appeal, along with the 9th defendant.
6.         Be that as it may, it was the contention of the 9th

      defendant that the property was his ancestral property,

      and he had been using it as a dung heap and for waste
Page 5 of 11
Civil Appeal No. 720 of 2015
disposal while also claiming common use as per an oral

      partition of 1974. The trial court found that due to the

      discrepancy in the revenue records; the correction

      regarding the extent having been made during the

      pendency of the suit, no reliance could be placed on the

      same. It was hence found that the plaintiff could not

      establish his title either over ‘ABCD’, marked in the map

      wherein the building existed and also ‘PCDF’, the

      adjacent open plot which was the bone of contention

      between the plaintiff and the 9th defendant. The first

      appellate court went further to find that since there was

      no claim for recovery of possession, the suit has to be

      dismissed under
Section 34
of the Specific Relief Act,

      1963, specifically the declaratory relief prayed for, being

      also a matter of discretion. It was also found by the first

      appellate court that the sale deed was only with respect

      to 109.70 square metres.
Page 6 of 11
Civil Appeal No. 720 of 2015
7.         The plaint was accompanied with a map showing

      the two different extents lying contiguous within ‘ABCD’

      the disputed open plot lying adjacent demarcated as

      ‘PCDF’. There was no dispute raised as against the plot

      in which there was a residential building, even by the 9th

      defendant who alone contested the suit. There was no

      cause for the trial court to find the title of entire ‘ABCD’ to

      be not established especially when there was a title

      deed.         The        Commissioner   has   given   specific

      measurements of the property and without a finding that

      the building was not constructed at least in the 109.70

      square metres, the trial court ought not to have declined

      the relief of declaration with respect to the entire ‘ABCD’.
8.         Insofar as the land indicated as ‘PCDF’, the trial

      court entered a finding based on the Commissioner’s

      report. The Commissioner’s report only spoke of the

      manure kept and waste dumped in the property; which

      according to us cannot be a valid ground to find
Page 7 of 11
Civil Appeal No. 720 of 2015
possession, especially when the case of the plaintiff was

      that waste is being thrown in the property and manure

      kept by the 9th defendant, without permission and

      despite specific objection raised against such acts.
9.         We also see from the Judgment of the trial court

      that the 9th defendant had claimed that in an oral partition

      by the sons and brothers of the father of the vendor of the

      plaintiff, the open land was kept in common. This claim

      was taken without any pleading or evidence regarding

      his relationship with the vendors family, who sold the

      property which devolved on him. The vendor of the

      plaintiff was the son of the original owner whose brothers

      and sons are said to have entered into an oral partnership

      in the year 1971. But for the bland assertions of partition

      and common use, nothing is produced to establish the

      same nor is anybody examined to substantiate the

      contentions. Without any evidence regarding the oral

      partition and without establishing the connection with
Page 8 of 11
Civil Appeal No. 720 of 2015
such partition or relationship with the vendor or his

      father, who was the original owner, the 9th defendant

      could not have raised a valid claim of possession-in-

      common, of the property.
10.        The High Court in the second appeal looked into

      the sale deed and found that it conveyed 150 square

      metres of property which was comprised in the two

      extents indicated separately in the map and together in

      the plaint description. The High Court also found that the

      mere reason of the manure and waste having been found

      in the property, cannot lead to a finding of possession;

      which finding is perverse. We are in perfect agreement

      with the findings of the High Court.
11.          The revenue records produced by the plaintiff

      showed the corrected area as per the sale deed. Merely

      because the correction was done in the course of the suit

      is no reason to disbelieve the public record maintained.

      The written submissions indicate that the application for
Page 9 of 11
Civil Appeal No. 720 of 2015
correction was filed much before the suit was filed and

      the documents were produced in first appeal by an

      application under Order 41 Rule 27 of the Civil

      Procedure Code, which however was rejected. Even

      dehors such proof the latest revenue records having

      shown the actual extent, it was for the defendants to

      disprove the same. The trial court ought not to have

      suspected the sanctity of the correction, unless it was

      disproved.
12.        The first appellate court’s finding on
Section 34
of

      the Specific Relief Act cannot be sustained since the 9th

      defendant did not establish possession. PW2, known to

      both parties, deposed that the vendor of the plaintiff used

      to tie his cattle in the property. It was also deposed that

      the 9th defendant used to keep manure and dump waste

      in the open plot, since the plaintiff was not residing

      therein. Hence, the plaintiff’s vendor’s possession is
Page 10 of 11
Civil Appeal No. 720 of 2015
established and the plea of his common use set up by the

      9th defendant is demolished.
13.        We cannot but reiterate that the deceased 1st

      appellant, now represented by the 2nd appellant and the

      appellants 3 to 5 never contested the suit and they cannot

      file an appeal and prosecute it based on the contentions

      of the 9th defendant though an identity of interest is

      claimed by the 9th defendant.
14.        For all the above reasons, we find absolutely no

      merit in the Appeal and the same stands dismissed.
15.        Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed

      of.
….….…………………….….. J.
(Prashant Kumar Mishra)



                                   .….….…………………….….. J.
(K. Vinod Chandran)

      New Delhi;
September 09, 2025.
Page 11 of 11
Civil Appeal No. 720 of 2015