[Cites
17
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Sajib Roy on 9 September, 2025
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Surya Kant
2025 INSC 1084                                                     REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NOs.           /2025
                                       (@ SLP (C) Nos.21392-21393/2019)



                              UNION OF INDIA & ORS.               APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS

                              SAJIB ROY                          RESPONDENT(S)

                                                        With

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NOs.           /2025
                                       (@ SLP (C) Nos.21394-21395/2019)

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NOs.           /2025
                                       (@ SLP (C) Nos.21926-21927/2019)

                                                         And

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NOs.           /2025
                                       (@ SLP (C) Nos.22432-22433/2019)

                                                JUDGMENT
Joymalya Bagchi, J.
Signature Not Verified   1. Leave granted.
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2025.09.09
16:29:01 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 22
2. Appellants have assailed common impugned judgment

           and     order     dated      12.10.20181         and      order    dated

           26.02.20192 whereby the respondents-writ petitioners

           who had applied as reserved candidates in OBC category

           after having availed age relaxation for the post of

           Constable (GD) were directed to be considered for

           recruitment under unreserved category.
3. Facts in a short compass giving rise to the appeals are

           as follows –

           Staff Selection Commission3                published employment

           notification for recruitment of Constables (GD) in BSF,

           CRPF, ITBP, SSB, NIA and SSF and Rifleman in Assam

           Rifles comprising physical test, written examination and

           medical        examination.        As     per     the     employment

           notification,      the    prescribed       age    limit    for    eligible

           candidates to participate in the recruitment process was

           18 to 23 years as on 01.08.2015 and age relaxation was

           given     to   various      reserved      candidates4.       For     OBC


1 In WP (C) No. 277/2017, WP (C) No. 279/2017, WP (C) No. 280/2017 and WP (C) No.
281/2017
2 In Review Application No. 3/2019, Review Application No. 4/2019, Review Application No.

5/2019 and Review Application No. 6/2019
3 SSC for short
4 Employment Notification no. F. No.3/1/2014–P&P-I (vol-II), Para 4A
Page 2 of 22
candidates, i.e., the respondents-writ petitioners, age

           relaxation was 3 years5.
4. All the respondents-writ petitioners availed of such age

           relaxation for participation in the recruitment process.

           However, they were declared unsuccessful as they had

           scored marks lower than the last selected candidate in

           the OBC category for various departments. But their

           marks were higher than the last selected candidate in

           the       unreserved       category         for     those   departments.

           Claiming that they ought to be permitted to migrate to

           the       unreserved         category,            the   respondents-writ

           petitioners approached the High Court. Union of India

           opposed the prayer on the ground that the respondents-

           writ petitioners had applied in the OBC category after

           availing age relaxation and under such circumstances

           cannot be considered eligible for appointment in

           unreserved category.
5. Relying on
Jitendra Kumar Singh & Anr v. State of UP &

           Ors6
, the High Court held that the refusal to permit



5 Para 4B of the aforementioned notification
6 (2010) 3 SCC 119
Page 3 of 22
respondents-writ      petitioners    to    migrate   to   the

  unreserved category though they scored higher than the

  last candidate in such category runs counter to the

  principles of merit-based recruitment in public services

  and would be opposed to the principles of equality

  enshrined under
Article 14
of the Constitution.           The

  High
Court further held
that relaxations in fee and age

  for reserved candidates to participate in the selection

  process are concessions in aid of reservation and do not

  impair the ‘level-playing field’ in the open competition,

  i.e., written examination where such candidates have

  scored more than those selected under the unreserved

  category.
6. Subsequently, Union of India by way of a review petition

  placed      on   record   an    office    memorandum      no.

  36011/1/98-Estt. (Res) dated 01.07.1998 which inter

  alia provided that SC/ST/OBC candidates who have

  availed relaxations in age limit, experience qualification

  or number of chances in written examinations would be

  deemed unavailable for consideration against the

  unreserved vacancies. Notwithstanding such office
Page 4 of 22
memorandum the High Court refused to review its

  judgment and the review petition came to be dismissed.
7. We have heard Mr. Shailesh Madiyal, learned senior

  counsel for the appellants and Dr. Nirmal Chopra and

  Ms.   Manika    Tripathy,    learned   counsel   for   the

  respondents-writ petitioners.
8. The moot issue which falls for consideration is did the

  High Court err in applying the ratio in
Jitendra Kumar
(supra) in the teeth of the office memorandum dated

  01.07.1998 which put a clog on migration of reserved

  candidates who have availed concessions in the form of

  age relaxation for appointment in unreserved category?
9.
In
Jitendra Kumar
(supra) this Court was called upon to

  decide whether availing relaxation in fees/upper age

  limit in the reserved category would disentitle such

  candidates from being considered for appointment in the

  unreserved seats. The Bench held such relaxations in

  fee or age were incidental and ancillary provisions which

  made the core concept of reservation under
Article 16(4)
effective. Such enlargement of zone of consideration by

  giving concession in fees/upper age limit were merely an
Page 5 of 22
‘aid to reservation’ and enabled the reserved candidate

to participate with others in an open competition on

merit. These concessions did not affect the level-playing

field in the recruitment process wherein both reserved

and unreserved candidates competed against each other

without handicap. The Bench elucidated as follows:-
“75. In our opinion, the relaxation in age does not
    in any manner upset the “level playing field”. It is
    not possible to accept the submission of the
    learned counsel for the appellants that relaxation
    in age or the concession in fee would in any
    manner be infringement of
Article 16(1)
of the
    Constitution of India. These concessions are
    provisions pertaining to the eligibility of a
    candidate to appear in the competitive
    examination. At the time when the concessions
    are availed, the open competition has not
    commenced. It commences when all the
    candidates who fulfil the eligibility conditions,
    namely, qualifications, age, preliminary written
    test and physical test are permitted to sit in the
    main written examination. With age relaxation
    and the fee concession, the reserved candidates
    are merely brought within the zone of
    consideration, so that they can participate in the
    open competition on merit. Once the candidate
    participates in the written examination, it is
    immaterial as to which category, the candidate
    belongs. All the candidates to be declared eligible
    had participated in the preliminary test as also in
    the physical test. It is only thereafter that
    successful candidates have been permitted to
    participate in the open competition.”
Page 6 of 22
10. Having propounded the aforesaid general principles, the

           Bench proceeded to decide the case in light of the

           relevant recruitment rules:-
“65.
In any event the entire issue in the present
                appeals need not be decided on the general
                principles of law
laid down in
various judgments
                as noticed above. In these matters, we are
                concerned with the interpretation of the 1994
                Act, the Instructions dated 25-3-1994 and the
                G.O. dated 26-2-1999. The controversy herein
                centres around the limited issue as to whether an
                OBC who has applied exercising his option as a
                reserved category candidate, thus becoming
                eligible to be considered against a reserved
                vacancy, can also be considered against an
                unreserved vacancy if he/she secures more
                marks than the last candidate in the general
                category.”
11. It is clear that the decision in
Jitendra Kumar
(supra)

           is not founded on the general principles but on the

           interpretation of the relevant statute7, government

           order8     and     instructions9           regulating   the   selection

           process. It may not be out of place to note Section 8 (1)

           of the 1994 Act empowered the State Government to

           grant concessions in respect of age limit, fees for

           reserved categories in any competitive examination or




7 The U.P. Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other

Backward Classes) Act, 1994 (1994 Act for short)
8 GO dated 26.02.1999
9 Instructions dated 25.03.1994
Page 7 of 22
interview.         The       government            instructions           dated

            25.03.1994 permitted reserved candidates availing such

            concessions to be adjusted against unreserved seats10.
12. In light of such government instructions the Bench

            held:-
“72. ……From the above it becomes quite
                  apparent that the relaxation in age-limit is
                  merely to enable the reserved category
                  candidate to compete with the general
                  category candidate, all other things being
                  equal. The State has not treated the
                  relaxation in age and fee as relaxation in the
                  standard for selection, based on the merit of
                  the candidate in the selection test i.e. main
                  written test followed by interview.”
13. The        ratio    in
Jitendra       Kumar
(supra)      is    clearly

            distinguishable on facts. The recruitment process at

            hand      is     regulated       by    office memorandum dated

            01.07.1998 which bars the migration of a reserved

            candidate. Office memorandum reads as follows:-
"No.36011/1/98-Estt. (Res)
                           Ministry of Personnel, P.G. & Pensions
                            Department of Personnel & Training
                                          New Delhi Dated 01.07.1998
                                  OFFICE MEMORANDUM



10 4. If any person belonging to reserved categories is selected on the basis of merits in open

competition along with general category candidates, then he will not be adjusted towards
reserved category, that is, he shall be deemed to have been adjusted against the unreserved
vacancies. It shall be immaterial that he has availed any facility or relaxation (like relaxation
in age-limit) available to reserved category.
Page 8 of 22
Subject: Relaxations and concessions for SCs
         and STs clarification regarding.
The undersigned is directed to refer to this
         Department's O.M.No.36012/13/88-Estt. (SCT)
         dated May 22, 1989 and to clarify that the
         instructions contained in the C.M. apply in all
         types of direct recruitment whether by written
         test alone or written test followed by interview or
         by interview alone.
2. O.M. dated May 22, 1989
referred to above
and
         the
         O.M. No. 36012/2/96-ESTT(RES) dated July 2,
         1997 provide that in cases of direct recruitment,
         the SC/ST/OBC candidates who are selected on
         their own merit will not be adjusted against
         reserved vacancies.
3. In this connection, it is clarified that only such
         SC/ST/OBC candidates who are selected on the
         same standard as applied to general candidates
         shall not be adjusted against reserved vacancies.
         In other words, when a relaxed standard is
         applied in selecting an SC/ST/OBC candidates
         for example in the age limit, experience
         qualification, permitted number of chances in
         written     examination,      extended      zone    of
         consideration larger then what is provided for
         general category candidates etc. the SC/ST/OBC
         candidates are to be counted against reserved
         vacancies. Such candidates would be deemed as
         unavailable for consideration against unreserved
         vacancies.
14. It may be apposite to bear in mind the respondents-writ

    petitioners have without demur participated in the

    selection process and had not called in question the
Page 9 of 22
constitutional validity of the aforementioned office

           memorandum.
15. Given           this     situation,    the     High   Court   erred    in

           mechanically applying the ratio in
Jitendra Kumar
(supra) to the present case without appreciating the

           difference in the factual matrix of the present case with

           the cited authority.
While in
Jitendra Kumar
(supra) the

           government instructions dated 25.03.1994 expressly

           permitted           reserved    candidates     who    have     availed

           relaxation in fees/upper age limit etc. to be considered

           for    appointment             in   unreserved     category,    office

           memorandum dated 01.07.1998 clearly barred such

           migration in the event the reserved candidates had

           availed relaxations in age, experience qualification, etc.
16. It is trite the ratio in a judgment must be read in the

           facts of a particular case and cannot have universal

           application.          In Quinn v. Leathem11, Lord Halsbury

           remarked:-
“….there are two observations of a general
                 character which I wish to make, and one is to
                 repeat what I have very often said before, that
                 every judgment must be read as applicable to the
                 particular facts proved, or assumed to be proved,

11 [1901] AC 495 (HL)
Page 10 of 22
since the generality of the expressions which may
                be found there are not intended to be expositions
                of the whole law, but governed and qualified by
                the particular facts of the case in which such
                expressions are to be found. The other is that a
                case is only an authority for what it actually
                decides. I entirely deny that it can be quoted for
                a proposition that may seem to follow logically
                from it. Such a mode of reasoning assumes that
                the law is necessarily a logical code, whereas
                every lawyer must acknowledge that the law is
                not always logical at all.”
17.
In
Haryana Financial Corporation & Anr v. Jagdamba Oil

           Mills & Anr12
, the Court held:-
“21. Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or
                different fact may make a world of difference
                between conclusions in two cases. Disposal of
                cases by blindly placing reliance on a decision is
                not proper.
22. The following words of Hidayatullah, J. in the
                matter of applying precedents have become locus
                classicus: (
Abdul Kayoom v. CIT
, AIR p. 688, para
19)

                      “19. … Each case depends on its own
                      facts and a close similarity between one
                      case and another is not enough because
                      even a single significant detail may alter
                      the entire aspect. In deciding such
                      cases, one should avoid the temptation
                      to decide cases (as said by Cardozo) by
                      matching the colour of one case against
                      the colour of another. To decide,
                      therefore, on which side of the line a
                      case falls, the broad resemblance to
                      another case is not at all decisive.”
                      ***               ***               ***
                                  ***


12 (2002) 3 SCC 496
Page 11 of 22
“Precedent should be followed only so
                       far as it marks the path of justice, but
                       you must cut the dead wood and trim
                       off the side branches else you will find
                       yourself lost in thickets and branches.
My plea is to keep the path to justice
                       clear of obstructions which could
                       impede it.”
18. Whether the general observations in
Jitendra Kumar
(supra) could be treated as a binding precedent in

          respect of recruitment process where such migration is

          not permitted is no longer res integra.
19.
In
Deepa E. V. v. Union of India & Ors13
, a two judge

          Bench of this Court taking note of self-same office

          memorandum applicable in the present case held the

          ratio        in
Jitendra    Kumar
(supra)   pertained   to

          interpretation        of   the    1994     Act   and   government

          instructions dated 25.03.1994 and general principles

          made therein were inapplicable to a recruitment process

          where such migration is not permitted. The Bench

          observed:-
“8. The learned counsel for the appellant mainly
                relied upon the judgment of this Court
                in
Jitendra Kumar Singh v. State of U.P
, which
                deals with the U.P. Public Services (Reservation
                for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
                Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994 and

13 (2017) 12 SCC 680
Page 12 of 22
Government Order dated 25-3-1994. On a
                 perusal of the above judgment, we find that there
                 is no express bar in the said U.P. Act for the
                 candidates of SC/ST/OBC being considered for
                 the posts under general category. In such facts
                 and circumstances of the said case, this Court
                 has taken the view that the relaxation granted to
                 the reserved category candidates will operate a
                 level playing field. In the light of the express bar
                 provided under the proceedings dated 1-7-1998
                 the principle
laid down in
Jitendra Kumar
                 Singh cannot be applied to the case in hand.
10. Having regard to the observations in paras 65
                 and 72, in our view, the principles
laid down
                 in
Jitendra Kumar Singh cannot be applied to the
                 case in hand. As rightly pointed out by the High
                 Court that the judgment in Jitendra Kumar
                 Singh was based on the statutory interpretation
                 of the U.P. Act, 1994 and Government Order
                 dated 25-3-1994 which provides for entirely a
                 different scheme.”
20. Considering similar embargo14 in the recruitment

           process, another Coordinate Bench in
Gaurav Pradhan

           & Ors v. State of Rajasthan & Ors15
, held general

           observations in
Jitendra Kumar
(supra) shall not come

           in aid of reserved candidates who have availed age

           relaxation to migrate to general category. The Bench

           observed as follows:-
“32. We are of the view that the judgment of this
                 Court in Jitendra Kumar Singh which was based
                 on statutory scheme and the Circular dated 25-
                 3-1994 has to be confined to scheme which was
14 Para 6.2 of circular dated 24.06.2008
15 (2018) 11 SCC 352
Page 13 of 22
under consideration, statutory scheme and
                intention of the State Government as indicated
                from the said scheme cannot be extended to a
                State where the State circulars are to the contrary
                especially when there is no challenge before us to
                the converse scheme as delineated by the
                Circular dated 24-6-2008.”
21. These views have been reiterated in
Niravkumar

           Dilipbhai Makwana v. Gujarat Public Service Commission

           & Ors16
and affirmed by a three judge Bench in
Government (NCT of Delhi) & Ors v. Pradeep Kumar &

           Ors17
.
22. On the other hand, respondents-writ petitioners have

           relied on
Vikas Sankhala & Ors v. Vikas Kumar Agarwal

           & Ors18
,
Saurav Yadav & Ors v. State of UP & Ors19
,
Ajithkumar P. & Ors. v. Remin K. R. & Ors20
and
Sadhana

           Singh Dangi & Ors v. Pinki Asati & Ors21
, to sustain the

           view of the High Court that the migration of the reserved

           candidate who has scored higher than the last selected

           unreserved candidate is permissible. Respondents-writ

           petitioners argue that a bar to migration would be in




16 (2019) 7 SCC 383
17 (2019) 10 SCC 120
18 (2017) 1 SCC 350
19 (2021) 4 SCC 542
20 (2015) 16 SCC 778
21 (2022) 12 SCC 401
Page 14 of 22
violation of the principles of equality under
Article 14
and     counter        to     maintenance         of     efficiency     of

           administration enshrined under
Article 335
of the

           Constitution.
23.
In
Vikas Sankhala
(supra), the State government had

           relaxed the minimum pass marks in Teacher Eligibility

           Test22 by 10 percent to 20 percent for various reserved

           categories in the matter of recruitment of primary

           teachers. It was contended such relaxation was contrary

           to the extant reservation policy of the State and

           migration of such candidates who availed concession for

           recruitment       to    unreserved          categories    was      illegal.

           Reserved        candidates       relied      on   a    circular     dated

           11.05.2011 which permitted such migration. Holding

           that the said circular was issued after the recruitment

           process had commenced and migration was barred as

           per earlier circulars, the High Court held appointment

           of reserved candidates availing concession in qualifying

           marks      in     TET       against         unreserved     seats      was

           impermissible.
22 TET for short
Page 15 of 22
24. This Court analysed the concession given to reserved

   candidates with regard to qualifying marks in TET in the

   context of the recruitment rules which inter alia

   prescribed a uniform addition of 20 percent of TET

   marks    to   the   final    score   of   each   candidate.

   Consequently, the reserved candidates who secured

   lesser marks in TET would not get any additional

   advantage vis-à-vis general candidates in computing the

   final scores irrespective of the lowering of the qualifying

   marks in TET. The Bench clarified this issue as follows:-
“80. …..One of the heads is “marks in TET”. So
       far as this head is concerned, 20% of the marks
       obtained in TET are to be assigned to each
       candidate. Therefore, those reserved category
       candidates who secured lesser marks in TET
       would naturally get less marks under this head.
       We would like to demonstrate it with an example
       : Suppose a reserved category candidate obtains
       53 marks in TET, he is treated as having qualified
       TET. However, when he is considered for
       selection to the post of primary teacher, in
       respect of allocation of marks he will get 20%
       marks for TET. As against him, a general
       candidate who secures 70 marks in TET shall be
       awarded 14 marks in recruitment process. Thus,
       on the basis of TET marks reserved category
       candidate has not got any advantage while
       considering his candidature for the post. On the
       contrary, “level-playing field” is maintained
       whereby a person securing higher marks in TET,
       whether belonging to general category or reserved
       category, is allocated higher marks in respect of
       20% of TET marks. Thus, in recruitment process
       no weightage or concession is given and
Page 16 of 22
allocation of 20% of TET marks is applied across
                the board. Therefore, the High Court is not
                correct in observing that concession was given in
                the recruitment process on the basis of relaxation
                in TET.”
25. In this backdrop, the Bench held irrespective of the

           applicability of circular dated 11.05.2011 relaxation in

           TET qualifying marks does not amount to a concession

           which would disentitle migration of reserved candidates

           against unreserved seats. The Bench opined:-
“81. Once this vital differentiation is understood,
                it would lead to the conclusion that no concession
                becomes available to the reserved category
                candidate by giving relaxation in pass marks in
                TET insofar as recruitment process is concerned.
                It only enables them to compete with others by
                allowing them to participate in the selection
                process. In this backdrop, irrespective of the
                Circular dated 11-5-2011, the reserved category
                candidates who secured more marks than marks
                obtained by the last candidate selected in general
                category, would be entitled to be considered
                against unreserved category vacancies. However,
                it would be subject to the condition that these
                candidates have not availed any other concession
                in terms of number of attempts, etc., except on
                fee and age.”

           It may also be apposite to note that the earlier circulars

           applicable to the selection process23 did not put a

           restriction on selection of the reserved candidate

           availing concession in TET marks for appointment in


23 See Para 73 and 74 in
Vikas Sankhala
(supra)
Page 17 of 22
unreserved seats provided they scored higher than the

    last selected unreserved candidate.
26.
In
Ajithkumar
(supra)     the    issue   which   fell   for

    consideration was the power of the recruiting authority

    to conduct a preliminary examination in order to

    shortlist candidates and not the right of a reserved

    candidate seeking relaxation to migrate to unreserved

    category.
27.
In
Saurav Yadav
(supra) the issue which fell for decision

    was whether women OBC candidates could be adjusted

    against vacancies in the women general category. The

    case involved an interplay between vertical reservation

    and horizontal reservation for women. Lalit J., (as His

    Lordship then was) permitted the migration holding that

    the candidates in question had not availed of any special

    benefit which may disentitle them from being considered

    against general category seats:-
“42. We must also clarify at this stage that it is
         not disputed that Applicant 1 and other similarly
         situated candidates are otherwise entitled and
         eligible to be appointed in “Open/General
         Category” and that they have not taken or availed
         of any special benefit which may disentitle them
         from being considered against “Open/General
         Category” seat. The entire discussion and
Page 18 of 22
analysis in the present case is, therefore, from
                  said perspective.”
28. Supplementing this view, Ravindra Bhat J. held that:-
“65. ….it is too late in the day for the respondent
                  State to contend that women candidates who are
                  entitled to benefit of social category reservations,
                  cannot fill open category vacancies. The said view
                  is starkly exposed as misconceived, because it
                  would result in such women candidates with less
                  merit (in the open category) being selected, and
                  those with more merit than such selected
                  candidates, (in the social/vertical reservation
                  category) being left out of selection.”
29. However, such observations were premised on the fact

           that there was no rule, or direction which prohibited the

           adjustment of socially reserved categories of women in

           the general category or open category24.
30.
In
Sadhana Singh Dangi
(supra), the Court again looked

           into migration of women candidates availing horizontal

           reservation       from        reserved        i.e.   OBC    category   to

           unreserved        category.             The      recruitment    process

           permitted migration in vertical reservation but stated

           that     the     horizontal          reservation      for    women     is

           compartmentalised.
Referring to the observations of

           Ravindra Bhat J. in
Saurav Yadav
(supra) the Bench



24 See Para 57 in
Saurav Yadav
(supra)
Page 19 of 22
reversed the decision of the High Court barring

          migration in horizontal category, observing as follows:-
“22. It is true that the leading judgment
                in
Saurav Yadav [Saurav Yadav v. State of U.P.
,
                considered the matter from a general plane but
                the concurring judgment authored by S.
                Ravindra Bhat, J. did additionally consider the
                issue from the perspective of absence of any
                statutory rules in the field. It is also true that in
                the instant case, there are rules occupying the
                field and the case would be a fortiori, but we need
                not enter into that arena as, in our view, the
                general propositions
laid down in
Saurav
                Yadav by themselves are sufficient to take care of
                the controversy which has arisen in the instant
                matters.
23. The law
laid down in
Saurav Yadav is very
                clear that even while applying horizontal
                reservation, the merit must be given precedence
                and that if the candidates who belong to SCs, STs
                and OBCs have secured higher marks or are more
                meritorious, they must be considered against the
                seats meant for unreserved candidates.
These observations in
Sadhana Singh Dangi
(supra)

          must be read in the factual matrix of the case which

          permitted migration of candidates in vertical reservation

          unlike the present case.
31.
In
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited & Anr. v. Sandeep

          Chaudhary & Ors25
, the cut off marks was reduced for

          both OBC and general candidates and no special



25 (2022) 11 SCC 779
Page 20 of 22
concession was given to OBC candidates. Under these

    circumstances, the Court permitted the OBC candidates

    who had scored higher marks than the last selected

    candidate in the general category to avail unreserved

    seats.
32. On an analysis of the aforecited cases, we summarise as

    follows:
Whether      a     reserved       candidate     who    has    availed

    relaxation in fees/upper age limit to participate in open

    competition with general candidates may be recruited

    against unreserved seats would depend on the facts of

    each case. That is to say, in the event there is no

    embargo       in      the      recruitment       rules/employment

    notification, such reserved candidates who have scored

    higher than the last selected unreserved candidate shall

    be entitled to migrate and be recruited against

    unreserved seats. However, if an embargo is imposed

    under      relevant    recruitment          rules,   such    reserved

    candidates shall not be permitted to migrate to general

    category seats.
Page 21 of 22
33. Accordingly, we hold as the respondents-writ petitioners

    had availed concession of age for participating in the

    recruitment process, in the teeth of office memorandum

    dated 01.07.1998, the High Court was wrong in applying

    the ratio in
Jitendra Kumar
(supra) and permitting them

    to be considered for appointment in the unreserved

    category. Consequently, we set aside the common

    impugned judgment and order dated 12.10.2018 and

    order dated 26.02.2019 and allow the appeals. Pending

    application(s) if any, stand disposed of.
………………………………………., J
                                   (SURYA KANT)


                           ………………………………………, J
                                (JOYMALYA BAGCHI)
 New Delhi,
 September 09, 2025.
Page 22 of 22