[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shobhit Kumar Mittal vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 24 September, 2025
2025 INSC 1152


                                                                            NON-REPORTABLE


                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                     OF 2025
                            (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.4069 of 2024)

                   SHOBHIT KUMAR MITTAL                                      …APPELLANT

                                        VERSUS

                   STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH
                   & ANOTHER                                                 …RESPONDENTS




                                                 JUDGMENT
NAGARATHNA, J.
Leave granted.
2.       This appeal arises out of the order dated 27.02.2024 passed

                   by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Criminal

                   Miscellaneous Writ Petition No.2676 of 2024 dismissing the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
BORRA LM VALLI
Date: 2025.09.24
19:13:40 IST
application filed under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India
Reason:
Page 1 of 14
preferred by the accused/appellant, Shobhit Kumar Mittal and

thereby refusing to quash the proceedings arising out of FIR

No.347 of 2023 dated 09.11.2023 registered at PS Civil Lines,

Meerut. The said FIR was filed by Smt. Jyoti Garg, the

complainant/respondent No.2, against her husband, Mohit Mittal;

her mother-in-law, Shashi Mittal and appellant No.1 herein who is

her brother-in-law under
Sections 323
and
498A
of the Indian

Penal Code, 1860 (“
IPC
”, for short) and
Sections 3
and
4
of the

Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (“
Dowry Act
”, for short).
3.   Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the complainant/

respondent No.2 got married to Mohit Mittal, brother of the

accused/appellant herein on 01.05.2014. After a few months into

the marriage, on account of marital discord, the complainant/

respondent No.2 left her matrimonial home and started residing at

her parental home. Thereafter, both the parties initiated multiple

matrimonial proceedings against each other which are not really

germane to the facts of the present appeal.
4.   On 09.11.2023, the complainant/respondent No.2 lodged FIR

No.347 of 2023 with Police Station Civil Lines, Meerut under
Page 2 of 14
Sections 323
and
498A
of the IPC and
Sections 3
and
4
of the

Dowry Act against her husband, mother-in-law and the accused/

appellant herein.
5.     On perusal of the FIR dated 09.11.2023, the allegations

contained in the same can be crystallized as hereunder:
i.     The complainant/respondent No.2 got married to Mohit

       Mittal and within ten days of marriage, she started facing

       harassment for dowry.
ii.    The appellant along with the husband and mother-in-law of

       complainant/respondent No.2 got her to write a consent

       letter which was signed by her uncle and four other relatives

       after which she was allowed to live at her matrimonial house.
iii.   On 10.12.2022, due to repeated harassment related to

       dowry, a vein of the complainant/respondent No.2 in the

       brain burst and consequently her right hand and right leg

       got paralyzed due to which the complainant/respondent

       No.2 had to undertake physiotherapy.
Page 3 of 14
6.   Aggrieved by the registration of the FIR, the accused/

appellant, along with the mother-in-law and husband of the

complainant/respondent No.2, filed Writ Petition No.2676 of 2024

under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India before the High Court

of Allahabad praying for the quashing of FIR No.347 of 2023.
7.   The Allahabad High Court, vide impugned order dated

27.02.2024 refused to quash the proceedings arising out of the said

FIR. It was observed by the High Court that although the prayer

made in the said Writ Petition was to quash the FIR, the

accused/appellant sought the relief of grant of protection under
Section 41A
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (“
CrPC
”, for

short) only; and that on perusal of the said FIR, a prima facie case

of commission of a cognizable offence was made out.
8.   Aggrieved by the impugned order dated 27.02.2024, the

accused/appellant has preferred the present appeal praying for

quashing of FIR No.347 of 2023 dated 09.11.2023.
9.   We have heard learned counsel for the accused/appellant and

learned counsel for the respondent-State as well as respondent-

complainant. We have perused the material on record.
Page 4 of 14
10. We have given our thorough consideration to the arguments

advanced at the bar and the material on record.
11. In the instant case, the allegations in the FIR pertain to
Sections 323
and
498A
of the IPC and
Sections 3
and
4
of the

Dowry Act.
12.
Section 323
of the IPC deals with punishment for voluntarily

causing hurt.
13.
Section 498A
of the IPC deals with offences committed by the

husband or relatives of the husband subjecting cruelty towards the

wife.
14. An offence is punishable under
Section 323
of IPC when a

person commits an act with an intention to cause or with

knowledge that the said act is likely to cause bodily pain, disease

or infirmity to another person. Such an act or omission is

punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one

year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with

both.
Page 5 of 14
15. Similarly, an offence is punishable under
Section 498A
of the

IPC when a husband or his relative subjects a woman to cruelty,

which may result in imprisonment for a term extending up to three

years and a fine. The Explanation under
Section 498A
of the IPC

defines “cruelty” for the purpose of
Section 498A
of the IPC to mean

any of the acts mentioned in clauses (a) or (b) therein. The first limb

of clause (a) of the Explanation to
Section 498A
of the IPC states

that “cruelty” means any wilful conduct that is of such a nature as

is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide. The second limb of

clause (a) of the Explanation to
Section 498A
of the IPC states that

cruelty means any wilful conduct that is of such a nature as to

cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental

or physical) of the woman. Further, clause (b) of the Explanation

to
Section 498A
of the IPC states that cruelty would also include

harassment of the woman where such harassment is to coerce her

or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any

property or valuable security or is on account of failure by her or

any person related to her to meet such demand.
Page 6 of 14
16. Further,
Section 3
of the Dowry Act deals with the penalty for

giving or taking dowry. It states that any person who gives, takes,

or abets the giving or taking of dowry shall face a punishment of

imprisonment for a minimum term of five years and a fine not less

than fifteen thousand rupees or the value of the dowry, whichever

is greater.
Section 4
of the Dowry Act talks about the penalty for

demanding dowry. It states that any person demanding dowry

directly or indirectly from the parents or other relatives or

guardians of a bride or bridegroom, as the case may be, shall be

punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less

than six months, but which may extend to two years and with fine

which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
17.   The issue for consideration is whether, given the facts and

circumstances of the present case and after examining the FIR, the

High Court was right in refusing to quash the criminal proceedings

arising out of FIR No.347 of 2023 dated 09.11.2023 under
Section

323
and
498A
of the IPC and
Sections 3
and
4
of the Dowry Act, as

against the appellant herein.
Page 7 of 14
18.   A bare perusal of the FIR shows that the allegations made by

complainant/respondent No.2 are vague and omnibus. Other than

claiming that the husband and his family along with the

accused/appellant herein mentally harassed her with a demand

for dowry, the complainant/respondent No.2 has not provided any

specific details or described any particular instance of harassment.

She has also not mentioned the time, date, place, or manner in

which the alleged harassment occurred or the details of the nature

of demand or its particulars. Therefore, the FIR lacks concrete and

precise allegations. Furthermore, the complainant/respondent

No.2 has failed to impress the Court as to how the alleged

harassment has any proximate relationship to the said injury and

nerve damage that she sustained, so as to punish her in-laws

under
Section 323
IPC. There is no remote or proximate act or

omission attributed to the accused/appellant that implicates him

or assigns him any specific role in the said FIR for the offence of

hurt as defined under
Section 319
IPC. Furthermore, merely

stating that the accused/appellant has mentally harassed the

complainant/respondent No.2 with respect to a demand for dowry

does not fulfill the ingredients of
Section 498A
of IPC specially in
Page 8 of 14
absence of any cogent material or evidence on record to

substantiate the said allegations. The term “cruelty” cannot be

established without specific instances. The tendency of invoking

the aforesaid provisions, without mentioning any specific detail,

weakens the case of the prosecution and casts serious aspersions

on the probability of the version of the complainant. Therefore, this

Court cannot ignore the missing specifics in the FIR which is the

basic premise for invoking the criminal machinery of the State. In

such cases involving allegations of cruelty and harassment, there

would normally be a series of offending acts, which would be

required to be spelt out by the complainant against perpetrators in

specific terms to initiate criminal proceedings against them.

Therefore, mere general allegations of harassment without pointing

out the specific details would not be sufficient to continue criminal

proceedings against any person.
19. Courts have to be careful and cautious in dealing with

complaints and must take pragmatic realities into consideration

while dealing with matrimonial disputes where the allegations have
Page 9 of 14
to be scrutinized with great care and circumspection in order to

prevent miscarriage of justice and abuse of process of law.
20.
In this regard, it would be apposite to rely on the judgment of

this Court in the case of
State of Haryana vs. Bhajan Lal
, 1992

Suppl (1) SCC 335 (“Bhajan Lal”) with particular reference to

paragraph 102 therein, wherein this Court observed as hereunder:
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various
    relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of
    the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series
    of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary
    power Under
Article 226
or the inherent powers under
    Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted and
    reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases
    by way of illustration wherein such power could be
    exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any
    court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it
    may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly
    defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible
    guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list
    of myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be
    exercised.
(1)    Where the allegations made in the first information
    report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face
    value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
    constitute any offence or make out a case against the
    Accused.
(2)    Where the allegations in the first information report
    and other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not
    disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by
    police officers Under Section 156(1) of the Code except
Page 10 of 14
under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of
    Section 155(2) of the Code.
(3)   Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the
    FIR or complaint and the evidence collected in support of
    the same do not disclose the commission of any offence
    and make out a case against the Accused.
(4)   Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute
    a cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable
    offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer
    without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated Under
    Section 155(2) of the Code.
(5)    Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint
    are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of
    which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion
    that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the
    Accused.
(6)    Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any
    of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under
    which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution
    and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is
    a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
    providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the
    aggrieved party.
(7)    Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended
    with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously
    instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance
    on the Accused and with a view to spite him due to private
    and personal grudge.”
21. On a careful consideration of the aforementioned judicial

tests, we find that none of the offences alleged against the accused/

appellant herein is made out. In fact, we find that the allegations
Page 11 of 14
of cruelty, mental harassment and voluntarily causing hurt against

the accused/appellant herein are vague and general in nature and

therefore, the judgment of this Court in the case of Bhajan Lal

squarely applies to the facts of this case. It is neither expedient nor

in the interest of justice to permit the present prosecution

emanating from the FIR to continue.
22. Furthermore, at this juncture, we find it appropriate to quote

the observations of this Court in
Dara Lakshmi Narayana vs.

State of Bihar
, (2025) 3 SCC 735 wherein it was observed:
“27. A mere reference to the names of family members in
    a criminal case arising out of a matrimonial dispute,
    without specific allegations indicating their active
    involvement should be nipped in the bud. It is a well-
    recognised fact, borne out of judicial experience, that there
    is often a tendency to implicate all the members of the
    husband’s family when domestic disputes arise out of a
    matrimonial discord. Such generalised and sweeping
    accusations unsupported by concrete evidence or
    particularised allegations cannot form the basis for
    criminal prosecution. Courts must exercise caution in
    such cases to prevent misuse of legal provisions and the
    legal process and avoid unnecessary harassment of
    innocent family members. We say so for the reason that
    while the complainant/respondent No.2 has made vague
    and omnibus allegations against the accused/appellant
    herein, she has failed to justify the same before this Court.
    Such actions would create significant divisions and
    distrust among people, while also placing an unnecessary
    strain on the judicial system, particularly criminal courts.
Page 12 of 14
xxx
30.    The inclusion of
Section 498A
of the IPC by way of
an amendment was intended to curb cruelty inflicted on a
woman by her husband and his family, ensuring swift
intervention by the State. However, in recent years, as
there have been a notable rise Page 22 of 26 in matrimonial
disputes across the country, accompanied by growing
discord and tension within the institution of marriage,
consequently, there has been a growing tendency to
misuse provisions like
Section 498A
of the IPC as a tool for
unleashing personal vendetta against the husband and his
family by a wife. Making vague and generalised allegations
during matrimonial conflicts, if not scrutinized, will lead to
the misuse of legal processes and an encouragement for
use of arm-twisting tactics by a wife and/or her family.
Sometimes, recourse is taken to invoke
Section 498A
of the
IPC against the husband and his family in order to seek
compliance with the unreasonable demands of a wife.
Consequently, this Court has, time and again, cautioned
against prosecuting the husband and his family in the
absence of a clear prima facie case against them.
31.    We are not, for a moment, stating that any woman
who has suffered cruelty in terms of what has been
contemplated under
Section 498A
of the IPC should
remain silent and forbear herself from making a complaint
or initiating any criminal proceeding. That is not the
intention of our aforesaid observations but we should not
encourage a case like as in the present one, where as a
counterblast to the petition for dissolution of marriage
sought by the first appellant-husband of the second
respondent herein, a complaint under
Section 498A
of the
IPC is lodged by the latter. In fact, the insertion of the said
provision is meant mainly for the protection of a woman
who is subjected to cruelty in the matrimonial home
primarily due to an unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security in the form of dowry. However,
sometimes it is misused as in the present case.”
Page 13 of 14
23. In the aforementioned facts of the case and keeping the

judicial dicta rendered by this Court in mind, we find that the

impugned order dated 27.02.2024 of the High Court ought to be

set aside and is set aside. Consequently, FIR No.347 of 2023 dated

09.11.2023 lodged at Police Station Civil Lines, Meerut and all

consequent proceedings initiated pursuant thereto stand quashed,

only qua the accused/appellant herein.
24. It is needless to observe that the observations made in the

present appeal shall not come in the way of any other proceedings

pending between the parties which shall be decided on their own

merits and in accordance with law.
The appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
…………………………………..J.
                                     (B.V. NAGARATHNA)



                                     …………………………………..J.
                                     (R. MAHADEVAN)
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 24, 2025.
Page 14 of 14