[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Vaneeta Patnaik vs Nirmal Kanti Chakrabarti on 12 September, 2025
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
2025 INSC 1106                                                                              REPORTABLE



                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.                OF 2025
                            (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 17936 of 2025)


                         VANEETA PATNAIK                                                …APPELLANT(S)

                                                                     VERSUS


                         NIRMAL KANTI CHAKRABARTI & ORS.                               …RESPONDENT(S)




                                                                ORDER
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.    Leave granted
2.    Heard Ms. Meenakshi Arora, senior counsel and Ms.

                               Madhavi         Divan,        senior       counsel,   appearing   for   the

                               appellant and the respondent no.1 respectively.
3.    The appellant-Ms. Vaneeta Patnaik is a faculty member of

                               the West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences1,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
geeta ahuja
Date: 2025.09.12
16:26:27 IST
Kolkata. Dr. Nirmal Kanti Chakrabarti, respondent no.1
Reason:
1
Hereinafter referred to as “NUJS” or “University”
1
was appointed as a Vice Chancellor of NUJS on

                03.07.2019
4.       The appellant lodged a formal complaint on 26.12.2023

                with the Local Complaint Committee2 alleging sexual

                harassment on part of respondent no.1. The LCC rejected

                the complaint as barred by time inasmuch as the last

                alleged incident of sexual harassment occurred in April

                2023; whereas the complaint was filed on 26.12.2023

                which was not only beyond the prescribed period of

                limitation of three months but also beyond the extendable

                period of limitation of six months.
5.       The appellant, aggrieved by the rejection of her complaint,

                preferred a writ petition before the High Court. The single

                Judge of the High Court vide judgment and order dated

                22.05.2024 quashed the order of the LCC and directed for

                rehearing of the complaint on its merit. The single Judge

                held that the appellant was subjected to threat of

                detrimental treatment in her employment even after April

                2023 and as the Vice-Chancellor created an intimidating,

                offensive and hostile work environment for her, as such
2
Hereinafter referred to as “LCC”
2
the complaint was within time, taking the subsequent

     event as the last incident of sexual harassment.
6.   The aforesaid judgment and order of the single Judge of

     the High Court was taken up by the Division Bench in a

     writ appeal, FMA No. 873 of 2024 (M.A.T. No. 1295 of

     2024) and the same was allowed by the impugned

     judgment and order dated 23.12.2024.
7.   The Division Bench held that administrative actions taken

     against the appellant after April 2023 were collective

     decisions of the Executive Council, consisting of eminent

     academicians, jurists and even Supreme Court Judges

     and were not just personal actions of the Vice-Chancellor.

     It was improbable for the Vice-Chancellor to have prevailed

     over the decision of the Executive Council, exerting his

     pressure. He was not in a position to manipulate the

     decision of the Executive Council. The alleged incidents of

     harassment, if any, after April 2023, did not constitute

     sexual harassment and that even the appellant in all her

     communications to the Chancellor and Executive Council

     prior to December 2023, had not made any allegation of

     such sexual harassment against the Vice-Chancellor.
3
Therefore, the complaint filed on 26.12.2023, after the last

               incident of sexual harassment that took place in April

               2023, is beyond the normal period of limitation and even

               the extended period. It was, therefore, rightly rejected by

               the LCC as barred by time and the Single Judge of the High

               Court was not justified in overturning the said decision.
8.      The neat question which falls for consideration of this

               Court is: whether the Division Bench of the High Court is

               justified in non-suiting the appellant on the ground that

               her complaint was barred by limitation.
9.      To decide the above issue in the facts of the present case,

               it would be beneficial to first consider not only the

               definition of ‘sexual harassment’ but also what other

               circumstances, acts or behaviours would constitute as

               sexual harassment, vis-a-vis the period of limitation

               provided for making complaint in that regard.
10. ‘Sexual harassment’ is defined in Section 2(n) of the Sexual

               Harassment              of    Women   at   Workplace   (Prevention,

               Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 20133 to include any one

               or more of the unwelcome act or behaviour (whether
3
Hereinafter referred as the “POSH Act”
4
directly or by implication) such as physical contact and

     advances; or a demand or request for sexual favours; or

     making      sexually    coloured       remarks;         or    showing

     pornography; or any other unwelcome physical, verbal or

     non-verbal conduct of sexual nature.
11. Section 3 of the POSH Act, while providing that no woman

     shall be subjected to sexual harassment at any workplace,

     describes certain circumstances that would amount as an

     act or behaviour of sexual harassment, i.e., implied or

     explicit    promise    of     preferential    treatment       in     her

     employment; or implied or explicit threat of detrimental

     treatment in her employment; or implied or explicit threat

     about her present or future employment status; or

     interference with her work or creating an intimidating or

     offensive    or   hostile    work   environment         for   her;    or

     humiliating treatment likely to affect her health or safety.
12. On a combined reading of both the above provisions, it is

     manifest that not only the unwelcome act or behaviour in

     the form of physical contact or advances, a demand or

     request for sexual favours, making sexually coloured

     remarks,     showing        pornography      or   any    unwelcome
5
physical, verbal or non-verbal conduct of sexual nature

    but also any other circumstances connected with the act

    or behaviour of sexual harassment, like implied or explicit

    promise of preferential treatment in employment, threat

    about   the   present   and   future   employment   status,

    interference with work or creating an intimidating,

    offensive or hostile work environment or subjecting to

    humiliating treatment which may likely affect her health

    or safety, would also amount to acts or behaviour of sexual

    harassment.
13. Section 9 of the Act postulates that any aggrieved woman

    may make a complaint, in writing, of sexual harassment at

    the work place to the Local Committee within a period of

    three months from the date of incident, and in the case of

    series of incidents, within a period of three months from

    the date of the last incident. The second proviso to Section

    9 provides that the LCC may for reasons to be recorded in

    writing, extend the time of making the complaint not

    exceeding three months, if it is satisfied that the

    circumstances prevailing prevented the woman from filing

    of the complaint within the period prescribed.
6
14. In other words, a complaint of sexual harassment is

     mandatorily required to be filed within a period of three

     months from the date of the last incident of such

     harassment or within a further extended period of three

     months, i.e., within a maximum period of six months from

     the date of the last incident of sexual harassment.
15. No doubt, the issue of limitation is ordinarily a mixed

     question of fact and law and it may not be possible to throw

     out a complaint at the threshold without collecting

     material on the factual aspects relating to the limitation.

     Nonetheless, where a complaint on the simple reading of

     the averments made therein appears to be patently barred

     by limitation, it can be rejected at the very first instance

     on the analogy of
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
, without even

     calling the other side to participate in the proceedings.
16. In view of the above, it would be prudent to consider the

     averments made in the complaint which admittedly was

     filed by the appellant on 26.12.2023. The said complaint,

     apart from other things, inter alia, alleges that respondent

     no. 1 joined the University as the Vice-Chancellor in July

     2019. He called her (the appellant herein) in his office in
7
September 2019, and insisted that she should accompany

    him for dinner, which would greatly benefit her personally.

    He even touched her hand in a manner that made her

    extremely uncomfortable, whereupon, she left his office

    quietly.
17. The Vice-Chancellor again called her in his office in

    October 2019. He asked her whether she (the appellant)

    has thought over his proposal for going out for a dinner.

    The appellant told him that she is not comfortable and

    wants to keep the relationship professional only. He,

    thereafter,   demanded    sexual    favour   from   her   and

    threatened her if the offers are declined.
18. In October 2019, her promotion was put on hold by the

    Executive Council. Finally, the Executive Council in its

    meeting       held   on       02.04.2022     accepted     the

    recommendations of the Selection Committee and cleared

    her for promotion.
19. The appellant was called upon by the Vice-Chancellor in

    his office again in April 2023, where he asked the appellant

    to accompany him on a trip to a resort which the appellant

    flatly refused. Thereupon, he threatened the appellant that
8
her career would suffer badly. On 29.08.2023, the

               appellant received a letter from the Vice-Chancellor

               removing her as Director, Centre of Financial, Regulatory

               and Governance Studies4.
20. In the meantime, some complaints by the faculty members

               were made against her, whereupon the Executive Council

               resolved          to      appoint   the   Principal   Secretary,   Law,

               Government of West Bengal as a ‘one-man enquiry

               commission’ for conducting preliminary enquiry into the

               issue of misutilisation of the grant received from UGC and

               with regard to the issue of National Foundation of

               Corporate Governance5. The Executive Council resolved

               that a sum of Rs. 1,00,000/- be refunded immediately by

               the NUJS. Thereafter, the appellant allegedly made

               complaints of harassment and victimisation to the

               members of the Executive Council through e-mails and

               even to the Chancellor.
21. A plain reading of the entire complaint would reveal that

               the sexual harassment, if any, of the appellant at the

               hands of respondent no.1 commenced sometime in
4
Hereinafter referred to as “CFRGS”
5
Hereinafter referred to as “NFCG”
9
September 2019, and the last incident in that connection

    took place in April 2023. Thereafter, no incident of sexual

    harassment is alleged to have taken place except for the

    fact that on 29.08.2023, the appellant was removed from

    the post of Director, CFRGS or that a preliminary inquiry

    was instituted against her by the Executive Council.
22. The complaint of the appellant from the last incident of

    sexual harassment of April 2023, is certainly beyond time.

    However, the issue is whether the subsequent event of

    removal of the appellant from the post of the Director,

    CFRGS or initiation of inquiry by the Executive Council are

    in any way linked to sexual harassment or amounts to

    sexual harassment as described under Section 3(2) of the

    POSH Act.
23. The last incident of actual sexual harassment took place

    in April 2023. The subsequent incident of August 2023,

    whereunder the appellant was removed as Director of

    CFRGS, with no financial implications arose out of a

    complaint    received    from     the   Central   Government

    undertaking i.e. NFCG wherein appellant was specifically

    named.      The   said   action     was   taken    completely
10
independently on the basis of the complaint of NFCG

     alleging that the project report was not submitted within

     time and that the amount sanctioned for the project be

     refunded. It may be pertinent to note that the MoU was

     signed by the appellant with the NFCG and the bank

     account was also under her control.
24. In view of the above, the incident of removal of appellant

     as the Director of CFRGS cannot be attributed as an act of

     sexual harassment in connection with the previous

     incidents. It was based upon the report of NFCG, an

     independent body.
25. The inquiry into the project funds was taken up by the

     Executive Council and it was a collective decision and not

     a unilateral action of the Vice-Chancellor. Thus, the said

     act would also not amount to an act of sexual harassment

     in conjunction with the previous reported acts.
26. The actions taken against the appellant in August 2023,

     are administrative in nature and does not create a gender

     based hostile environment, and hence, fall short of being

     actions amounting to acts of sexual harassment.
11
27. It would be important to refer to the expressions “in

               relation to” or “connected with” used in Section 3(2) of the

               Act. The use of the above expression clearly demonstrates

               that there has to be a direct link between the action

               complained of and an overt act of sexual harassment. In

               view of what has been said above, we find no such direct

               link between the last incident of sexual harassment which

               happened    in   April   2023,   and   those   referred   to

               subsequently in August 2023 or December 2023.
28. A distinction has to be made between a “continuing wrong”

               and a “recurring wrong”. The difference between the two

               has been clarified in
Union of India vs. Tarsem Singh6
where it has been held that a “continuing wrong” is when

               the injury itself persists, whereas a “recurring wrong” is

               when a fresh cause of action arises each time.
29. The alleged act of harassment of April 2023, was a

               complete act in itself and had not continued thereafter.

               The administrative measures of August 2023, were

               independent and were collective decisions of the NFCG and

               the Executive Council which cannot be solely attributed to
6
(2008) 8 SCC 648
12
the Vice-Chancellor. The said decision may have caused

    inconvenience to the appellant or may have given an

    impression that they are in line with previous acts of

    harassment, but they were not part of the continued

    sexual harassment. The subsequent events have no

    connection to the earlier act of sexual misconduct and as

    such, fall clearly out of the preview of acts or behaviours

    amounting to sexual harassment. In this way, the incident

    of April 2023, remains the last event related to sexual

    harassment.
30. The appellant, in addressing her grievances to the

    Chancellor, had not made any mention whatsoever of the

    sexual harassment which may have taken place in August,

    2023 onwards. The appellant initiated the complaint on

    26.12.2023, immediately after the Executive Council

    meeting on 21.12.2023, which had resolved to inquire into

    diverse acts of misconduct on part of the appellant, that

    could give an impression that the complaint was filed in

    retaliation.
31. The appellant, in filing the complaint, also moved an

    application for condonation of delay stating that there were
13
“mitigating circumstances” which she had attempted to

     resolve within the institution and when she failed, she then

     filed the complaint. The very fact that the appellant was

     conscious of the fact that her complaint was delayed,

     proves that she herself treated the act of April 2023, to be

     the last incident of sexual harassment and as such, tried

     to explain the delay in filing the complaint.
32. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances as well as

     the discussion, we are of the view that the Division Bench

     of the High Court committed no error of law in restoring

     the decision of the LCC that the complaint of the appellant

     is time barred and is liable to be dismissed.
33. It is advisable to forgive the wrongdoer, but not to forget

     the wrongdoing. The wrong which has been committed

     against the appellant may not be investigated on technical

     grounds, but it must not be forgotten.
34. In this view of the matter, we direct that the incidents of

     alleged sexual harassment on part of respondent no.1 may

     be forgiven but allowed to haunt the wrongdoer forever.

     Thus, it is directed that this judgment shall be made part
14
of the resume of respondent no.1, compliance of which

     shall be strictly ensured by him personally.
35. The appeal is dismissed with the observations made above.
36. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
.............……………………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)




                          .............……………………………….. J.
(PRASANNA B. VARALE)
  NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 12, 2025.
15