[Cites
22
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Quippo Energy Ltd vs Commissioner Of Central Excise ... on 19 September, 2025
2025 INSC 1130                                                    REPORTABLE

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                            CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 9418-9420 OF 2016



   M/S QUIPPO ENERGY LTD.                                          ...APPELLANT

                                         VERSUS



   COMMISSIONER OF CENTRAL EXCISE AHMEDABAD – II                  ...RESPONDENT




                                     JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHANDRESH
Date: 2025.09.19
14:46:39 IST
Reason:
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.:
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the
following parts:
INDEX

A.   FACTUAL MATRIX ............................................................... 2

B.   SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PARTIES..................... 11
(i) Submissions on behalf of the Appellant .................................. 11
(ii) Submissions on behalf of the Respondent ............................... 13

C.   ISSUE TO BE DETERMINED ............................................... 14

D.   ANALYSIS .......................................................................... 15
(i) What amounts to “manufacture” under the Act, 1944? ........... 15
(ii) Whether the activity undertaken by the Appellant amounts to
     “manufacture”? ....................................................................... 24

E.   CONCLUSION .................................................................... 39
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                                          Page 1 of 39
1.   These appeals under
Section 35L(b)
of the Central Excise Act,
       1944 (for short, the “Act, 1944”) are at the instance of an
       assessee and are directed against the Final Order dated
       15.10.2015 (for short, the “Impugned Order”) passed by the
       Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal West Zonal
       Bench (for short, the “CESTAT”) at Ahmedabad in Appeal
       bearing   Nos.   E/640/2009-DB,      E/1284,1285/2009-DB        &
       E/557/2012-DB respectively, by which all the three appeals
       filed by the assessee came to be partly allowed by setting aside:
(i) the demand of duty with interest for the extended period of
       limitation   and (ii) the imposition     of fine, penalty and
       confiscation of goods. However, the CESTAT in the impugned
       order held that the activities undertaken by the assessee-
appellant to set up the “Containerized Gensets” would amount
       to “manufacture” and the same are liable to be classified under
       the sub-heading No. 8502.2090 of the
Schedule to the Central
       Excise Tariff Act, 1985
(for short, the “Act, 1985”). Accordingly,
       the demand of duty along with interest for the period other than
       the extended period was upheld.
A. FACTUAL MATRIX
2.   The appellant is engaged in the business of providing
       containerised gas generating sets known as the Power Packs on
       a lease basis.
3.   To carry out the above business, the appellant imported Gas
       Generating Sets (for short, “Gensets”) consisting of an engine
       (prime mover) coupled with an alternator on a common base
       frame. The Gensets are imported along with the standard
       accessories and total electronic management system. At the
       time of import, the Customs Authorities assessed the Gensets
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                         Page 2 of 39
under the sub-heading 8502.2090 of the
Schedule to the
       Customs Tariff Act, 1975
, categorising them as “Generating sets
       with spark-ignition combustion piston engines of an output
       exceeding 3.5 kVA”.
4.   Since the Gensets were to be provided on a lease basis, the
       appellant considered it unfeasible to install them at customer
       premises. This was because, in cases of non-renewal of the
       lease, the Genset would have to be relocated to the premises of
       a new customer.
5.   In such circumstances, to avoid inconvenience during shifting
       and to provide for ease of transportation, the appellant placed
       the Genset in a steel container. Further, in order to ensure the
       functioning of the Genset within the container, the appellant
       indigenously procured components such as radiator, ventilation
       fan, air filter unit, oil tank, pipes, pumps, valve, silencer and
       fitting items and fixed them to the container. The appellant has
       described the process as follows:
(i) Using jacks and rollers, the imported equipment is first rolled
           into a steel transport container and properly positioned on
           anti- vibrating mounting pad.
(ii) Remote radiator is lifted by crane and properly positioned
            onto the roof of the container. Further, it is arrested on the roof
            with suitable sized nuts, bolts and washers.
(iii) Lube Oil Tank is lifted by crane and moved onto the roof of
             the container. It is properly placed on the mounting channels
             and locked on the roof top by suitable nuts, bolts and
             washers.
(iv) For the purpose of HT, LT, Water and Lube Oil pipe lining on
            the roof of the container, necessary fittings like pipes,
            reducers, valves, tee, elbows, flanges, etc. are fitted.
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                              Page 3 of 39
(v) Similar process is done for HT, LT, Water, DM Water and Lube
           Oil line inside the container. Pumps, 3-way valve etc. are
           located inside the container.
(vi) Ventilation fans and cowls are thereafter mounted.
(vii) The silencer is lifted by crane and located on the rooftop at
            the appropriate position.
(viii) Necessary Cable Trays are placed inside and outside the
              container. Proper earthing is done.
(ix) Control panel and other electrical items are properly placed
            inside the container. Cabling with all other accessories is
            done.
(x) All pipings are de-assembled. Pipings are then caustic
           cleaned, hydraulic test is done thereon and painted.
(xi) Testing process involves hydraulic testing of piping for
            leakage and electrical testing of all electrical connections.
6.   As per the appellant, the role of each individual component is
       as follows:
Component                           Purpose
              Name
         Ventilation Fan     This supplies ambient air to the generating
set to cool down the heat which surrounds
                             it because of the internal working of the
                             engine. This has no role to play in
                             generation of electricity.
Air Filter Unit    This prevents dust from entering internal
                             parts of engine. It is common knowledge
                             that process of combustion needs oxygen
                             that is available in air. This is called
                             consumable and is being replaced from
                             time to time. Thus, Air Filter unit has no
                             role to play in generation of electricity. That
                             work is performed only by the imported
                             Gas Genset
             Oil Tank        Lubricant oil which kept in a pan beneath
                             engine of Gas Genset is circulated to
                             various     moving     parts     for    proper
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                            Page 4 of 39
lubrication. Oil tank is required to
                            replenish the oil in the pan and thus has
                            no role to play in generation of electricity.
                            Electricity is generated only by the
                            imported Gas Genset.
Pumps          These pumps are used to move fluids from
                            one location to another. They are used to
                            carry water. Fitting of pump to Gas Genset
                            does not give rise to new product with
                            distinct name, character or use.
Valve         It is a flow control device and have no
                            participation as such in generation of
                            electricity
            Silencer &      Silencer helps in controlling the noise
             Radiator       produced by exhaust gases during
                            operation. Therefore, silencer has no role
                            to play in Generation of Electricity by Gas
                            Genset.
While generating electricity the internal
                            parts of Gas Generator becomes very hot
                            due to process of combustion. Radiator
                            merely helps in radiating heat into the air
                            and cooling the engine. Coolant flows
                            through the generator block and then to
                            the radiator. In many cases, chiller is used
                            instead of radiator to extract heat that is
                            otherwise thrown into the environment.
Thus, radiator has no role to play in
                            generation of electricity. That work is
                            performed only by the imported gas
                            genset.
Pipes, Flanges,    These are used for fitting of the above
        Nut-bolts, Gasket   items.
7.   The appellant vide letter dated 22.11.2007 explained to the
       Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise, Ahmedabad about the
       activities carried out by it and sought an opinion as regards its
       liability under the Act, 1944. Thereafter, on 17.07.2008 the
       officers of Central Excise (Preventive), Ahmedabad-II visited the
       appellant’s factory and examined the process undertaken by it.
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                         Page 5 of 39
8.   The Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise, Ahmedabad-II,
       vide its letter dated 19.08.2008 informed the appellant that the
       activities undertaken by it would amount to “manufacture” by
       virtue of Notes 4 and 6 of
Section XVI of the Schedule to the Act,
       1985
, respectively.
9.   The appellant in the aforesaid context filed an appeal before the
       Commissioner (Appeals), questioning the communication of the
       Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise. The Commissioner
       (Appeals) vide order dated 27.03.2009 dismissed the appeal.
10. A Show Cause Notice dated 19.11.2008 was issued proposing
       demand of duty along with interest and levy of penalty on the
       Power Packs cleared during the period from November 2006 to
       July 2008. The said Show Cause Notice was adjudicated by the
       Commissioner of Central Excise, Ahmedabad and vide the
       Order-in-Original        No.10/Commissioner/RKS/AHD-II/2009
       dated 28.04.2009 the demand and penalty were confirmed.
11. Thereafter, six Show Cause Notices were issued proposing
       demand of duty along with interest and levy of penalty on the
       Power Packs cleared during the period from August 2008 to
       March 2011. The said Show Cause Notices were adjudicated
       and         vide   the     Order-in-Original    No.      01     to
       06/COMMR/RAJU/AHD-II/2012             dated    29.03.2012     the
       demand and penalty were confirmed.
12. In     the   aforementioned   Orders-in-Original, the    respective
       authorities have held that the “Containerized Genset” i.e., the
       “Power Pack” has a distinct name, character and use and is
       capable of being sold and marketed. Thereby, the activity
       undertaken by the appellant satisfies the conditions of
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                          Page 6 of 39
“manufacture” as defined under
Section 2(f)
of the Act, 1944.
Consequently, the said goods are classifiable under the sub-
       heading
No.8502.2090 of the Schedule to the Act, 1985
and are
       liable for Central Excise duty.
13. The appellant filed appeals before the CESTAT against the order
       passed by the Commissioner (Appeals) dated 27.03.2009, the
       Order-in-Original dated 28.04.2009 and the Order-in-Original
       dated 29.03.2012 respectively.
14. The CESTAT while disposing of the appeals filed by the
       appellant held as under:
“13. .......It is submitted that the Gensets imported by
          the Appellant remains essentially the same. We have
          already observed that in the present case, the
          imported Gensets after certain process sold as Power
          Pack, different and distinct nature. As per statement
          of Shri Divyesh Shah, the Gensets imported by the
          Appellant is incomplete machine, can be used into
          complete        form    after   assembly    of   various
          accessories/components. Note 6 of the Section XVI of
          Customs Tariff Act provides that the conversion of an
          incomplete or unfinished article into complete or
          finished goods shall amount to manufacture. It is
          evident from the record that the activities undertaken
          by the Appellant are incidental to the completion of
          manufacture of Power Pack, and without such
          activities Power Pack           cannot be used by the
          customers
Section 2(f)
of Central Excise Act, 1944, the
          definition of manufacture includes the process
          incidental to the completion of a manufactured
          product. Heading 85.02 covers Electric Generating
          Sets     and       Rotary     Connectors".  Sub-heading
          8502.2090 covers "Generating sets with spark-
          ignition internal combustion piston engines" other
          than Electric portable generators of an output not
          exceeding 3.5 KVA. As per Notes of Chapter 85 of
          HSN, Generating Sets consisting of the generator and
          its prime mover which are mounted (or designed to be
          mounted) together as one unit or on a common base.
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                          Page 7 of 39
In the present case, the activities of fixing of anti-
vibrating mounting pad, radiator, Lube Oil Tank,
          Ventilation, fans,   silencers, Cable Trays, Control
          Panel and other electrical items, hydraulic test
          processing etc, are mounted together as one unit on a
          common base, known as Power Pack and also
          Containerized Gensets.
14. According to the Appellant, the Gensets imported
          by them were capable of generating electricity, and
          the Gensets itself is marketed. But, it is seen from the
          record that the process undertaken by the Appellant
          on the imported Gensets for the industrial customers.
Thus, the industrial customer would buy Power Pack
          rather than Gensets. The imported Gensets and
          Power Pack are known separately in the trade and
          parlance. It is also noted that the use of both the items
          are for different purposes. In our considered view, the
          process undertaken by the Appellant would
          constitute manufacture as it emerges a new
          commodity in the market.
xxx       xxx          xxx
16. In case of Laminated Packing Pvt Ltd (supra) the
          Hon’ble Supreme Court considered that manufacture
          is bringing into the goods as known in the Excise law
          i.e. known in the market having distinct and separate
          and identifiable function. In the present case, we
          have also noticed the photograph of the products of
          the Gensets and the Power Pack are different and
          distinct items. The learned Advocate contended that
          the imported Gensets is covered under the sub-
          heading 8502.2090 of the
First Schedule to Customs
          Tariff Act
"Generating sets with Spark - Ignition
          Combustion System Engine" of an output not
          exceeding 3.5 KVA." It is submitted that the Customs
          Department had assessed the goods as complete
          electric generating sets and classification under the
          same heading under the
Central Excise Tariff Act,
          1985
, cannot be sustained. We find that the identical
          issue was raised before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
          the case of Laminated Packings Pvt. Ltd (supra). It
          has been observed that the goods belongs to the same
          entry is also not relevant because even if the goods
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                           Page 8 of 39
belong to the same entry, the goods are different
          identifiable goods known as such in the market. If
          that is so, the manufacture occurred and if
          manufacture takes place, it is dutiable. The said
          decision would squarely apply in the present case
          and the Power Pack is rightly classified under sub-
          heading No.8502.2090 of Central Excise Tariff Act,
          1985.
17. However, we find force in the submissions of the
          learned Advocate that the extended period of
          limitation cannot be invoked. On perusal of the
          records, we find that the Appellant by letter
          dt.22.11.2007, informed the Assistant Commissioner
          of Central Excise for a clarification on any possible
          liability of Central Excise duty. The Appellant also
          pursued the matter before the Department. There is
          no material on record of suppression of facts with
          intent to evade payment of duty. The Hon'ble Gujarat
          High Court in the case of Gujarat Glass Pvt. Ltd
          (supra) observed that the Assessee on his own
          brought to the notice of the Department the fact about
          the clearance of the goods to its sister unit without
          duty before the date of visit of the officers. The
          Assessees conduct was candid and therefore, bona
          fide. There is no evidence of intentional evasion.
18. In the case of Anand Nishikawa Company ltd Vs
          CCE Meerut 2005 (185) EL T 149 (SC), the Hon'ble
          Supreme Court observed that there was no deliberate
          attempt of non-disclosure of excise duty. No claim as
          to "suppression of facts" would be entertained for the
          purpose of invoking extended period of limitation
          within the meaning of proviso to
Section 11A(1)
of the
          Act. It is also noted that Hon’ble Supreme Court in
          series of cases, has held that the extended period of
          limitation, would not be invoked in the case of
          revenue neutrality as the CENVAT Credit is available
          against the demand of duty.
19. We find that the Appellant acted under a bona
          fide belief that the activities undertaken by them
          would not amount to manufacture. It is the case of
          interpretation of the provisions of law and therefore,
          the imposition of penalties on the Appellants are not
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                        Page 9 of 39
warranted. It is noted that the goods were available
          for confiscation. It is well settled that if the goods are
          available, the same cannot be confiscated.
          Accordingly, the confiscation of goods and imposition
          of penalty cannot be sustained.
20. In view of the above discussions. we hold that the
          activities undertaken by the Appellant would amount
          to manufacture and Power Pack also known as
          "Containerized Gensets" would be classifiable under
          sub-heading
No.8502.2090 of the Schedule to the
          Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
and the demand of
          duty alongwith interest for the normal period is
          upheld. The adjudicating authority is directed to
          extend CENVAT Credit benefit, while quantifying
          duty, subject to verification of record. The demand of
          duty with interest for the extended period of limitation
          and confiscation and imposition of redemption fine
          and penalties are set aside. The appeal filed by the
          Appellant company is disposed of in the above terms.
          The appeal filed by the Appellant No.2 Shri Montu
          Patwa, General Manager (F&A) is allowed. The
          applications for extension of stay order are dismissed
          as infructuous.”
15. Thus, the CESTAT held that the process undertaken by the
       appellant would amount to “manufacture” on the following
       grounds:
a. The Power Packs are different and distinct in nature from
           the imported Gensets, and the activities undertaken by the
           appellant are incidental to the completion of manufacturing
           Power Packs. Thus, these activities would amount to
           “manufacture” under
Section 2(f)
of the Act, 1944, which
           brings under the ambit of “manufacture” any process
           incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured
           product;
b. Imported Gensets and the Power Packs are known
           separately in trade and parlance and both items are used
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                          Page 10 of 39
for different purposes. Thus, the process undertaken by the
           appellant would constitute “manufacture” as it leads to the
           emergence of a new product in the market; and
        c. Imported Gensets are incomplete machines and can be
           used     in   complete   form   after    assembly      of   various
           components procured by the appellant. Note 6 of Section
           XVI of the Act, 1985 provides that conversion of an
           incomplete or finished goods falling under that section shall
           amount to “manufacture”.
16. In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant is here
       before this Court with the present appeals.
B. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PARTIES
(i) Submissions on behalf of the Appellant
17. Ms. Charanya Lakshmikumaran, the learned counsel appearing
       for the appellant, submitted the following:
a. A process would amount to “manufacture” if the following
           two-fold test, as explained by this Court in a catena of
           judgments, is satisfied: (i) Whether by the said process a
           different commercial commodity comes into existence or
           whether the identity of the original commodity ceases to
           exist    (Transformation    Test);      and   (ii)   Whether      the
           commodity which was already in existence would be of no
           commercial use but for the said process (Marketability
           test).
b. The two limbs must be satisfied cumulatively. As held by
           this     Court   in
Servo-Med   Industries         Pvt    Ltd    v.
           Commissioner of Central Excise, Mumbai
reported in
           (2015) 14 SCC 47, fulfilment of any one of these limbs is
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                             Page 11 of 39
not conclusive if the other limb of the test is not satisfied.
In the facts of the present case, both the limbs of the above
           test are not satisfied.
c. The transformation test is not satisfied as the product
           remains a Genset performing the function of generating
           electricity and does not transform into another distinct
           commodity, whereby its original identity as a Genset ceases
           to exist. The various accessories attached to the container
           serve the sole purpose of making the generating set fit to
           work within a container box (for logistical purposes). Mere
           enhancement of the functionality with the use of these
           accessories will not detract from the fact that the product
           continues to remain a generating set and can generate
           electricity without such accessories. Thus, the process does
           not transform the imported Genset into a different
           commercial commodity. The term ‘Power Pack’ is merely a
           trade name given by the appellant, and the use and
           character of the product imported remains the same.
         d. The imported Gensets were complete and functional
           Gensets in themselves and it would be incorrect to say that
           the addition of accessories leads to completing an
           incomplete machine.
e. The marketability test is also not satisfied, as it cannot be
           said that the product, in its imported form, served no
           purpose without the activity undertaken by the appellant.
           It   was   capable   of   generating   electricity   and   was
           commercially available for such purpose de hors the
           accessories.
f. Without prejudice to the aforesaid even if it were to be held
           that the second test is satisfied in the present case, i.e., by
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                        Page 12 of 39
way of containerization and adding accessories the Genset
            becomes marketable for a customer, this test has to be
            simultaneously and cumulatively satisfied along with the
            first test. However, the transformation test is not satisfied
            in the present case, as there was no transformation of the
            imported Genset into a different and distinct product.
            Thus, the activity undertaken by the appellant would not
            amount to “manufacture”.
18. In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned counsel
        prayed that there being merit in her appeal, the impugned order
        be set aside.
(ii) Submissions on behalf of the Respondent
19.   Ms. Nisha Bagchi, the learned senior counsel appearing for the
        Revenue, submitted the following:
a. The findings recorded in the impugned order have been
            arrived at after considering all the relevant material and
            applying    the    established    test    for    determining
            “manufacture”. Thus, the impugned order is unassailable
            in law as well as on the facts.
b. The Genset in its imported form is not functional. It is
            undisputed that the appellant is not selling the imported
            Genset as such. The Genset is containerized using various
            locally procured parts to transform it into a functional
            Power Pack. The Power Pack is a different product having a
            distinct character, name and use and is marketable as
            such. The test of no commercial use without further
            process is satisfied, and the fact of “manufacture” stands
            established. The present dispute falls within the fourth
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                         Page 13 of 39
category enunciated in
Servo-Med
(supra), i.e., where the
           goods are transformed into marketable, different/new
           goods after a particular process. Thus, “manufacture”
           could be said to have taken place as contemplated under
           Note 6 of
Section XVI of the Schedule to the Act, 1985
and
Section 2(f)
of the Act 1944, respectively, thereby attracting
           the levy of Central Excise duty.
c. Further, emphasis was laid on the fact that “part” of an
           article is something necessary for the completion of that
           article. It is an integral, constituent or component part,
           without which the article to which it is to be joined would
           not function as such an article. On the other hand, an
           “accessory” is something that is not necessary for the
           functioning    of   an   article.   In   this   context,   the
           characterisation    of   components      such   as   radiator,
           ventilation fan, etc., by the appellant as ‘accessories’ is
           wholly untenable. The Genset, once placed in the
           container, would not function without these components,
           and thus these components should rightly be termed as
           ‘parts’ of the Power Pack.
C. ISSUE TO BE DETERMINED
20. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and
       having gone through the materials on record, the following
       question falls for our consideration:
• Whether the process of placing the Genset within a steel
             container and fitting the steel container with components
             such as radiator, ventilation fan, air filter unit, oil tank,
             pipes, pumps, valve and silencer would amount to
             “manufacture” under
Section 2(f)
of the Act, 1944?
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                        Page 14 of 39
D. ANALYSIS
(i) What amounts to “manufacture” under the Act, 1944?
21. Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either
       side, we must look into a few provisions of the Act, 1944.
Section
       2(f)
defines the term “manufacture”. The same reads as follows:
“2. Definitions.— In this Act, unless there is
            anything repugnant in the subject or context,—


                             xxx       xxx          xxx
(f) “manufacture” includes any process—
(i) incidental or ancillary to the completion of a
                 manufactured product;
(ii) which is specified in relation to any goods
                 in the Section or Chapter Notes of the Fourth
                 Schedule as amounting to manufacture; or,
(iii) which in relation to the goods specified in
                 the Third Schedule, involves packing or
                 repacking of such goods in a unit container or
                 labelling or re-labelling of containers including
                 the declaration or alteration of retail sale price
                 on it or adoption of any other treatment on the
                 goods to render the product marketable to the
                 consumer and the word “manufacture” shall
                 be construed accordingly and shall include not
                 only a person who employs hired labour in the
                 production or manufacture of excisable goods,
                 but also any person who engages in their
                 production or manufacture on his own
                 account;”
22. The term “manufacture” assumes vital importance as under the
       Act, 1944, the event of taxation is at the point of manufacturing.
Section 3
of the Act, 1944, which is the charging section, lays
       down that the excise duty is to be levied on goods which are
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                         Page 15 of 39
produced or manufactured in India. This is because excise duty
        is primarily a duty on the goods produced or manufactured
        within the country.
23.   Sub-clause (i) of
Section 2(f)
is inclusive, and “manufacture”
        has been defined to include any process incidental or ancillary
        to the completion of the manufactured product. Sub-clause (ii)
        of
Section 2(f)
stipulates that “manufacture” would include any
        process which has been specified in the Section/Chapter notes
        of   the
Schedule      to   the   Act,   1985
,   as   amounting   to
        “manufacture”. In other words, if a process is declared as
        amounting to “manufacture” in the section or chapter notes, it
        would come within the definition of
Section 2(f)
and become
        liable to excise duty.
24. At first blush,
Section 2(f)(i)
may suggest that any process
        undertaken on the goods in question would fall within the ambit
        of “manufacture”. However, this Court has consistently held
        that such a broad interpretation would be erroneous. The
        courts must try to appreciate the nuanced yet critical
        distinction that the law draws between mere ‘processing’ on the
        one hand, and ‘manufacturing’ on the other. The following
        paragraphs of the decision of this Court in
Union of India v.
        Delhi Cloth & General Mills
reported in 1962 SCC OnLine
        SC 148, would help in elucidating this very important
        distinction between processing and manufacturing:
“13. The other branch of Mr. Pathak's argument is
              that even if it be held that the respondents do not
              manufacture "refined oil" as is known to the market
              they must be held to manufacture some kind of
              "non-essential vegetable oil" by applying to the raw
              material purchased by them, he processes of
              neutralisation by alkali and bleaching by activated
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                              Page 16 of 39
earth and/or carbon. According to the learned
            Counsel "manufacture" is complete as soon as
            by the application of one or more processes,
            the raw material undergoes some change. To
            say this is to equate "processing" to
            "manufacture" and for this we can find no
            warrant in law. The word "manufacture" used
            a as verb is generally understood to mean as
            "bringing into existence a new substance" and
            does not mean merely "to produce some
            change in a substance", however minor in
            consequence the change may be. This distinction
            is well brought about in a passage thus quoted in
            Permanent Edition of Words and Phrases, Vol. 26,
            from an American Judgment. The passages runs
            thus :-
'Manufacture' implies a change, but
                every change is not manufacture and
                yet every change of an article is the
                result of treatment, labour and
                manipulation. But something more is
                necessary     and   there    must     be
                transformation; a new and different
                article must emerge having a distinctive
                name, character or use.
xxx       xxx        xxx
15. These definitions make it clear that to become
            "goods" an article must be something which can
            ordinarily come to the market to be bought and
            sold.
16. This consideration of the meaning of the word
            "goods" provides strong support for the view that
            'manufacture' which is liable to excise duty under
            the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
, must be the
            "bringing into existence of a new substance known
            to the market." " But," says the learned Counsel,
            "look at the definition of 'manufacture' in the
            definition clause of the Act and you will find
            that 'manufacture' is defined thus :
'Manufacture' includes any process incidental
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                      Page 17 of 39
or ancillary to the completion of a
            manufactured product (s. 2(f))". We are unable
            to agree with the learned Counsel that by
            inserting this definition of the word
            "manufacture" in
s. 2(f)
the legislature
            intended        to   equate       "processing"        to
            "manufacture" and intended to make mere
            "processing" as distinct from "manufacture" in
            the same sense of bringing into existence of a
            new substance known to the market, liable to
            duty. The sole purpose of inserting this definition
            is to make it clear that at certain places in the Act
            the word 'manufacture' has been used to mean a
            process incidental to the manufacture of the article.
            Thus in the very item under which the excise duty
            is claimed in these cases, we find the words : "in or
            in relation to the manufacture of which any process
            is ordinarily carried on with the aid of power". The
            definition of 'manufacture' as in
s. 2(f)
puts it
            beyond any possibility of controversy that if power
            is used for any of the numerous process that are
            required to turn the raw material into a finished
            article known to the market the clause will be
            applicable; and an argument that power is not used
            in the whole process of manufacture using the word
            in its ordinary sense, will not be available. It is only
            with this limited purpose that the legislature, in our
            opinion, inserted this definition of the word
            'manufacture' in the definition section and not with
            a view to make the mere "processing" of goods as
            liable to excise duty.”

                                         (Emphasis Supplied)
25. As per this Court’s decision in
Delhi Cloth & General Mills
(supra) for an activity to amount to “manufacture” and not be
       considered as merely ‘processing’ it has to produce a
       ‘transformation’ of the subject article i.e, a new and different
       article must emerge having a distinctive name, character or
       use.
This test, as
laid down by
this Court in
Delhi Cloth &
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                          Page 18 of 39
General Mills
(supra), has been extensively applied by this
       Court in its subsequent rulings.
26.
In
Union of India & Ors v. J.G Glass Industries Ltd & Ors
reported in (1998) 2 SCC 32, this Court was dealing with the
       question whether printing on glass bottles amounts to
       “manufacture” within the meaning of
Section 2(f)
of the Act,
       1944. The Court accepted the contention of the respondents
       that the activity of printing names or logos on the bottles did
       not change the basic character of the commodity and that the
       plain bottles in themselves were commercial commodities and
       could be sold and used as such. Thus, the Court held that
       printing on glass bottles did not amount to “manufacture”
       under
Section 2(f)
of the Act, 1944. The relevant observations
       made by this Court are reproduced as follows:
“16. On an analysis of the aforesaid rulings, a two-
            fold test emerges for deciding whether the process
            is that of "manufacture". First, whether by the
            said     process     a     different    commercial
            commodity comes into existence or whether
            the identity of the original commodity ceases
            to exist; secondly, whether, the commodity
            which was already in existence will serve no
            purpose but for the said process. In other
            words, whether the commodity already in
            existence will be of no commercial use but for
            the said process. In the present case, the plain
            bottles are themselves commercial commodities
            and can be sold and used as such. By the process
            of printing names or logos on the bottles, the basic
            character of the commodity does not change. They
            continue to be bottles. It cannot be said that but for
            the process of printing, the bottles will serve no
            purpose or are of no commercial use.”

                                  (Emphasis Supplied)
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                        Page 19 of 39
27. This Court in
J.G. Glass
(supra) established a two-fold test to
       ascertain if an activity constitutes “manufacture”:
a. Fundamental Change Test: The first criterion is to determine
          if the process results in a new commercial item being
          created, or if the original item’s identity is fundamentally
          altered or ceases to exist. This means assessing whether a
          transformation occurs such that a distinct product with a
          new name, identity, character, or use emerges;
       b. But for the process Test: The second criterion evaluates
          whether the product that existed before the process would
          be commercially useless or serve no purpose without
          undergoing that specific process. In other words, if the pre-
          existing commodity would lack any commercial utility were
          it not for the process, this condition is met.
28. This Court in
Servo-Med
(supra) undertook extensive analysis
       and discussed its various previous judgments to clarify the
       issue as to what constitutes a manufacturing activity. The Court
       classified the existing case law into the following distinct
       categories for the purpose of examining the different aspects of
       the term “manufacture” under the Act, 1944:
a. When transformation occurs/does not occur: In this
          category, the Court discussed instances where goods are
          transformed into something different and/or new, which
          typically indicates “manufacture”, as against instances
          where changes/processes do not lead to transformation into
          a new product.
b. Retaining of essential character: In this category, the Court
          discussed instances where the activity did not amount to
          “manufacture” as the goods remained essentially the same
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                          Page 20 of 39
after   a   particular   process,   with   the   original   article
          continuing to hold its core identity despite changes.
       c. “But for the process” test / no commercial user without
          further process: In this category, the Court evaluated
          instances where a product in existence would serve no
          commercial purpose without undergoing a specific process,
          and whether undertaking such a process would amount to
          “manufacture”.
29. This Court in
Servo-Med
(supra) also discussed the ratio of the
       judgment in
J.G Glass
(supra), more particularly as to how the
       ‘but for the process’ test ought to be understood and applied.
       The relevant observation is reproduced as follows:
“24. It is important to understand the correct ratio
            of the judgment in the
J.G. Glass
case. This
            judgment does not hold that merely by application
            of the second test without more manufacture comes
            into being. The Court was at pains to point out that
            a twofold test had emerged for deciding whether
            the process is that of manufacture. The first test is
            extremely important-that by a process, a different
            commercial commodity must come into existence as
            a result of the identity of the original commodity
            ceasing to exist. The second test, namely that
            the commodity which was already in existence
            will serve no purpose but for a certain process
            must be understood in its true perspective. It
            is only when a different and/or finished
            product comes into existence as a result of a
            process which makes the said product
            commercially usable that the second test
laid
            down in
the judgment leads to manufacture.
            Thus understood, this judgment does not lead
            to the result that merely because the
            unsterilized syringe and needle is of no
            commercial use without sterilization, the
            process of sterilization which would make it
            commercially usable would result in the
            sterilization process being a process which
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                          Page 21 of 39
would amount to manufacture. If the original
             commodity i.e. syringes and needles continue
             as such post sterilization, the second test
             would not lead to the conclusion that the
             process of sterilization is a process which
             leads to manufacture.
This is because, in all
             cases, there has first to be a transformation in the
             original article which transformation brings about a
             distinctive or different use in the article.”

                                             (Emphasis supplied)

       Thus, this Court in
Servo-Med
(supra) has held that both the
       prongs of the two-prong test must be fulfilled in order for an
       activity to amount to “manufacture”. The ‘but for the process’
       test cannot be applied in isolation, without first establishing
       that the fundamental test of transformation has been satisfied.
30. While we are in respectful agreement with the above extracted
       observations of this Court in
Servo-Med
(supra), we believe a
       further clarification is necessary as regards the application of
       the two pronged test
laid down in
J.G. Glass
(supra). If the
       second wing of the J.G. Glass test—namely, that the original
       commodity would serve no purpose but for the said process
       were to be applied as a rigid and universal mandate, it would
       lead to manifest absurdity. To illustrate this, we may give a
       simple example of a flour mill that processes wheat grain into
       flour. The wheat grain, which is the input, is a perfectly
       marketable commodity in its own right; it can be sold as seed
       or used as animal feed.
If one were to apply the second test as
       propounded in
J.G. Glass
(supra) in a mechanical manner, the
       inescapable conclusion would be that since the wheat grain was
       in itself a marketable commodity, the process of milling it into
       flour would not amount to “manufacture”, as the second prong
       of the test is not being satisfied.
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                          Page 22 of 39
31. Even in the facts of the present case, it is the contention of the
       appellant that the imported Genset had commercial utility even
       without the activity being undertaken. This argument, when
       pedantically read with this Court’s clarification in
Servo-Med
(supra) that both prongs of the test have to be satisfied, would
       mean that just because the subject article had commercial
       utility prior to it being subjected to the process, the process
       undertaken would not lead to “manufacture” even if it was
       transformative in nature. Such an interpretation would be
       patently erroneous.
In order to avoid such absurdity, it is
       important that the applicability of the second wing of the
J.G.
       Glass
(supra) test must be judged on the facts and
       circumstances of each individual case, and the same cannot be
       brandished as a universal rule.
32. This Court in
Servo-Med
(supra) categorised the entire case law
       into four categories. In paragraph 27, the Court lists them out
       as follows:
“27. The case law discussed above falls into four
            neat categories.
(1) Where the goods remain exactly the same even
            after a particular process, there is obviously no
            manufacture involved. Processes which remove
            foreign matter from goods complete in themselves
            and/or processes which clean goods that are
            complete in themselves fall within this category.
            (2) Where the goods remain essentially the same
            after the particular process, again there can be no
            manufacture. This is for the reason that the original
            article continues as such despite the said process
            and the changes brought about by the said process.
            (3) Where the goods are transformed into something
            different and/or new after a particular process, but
            the said goods are not marketable. Examples
            within this group are the
Brakes India
case and
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                        Page 23 of 39
cases where the transformation of goods having a
            shelf life which is of extremely small duration. In
            these cases also no manufacture of goods takes
            place.
(4) Where the goods are transformed into
            goods which are different and/or new after a
            particular     process,      such  goods     being
            marketable as such. It is in this category that
            manufacture of goods can be said to take
            place.”
                                        (Emphasis Supplied)
33. A close reading of the four categories
referred to above
would
       indicate that this Court in
Servo-Med
(supra) has also laid down
       a two pronged test for the purpose of determining whether an
       activity amounts to “manufacture”. The two-fold test is: (i)
       Transformation test (Whether a distinct product with a new
       name,   identity,     character,    or    use   emerges?);    and    (ii)
       Marketability    test (Whether      the    transformed     product    is
       marketable as such?).
(ii) Whether the activity undertaken by the Appellant

         amounts to “manufacture”?
34. We now proceed to apply the test
laid down in
Servo-Med
(supra) for the purpose of answering the following two
       questions:
a. Whether      the   Imported      Gensets     have     undergone     a
          transformation into Power Packs, i.e. whether the imported
          Gensets      and   the   Power    Packs      are   distinct/different
          products, each with their own separate character, identity,
          or use?; and
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                             Page 24 of 39
b. Whether the Power Packs can be considered to be
           marketable?
35. The dispute between the parties before us primarily lies with
        respect to the transformation test. It is the case of the appellant
        that no transformation has occurred and there is no change in
        the character, identity or name as: (i) the function and end use
        of both the imported Gensets and Power Packs remains the
        same i.e., generating electricity; and (ii) placing the Genset
        inside the steel container and fitting it with various accessories
        is only for logistical purposes and the same merely enhances
        functionality.
36.
In
Servo-Med
(supra), the question before this Court was
        whether the process of sterilizing syringes and needles would
        amount to “manufacture” under the Act, 1944. Answering in the
        negative, the Court held as follows:
“28. The instant case falls within the first category
             aforementioned. This is a case of manufacture of
             disposable syringes and needles which are used
             for medical purposes. These syringes and
             needles, like in the
J.G. Glass
case and unlike
             the
Brakes India
case, are finished or
             complete in themselves. They can be used or
             sold for medical purposes in the form in which
             they are.
The fact that medically speaking they are
             only used after sterilization would not bring this
             case within the ratio of the
Brakes India
case. All
             articles used medically in, let us say, surgical
             operations, must of necessity first be sterilized.
xxx       xxx         xxx
30. The added process of sterilization does not
             mean that such articles are not complete articles in
             themselves or that the process of sterilization
             produces a transformation in the original articles
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                         Page 25 of 39
leading to new articles known to the market as
            such. A surgical equipment such as a knife
            continues to be a surgical knife even after
            sterilization. If the Department were right, every
            time such instruments are sterilized, the same
            surgical instrument is brought forth again and
            again by way of manufacture and excisable duty is
            chargeable on the same. This would lead to an
            absurd result and fly in the face of common sense.
If a surgical instrument is being used five times a
            day, it cannot be said that the same instrument has
            suffered a process which amounts to manufacture
            in which case excise duty would be liable to be paid
            on such instruments five times over on any given
            day of use. Further, what is to be remembered here
            is that the disposable syringe and needle in
            question is a finished product in itself. Sterilization
            does not lead to any value addition in the said
            product. All that the process of sterilization
            does is to remove bacteria which settles on the
            syringe's and needle's surface, which process
            does not bring about a transformation of the
            said articles into something new and
            different. Such process of removal of foreign
            matters from a product complete in itself
            would not amount to manufacture but would
            only be a process which is for the more
            convenient use of the said product. In fact, no
            transformation of the original articles into
            different articles at all takes place. Neither
            the character nor the end use of the syringe
            and needle has changed post-sterilization.
            The syringe and needle retains its essential
            character as such even after sterilization.”

                                         (Emphasis Supplied)

       According to this Court in
Servo-Med
(supra), the syringes and
       needles even before sterilization were complete and finished
       articles and all that the process of sterilization did was to
       remove the foreign particles which settled on the surfaces of
       such needles and syringes. Neither the character nor the end
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                         Page 26 of 39
use of the syringe and needle changed post sterilisation.
Consequently, no transformation had occurred.
37.
In
Commissioner of Central Excise-I, New Delhi v. S.R
       Tissues Pvt Ltd & Anr.
, reported in (2005) 6 SCC 310, the
       question before this Court was whether the cutting/slitting of
       jumbo rolls of tissue paper into various sizes suitable for use as
       toilet papers, table napkins or facial tissues would amount to
       “manufacture” in terms of
Section 2(f)
of the Act, 1944. The
       Court held as follows:
“12. At the outset, we may point out that the
            assessee is one of the downstream producers. The
            assessee buys duty-paid jumbo rolls from M/s
            Ellora Paper Mills and M/s Padamjee Paper Mills.
            There are different types of papers namely, tissue
            paper, craft paper, thermal paper, writing paper,
            newsprints, filter paper etc. The tissue paper is the
            base paper which is not subjected to any treatment.
            The jumbo rolls of such tissue papers are bought by
            the assessee, which undergoes the process of
            unwinding, cutting/slitting and packing. It is
            important to note that the characteristics of
            the tissue paper are its texture, moisture
            absorption, feel etc. In other words, the
            characteristics of table napkins, facial
            tissues and toilet rolls in terms of texture,
            moisture absorption capacity, feel etc. are the
            same as the tissue paper in the jumbo rolls.
            The said jumbo rolls cannot be conveniently
            used for household or for sanitary purposes.
            Therefore, for the sake of convenience, the
            said jumbo rolls are required to be cut into
            various shapes and sizes so that it can be
            conveniently used as table napkins, facial
            tissues, toilet rolls etc. However, the end-use
            of the tissue paper in the jumbo rolls and the
            end-use of the toilet rolls, the table napkins
            and the facial tissues remains the same,
            namely, for household or sanitary use. The
            predominant test in such a case is whether
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                        Page 27 of 39
the characteristics of the tissue paper in the
            jumbo roll enumerated above is different from
            the characteristics of the tissue paper in the
            form of table napkin, toilet roll and facial
            tissue. In the present case, the tribunal was right
            in holding that the characteristics of the tissue
            paper in the jumbo roll are not different from the
            characteristics of the tissue paper, after slitting and
            cutting, in the table napkins, in the toilet rolls and
            in the facial tissues.
13 .
In the case of
Brakes India Ltd. v. Supdt. of
            Central Excise & Others
this Court has very aptly
            brought out the test of character or end-use by
            observing as follows:
" If by a process, a change is effected in a
                product, which was not there previously,
                and which change facilitates the utility of the
                product for which it is meant, then the
                process is not a simple process, but a
                process incidental or ancillary to the
                completion of a manufactured product. It will
                not be safe solely to go by a test as to
                whether the commodity after the change
                takes in a new name, though in stated
                circumstances, it may be useful to resort to
                it. This may prove to be deceptive
                sometimes, for it will suit the manufacturer
                to retain the same name to the end product
                also. The 'character or use' test has been
                given due importance by pronouncements of
                the Supreme Court. When adopting a
                particular process, if a transformation takes
                place, which makes the product have a
                character and use of its own, which it did not
                bear earlier, then the process would amount
                to manufacture under
section 2
irrespective
                of the fact whether there has been a single
                process or have been several processes."
14. Applying the above tests, we hold that no
            new product had emerged on winding,
            cutting/slitting and packing. The character
            and the end-use did not undergo any change
            on account of the abovementioned activities
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                         Page 28 of 39
and, therefore, there was no manufacture on
            first principles.”

                                       (Emphasis Supplied)

       In
S.R. Tissues
(supra), this Court dealt with a fact situation
       wherein the form and shape of the subject article were being
       changed to facilitate the convenience of use. However, such a
       change in form did not lead to a change in either its character
       or use i.e., both the character and use of the product remained
       the same before and after undergoing the process.
38.
In
Satnam Overseas Ltd v. Commercial of Central Excise,
       New Delhi
, reported in (2015) 13 SCC 166, the assessee was
       engaged in packing combination of mixture of raw rice,
       dehydrated vegetables and spices in the name of ‘Rice and
       Spice’. The department contended that this process of mixing
       raw rice, dehydrated vegetables and spices amounted to
       “manufacture” as per
Section 2(f)
of the Act, 1944. The Court
       held that there was no transformation into a new commodity
       and thus the process did not amount to “manufacture”. The
       relevant observation reads thus:
“11. The first judgment which we want to mention,
            which was cited by Ms. Charanya, is
Crane Betel
            Nut Powder Works v. Commissioner of Customs,
            Central Excise, Tirupathi
. In the said case the
            Assessee was engaged in the business of
            marketing betel nuts in different sizes after
            processing them by adding essential/non-essential
            oils, menthol, sweetening agent etc. Initially, the
            Assessee cleared the goods under Chapter Sub-
            heading 2107 of the Central Excise Tariff and was
            paying duty accordingly. However, the Assessee
            filed a revised classification declaration Under Rule
            173B of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, with effect
            from 17th July, 1997, claiming classification of its
            product under Chapter Sub-heading 0801.00 of the
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                        Page 29 of 39
Central Excise Tariff. It was contended by the
            Assessee that the crushing of betel nuts into
            smaller pieces with the help of machines and
            passing them through different sizes of sieves to
            obtain goods of different sizes/grades and
            sweetening the cut pieces did not amount to
            manufacture in view of the fact that mere crushing
            of betel nuts into smaller pieces did not bring into
            existence a different commodity which had a
            distinct character of its own.
12. Though the authorities below had decided
            against the Assessee, this Court reversed the said
            view holding that the said process would not
            amount to 'manufacture' as the process involving
            manufacture does not always result in the creation
            of a new product. In the instant case
            notwithstanding the manufacturing process, it
            could not be said that a transformation had taken
            place resulting in the formation of a new product.
The relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced
            below:
31. In our view, the process of manufacture
                employed by the Appellant company did not
                change the nature of the end product, which
                in the words of the Tribunal, was that in the
                end product the 'betel nut remains a betel
                nut'. The said observation of the Tribunal
                depicts the status of the product prior to
                manufacture and thereafter.
In those
                circumstances, the views expressed in the
D.C.M. General Mills Ltd.
(supra) and the
                passage from the American Judgment
                (supra) become meaningful. The observation
                that manufacture implies a change, but
                every change of not manufacture and yet
                every change of an article is the result of
                treatment, labour and manipulation is
                apposite to the situation at hand. The
                process involved in the manufacture of
                sweetened betel nut pieces does not result in
                the manufacture of a new product as the end
                product continues to retain its original
                character though in a modified form.
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                       Page 30 of 39
What is to be highlighted is that even after the
            betel nut which had been cut to different sizes
            and had undergone the process, the Court did
            not treat it as 'manufacture' within the
            meaning of
Section 2(f)
of the Act on the
            ground that the end product was still a betel
            nut and there was no change in the essential
            character to that article even when it was the
            result of treatment, labour and manipulation,
            inasmuch as even after employing the same it
            had not resulted in the manufacture of a new
            product as the end product continued to
            retain its original character.
13. Another judgment which was referred to by
            learned Counsel for the Appellant is
Commissioner
            of Central Excise v. Laljee Godhoo and Co. Vide
this
            judgment the Court affirmed the view taken by the
            CEGAT, holding that the process of subjecting raw
            asafoetida (hing) resulting in formation of
            compounded asafoetida does not amount to
            manufacture, even when this process has
            undergone chemical change, because of the reason
            that the said chemical change had not brought even
            after it underwent a process, any new product as
            the product remained the same at starting and
            terminal points of the process....
14.....Again the test which was applied was
            that essential character of the product did not
            change and, therefore, it would not amount to
            manufacture. It was so held even when gum
            arabic as well as wheat flour were mixed in
            the process. A pertinent aspect which was
            noted was that mixing of these articles did not
            result in chemical reaction with asafoetida.
15. Last judgment to which we would like to refer
            to is
Deputy Commissioner Sales Tax (Law), Board
            of Revenue (Taxes), Ernakulam v. PIO Food
            Packers
. In that case, the process undertaken by
            the Assessee was to wash the pineapple, after
            purchase, and then remove inedible portion, the
            end crown as well as skin and inner core. After
            removing those inedible portions the pineapple fruit
            used to be sliced and the slices were filled in canes
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                        Page 31 of 39
after adding sugar as preservative. Thereafter,
            canes would be sealed under temperature and then
            put in a boiled water for sterilisation. Identical
            question was posed viz. whether this process
            amounted to 'manufacture'. Giving the answer in
            the negative, the Court held that even when
            with each process suffered, the original
            commodity experienced a change, such a
            change would not amount to 'manufacture'
            unless it seized to be the original commodity
            and a new and distinct article was produced
            therefrom....
xxx       xxx         xxx
17. It follows from the above that mere addition
            in the value, after the original product has
            undergone certain process, would not bring it
            within the definition of 'manufacture' unless
            its original identity also under goes
            transformation and it becomes a distinctive
            and new product.
18. When we apply the aforesaid principle to the
            facts of this case, it is clear that mere addition of
            dehydrated vegetables and certain spices to
            the raw rice, would not make it a different
            product. Its primary and essential character
            still remains the same as it is continued to be
            known in the market as rice and is sold as rice
            only. Further, this rice, again, remains in raw
            form and in order to make it edible, it has to
            be cooked like any other cereal. The process
            of cooking is even mentioned on the pouch
            which contains cooking instructions. Reading
            thereof amply demonstrates that it is to be
            cooked in the same form as any other rice is
            to be cooked. Therefore, we do not agree with the
            CEGAT that there is a transformation into a new
            commodity, commercially known as distinct and
            separate commodity.”

                                         (
Emphasis Supplied)

       Thus, Satnam Overseas
(supra) clarified that the addition of
       elements to a subject article would in itself not lead to
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                        Page 32 of 39
“manufacture”, as long as the essential character of the subject
       article is being retained.
39.
In
Maruti Suzuki India Ltd v. Commissioner of Central
       Excise
, reported in (2015) 13 SCC 186, the appellant’s primary
       contention was that the process of Electro Deposition Coating
       of various spare parts such as bumpers, grills, etc, did not
       amount to “manufacture” as the same was in the nature of anti-
       rust and was merely done to increase the shelf life of the said
       spare parts. Agreeing with the appellant, the Court held as
       follows:
“17. On the facts of the present case, we have first,
             therefore, to arrive at whether there is
             "manufacture" at all and only subsequently does
             the question arise as to if this is so, what is the
             valuation of the processed goods and whether duty
             is payable upon them. We have found on facts that
             for the purposes of the proviso to Rule 57F(ii), the
             inputs that were not ultimately used in the
             final product but were removed from the
             factory for home consumption remain the
             same despite ED coating and consequent value
             addition. We follow the law
laid down in
S.R
             Tissues Pvt. Ltd.
's case and state that on
             account of mere value addition without more
             it would be hazardous to say that
             manufacture has taken place, when in fact, it
             has not. It is clear, therefore, that the inputs
             procured by the Appellants in the present case,
             continue to be the same inputs even after ED
             coating and that Rule 57F(ii) proviso would
             therefore apply when such inputs are removed from
             the factory for home consumption, the duty of
             excise payable being the amount of credit that has
             been availed in respect of such inputs under Rule
             57A.”

                                        (Emphasis supplied)
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                         Page 33 of 39
40. At first glance, it may seem that the observations in various
       decisions discussed above fortify the appellant’s stance that no
       transformation could have occurred from placing imported
       Genset into a steel container and fitting the steel container with
       multiple additional components. The appellant may legitimately
       argue,      in   the   facts   of   the   present   case,   like   in the
       aforementioned cases: (i) no change in end use of the subject
       article is occurring [
Servo-Med
(supra)]; (ii) merely form is being
       changed for the sake of convenience [
S.R Tissues
(supra)] and
       utility [
Maruti Suzuki
(supra)]; and (iii) the additional elements
       do not change the character of the good [
Satnam Overseas
(supra)]. Consequently, undertaking the necessary process
       would not amount to “manufacture” under
Section 2(f)
of the
       Act, 1944.
41. However, such contention should fail. In all the aforementioned
       cases, the character or use of the subject article did not change,
       and hence, there was no transformation.
In
S.R Tissues
(supra), the change in form of the tissue roll did not lead to a
       change in the characteristics of the tissue.
Similarly, in
Satnam
       Overseas
(supra), the additional elements did not change the
       essential characteristics of the subject article. However, in the
       facts of the present case, the change in the form/structure and
       the addition of new components to the imported Genset has
       transformed it and brought into existence a different product,
       i.e. the Power Pack, which has its own distinct character and
       identity.
42. Determining the ‘character’ and ‘identity’ of goods is an
       inherently fact-specific inquiry, necessitating assessment on a
       case-to-case basis. Given the vast diversity of products and
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                                Page 34 of 39
manufacturing processes, it is impossible to lay down one
       universal definition for these terms.
43. In the facts of the present case, we are convinced that the steel
       container and the other additional components do transform
       the imported Genset and bring into existence a distinct product
       which has its own character and identity. On a preliminary
       analysis itself, it is amply evident that the constituent
       components of the imported Genset are very different from the
       constituent components of the Power Pack. The appellant
       argued that mere addition of extra components would not
       transform the imported Genset as all the additional components
       are in the nature of mere accessories being attached for the sake
       of convenience and utility. Consequently, the addition of these
       components would not transform the imported Genset into a
       different and distinct product.
44. At this juncture, it is necessary to determine whether these
       components attached to the steel container would constitute as
       ‘parts’ or ‘accessories’ of the Power Pack. This is crucial because
       if these additional components are ‘parts’ of the Power Pack, it
       would establish beyond doubt that the imported Genset has
       undergone transformation as its constituent elements are very
       different from that of the Power Pack.
45. The judicial understanding of the terms ‘part’ and ‘accessory’
       respectively is as presented below:
a. A part is an integral/ constituent component which renders
          the article complete and functional i.e., the article would not
          be able to fulfill its primary function without this component.
          [See
Saraswati Sugar Mills v. Commissioner of Central
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                        Page 35 of 39
Excise, Delhi- III
, reported in (2014) 15 SCC 625, and M/s
Steel Authority of India Ltd. v. Commissioner of Central
          Excise
, reported in 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1232];
       b. An accessory on the other hand is a component which while
          not being essential to the primary functioning of the article,
          is   used   in   conjunction    with   the   article   and   adds
          supplemental/secondary value by providing for additional
          beauty, elegance, comfort or convenience of use in relation
          to that article.
[See
Commissioner of Central Excise, Delhi
          v. Insulation Electrical Private Limited
reported in
          (2008) 12 SCC 45].
To illustrate, an air conditioner installed in a car would not be
       considered a ‘part’ of that car. This is because the car can
       effectively perform its primary function of transportation even
       without an air conditioner. Conversely, the air conditioner
       would be classified as an ‘accessory’ because it enhances
       comfort and convenience when utilised with the car. It provides
       supplemental/secondary value by enabling the ability to control
       the temperature within the car. On the other hand, a steering
       wheel would be considered as a ‘part’ of the car because without
       a steering wheel the car would not be able to perform its primary
       function, i.e., transportation.
46. Applying the above enunciated judicial understanding of ‘parts’
       and ‘accessories’ to the facts of this case, it becomes evident
       that the additional components should be considered as ‘parts’
       of the Power Pack. The appellant itself has admitted to the fact
       that once the Genset is placed in the steel container, these
       additional components, such as the radiator, ventilator fan and
       air filter unit, are required for its effective functioning. However,
       according to the appellant, these components do not have a
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                          Page 36 of 39
direct role in generating the electricity. Even if that be the case,
        it cannot be denied that these components play an equally vital
        role in facilitating such generation of electricity. It would be safe
        to assume that without these additional components, the Power
        Pack would not produce electricity within the steel container
        and thereby be able to fulfil its primary function. Thus, these
        additional components are not mere ‘accessories’ attached for
        the sake of convenience.
47.   Further, the change in the form of the imported Genset after
        undergoing the process is drastic and substantial. Unlike in
S.R
        Tissues
(supra) wherein the tissue roll was itself cut/slit into
        different forms, what is happening in the present case is not
        mere restructuring of the imported Genset. Rather, the Genset
        is being reengineered so that it can function within a container.
        In order to facilitate the same a number of additional
        components are being added, and they are all recognisable as
        ‘parts’ of the Power Pack. In fact, the pictorial representations
        of the imported Genset and Power Pack itself indicates that
        structurally there is a profound distinction between both the
        products. In such circumstances, the fact that the process was
        undertaken merely for the sake of logistical purposes would not
        change the undeniable fact that the imported Genset has been
        transformed into a different product.
48. The appellant’s submission that the Genset was complete and
        functional at the time of import and the end-use of both the
        imported Genset and the Power Pack is the same i.e., generation
        of electricity, is also devoid of any merit. There is a serious
        dispute between the parties as to whether or not the Genset at
        the time of import was complete and functional. Even if we
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                           Page 37 of 39
assume it was complete and functional, that still would not help
        in driving home the appellant’s contention. This is because the
        core end-use of a subject article might remain the same pre and
        post application of the process and yet it might have undergone
        a transformation into a different product.
49. The contention of the appellant that the end-use of both
        products is merely the ‘generation of electricity’ is an
        oversimplification that conflates the core function of a product
        with its functional utility. The Genset at the time of the import
        was in a form that was suitable/intended for permanent
        installation. The process undertaken by the appellant imparts
        the core functional utility of portability to the Genset, a utility
        that was non-existent in the product at the time of its import.
        This is not a minor, value-added feature, it is the defining
        attribute from which the final product derives its entire identity
        and character.
50.   We have no doubt in our mind that the test of transformation
        is satisfied in the facts of the present case. The imported Genset
        and the Power Pack are two different commodities with distinct
        constituent elements, structure and functional utility.
51. We now turn to the final test of marketability. No evidence has
        been adduced by the appellant to suggest that the Power Packs
        are not marketable. On the contrary, it is an admitted position,
        clear from the record, that it is these very Power Packs that are
        the subject of the lease agreements and are delivered to the
        ultimate customer. Thus, no serious question regarding the
        marketability of the final product remains, it is an established
        and undisputed fact.
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                         Page 38 of 39
E. CONCLUSION
52. In the facts of the present case, both the transformation test
       and the marketability test stand fulfilled. The process of placing
       the Genset within the steel container and fitting that container
       with additional, integral components brings into existence a
       new, distinct, and marketable commodity. This process would
       thus amount to “manufacture” under
Section 2(f)(i)
of the Act,
       1944. Consequently, the appellant is liable to pay excise duty
       on the goods manufactured.
53. For all the foregoing reasons, the appeals fail and are hereby
       dismissed.
….………………………….…. J.
(J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                          ….………………………….…. J.
(K.V.VISWANATHAN)



New Delhi.
September 19, 2025.
Civil Appeal Nos. 9418-9420 of 2016                        Page 39 of 39