[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Bikram Chatterji vs Union Of India on 10 June, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 601
Author:
Arun Mishra
Bench:
Uday Umesh Lalit
,
Arun Mishra
1



                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


         I.A.NOS. 49238 OF 2020, 49239 OF 2020, I.A.NO.29350 OF 2020,
                 I.A.NOS. 166987 OF 2019, I.A.NO. 29699 OF 2020,
              I.A.NOS.155624 OF 2019, I.A.NO.141062 OF 2019 AND
                              I.A.NO.49139 OF 2020

                                                         IN

                                   WRIT PETITION [C] NO.940 OF 2017

     BIKRAM CHATTERJI & ORS.                                              … PETITIONERS

                                                     VERSUS

     UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                                … RESPONDENTS

                                                   ORDER
In Re I.A.No.49238 of 2020 seeking directions filed by NBCC (I) Ltd.
1.                  By way of I.A. No.49238 of 2020, NBCC has submitted that it has

     established the work on the following conditions:
i. “NBCC will not be held responsible for any existing
                                    disputes involving and in relation to the Projects;
ii. NBCC will not be held responsible for any disputes
                                    arising from the contracts entered into by Amrapali
                                    in relation to the Projects;
iii. NBCC will not be held responsible for any past or
                                     present liabilities in relation to the Projects,
                                     including on account of dues of homebuyers,
                                     vendors, contractors, government authorities, etc.;
Signature Not Verified
iv. NBCC will not be liable in relation to any disputes,
Digitally signed by
MUKESH KUMAR
Date: 2020.06.10
including before any Court or Arbitrator, existing
16:06:33 IST
Reason:                             or arising at a later date, with the existing vendors,
                                    contractors, co-developers, landowners, home-
                                    buyers, banks, financial institutions, other lenders
2
and creditors and any government authority.”
2.   As NBCC is appointed as a Project Management Consultant to

complete various projects, it was permitted to float the tenders and

prepare DPRs. It is submitted that NBCC has completed two projects and

floated tenders for other projects, barring three projects.     However,

various home buyers are approaching different courts in different

jurisdictions across the country, making NBCC a party.               The

complaints/petitions are filed against NBCC seeking reliefs, such as

refund of amounts that home buyers have paid to the Amrapali Group or

to grant possession of flats, etc. The NBCC is forced to defend itself in

different Courts being a party to the said petitions.     For instance, a

summon has been received from the State Consumer Redressal

Commission, Lucknow against the CMD. The NBCC has been arrayed as

respondent No.3. A complaint has also been preferred by one of the home

buyers of the Amrapali Golf Homes, Greater Noida. They are receiving

various letters, emails, messages, calls seeking updates regarding the

progress of work being undertaken by the NBCC for their respective

projects. Reply to every home buyer is a herculean task, and much time

is being consumed in the process. The NBCC is ready and willing to

submit monthly project reports with all relevant information and

photographs in respect of each project to the learned Receiver, which can

be made available on the blog/website for the information of home

buyers, for that the NBCC has already made a request to the learned
3
Receiver as such various directions have been sought.
3.   NBCC is asked by this Court to complete the incomplete projects.

It is not liable for any legal action. In view of the order that has been

passed by this Court, the NBCC is immune from any such actions, and

we request the Courts/ Consumer Redressal Commission and other

authorities not to permit impleadment of NBCC as respondent and not to

issue summons to NBCC as they are doing the work under the

supervision of this Court and are not answerable to any other court,

tribunal, authorities. They are granted immunity to be sued in any other

court or commission, and they are answerable to this Court only in the

pending proceedings. Thus, they cannot be dragged in the litigation filed

by   existing   home   buyers,   previous   contractors,   co-developers,

landowners, banks, financial institutions, other lenders and creditors,

and any Government authorities before any other Court/ Commission or

Authority.
4.   It is also made clear that NBCC is not responsible for attending to

queries made by the home buyers. They have to report the progress to

the learned Receiver, and we request the learned Receiver to put progress

reports of projects on the blog/website.
With the said directions and observations, we dispose of I.A.

No.49238 of 2020.
4
In Re I.A. No.29350 of 2020 in I.A. No.13175 of 2019 filed by
Royalgolf Link City Projects Private Limited
5.   I.A. No.29350 of 2020 has been filed by Royalgolf Link City Projects

Private Limited for modification of order dated 11.9.2019, by which this

Court directed that a sum of Rs.48.52 crores, which was the principal

amount received by Royalgolf Link City Projects Private Limited from the

Amrapali Group to be repaid along with 12% interest by 10.1.2020 and

the attachment of 30 villas was to continue unless otherwise ordered. An

undertaking was also to be furnished by the Chief Finance Officer as well

as by all the Directors to deposit the amount as ordered. This Court

directed that 25% of the amount be paid by 30.10.2019, 30%             by

30.11.2019, and the remaining amount on or before 10.1.2020.          The

interest was to be calculated until the date of the payment.
6.   The Royalgolf Link City Projects Private Limited, after construction,

was to give 30 villas to the Amrapali Ultra Homes as per the Agreement

entered into between them. A sum of Rs.48.52 crores was received as the

principal amount by Royalgolf Link City Projects Private Limited. The

present application has been filed to modify the order passed by this

Court because it deposited a sum of Rs.48.52 crores, but it has extreme

hardship in depositing 12% of interest on the amount mentioned above.

It is averred that due to litigation, the goodwill of the project has been

severely affected, and construction work is considerably slowed down due
5
to lack of funds. The vendors have stopped offering credit. The existing

buyers are not making payments. The average yearly collections had also

dropped from Rs.61.86 crores in the year 2018-19 to Rs.17.85 crores in

2019-2020. Despite part injunction lifted by this Court, the project could

register new sales of only 15 units, and only Rs.1.42 crores could be

recovered. The banks have also stopped making further disbursement of

the retail loans to individual home buyers.       Fourteen buyers have

cancelled their units. The RERA has ordered a refund of 6 units along

with interest upon the complaints filed before it. A loan was taken at a

very high rate of 21% in order to deposit the amount. It will be difficult

to repay the loan in case interest is not waived. Home buyers' interest is

at stake as the project has been delayed for more than three years due to

the injunction of this Court. This Court vide judgment dated 23.7.2019

directed various entities to deposit the amount with the Registry and did

not direct payment of any interest, but in the case of the applicant,

interest has been ordered to be paid.
7.   Having heard Shri Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel at length,

we are of the opinion that value of money increased at the hands of

Royalgolf Link City Projects Private Limited and the value of houses and

villas which were to be handed over to Ultra Homes, has also been

appreciated. Considering over all facts and circumstances of the case,

we have ordered a reasonable interest rate of 12%. As it was the money
6
of home buyers, which was diverted, they must have a refund of their

money with a reasonable rate of interest. We find the hardships, which

are pointed out, are all commercial one and the Royalgolf Link City

Projects Private Limited is bound to disgorge the advantage it received

out of huge money of Rs.48.52 crores, which remained with it for a

substantial period; otherwise, it would tantamount to unjust enrichment.

It cannot be taken as a ground that in the judgment/ order dated

23.7.2019, the interest was not imposed on other entities. It has been

imposed on the facts and circumstances of the case on the Royalgolf Link

City Projects Private Limited. It is open to imposing interest and on other

persons/ entities. The question is quite open as interest was not dealt

with in the judgment dated 23.7.2019, and only the aspect of findings of

Forensic Auditors was dealt with.       Thus, we find no merit in the

application, and the same is dismissed. Let interest be deposited within

six weeks, failing which appropriate action would be taken for violation

of undertaking furnished by the Chief Financial Officer and the Directors

and for violation of the order passed by this Court.
In Re. IA No.141062 of 2019 and IA No.155624 of 2019
(Release of FAR to the Noida and Greater Noida Authorities)
8.   I.A. Nos.141062 of 2019 and 155624 of 2019 have been filed by the

Noida and Greater Noida Authorities respectively for issuance of direction

for return of unused FAR. The Noida Authority has prayed for the release
7
of FAR of 98,445.77 sq. mtrs. as detailed in para 7 of the application.

Several other prayers have also been made. The Greater Noida Authority

also made similar prayer in the application. We are presently dealing

with the part of prayers with respect to the release of FAR.
9.   It is submitted in the application that as per judgment dated

23.7.2019, directions were issued by this Court to execute tripartite

Agreement concerning projects, where flat buyers are residing within a

period of one month.     The concerned authorities are duty-bound to

implement the judgment.      As the Registry did not accept the review

petition, applications have been filed. The Noida Authority had allotted

a total of nine Group Housing Plots in favour of the Amrapali Group of

Companies. This Court ordered the cancellation of the lease of Amrapali

Group of Companies and the property vest in Receiver. The outstanding

dues of Rs.2,191.38 crores existed against the allotment of nine Group

Housing Plots as only partial payment has been made. This Court also

directed that the land dues can be recovered from other properties of

Amrapali Group, which have been attached.        The Noida and Greater

Noida Authorities are entrusted with the task of holistic development of

the industrial area, which includes the construction of various

infrastructural projects and carrying out of municipal works, catering to

more than 15 lakhs population. The recovery of dues is necessary as it

is public money. It is submitted that as per the terms of allotment and
8
lease deed, the builder was entitled to FAR at 2.75. Based on the layout

plan sanctioned by the Noida Authority, it was permissible to construct

a specified number of flats in each of the group housing plots. However,

all the flats that can be constructed within the permitted FAR are neither

under construction work nor sold. There remains unused FAR, as vacant

land, to which builder was entitled. Considering the flats that can be

constructed within the permitted FAR @ 2.75, and there are no flats

constructed on the available FAR, the unused FAR of 98,445.77 sq. mtrs.

which translates into 35,798.19 sq. mtrs. of land may be ordered to be

returned to Noida Authority. If FAR is ordered to be returned to the Noida

Authority, to some extent, the outstanding land dues can be recovered.
10.   In I.A. No.155624 of 2019 filed by Greater Noida Authority, it is

submitted that there is a vacant area in square meter plot-wise within

the sanctioned FAR @ 2.75. It has also been prayed that NBCC may be

directed to complete the construction of 10,556 nos. of flats and not

11,469 nos. of flats on Plot No.GH 09, Sector Tech. Zone 4, Greater Noida.

Because of the availability of FAR @ 2.75, prayer made is to return it to

realize the dues, Rs.3,234.71 crores as on 15.1.2019,        inclusive of

interest, 15% per annum with half-yearly compounding and penal

interest.
11.   Learned Receiver has prayed to permit him and the Committee

assisting in proceeding to sell or otherwise transfer of unused sanctioned
9
FAR, permissible FAR, and purchasable FAR, as well as additional FAR

due to existing or proposed metro line. The sale and transfer can be on

such terms as may be found profitable and expeditiously executable.

Learned Receiver shall be at liberty to invite applications from intending

purchasers by issuing public notices.           Learned Receiver and the

Committee be authorized to require Noida and Greater Noida Authorities

to act in the facilitation of sale or transfer, and the authorities may be

directed to abide by instructions or compliances that may be sought by

the learned Receiver and the Committee. Learned Receiver has pointed

out that FAR's sale is necessary to complete the projects and fetch money

for incomplete projects left by the builders.
12.   Our attention was drawn to a finding recorded by this Court in

judgment and order delivered on 23.7.2019 to the effect that basic

obligation was not complied with by promoter as such it was not entitled

to sell FAR. Learned Receiver pointed out that in Dream Valley Project in

Greater Noida, the authorities had sanctioned FAR @ 3.5, which include

up to 2.75 permissible FAR and 0.75 purchasable FAR. In Silicon City,

Noida, the Authority had sanctioned up to 2.75 FAR and an additional

15% FAR over and above 2.75 FAR. As this Court cancelled the leases

granted in favor of the Amrapali Group of Companies by the Noida and

Greater Noida Authorities, the rights have vested in the Receiver. The

Receiver has also attracted our attention to the findings recorded in the
10
judgment to the effect that buyers have paid the dues of Noida and

Greater Noida Authorities as a component of the price for flats. Thus, the

premium and other dues payable under the lease deeds to the Noida and

Greater Noida Authorities cannot be recovered from the home buyers or

the projects in question. The directions have been issued to the effect

that Noida and Greater Noida Authorities could not sell the buildings or

demolish them nor could enforce the charge against home buyers/leased

land/projects, in the facts of the case and ultimately various directions

were issued by this Court. Relevant findings and directions are extracted

hereunder:
“122.    As the basic obligations have not been complied
         with by the promoters, they cannot also be entitled to FAR.
         It was pointed out on behalf of Authorities that permissible
         FAR is 2.75, whereas it has been wrongly mentioned and
         worked out at 3.50 by the Amrapali Group. In the instant
         case, we find that there is serious kind of fraud by the
         promotors as such they cannot be said to be entitled to avail
         the FAR to utilise it or to alienate and more so when they
         have failed to complete the projects and pay the dues.
149. Because of the gross violations of the conditions of
         lease deeds executed by the Noida and Greater Noida
         Authorities in favour of Amrapali group of companies with
         respect to various projects, are liable to be cancelled and
         the rights thereupon shall vest in the Court Receiver.
150.    There was no valid mortgage created in favour of
         Banks and there was a huge diversion of money paid by
         homebuyers which were more than required for payment of
         dues of the Noida/ Greater Noida Authorities and banks.
The buyers have paid the dues of Noida and Greater Noida
         authorities as a component of the price for flats. Thus, the
         premium and other dues payable under the lease deeds to
         the Noida and Greater Noida Authorities, cannot be
         recovered from the home buyers or the projects in question.
         The dues as may be ordered shall be recovered by sale of
         other properties which have been created by the diversion
11
of funds and have been attached by this Court. The banks
        have also failed to ensure that the money was used in the
        projects. As found in the forensic audit, there was no
        necessity of obtaining loans from the banks and it has not
        been used for the purpose it was obtained. The Authorities
        and Bankers have violated the doctrine of public trust and
        their officials, unfortunately, acted in collusion with
        builders. The dues of the banks are also to be recovered
        from the other attached properties as observed by us.
153. We have also found that non-payment of dues of the
        Noida and Greater Noida Authorities and the banks cannot
        come in the way of occupation of flats by home buyers as
        money of home buyers has been diverted due to the inaction
        of Officials of Noida/ Greater Noida Authorities. They
        cannot sell the buildings or demolish them nor can enforce
        the charge against homebuyers/ leased land/ projects in
        the facts of the case. Similarly, the banks cannot recover
        money from projects as it has not been invested in projects.
        Homebuyers money has been diverted fraudulently, thus,
        fraud cannot be perpetuated against them by selling the
        flats and depriving them of hard-earned money and savings
        of entire life. They cannot be cheated once over again by
        sale of the projects raised by their funds. The Noida and
        Greater Noida Authorities have to issue the Completion/
        Part Completion Certificate, as the case may be, to execute
        tripartite agreement and registered deeds in favour of the
        buyers on part-completion or completion of the buildings,
        as the case may be or where the inhabitants are residing,
        within a period of one month.
154.    Resultantly, we order as follows:
(i)       The registration of Amrapali Group of Companies under
          RERA shall stand cancelled;
(ii)      The various lease deeds granted in favour of Amrapali
          Group of Companies by Noida and Greater Noida
          Authorities for projects in question stand cancelled and
          rights henceforth, to vest in Court Receiver;
(iii)     We hold that Noida and Greater Noida Authorities shall
          have no right to sell the flats of the home buyers or the
          land leased out for the realization of their dues. Their
          dues shall have to be recovered from the sale of other
          properties which have been attached. The direction holds
          good for the recovery of the dues of the various Banks
          also.
12
(iv)    We have appointed the NBCC to complete the various
        projects and hand over the possession to the buyers. The
        percentage of commission of NBCC is fixed at 8 percent.
(v)     The home buyers are directed to deposit the outstanding
        amount under the Agreement entered with the promoters
        within 3 months from today in the Bank account opened
        in UCO Bank in the Branch of this Court. The amount
        deposited by them shall be invested in the fixed deposit
        to be disbursed under the order of this Court on phase-
wise completion of the projects/work by the NBCC.
(vi)    In view of the finding recorded by the Forensic Auditors
        and fraud unearthed, indicating prima facie violation of
        the FEMA and other fraudulent activities, money
        laundering, we direct Enforcement Directorate and
        concerned authorities to investigate and fix liability on
        persons responsible for such violation and submit the
        progress report in the Court and let the police also submit
        the report of the investigation made by them so far.
(vii)   We direct the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        to initiate the appropriate disciplinary action against Mr.
        Anil Mittal, CA for his conduct as reflected in various
        transactions and the findings recorded in the order and
        his overall conduct as found on Forensic Audit. Let
        appropriate proceedings are initiated and concluded as
        early as possible within 6 months and a report of action
        taken to be submitted to this Court.
(viii) We direct various Companies/ Directors and other
       incumbents in whose hands money of the home buyers
       is available as per the report of Forensic Auditors, to
       deposit the same in the Court within one month from
       today and to do the needful in the manner as observed.
       The last opportunity of one month is granted to deposit
       the amount and to do the needful failing which
       appropriate action shall be taken against them.
(ix)    Concerned Ministry of Central Government, as well as the
        State Government and the Secretary of Housing and
        Urban Development, are directed to ensure that
        appropriate action is taken as against leaseholders
        concerning such similar projects at Noida and Greater
        Noida and other places in various States, where projects
        have not been completed. They are further directed to
        ensure that projects are completed in a time-bound
        manner as contemplated in RERA and home buyers are
        not defrauded.
13
(x)    We appoint Shri R. Venkataramani, learned Senior
             Advocate, as the Court Receiver. The right of the lessee
             shall vest in the Court Receiver and he shall execute
             through authorized person on his behalf, the tripartite
             agreement and do all other acts as may be necessary and
             also to ensure that title is passed on to home buyers and
             possession is handed over to them.
(xi)   We also direct Noida and Greater Noida Authorities to
             execute the tripartite agreement within one month
             concerning the projects where homebuyers are residing
             and issue completion certificate notwithstanding that the
             dues are to be recovered under this order by the sale of
             the other attached properties. Registered conveyance
             deed shall also be executed in favour of homebuyers, they
             are to be placed in the possession and they shall continue
             to do so in future on completion of projects or in part as
             the case may be. We direct the Noida and Greater Noida
             Authorities to take appropriate action to do the needful
             in the matter. The Water Works Department of the
             concerned area and the Electricity Supplier are directed
             to provide the connections for water and electricity to
             home buyers forthwith.”
13.   Learned Receiver prayed for directions in respect of the sale of

balance FAR available within the sanctioned plan, unused FAR up to the

permissible limit of 2.75 or more and FAR beyond 2.75 up to 3.5 under

the purchasable scheme and other FAR which may be available due to

metro projects, etc.
14.   A prayer has also been made to direct Noida and Greater Noida

Authorities/Other Authorities/Govt. Departments/Bodies to sanction

necessary     plans.       Concerning        water    and   power,    Electricity

Department/Authorities be directed to provide water, electricity & sewage

connection to the prospective Institution/Builders/Developers, who will

purchase     the    balance     FAR     as     also   to    various   Executing
14
Agencies/Contractor who may be appointed by NBCC during (i) execution

of work, and (ii) after completion of work till handing over of possession

is also done.
15.   We have heard the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of

Noida and Greater Noida Authorities as well as the learned Receiver.
16.   It was argued by the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of

Noida and Greater Noida Authorities that FAR is available at 2.75, and in

some projects, FAR at 3.50 was sanctioned by the Noida and Greater

Noida Authorities. The purchasable FAR can be 0.75, as the case may

be. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case and the huge

dues recoverable by Noida and Greater Noida Authorities, the FAR

deserve to be returned in favor of Noida and Greater Noida Authorities so

that they may sell it for the realisation of their dues as the recovery of

public money is to be made and authorities require money for various

development works.
17.   While passing the judgment, we have noted that the Amrapali

Group of Companies worked out the price considering the premium

payable to the Noida and Greater Noida Authorities and have realized the

money from the buyers on that basis. It was also noted that diversion of

money was permitted not only by Noida and Greater Noida Authorities

but also by the bankers and other financial institutions. The concerned
15
authorities did not take timely action, and the financial institutions

resulted in projects being stalled, and now it has become tough to

complete the projects. Financial institutions/ Banks are not coming

forward to fund the incomplete projects, and the buyers who borrowed

the money from the banks have not been able to obtain possession of the

flats booked by them due to the non-completion of the projects. On the

other hand, the liability to pay the interest on the amount of loan, which

they had taken, is fastened upon them, and they have been duped by

diverting money by the builders.
18.   In view of the finding recorded in the judgment delivered by this

Court on 27.3.2019, the FAR is made available only because of the

investment made by the home buyers, but for that, the FAR would not

have been available. Thus, they should have the first charge on it as they

have deposited the money which had been diverted. Thus, we find no

justification in the prayer made by the Noida and Greater Noida

Authorities to release the FAR, which was available to the erstwhile

Amrapali Group of Companies, and all the rights of the builders are now

vesting in the Receiver. A finding was recorded earlier that builders were

not entitled to release of FAR as they did not fulfil the obligation, does not

come in the way of availability of FAR to the Receiver, it can be permitted

to be sold by the Receiver and the Committee formed by this Court for

this purpose. A substantial amount has to be fetched out of the sale of
16
permissible FAR, which is 2.75. Purchasable FAR, which is 0.75, as the

case may be, and due to other developments, if any other FAR is made

available, it is permitted to be sold by the Receiver and the Committee to

utilize the money to complete various projects. In case any surplus

amount of money remains after completion of the projects, appropriate

orders can be passed to release the amount to Noida and Greater Noida

Authorities after completion of projects, if the dues are not satisfied by

the sale of the property of Amrapali Group of Companies, which has been

attached pursuant to the orders of this Court.       We do not find any

justification in the prayers made in I.A. Nos.141062 of 2019 and 155624

of 2019 concerning the release of FAR in favour of Noida and Greater

Noida Authorities. The prayer is resultantly rejected, and we issue the

following directions concerning the sale of FAR as prayed by the learned

Receiver:
(i)    The sale of balance FAR shall be available within the Sanctioned

         Plan;
(ii)   The sale of unused FAR shall be up to permissible limit @ 2.75 or

         more as available;
(iii) The sale of FAR beyond 2.75 up to 3.5 under the purchasable

         scheme or otherwise granted in Dream Valley Project, Plot No.

         GH-09, Tech Zone IV, Greater Noida, and other projects or any

         increase   in   FAR   beyond    permissible/purchasable   due   to
17
whatever reasons such as the coming up of Metro project are to

          be sold & transferred under the Authority of Receiver and

          Committee appointed by this Court.
(iv)    The above direction will be notwithstanding any previous dues of

          the Amrapali Group, their associate companies/ developers/

          other     contractors   deployed   by   them,     or   any    other

          previous/present outstanding.
(v)     The Noida / Greater Noida Authorities or any other Development

          Authorities, where these projects are situated, will not take into

          account any cost consideration and will provide additional FAR

          as may be available due to existing/proposed metro line and

          sanction their plans accordingly within a fixed time frame of 30

          days after submission of the details and designs.
(vi)    The Noida / Greater Noida Authorities / Public Authorities /

          Various       Service   Departments      /      Authorities    like
Water/Power/Sewage/Pollution etc. shall adhere to the advice/

          request of the Receiver appointed by this Court and will consider

          the same as a direction issued by this Court.
(vii) With respect to purchasable FAR, if any amount is payable to

          Noida and Greater Noida Authorities it shall be paid after the sale

          of the FAR.
19.     Thus, I.A. Nos.141062 of 2019 and 155624 of 2019 relating to the

release of FAR are rejected. It is made clear that while passing this order,
18
we have not commented on the other prayers made in the applications.

They are to be decided later on.
In Re. I.A. No.166987 of 2019 and I.A. No.29699 of 2020 in I.A.
No.166987 of 2019 filed by Vansh Consultants Private Limited.
20.   I.A. No.166987 of 2019 has been filed by Vansh Consultants Private

Limited, seeking deletion of its name from the summary of Report of

Forensic Auditors contained in paragraph 60(17) of the judgment dated

23.7.2019. It is submitted that the applicant had invested Rs.10 crores

in the Amrapali Leisure Valley Private Limited. It has been mentioned in

the judgment that an amount of Rs.9.75 crores is recoverable from the

applicant. Due to some inadvertent error, the name of the applicant has

been mentioned as a debtor. Following is the summary of the report of

Forensic Audit in paragraph 60(17) :
“SUMMARY OF REPORT OF FORENSIC AUDIT
60.    The summary of report submitted by
         Forensic Auditors in the Court is as under:
17.    Summary of amounts recoverable standing
         as debit balances in books of accounts

         Amrapali group of companies had several amounts lying in
         debit balances in the form of advances recoverable on
         account of long term loans to third parties, short term loans
         given to third parties, advances given for purchase of plots,
         advances given to creditors for materials/others etc.

         Amrapali group of companies were mostly diverting loan
         funds as well as home buyers funds to directors, key
         managerial personnel, relatives, group companies and third
         parties. They did construction activity only in part and
         created a circle for movements of funds vide bogus expenses
         or hollow transactions. Funds were given to several parties
         in the garb of advances against purchase of land or for
19
purchasing material for construction and booked as sundry
creditors with debit balances. However, in effect such
amounts were neither returned nor any expense was
booked against them. Such amounts are as old as 2006-07,
which have not been returned or no expense has been
booked till date. Total of such recoverable amounts to
Rs.582 crore.
Top 20 of such parties with their balances are stated
hereunder:
Name of the
  Company/Entity                                 Total
  Jaura Infratech
  Private Limited                         34,55,00,000
  Mauria Udyog
  Limited                                 22,24,34,199
  Anil Kumar
  Sharma                                  16,34,69,224
  Shiv Priya
                                          11,53,30,097
  Prem Mishra
                                          10,26,03,947
  Vansh Consultants
  Private Limited                          9,75,00,000
  Apex Infraventure
  Private Limited                          7,95,05,000
  Rinku Computech
  Private Limited                          6,69,59,467
  Sapphire Digital
  Printers                                 4,46,83,088
  Heart Beat City
  Developers Pvt Ltd                       4,29,32,000
  Rubi Creations
  Private Limited                          4,26,27,790
  Ajay Kumar
                                           4,05,40,931
  Star Land Craft
  Private Limited                          4,01,85,888
  Heartland City
  Developers Private
  Limited                                  4,01,22,762
  Vidhya Shree
  Buildcon Private
  Limited                                  4,00,00,000
  Sky Tech Buildcon
  Private Limited                          3,88,53,775
  Skyline Tele Media
  Services Limited                         3,48,02,771
20
Shantinath
            Enterprises                              3,24,71,100
            Red Star Tradex P
            Ltd.                                     3,00,00,000
            Mohabbat S/o
            Abbas                                    2,66,99,000
            Total of top 20
            companies/parties                    1,64,72,21,039


         It can be seen from records that the recoverable are due
         since long and there are mostly no movements
         subsequently either in the form of booking of expenses or
         receipts. Out of the amounts recoverable from parties in
         case of Ultra Home Construction Pvt Ltd, 20 parties having
         huge balances recoverable were called for personal
         interviews. 7 parties appeared      and no satisfactory
         explanation was provided
         (Refer Annexure X.1, Volume IV page no 1015-1019).”
21.   The applicant submitted that opening balances were not correctly

entered into Amrapali Leisure Valley Private Limited's accounting

software.   The correctness of accounts of the Amrapali Group of

Companies escaped the attention of Forensic Auditors. It is submitted

that the applicant was incorporated and registered with the Registrar of

Companies, Delhi. The Amrapali Group needed infusion of money; as

such, it invested Rs.10 crores with Amrapali Leisure Valley Private

Limited in March/April 2014 and invested the amount bonafide.            To

secure the return on the investment of Rs.10 crores, Amrapali Leisure

Valley Private Limited also offered allotment of flats to the applicant with

a condition of assured buy-back of flats. An agreement dated 28.3.2014

was entered into between Amrapali Leisure Valley Private Limited and the

applicant to secure investment of Rs.10 crores. The buy-back process
21
was to commence within 12 months from the date of the Agreement and

to be completed within 24 months.        Amrapali Leisure Valley Private

Limited initially honoured its commitment of buy-back, and later on, it

started defaulting. Amrapali Leisure Valley Private Limited requested for

replacement of some cheques from time to time. Some cheques were

dishonoured.        Proceedings under
Section 138
of the Negotiable

Instruments Act are pending before the Trial Court. A statement about

the receipt of Rs.8 crores has been filed.
22.   Vide email dated 21.11.2018, the Forensic Auditors sought the

statement of accounts of inter-corporate deposits of the applicant with

the Amrapali Group of Companies. A reply to which was submitted on

29.11.2018 by the applicant. The Forensic Auditors made certain queries

on 30.11.2018. A reply to which was sent on 2.12.2018 by the applicant.
Thereafter, on 3.12.2018, the Forensic Auditors requested the presence

of the Directors of the company.     On 6.12.2018, the Directors of the

company, along with their Chartered Accountant, visited the Forensic

Auditor's office.    The Enforcement Directorate issued a letter dated

18.10.2019 to the applicant based on the judgment and facts mentioned

in the report of the Forensic Auditors. The applicant was not a party to

the petition. The applicant submitted that Rs.10 crores' investment was

not reflected in the opening balance of the Amrapali Leisure Valley Private

Limited.   An amount of Rs.8 crores received by the applicant from
22
Amrapali Leisure Valley Private Limited has not been reconciled against

the payment of Rs.10 crores paid by the applicant.         The applicant

company does not owe any loan to the Amrapali Group of Companies or

the home buyers.     The applicant is entitled to receive money from

Amrapali Leisure Valley Private Limited. The incomplete entries in the

books of accounts of the Amrapali Group of Companies have resulted in

an incorrect appreciation of entries about the applicant company. Thus,

the prayer has been made to delete the applicant's name from the table

contained in paragraph 60(17) of the judgment dated 23.7.2019.
23.   In continuation of I.A. No.166987 of 2019, I.A. No.29699 of 2020

has been filed for directions. It is submitted that the Forensic Auditor’s

report violates the principles of natural justice. The Forensic Auditors

have shown the applicant as an inter-corporate depositor. The Forensic

Auditors sent an email dated 6.2.2020 to Mr. Raj Kumar Jain, Mr. Balbir

Singh Malhotra, and Mr. Sandeep, requesting them to present for

examination on 11.2.2020 and a reminder was received on 10.2.2020.

The applicant's counsel sent an email on 10.2.2020, requesting for books

of accounts of Amrapali Leisure Valley Private Limited to be kept ready.

The Forensic Auditors called each of the Directors of the company

separately one by one. The Forensic Auditors made a fishing and roving

inquiry.   The applicant submitted that the imposition of liability of

Rs.9.75 crores is an error.
23
24.      We have heard Mr. Anoop G. Chaudhari, learned senior counsel and

Mr. Pawan Kumar Aggarwal, the Forensic Auditor at length. Learned

senior counsel on behalf of applicant argued that the applicant invested

Rs.10 crores in Amrapali Leisure Valley Private Limited's project between

28.3.2014 to 4.4.2014.      The amount of Rs.10 crores was invested in

Vansh Consultants by M/s. Harsh International, a partnership firm of

two brothers Yogesh Jain and R.K. Jain, located in Noida SEZ, a part of

Mahak Group. To safeguard the investment and funds, Mr. R.K. Jain

was inducted as a Director in Vansh Consultants on 9.8.2014. By way

of post-dated cheques, the applicant received only Rs.8 crores so far. The

post-dated cheques of Rs.11.25 crores were dishonored; as such, five

complaints under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act were

filed.    The Forensic Auditors had asked the applicant to submit the

statement of accounts of inter-corporate deposits between 1.4.2008 and

30.9.2018. The Forensic Auditors, before submission of the report to this

Court, asked the applicant for certain information, which were given on

6.12.2018. This Court asked the Forensic Auditors to clarify the position

vide order dated 13.1.2020. This is a case of an obvious error on the part

of the Forensic Auditors.     The applicant cannot be an inter-corporate

depositor of Rs.10 crores as well as a debtor of Rs.9.75 crores to Amrapali

Leisure Valley Private Limited. The Forensic Auditors have failed to take

note of the credit entries, bank transfers, the return of Rs.8 crores

received by the applicant by post-dated cheques, cheque bouncing cases
24
pending before the Trial Court and debit and credit entries have not been

reconciled. It is submitted that the applicant has received notice from

the Enforcement Directorate based on the incorrect report of the Forensic

Auditors.   Thus, prayer for deletion of the applicant's name from the

judgment and the report of Forensic Auditor has been made.
25.   The Forensic Auditor, Shri Pawan Agrawal, pointed out in detail the

various facts in the documents submitted by the applicant itself. It was

pointed out that there was nothing to dispute the debit entries made in

the accounts of Amrapali Leisure Valley Private Limited, and on

interrogation, the facts could not be explained. Several shell companies

were created or used to divert the money of home buyers.         Forensic

Auditor further pointed out that the agreement entered into between

Vansh Consultants Private Limited and Amrapali Leisure Valley Private

Limited is dubious and designed to hide actual transactions behind this

agreement. Forensic Auditor also pointed out that the tower number

given in the agreement is F2, having total 34 floors (G+33) and 102 flats.

Amrapali Leisure Valley Pvt. Ltd. has no sanction plan of constructing

any building of 34 floors. Further, there is no tower, namely, F2. The

tower and flats mentioned in the agreement were not in existence at any

point of time.
26.   Forensic Auditor further pointed out that it was mentioned in the

agreement that an amount of Rs 10 crores would be returned in a year
25
and Rs. 10 crores would be paid over and above the principal of Rs.10

crores in the next two years. This has resulted into an interest of Rs.10

crores on an amount of Rs.10 crores used for a year and after refund

interest of Rs.10 crores was payable.     The agreement is beyond any

financial prudence, and only an insane businessman will agree to borrow

funds at such a high interest rate of 100 percent. Forensic Auditor

pointed out that it is a case of money laundering and the agreement was

dubious. Vansh Consultants Private Limited was not having the money,

it came in bank account in order to route it to Amrapali Leisure Valley

Pvt. Ltd. The learned Auditor also pointed out from the bank statement

filed by the applicant along with the application that it did not have the

money for transaction. It was routed for the purpose. The transactions

were only a conduit to move the money. The bank account shows no

other activity. Thus, no case is made out by the applicant.
27.   Considering the material on record, deficiencies pointed out by

Forensic Auditor and the books of accounts of Amrapali Leisure Valley

Private Limited, the entries made therein, there is nothing to doubt the

correctness of the report of the Forensic Auditors, who made detailed

enquiries. The Directors were heard during Forensic Audit, and we find

that no case is made out to delete the name of the applicant from the

report of Forensic Audit as reflected in the judgment and order passed by

this Court, and we find no ground to doubt the correctness of the report
26
of the Forensic Auditors. No doubt about it that queries were made with

respect to inter-corporate deposit.    Merely mentioning in the letter or

query to furnish details of the inter-corporate deposit made to be

submitted by the applicant, is not decisive of the fact as to what is the

ultimate transaction of the applicant with Amrapali Leisure Valley Private

Limited. The transactions do not inspire confidence, the towers and flats

were never sanctioned. The Agreement, which has been filed concerning

the investment of Rs.10 crores, shows that it wanted to purchase the

flats. It cannot be said to be the case of simplicitor of investment made.

The rate of interest fixed was also a method to take out buyer’s money in

a dubious manner. The documents of applicant are contradicted by the

accounts maintained by Amrapali Leisure Valley Private Limited. In the

facts and circumstances of the case, we find that no case is made out to

allow the prayers made in the applications. The applications are bereft

of any merits and are hereby dismissed.
In Re. Financing of Home Buyers by Banks
28.   Learned Receiver submitted that the RBI may be directed to advise

all banks and financial institutions such as insurance companies, and

employers of the establishments which have sanctioned home loans to

home buyers to disburse all balance loan amounts to the home buyers

whose accounts are regular and they will abide by instructions issued by

the Receiver in this regard. It is further pointed out that banks have
27
certain reservations regarding the funding of NPA accounts. In view of

current social and economic conditions, the Court may direct the RBI to

keep its circulars/guidelines relating to NPA in abeyance and permit all

banking and financial institutions, etc. to disburse loans to home buyers

notwithstanding the status of accounts as NPA. Banks and financial

institutions be directed to work out a long-term restructuring of all home

buyers' loans about Amrapali Projects as well as any charges on the

Amrapali project held by banks and financial institutions.
29.   On the previous date of hearing, i.e., 27.5.2020, we requested

Mr.Vikramjit Banerjee, learned ASG to obtain instructions from the RBI

concerning the release of loans by the banks and other financial

institutions to the home buyers.          It was clearly stated that RBI

instructions do not come in the way of releasing home buyers' loans

whose accounts are NPAs. It would be for the banks and other financial

institutions to release the loan.        In the facts and circumstances,

appropriate directions can be issued by this Court, and the RBI

guidelines would not come in the way in the facts of the case. Learned

counsel appearing for the banks pointed out that they are ready to release

the loan to the home buyers. However, it would be in a phased manner

and as per the stage of construction, they would be releasing the loan to

the particular home buyer.
28
30.   Considering the aforesaid and in the facts and circumstances of the

case, as projects have been stalled for the last several years, the home

buyers have obtained loans but cannot enjoy the fruits of their

investment. At the same time, if projects are not completed and home

buyers are not sure of handing over of flats, it would be difficult for them

to pay bank dues till eternity and it is in the interest of home buyers as

well as banks and financial institutions as they can recover money when

projects are completed in an effective manner. We direct the banks and

financial institutions to release loans to home buyers, whose loans have

been sanctioned, notwithstanding the fact that their accounts are

declared as NPAs. Let there be restructuring of the loan amount. It may

be released under the current norms of the RBI for releasing loans and

the rates fixed by the RBI therefor. The disbursement of further loans

may be based on the present rate of interest fixed by the RBI; this we

order in the peculiar facts of the case. It may be released stage-wise and

long-term restructuring of the loans may be done so that construction is

completed and buyers are able to repay the loan. Ordered accordingly.

In Re. I.A. No. 49139 of 2020 (Interest to be realized on the
outstanding dues by Noida and Greater Noida Authorities)
31.   Learned Receiver has pointed out that there is a lack of clarity

concerning dues of local authorities/banks/lenders.           It has been

submitted that proper relaxations and concessions are required to be

given concerning such dues.
29
32.   In the interlocutory application filed by Ace Group of Companies,

precarious conditions in the entire Noida and Greater Noida region faced

by the developers have been pointed out. It is submitted that following

economic recession in the last decade, the entire real estate sector has

gone downwards and facing acute financial crunch and is fighting for its

survival.   The projects are incomplete, there were various litigations

which created a huge financial impact and non-delivery of projects, which

reflects the pathetic condition of the real estate sector. Multiple issues

are pointed out, which are adding to the woes of the developers. It is

averred that the developers and the home buyers both are adversely

affected due to non-delivery of booked flats in the regions of Noida and

Greater Noida etc.
33.   The Ace Group of Companies obtained the plots between the period

2010 and 2015 from the Authorities in the aforesaid areas. The Noida

Authority is raising additional demand at the rate of Rs.600 per square

meter, whereas Greater Noida Authority is raising demand at the rate of

Rs.1700 per square meter. Due to recession, developers operating in the

region were not able to receive the requisite amount on time from home

buyers. For one reason or the other, development work of the projects

was halted. The Authorities are levying excessive interest and penal

interest, which continues to rise exponentially, culminating into huge

dues, and in some cases, the cost of the allotted land has doubled than
30
what it was originally fixed at the time of allotment over a period of time

and that the premium of the land has enhanced manifold after adding

the interest and penal interest thereon, and other liabilities are also

fastened. There is also considerable delay in the completion of the

projects as scheduled initially. The cost of completion of the project has

thus increased manifold due to delay in construction and has also

resulted in price rise of important construction components, material,

and labour. The burden of Service Tax and other cess and statutory

charges have also increased manifold.        Though various companies

managed to raise the construction, however, the cost of land originally

allotted has doubled. The real estate sector is facing financial distress

due to the various intervening factors. The rate of interest has also gone

down substantially. Due to delay, in may cases refund order has also

been passed by Consumer Forums, which is adding financial constraints

on the part of developers. They are on the verge of completely financially

drained out. It is urged that interest rate and the delayed penalty being

charged by the Authorities on the allotted plots of land is excessively

higher than the prevailing financial market scenario whereas there has

been gradual and consistent fall in the interest rates since 2010 itself.

However, the interest rates of the Authorities have remained exorbitant

contrary to the prevailing economic situation of the country. The rates of

interest charged by the Authorities are exremely high. Apart from that,

penal interest on delayed payment is also added. The rates have been
31
increased from 11% to 14% - 15% to 18% - 23% per annum.
34.   It is submitted by SBI MCLR (Marginal Cost of Funds based Lending

Rate) rate of interest for three years is 7% to 8%, and in the last six

months, it has further come down to 7.85%. If the base rate of SBI MCLR

is compared with the interest rate charged by the Noida and Greater

Noida Authorities, one can easily find out that it has drastically been

reduced over the years and ranges between 7.5% to 8.15% over the last

ten years. The rate and historical data on the base rate of SBI is filed.
35.   It is further averred that over a period of time in the last five years,

the Banks have also reduced the interest paid on Fixed Deposits and

currently, it ranges between 6% to 7% only. However, Noida and Greater

Noida Authorities, despite allotting encumbered and disputed land

coupled with various other issues, failed to take any step to either reduce

the exorbitant rate of interest or completely waive off the interest and

other charges on account of delay and default in paying the land dues.

The Developers and the applicants and home buyers have acquired

valuable right in the land by paying the hefty amount. The developers

have made numerous efforts by approaching the concerned authorities

for redressal of their grievances. Till date, there has been no resolution.

Neither the Authorities nor the State Government has taken the issues

seriously. The issue of the interest affects the public at large, particularly

the home buyers and the interest of banks and financial institutions as
32
well besides that of Authorities.    It is not possible to pay their dues.

Presently, in the wake of COVID 19 pandemic and its outbreak in India,

there is a continuous nation-wide lockdown. There have been absolutely

no business and commercial activities in this sector, and the entire real

estate industry has come to a grinding halt causing further financial

losses and damages to the real estate sector, which is generally in a

precarious condition in the Delhi/ NCR region. Therefore, prayer has

been made that there should be a complete waiver of interest component

in the repayment of land dues of Noida and Greater Noida Authorities,

and payment schedule towards lease rent and premium may be extended.

It is further submitted that various companies have stopped production

of the construction/ building material in the wake of lockdown. Most of

the labourers have gone back to their home States resulting in shortage

of labourers. In short, it is submitted that the real estate sector is facing

a crisis, and due to various aforesaid reasons, the timeline for completion

of projects may be deferred by one more year. Due to excessive lease

rent, penalty and interest charged and levied, additional land costs

demanded, and charged on the land allotted, various projects are stalled.

Most of the projects have acquired the status of dormant projects.
36.   We are considering prayer Nos.1 and 2 of the I.A. with respect to

interest to be realized on the outstanding dues by Noida and Greater

Noida Authorities.
33
37.   The rates of SBI MCLR is reduced to 7.45 % in the year 2020 from

8.95% in the year 2016. It is clear that the Noida and Greater Noida

Authorities, on the outstanding dues, are realizing the dues from all such

projects, interest at exorbitant rate such as 15% per annum with half-

yearly compounding and in addition are also realizing penal interest on

the amount as fixed from time to time.
38.   We have noted in the judgment dated 23.7.2019 the figure given by

the Noida and Greater Noida Authorities that after 2005, 114 plots had

been allotted to various group housing societies. 81 plots were handed

over the possession on payment of 10% of the total premium. 29 projects,

out of 81 were completed. Out of the other 33 allotted earlier, 11 were

completed, and 7 obtained part-completion certificates.        Thus, it is

apparent that more than 60% of projects have not been able to come up

so far. We have also noted that the Noida and Greater Noida Authorities

did not take the step of termination of leases for various reasons. A large

number of home buyers have been waiting now approximately for the last

8 to 10 years or more for completion of houses. It is not in dispute that

the real estate sector has suffered a setback at present. It contributes to

the GDP of the country. As a large number of projects have not come up,

at the same time, Noida and Greater Noida Authorities have not been able

to realize their dues from such projects which are being piled up for the

last several years, at the same time interest of home buyers has
34
intervened. Even on the plots where the land was allotted from 2005

onwards, the projects have not been completed so far, though the buyers

have paid their money. The Noida and Greater Noida Authorities are not

issuing completion certificates to such projects and they are not able to

realize their outstanding dues. For various reasons, constructions have

not been completed, including due to diversion of funds. There is a failure

to comply with the obligation to the home buyers whose money has been

invested in the partially constructed structure and partial dues have been

paid to the Noida and Greater Noida Authorities.
39.   It cannot be disputed that the rate of interest, on which agreements

were entered into, has gone down by now. The present lending rate is

much below and the RBI has taken several steps to revive the economy.

In such a scenario, it would never be possible to make payment of interest

at the rate fixed by authorities and also a penal interest to be realized by

concerned authorities. The home buyers are not able to obtain fruits of

the investment and are deprived of legal title of the flats.
40.   We have heard the learned counsel appearing for Noida and Greater

Noida Authorities. Learned senior counsel also drew our attention to the

following observations made by this Court in the judgment dated

23.7.2019:
"72.     In our opinion, if the real estate business has to
         survive in India, it has to be answerable to the public and
         has necessarily to uphold the trust reposed in
35
builders/promoters. They have been paid huge amounts
         not only by the home buyers but also, they have to pay a
         huge amount for the public land given to them on lease by
         Noida and Greater Noida Authorities for construction of
         houses. The land has been given to them by the authorities
         on a concessional basis by making payment of 10% amount
         at the time of allotment. The builders have to be
         accountable to public/home buyers as well as the
         authorities and bankers. It is a matter relating to housing
         needs dealing with shelter place, such an activity is of the
         public importance as the real estate sector plays a pivotal
         role in the fulfillment of needs of housing infrastructure."
41.   It was also argued by the learned senior counsel that even if the

builder may have factored the valuation of price, including interest on the

cost of the land, the lease deed and the authorities will remain unaffected.

A prayer was made that the authorities may be given liberty to recover

their amount of interest from the builder at the contractually agreed rate

under the lease deed. It was lastly and rightly pointed out that the Court

can fix a reasonable rate of interest. Considering the present scenario,

we feel that the aforesaid submission is justified.
42.   Considering the current state of real estate, the projects are

standstill, and in order to give impetus to such housing projects and

mainly considering plight of home buyers and as pointed out by Noida

and Greater Noida Authorities that 114 plots were allotted from 2005

onwards, most of projects are incomplete; we direct that rate of interest

on the outstanding premium and other dues to be realized in all such

cases at the rate of 8% per annum and let the Noida and Greater Noida

Authorities do a restructuring of the repayment schedule so that amount
36
is paid and Noida and Greater Noida Authorities are able to realize the

same. As to reasonable time frame, we would like to hear the parties. In

case of failure to pay, the concession granted shall stand withdrawn.

However, at the same time, the Noida and Greater Noida Authorities shall

also ensure that not only instalments/money are deposited, but also all

such projects are completed within the stipulated time.
...……………………J.
                                                       (Arun Mishra)



                                                  ...……………………J.
                                                   (Uday Umesh Lalit)
New Delhi;
June 10, 2020.