[Cites
18
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Orissa vs M/S B.Engineers And Builders Ltd. on 5 June, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 577
Author:
Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench:
Dinesh Maheshwari
,
Indira Banerjee
,
A.M.Khanwilkar
REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2516 OF 2020
                              (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 32044 of 2011)

                 STATE OF ORISSA                                         …APPELLANT(S)

                                Vs.


                 M/S B. ENGINEERS & BUILDERS LTD. & ORS.               …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                JUDGMENT
Dinesh Maheshwari, J.
1.      Before entering into the subject matter, we may notice at the

                 outset that this petition for special leave to appeal is barred by limitation

                 by a period of 274 days. Though objections have been raised on behalf of

                 the contesting respondent against the prayer for condonation of delay but,

                 the record shows that notices on the application seeking condonation of

                 delay as also on the petition for leave to appeal were issued way back on

                 18.11.2011 and for a long time, the matter remained pending while
Signature Not Verified
awaiting service on the respondents. Ultimately, after completion of
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2020.06.05
16:28:58 IST
Reason:
service, we had heard learned counsel for the contesting parties on
1
merits. Having regard to the circumstances of the case and after having

heard the contesting parties on merits, we find no reason to close the

matter only on the ground of delay. Accordingly, delay in filing is

condoned.
1.1.      Leave granted.
2.        This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and

order dated 05.08.2008 as passed by the Orissa High Court at Cuttack in

W.P. (C) No. 8857 of 2003, whereby the High Court accepted the claim of

the respondent No. 1 of present appeal1, for reimbursement of the

amount of sales tax levied in respect of the works contracts executed by

it. The High Court also directed the Opposite Parties to grant appropriate

reimbursement as claimed by the writ petitioner in terms of Clause 45.2 of

the General Conditions of Contract2 under the National Competitive

Bidding Contract3 while quashing the clarification Circular dated

07.11.2001 issued by the Government of Orissa in its Department of

Water Resources.
2.1.      The appellant State of Orissa has challenged the order so passed

by the High Court while essentially raising the questions concerning the

nature and implication of the sales tax, levied in relation to the works

contracts executed by the writ petitioner, under the Orissa Sales Tax Act,

19474 as amended in terms of the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment)


1 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the writ petitioner’ or ‘the contractor company’.
2 ‘GCC’ for short
3 ‘NCB’ for short
4 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the Act of 1947’
2
Act, 19825; and concerning the operation and import of the relevant

stipulations in the contracts in question.
3.       The factual and background aspects of the matter, being not of

much dispute and confined to a narrow compass, may be noticed, in brief,

as follows:
3.1.     The respondent No. 1 of this appeal, said to be a company of

engineers and builders, who had been engaged in undertaking various

works contracts, responded to the tenders floated by the respondent Nos.
6 to 18 (various offices of the Government of Orissa) and, on being

determined as the lowest tenderer, was awarded the contracts from time

to time.
3.2.     It is not in dispute that the aforesaid contracts awarded to the

respondent No. 1 carried the stipulations regarding taxes in Clause 45 of

GCC. The claim of the respondent No. 1 for reimbursement of sales tax

had been essentially based on Clause 45.2 of GCC, which carried the

stipulation that any Central or State sales tax and other taxes on

completed items of works (excluding penalty), as may be levied and paid

by the contractor shall be reimbursed by the employer on proof of

payment (and) on production of assessment certificate.
3.3.     The sales tax regime in the State of Orissa is primarily governed

by the Act of 1947. By way of the Orissa Sales Tax (Amendment) Act,

1984 and the Orissa Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985 6,                                        the
5 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the forty-sixth amendment’
6 These amendments were introduced after the forty-sixth amendment of the Constitution whereby,
Clause (29-A) was inserted to
Article 366
and it was, inter alia, provided that the expression “tax on
the sale or purchase of goods” includes a tax on the transfer of property in goods involved in the
3
amendments were brought about in the Act of 1947 with effect from

07.04.1984 whereby, inter alia, the definition of expression “Works

contract” was inserted; the      definition of the expression “Sale” was

expanded so as to include therein the transfer of property in goods

involved in the execution of a works contract; and specific meaning was

also assigned to the expression “taxable turnover” in respect of a works

contract for the purpose of the rate of tax payable by a dealer. The rate of

tax payable by a dealer on the “taxable turnover” in respect of “works

contract” was fixed at 4%.
3.4.     On 04.11.1986, the Government of Orissa, in its Department of

Irrigation and Power, issued a Circular to the effect that in case of works

contract executed on or after 07.04.1984, containing the specific clause

for reimbursement of sales tax, the Department of Irrigation and Power

would be liable for reimbursement of the amount of sales tax actually paid

by the concerned contractor on production of necessary documentary

evidence. Pursuant to these observations and directions, reimbursement

of the sales tax paid by the contractor company in respect of assessment

years 1995-1996 to 1997-1998 was allowed.
3.5.     Later on, the State Government issued a notification under

Section 5 of the Act of 1947 whereby, the rate of tax payable by a dealer

on the taxable turnover in respect of the works contract was increased to

8%. Thereafter, by way of the orders of assessment for the years 1998-
1999 to 2000-2001, the Assessing Authority levied sales tax @ 8% on the
execution of a works contract.
4
taxable turnover in respect of the works contracts executed by the

contractor company. With reference to such assessments, the contractor

company claimed reimbursement of the sales tax paid in respect of the

works contracts executed by it.
3.6.      However, in the meantime, the Government of Orissa, in its

Department of Water Resources, issued another Circular dated

27.01.2000 to the Engineers-incharge of various offices and projects that

the question as to whether sales tax deducted from the bills of the

contractor and paid to the sales tax officer will be again reimbursed to the

contractor whose quoted price was inclusive of all taxes as per Clause

13.3 of the Instructions to Bidders7, was under active consideration; and it

was directed that no reimbursement of sales tax be made under Clause

45.2 of GCC until clarification was communicated in that regard.

3.7.      Thereafter, on 07.11.2001, the State Government, in its

Department of Water Resources, issued the impugned Circular, said to be

a clarificatory one, stating that a completed item of works, for which the

contractor had entered into an agreement with the department, was either

an immovable property or a works contract and in either case, was not

exigible to sales tax; and therefore, the question of payment of sales tax

on such immovable property or works contract and consequential

reimbursement by the department as per Clause 45.2 of the General

Conditions of Contract, or similar provision in other contracts, did not

arise. Accordingly, the State Government instructed its Engineers-
7 ‘ITB’ for short
5
incharge not to reimburse the sales tax levied on cement, steel etc.; and

also directed for recovery of the amount from the contractor wherever any

such amount of sales tax had been reimbursed. These directions of the

Government were followed up by another Circular dated 19.06.2002 to

the same effect.
3.8.   In view of the aforementioned Circulars dated 07.11.2001 and

19.06.2002, its claim, for reimbursement of the sales tax paid, being in

jeopardy and rather, the proposition for recovery of the amount already

reimbursed looming large, the contractor company preferred the writ

petition leading to this appeal, while seeking the following reliefs: –

       “(i) Issue a Rule Nisi Calling upon the Opposite Parties to
       show cause as to why the alleged clarification dated
       07.11.2001 under Annexure-1, and the subsequent direction
       for recovery of the amount earlier reimbursed, vide letter
       dated 19.6.2002 under Annexure-3 ought not to be declared
       illegal, invalid and non-est in the eyes of law;
And
(ii) issue a further Rule Nisi Calling upon the Opp. Parties to
       show cause as to why the reimbursement claims made by
       the petitioner under Annexure-5 series may not be granted
       with a period stipulated by this Hon’ble Court;
And
(iii) in the event the Opp. Parties fail to show cause or show
       insufficient cause make the said Rule Nisi absolute and issue
       an appropriate writ of Mandamus or a writ of certiorari in line
       with the aforesaid Rule Nisi;
And/or
(iv) further be pleased to direct either of the Opp. Parties i.e.,
       the contracting parties (Opp. Parties 6-18) or the Sales-tax
       Authorities (Opp. Parties 3-5) to effect reimbursement or
       refund along with interest from the date of deposit of tax;
And
6
(v) to pass any other writ/writs, order/orders as this Hon’ble
       Court may deem just and proper.”
4.     The High Court in its impugned order dated 05.08.2008, examined

the contentions of the parties and granted the prayers of the writ

petitioner while observing and holding, inter alia, as under:-
“8…… The petitioner now claims reimbursement of tax paid
       by it on actual turnover of the works contract and not on the
       tax paid by it on the materials procured by it, which have
       gone into for the purpose of execution of the works contract.
       The further admitted fact that O.Ps. 6 to 18 have, in fact,
       deducted the sales tax at source from the bills raised by the
       petitioner from time to time in due progress of the work and
       the same have in turn been deposited with the Sales Tax
       Department.
****                   ****              ****
10. Now Annexure-1, which is sought to be quashed, is a
       clarification but not in supersession of Annexure-10, as it is
       projected by the State Government. The said clarification
       cannot take away the effect of the statutory provision. The
       orders of assessment in Annexure-4 series indicate that after
       deducting the labour charges, services charges, amount of
       tax paid, materials used in the execution of works contract,
       from the gross turn over of the assessment year, the balance
       has been put to tax by the Sales Tax Authority. The tax, as we
       find, has been imposed in the light of the decision in Gannon
       Dunkerly (supra).
From the discussion made above, the irresistible
       conclusion is that the sales tax has been levied in the orders
       of assessment in respect of the amount received pertaining
       to items of work completed during the financial year. The
       clarification in Annexure-1, which unilaterally takes away the
       claim of the petitioner for reimbursement, is contrary to
       Clause-45.2 of the General Conditions of the Contract and
Section 5 (2) (AA)
of the Orissa Sales Tax Act as well as the
       decision of the apex Court in Gannon Dunkerly (supra).
       Accordingly, the clarification letter dated 7.11.2001
       (Annexure-1) issued by the Financial Adviser-cum-Additional
       Secretary to Government, Department of Water Resources is
       quashed and the O.Ps. are directed to grant appropriate
7
reimbursement in terms of Clause-45.2 of the General
       Conditions of Contract, as claimed by the petitioner.”
5. Assailing the order so passed by the High Court, learned senior

counsel for the appellant has strenuously argued that the impugned order

is contrary to the facts of the case as also the principles of law applicable

and hence, deserves to be set aside.
5.1.   The learned senior counsel for the appellant has referred to

Clause (29-A) of
Article 366
of the Constitution of India; and the principles

enunciated by this Court in the cases of
Builders’ Association of India

and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors.
: (
1989) 2 SCC 645 and Gannon

Dunkerley and Co. and Ors. v. State of Rajasthan and Ors.
: (1993) 1

SCC 364 to submit that by the forty-sixth amendment of Constitution, a

fiction was created for treating the works contract as deemed sale on

which, sales tax would be leviable but, only on the value of goods which

went into the execution of any works contract.
5.2.   Further, with reference to the definitions of “sale”, “goods” and

“works contract” as contained in the Act of 1947 as also
Section 5(2)(AA)
thereof and the relevant clauses governing the contracts in question, the

learned counsel has submitted that any payment against the monthly

running bill to the contractor does not constitute payment for any

“completed item of work”; and the only meaning of the nomenclature

“completed item of work” is the completion of the works contract as such.

Learned counsel would maintain that sales tax is not leviable on the

“completed item of work” in a works contract but, the contractor is bound
8
to pay sales tax on “taxable turnover” which, for the purpose of sales tax,

could only be on the value of goods utilised in completion of the works

contract.
5.3.   The learned senior counsel has elaborated on the aforesaid

aspects with the submissions that every amount of sales tax on the

“taxable turnover”, which is required to be paid by the contractor, is

achieved either by deduction of such amount of sales tax from the

monthly running bills by the employer for deposit of the same with the

Sales Tax Department or by way of payment by the contractor directly to

the Sales Tax Department. According to the learned counsel, where the

amount payable as sales tax by the contractor is deducted by the

employer at the time of making payment of monthly running bills and is

deposited by the employer with the Sales Tax Department, there would

not arise any question of making any reimbursement of the amount so

deducted and paid to the Sales Tax Department back to the contractor

because the liability to pay sales tax on the value of material/goods

utilised in any works contract is that of the contractor; and the claim for its

reimbursement is entirely impermissible.
5.4.   The learned senior counsel for the appellant has strenuously

argued that the High Court has failed to examine the import and effect of

Clause 13.3 of the Instructions to Bidders and Clause 45.1 of the General

Conditions of Contract which make it clear that the bid price quoted by the

contractor is inclusive of all duties, taxes and other levies, including
9
royalties on all materials to be used in performance of the works contract.

Hence, according to the learned counsel, when sales tax on the

goods/materials   forms   a   part     of   contract   price,   the   claim   for

reimbursement has rightly been denied by the Government.

5.5.   As regards Clause 45.2 of the General Conditions of Contract, the

learned counsel would re-emphasise that thereunder, reimbursement is

permissible when there is any sales tax levied on a “completed item of

work” but in the context of a works contract in a construction project,

there is no sales tax on the “completed item of work” which is an

immovable property. The learned counsel would submit that earlier, the

Circular dated 04.11.1986 came to be issued on an erroneous

understanding of Clause 45.2 in relation to works contract but

subsequently, clarificatory Circulars dated 07.11.2001 and 19.06.2002

were issued, stating the correct position of law that the said Clause 45.2

applied only to the sales tax on “completed item of work”; and the sales

tax levied in terms of
Section 5(2)(AA)
of the Act of 1947 was not

reimbursable and had to be borne by the contractor in view of clear

stipulation in Clause 45.1 of the General Conditions of Contract.

According to the learned counsel, reliance on the Circular dated

04.11.1986 on behalf of the respondent No. 1 is entirely misplaced and

the said Circular, by no means, could be construed as that of amending

the contractual terms as also the liability of the contractor in terms of
Section 5(2)(AA)
of the Act of 1947.
10
6.     Per contra, learned senior counsel for the contractor company (the

respondent No. 1 herein) has duly supported the order impugned with

reference to the reasonings therein.
6.1.   Learned senior counsel for the contractor company has contended

that the argument made on behalf of the appellant, that the deduction in

the running bills had only been of the sales tax payable on various items,

is contrary to the record because the deductions were made on a deemed

sale on turnover basis and not item-wise and such a recovery of sales tax

is squarely covered by Clause 45.2 of GCC whereunder, the contractor

company is entitled to the claimed reimbursement.
6.2.   The learned senior counsel has again referred to the decision of

this Court in the case of
Gannon Dunkerley
(supra) and the provisions

contained in
Section 5 (2) (AA)
of the Act of 1947 as also the said Clause

45.2 of GCC and the Circular dated 04.11.1986 to submit that deduction

of sales tax on turnover basis pre-supposes the existence of sale and

therefore, the contractor company is entitled to the reimbursement as

claimed. According to the learned counsel, the Circular dated 07.11.2001

had been directly against the statutory provisions as also the contractual

stipulations and the same has rightly been disapproved by the High

Court.
The learned counsel has also referred to various decisions

including that in the case of
State of U.P. and Ors. v. P.N.C.

Construction C. Ltd. and Ors.
: (2007) 7 SCC 320.
11
7.     We have heard learned counsel for the parties at sufficient length

and have examined the record with reference to the law applicable.
8.     Having regard to the issues raised, appropriate it would be to take

note of the relevant provisions of law; the referred conditions governing

the contractual relations of the parties; and the referred Circulars issued

by the Government of Orissa.
8.1.   By way of the
Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982
,

Clause (29-A) came to be inserted to
Article 366
of the Constitution of

India, providing for inclusive definition of the expression “tax on the sale

or purchase of goods” in relation to various transactions and dealings. As

regards “works contract”, the said expression came to be assigned the

meaning in sub-clause (b) thereof, which reads as under:-
“(29-A) “tax on the sale or purchase of goods” includes-
(a)… … …
(b) a tax on the transfer of property in goods
                    (whether as goods or in some other form)
                    involved in the execution of a works contract;
(c) to (f) … … …”


8.1.1. The constitutional validity of the aforementioned provisions by

which the legislatures of the States were empowered to levy sales tax on

certain transactions described in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of Clause (29-A) of
Article 366
of the Constitution as also the question, as to whether the

power of the State legislature to levy tax on the transfer of property in

goods involved in the execution of works contracts is subject to the

restrictions and conditions contained in
Article 286
of the Constitution,
12
were considered and decided by the Constitution Bench of this Court in

the case of
Builders’ Association
(supra). Therein, while upholding the

constitutional validity of the aforementioned provisions, the Constitution

Bench explained the unique features of a composite contract relating to

work and materials; and expounded on the meaning, effect and amplitude

as also contours of the provisions pertaining to the taxing power of the

States in relation to works contract in the following words: -
“38. In Benjamin’s Sale of Goods (3rd Edn.) in para 43 at p.
       36 it is stated thus:
“Chattel to be affixed to land or another chattel.—
             Where work is to be done on the land of the employer
             or on a chattel belonging to him, which involves the
             use or affixing of materials belonging to the person
             employed, the contract will ordinarily be one for work
             and materials, the property in the latter passing to the
             employer by accession and not under any contract of
             sale. Sometimes, however, there may instead be a
             sale of an article with an additional and subsidiary
             agreement to affix it. The property then passes before
             the article is affixed, by virtue of the contract of sale
             itself or an appropriation made under it.”
39. In view of the foregoing statements with regard to the
       passing of the property in goods which are involved in works
       contract and the legal fiction created by clause (29-A) of
Article 366
of the Constitution it is difficult to agree with the
       contention of the States that the properties that are
       transferred to the owner in the execution of a works contract
       are not the goods involved in the execution of the works
       contract, but a conglomerate, that is the entire building that is
       actually constructed. After the 46th Amendment it is not
       possible to accede to the plea of the States that what is
       transferred in a works contract is the right in the immovable
       property.
40. We are surprised at the attitude of the States which have
       put forward the plea that on the passing of the 46th
       Amendment the Constitution had conferred on the States a
       larger freedom than what they had before in regard to their
       power to levy sales tax under Entry 54 of the State List. The
13
46th Amendment does no more than making it possible for
       the States to levy sales tax on the price of goods and
       materials used in works contracts as if there was a sale of
       such goods and materials. We do not accept the argument
       that sub-clause (b) of
Article 366(29-A)
should be read as
       being equivalent to a separate entry in List II of the Seventh
       Schedule to the Constitution enabling the States to levy tax
       on sales and purchases independent of Entry 54 thereof. As
       the Constitution exists today the power of the States to levy
       taxes on sales and purchases of goods including the
       “deemed” sales and purchases of goods under clause (29-A)
       of
Article 366
is to be found only in Entry 54 and not outside
       it. We may recapitulate here the observations of the
       Constitution Bench in the case of Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd.
[AIR 1955 SC 661 in which this Court has held that the
       operative provisions of the several parts of
Article 286
which
       imposes restrictions on the levy of sales tax by the States are
       intended to deal with different topics and one could not be
       projected or read into another and each one of them has to
       be obeyed while any sale or purchase is taxed under Entry
       54 of the State List.”
                                                      (emphasis supplied)


8.1.2.
In the case of
Gannon Dunkerley
(supra), while dealing with the

scope of the legislative power of State under Entry 54 of the State List

contained in Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, particularly in the

context of inter-State trade or commerce, another Constitution Bench of

this Court found no reason to reopen the issues covered by the decision

in
Builders’ Association
case (supra) and held on the limitations of the

powers of State legislature as under:-
“31…..the legislative power conferred under Entry 54 of the
       State List does not extend to imposing tax on a sale or
       purchase of goods which takes place outside the State or
       which takes place in the course of import or export of goods.
       In view of the aforesaid limitations imposed by the
       Constitution on the legislative power of the States under
       Entry 54 of the State List, it is beyond the competence of the
       State Legislature to make a law imposing or authorising the
       imposition of a tax on transfer of property in goods involved in
14
the execution of a works contract, with the aid of sub-clause
(b) of clause (29-A) of
Article 366
, in respect of transactions
         which take place in the course of inter-State trade or
         commerce or transactions which constitute sales outside the
         State or sales in the course of import or export.
****                   ****               ****
41. It must, therefore, be held that while enacting a law
         imposing a tax on sale or purchase of goods under Entry 54
         of the State List read with sub-clause (b) of clause (29-A) of
Article 366
of the Constitution, it is not permissible for the
         State Legislature to make a law imposing tax on such a
         deemed sale which constitutes a sale in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce under
Section 3
of the Central
         Sales Tax Act or an outside sale under
Section 4
of the
         Central Sales Tax Act or sale in the course of import or export
         under
Section 5
of the Central Sales Tax Act. So also it is not
         permissible for the State Legislature to impose a tax on
         goods declared to be of special importance in inter-State
         trade or commerce under
Section 14
of the Central Sales Tax
         Act except in accordance with the restrictions and conditions
         contained in
Section 15
of the Central Sales Tax Act.”

8.1.3.   In the said case of Gannon Dunkerley, the Constitution Bench

explained the purport and effect of the legal fiction introduced by sub-

clause (b) of Clause (29-A) of
Article 366
of the Constitution and also

enunciated the principles for its operation as follows: -
“36. If the legal fiction introduced by
Article 366(29-A)(b)
is
         carried to its logical end it follows that even in a single and
         indivisible works contract there is a deemed sale of the goods
         which are involved in the execution of a works contract. Such
         a deemed sale has all the incidents of a sale of goods
         involved in the execution of a works contract where the
         contract is divisible into one for sale of goods and the other
         for supply of labour and services.
****                    ****               ****
         47……..The value of the goods involved in the execution of a
         works contract will, therefore, have to be determined by
         taking into account the value of the entire works contract and
         deducting therefrom the charges towards labour and services
         which would cover—
(a) Labour charges for execution of the works;
15
(b) amount paid to a sub-contractor for labour and services;
(c) charges for planning, designing and architect’s fees;
(d) charges for obtaining on hire or otherwise machinery and
       tools used for the execution of the works contract;
(e) cost of consumables such as water, electricity, fuel, etc.
       used in the execution of the works contract the property in
       which is not transferred in the course of execution of a works
       contract; and
(f) cost of establishment of the contractor to the extent it is
       relatable to supply of labour and services;
(g) other similar expenses relatable to supply of labour and
       services;
(h) profit earned by the contractor to the extent it is relatable
       to supply of labour and services.
The amounts deductible under these heads will have to be
       determined in the light of the facts of a particular case on the
       basis of the material produced by the contractor.”
                                                       (emphasis supplied)

8.1.4. The salient features of the legal fiction introduced by sub-clause
(b) of Clause (29-A) of
Article 366
of the Constitution and the co-related

concept of “value addition” came to be succinctly explained by this Court

in the case of
P.N.C. Construction Co.
(supra) in the following words: -
“21. “Value addition” is an important concept which has
       arisen after the Forty-sixth Amendment to the Constitution.
       Prior to the said Amendment this Court had taken the view in
State of Madras v. Gannon Dunkerley & Co. (Madras) Ltd
[AIR 1958 SC 560] that “works contract” was an indivisible
       contract and the turnover of the goods used in the execution
       of the works contract could not, therefore, become exigible to
       sales tax. To overcome the effect of
the said decision
, the
       concept of “deemed sale” was introduced by Parliament by
       introducing sub-clause (b) of Clause 29-A in
Article 366
of the
       Constitution which states that the tax on sale or purchase of
       goods would include a tax on transfer of property in goods
       involved in the execution of works contract. The emphasis is
       on the expression “transfer of property in goods (whether
       goods as such or in some other form)”. Therefore, after the
       Forty-sixth Amendment to the Constitution, the works
       contract which was an indivisible contract is, by a legal
       fiction, divided into two parts—one for sale of goods and the
16
other for supply of labour and services. Therefore, after the
          Forty-sixth Amendment, it became possible for the States to
          levy sales tax on the value of the goods involved in a works
          contract in the same way in which the sales tax was leviable
          on the price of the goods supplied in a building contract. This
          is where the concept of “value addition” comes in. It is on
          account of the Forty-sixth Amendment to the Constitution that
          the State Government is empowered to levy sales tax on the
          contract value which earlier was not possible.”
                                                          (emphasis supplied)

8.2.      Having thus noticed the source of power of the State legislature to

levy sales tax in relation to the works contract but only on the value of the

goods/materials involved therein, we may also take note of the relevant

amended provisions of the
Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947
, which read as

under:-
“
Section 2(g)
“Sale” means with all its grammatical variations
          and cognate expression, any transfer of property in goods for
          cash or deferred, payment or other valuable consideration
          and includes,--
(i)    ………
(ii)   (ii) transfer of property in goods (whether as goods or
                 in some other form) involved in the execution of a
                 works contract;
(iii) to (vi) … … …
Section 2(jj)
- “Works Contract” includes any agreement for
          carrying out, for cash or deferred payment or other valuable
          consideration, the building, construction, manufacture,
          processing, fabrication, erection, installation, fitting out,
          improvement, modification, repair or commissioning of any
          moveable or immoveable property.
S.5(2)(AA)- Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
          section (2)(A), “taxable turnover” in respect of:
(i) ‘works contract’ shall be deemed to be the gross value
          received or receivable by dealer for carrying out such
          contract, less the amount of labour charges and service
          charges incurred for the execution of this contract… … …”
17
8.3.   As noticed, the claim for reimbursement made by the contractor

company is based on Clause 45.2 of GCC whereas this claim is being

resisted by the appellant State with reference to Clause 13.3 of ITB and

Clause 45.1 of GCC. The referred clauses, as placed before us for

consideration, read as under: -
Clause 13.3 of ITB

       “13.3 All duties, taxes and other levies including royalty
       payable by the contractor under the contract or for any other
       cause shall be included in the rates, price and total bid price
       submitted by the bidder.”
       Clauses 45.1 and 45.2 of GCC

       “45.1 The rates quoted by the contractor shall be deemed to
       be inclusive of the sales and other taxes including royalties
       on all materials that the contractor will have to purchase for
       performance of this contract.
45.2 Any Central or State Sales Tax and other taxes on
       completed items of works of this contract as may be levied
       excluding penalty levied for Contractor’s fault and paid by the
       Contractor shall be reimbursed by the Employer to the
       Contractor on proof of payment on production of assessment
       certificate on every financial year. During the course of
       contract period, deductions of sales tax on works contract
       turnover at the source, shall be made from each bill at such
       rate and conditions as may be required under the provisions
       of
Orissa Sales Tax Act
and Rules.”(sic)

8.4.   Now, the three Circulars issued by the Government of Orissa in

regard to the acceptance and then denial of the claim for reimbursement

of sales tax in works contract, which form the part of controversy herein,

may also be noticed.
8.4.1. In its initial Circular dated 04.11.1986, the State Government

issued directions and guidance for such reimbursement of sales tax in
18
relation to the existing work contracts; and also directed that any such

clause for reimbursement be not included in future contracts.. This

Circular dated 04.11.1986 reads as under:-
“Government of Orissa
                      Irrigation and Power Department
                    48154/Dated 4th No November, 1986
       No. FA-1-11/86
       From
            Shri P.K. Das
            Financial Adviser-cum-
Joint Secretary to Government
       To
       The Engineer-in-Chief, Irrigation, Orissa/Chief Engineer,
       Delta and Flood Control/ Chief Engineer, Medium Irrigation-
       I/Chief Engineer, Medium Irrigation-II/Chief Engineer,
       Rengali, Gohira and Samkoi Projects/ Chief Engineer,
       Rengali Irrigation Project, Samal/ Chief Engineer, Mahanadi
       Birupa Barrage Project/Chief Engineer, Upper Kolab Project,
       Bariniput/Chief Engineer, Potteru Irrigation Project/Chief
       Engineer, Electricity-cum-Chief Engineer, Electrical Projects,
       Orissa/General Manager, Upper Indravati Project/Chief
       Engineer (Ele.) Upper Kolab Hydro Ele. Project.
       Sub:  RE-IMBURSEMENT OF SALES TAX ON WORKS
       CONTRACTS
       Sir,
1.    I am directed to say that in accordance with the Orissa Sales
       Tax (Amendment) Act, 1984 read with Orissa Sales Tax
       (Amendment) Ordinance, 1985, Sales Tax has become
       payable on the turn over of Works Contracts with effect from
       07.04.1984.
2.    Under the Law, Sales Tax is payable by the concerned
       contractor/dealer, and not by this Department. Yet, a question
       arose as to whether this Department was legally liable to
       reimburse the amount of sale tax actually paid or payable by
       the Contractor/dealers in so far as the contracts relating to
       this Department are concerned. After due consideration of
       the legal aspects of the problem, the following instructions
       are issued for information and guidance of all concerned.
19
(i)     In case of Works- Contracts executed on or after
             07.04.1984 which contained specific clauses for
             reimbursement of Sales Tax, this Department is liable
             to reimburse the amount of sale tax actually paid by the
             concerned contractor on production of necessary
             documentary evidence in token of making such
             payment, after obtaining an undertaking from the
             concerned contractor to the following effect:-
If the Contractor prefers or has preferred
             appeal/revision before the concerned appellate
             authority under the Sales Tax Law for remission of the
             Sales Tax dues paid by him and said appeal/revision
             results in any reduction of such dues, the differential
             amount, the amount of Sales Tax reimbursed and the
             amount of Sales Tax reimbursed and the amount of
             Sales Tax payable as decided on appeal/revision will
             be refunded back to Government by the Contractor.
(ii)    Similar reimbursement will also be permissible and in
             the same manner as indicated in Sl. (i) above in case
             of contracts executed prior to 07.04.1984 where the
             work was in progress beyond that date, which
             contained specific clause for such reimbursement.
(iii)   The amount of penalty levied if any, under the Sales
             Tax Law on any count and paid by the Contractor-
dealer shall not be reimbursed by the Department to
             the concerned Contractor.
(iv)    No clause either for reimbursement for Sales Tax or
             payment of such Tax by the department to the
             Contractor should be inserted in the Notice Inviting
             Tenders or Tender document and no tender containing
             any clause or condition to the above effect should be
             accepted.
3.   I am to request that the above guideline may be brought to
     the notice of all concerned.
4.   If any amount of Sales Tax has been reimbursed/paid to any
     Contractor in any case, not in conformity with the guidelines
     as noted vide paragraph-2 above, a proposal should be
     furnished to this Department seeking Government approval
     to that effect, furnishing full facts and figures on that score,
     clearly indicating the extent and manner of deviation from any
     of the guidelines as noted above Sls. (i) to (iv) of Paragraph-2
20
above. This may please be treated as urgent and the
          proposal(s) should be submitted to Government in all such
          cases by 30.11.1986 at latest. If there is no need for
          furnishing any proposal on the above score, a Nil report
          should be submitted by the aforesaid target date.
5. Receipt of the letter may please be acknowledged by
          return of post.
Yours faithfully
                                          Sd/- 04.11.1986
                                    FA-cum-Joint Secretary to Govt.”


8.4.2. However, in the Circular dated 27.01.2000, the State Government

asked the Engineers-incharge to await its decision on the queries raised

on the issue pertaining to such reimbursement of the amount of sales tax

in relation to the works contracts. This Circular dated 27.01.2000 reads as

under:-
“Government of Orissa
                       Department of Water Resources
          No. IIT-RVN-11/2000-5295                Dated: 27.01.2000
          From
                  Shri N. Behera,
                  FA-cum-Addl. Secretary to Government
          To
                  The Engineer-in-Chief, Water Resources/
                  Engineer-in-Chief, Planning & Designs/
                  Engineer-in-Chief, Rengali Irrigation Project/
                  All the Chief Engineers & Basin Manages/
                  All the Chief Engineers/
                  All the Chief Construction Engineers/
                  Director, Ground Water Survey and Investigation
          Sub:    Reimbursement of Sales Tax on Works contract.
          Sir,
21
I am directed to say that clause 13.3 of ITB of the NCB bid
       document approved by World Bank stipulates that “All duties,
       taxes and other levies including royalty payable by the
       contractor under the contract or for any other cause shall be
       included in the rates, prices and total bid price submitted by
       the Bidder.”
          The clause 45.2 at G.C.C. of the said document stipulates
       that “Any Central or State Sales Tax and other Taxes on
       completed item of work of this contract as may be levied
       excluding penalty levied for contractor’s default and paid by
       the contractors shall be reimbursed by the employer to the
       contractor on proof of payment. During the course of contract
       period deduction of Sales Tax on works contract turn over at
       the sources shall be made from each bill at such rate and
       conditions as may be required under the provision of
Orissa
       Sales Tax Act
and Rules.”
          Some Chief Engineers have sought for clarification as to
       whether Sales Tax deducted from the bills of the contractor
       and paid to the sales tax officer will be again reimbursed to
       the contractor whose quoted price is inclusive of all taxes as
       per clause 13.3 of ITB. In some cases, A. G. Audit has raised
       objection against such reimbursement. This is under active
       consideration of govt. for issuing necessary clarification.
          Therefore, you are hereby instructed that no
       reimbursement of sales tax should be made under clause
       45.2 of G. C. C. of NCB agreements for World Bank works
       and works covered under similar contracts till clarification is
       communicated by Government.
This may please be brought to the notice of all
       Subordinate Officers under your control.
Receipt of the letter may please be acknowledged.
Yours faithfully
                                                    Sd/-
FA-cum-Addl. Secretary to Government”
8.4.3. Thereafter, by the impugned Circular dated 07.11.2001, the State

Government purportedly came out with the clarification but, in effect,

issued directions squarely opposite to those contained in the earlier

Circular dated 04.11.1986, while asserting that no such claim for
22
reimbursement of the amount of sales tax pertaining to works contract

was admissible. This Circular dated 07.11.2001 reads as under: -
“Government of Orissa
                     Department of Water Resources
       No. IIT RVN. 11/2000-42711/UR            Dated 07.11.2001

       From
                Shri B. Pradhan,
                FA-cum-Addl. Secretary to Government.
To
                The Engineer in Chief, Water Resources/
                Engineer in Chief, Planning and Designs/
                Engineer in Chief, Rengali Irrigation Project/
                All the Chief Engineers and Basin Manager/
                All the Chief Engineers/
                All the Chief Construction Engineer/
                Director, Ground Water Survey and Investigation.
Sub:     Clarification on reimbursement of sales tax in
                respect of works contracts

       Sir,
       In continuation of this Department letter no.5295 dt.5295
       dt.27.01.2000 on the subject mentioned above, I am directed
       to say that as per
Orissa Sales Tax Act
transfer of property in
       execution of works contracts (Whether as goods or in some
       other form) is subject to levy of Sales Tax. When a building, a
       bridge, a road, a canal, a plant etc., is constructed, the
       ingredients like cement, iron & steel, bricks, stones etc.
       involved in execution of the contract are subject to levy of
       sales tax. The completed item i.e., a bridge, a building, a
       road, or a canal, as the case may be, is not subjected to levy
       of sales tax because after construction these become
       immovable property not susceptible to transfer of property for
       the purpose of sales tax assessment.
23
As per clause 13.3 of I.T.B. of the NCB bid document read
       with clause 45.1 of the general conditions of the contract the
       rates quoted by the contractor shall be deemed to be
       inclusive of sales and other taxes including royalties on all
       materials that the contractor will have to purchase for
       performance of the contract.
Clause 45.2 of the G.C.C. speaks that any Central or State
       Sales Tax and other taxes on completed items of work of the
       contract as may be levied, excluding penalty levied for
       contractors default and paid by the contractor shall be
       reimbursed by the employer to the contractor on proof of
       payment. It is clarified that a completed item of work for
       which the contractor has entered into agreement with the
       department is either immovable property or a works contract
       and in either case is not exigible to sales tax. Therefore, the
       question of payment of sales tax on such immovable property
       and consequential reimbursement of the sales tax by the
       department as per clause 45.2 of the G.C.C. or similar
       provision existing in other contracts does not arise. A
       contractor may, however, have to pay sales tax as assessed
       by the sales tax officer on items which go into construction of
       the work. This tax is not reimbursable since the contractor is
       expected to have built it into his rates.
In view of the above, you are hereby instructed not to
       reimburse sales tax levied on cement, steel etc.,
       misinterpreting clause 45.2 of the G.C.C. of N.C.B.
       agreement for World Bank assisted works and the works
       covered under other agreement containing similar clause.
       Besides if any amount of sales tax has already been
       reimbursed, immediate steps should be taken for recovery of
       the amount from the contractors.
This has been concurred in by Finance Department in their
       U.O.R.No.3896/ SF. Dt. 24.09.2001.
Yours faithfully,
                                                                 Sd/-
Financial Adviser-cum-Addl. Secretary to Government”
9.     Now, while taking up the points arising for determination, we may

usefully summarise the relevant aspects pertaining to this case.
24
9.1.   It is evident that the contractor company (respondent No. 1 herein)

seeks to assert its right to claim reimbursement of the amount of sales tax

levied in respect of the works contracts executed by it on the strength of

the stipulations contained in Clause 45.2 of GCC of NCB bid documents.

On the other hand, the appellant State seeks to resist the right so claimed

by the contractor company with reference to the principles enunciated in

the cited decisions that after the forty-sixth amendment and insertion of

sub-clause (b) of Clause (29-A) to
Article 366
, the State could levy sales

tax on the price of goods and materials used in works contract as if there

was a sale of such goods and materials and then, on two-fold assertions

on that basis: one, that in the context of a works contract, there is no

sales tax on the “completed item of work” which is an immovable property

and, therefore, question of any reimbursement does not arise; and

second, that in works contract, the contractor may have to pay sales tax

assessed on the items which go into the construction but, such amount of

sales tax is not reimbursable because the contractor is supposed to have

provided for the same in its rates, as envisaged by Clauses 13.3 of ITB

and 45.1 of GCC.
9.2.   So far as the basic factual aspects are concerned, it is not in

dispute that the respondent No. 1 indeed undertook execution of various

works contracts with the respective offices of the appellant State of

Orissa. It remains indisputable that in relation to such contracts, Clause

13.3 of ITB stipulated that all duties, taxes and other levies including
25
royalties payable by the contractor were to be included in the bid price

and Clause 45.1 of GCC specifically provided that the rates quoted by the

contractor shall be deemed to be inclusive of the sales and other taxes

including royalties on all materials that the contractor was to purchase for

performance of the contract. However, and at the same time, it is also

indisputable that as per Clause 45.2 of GCC, any Central or State Sales

Tax and other taxes on “completed items of works” of the contract as

might be levied upon, and paid by, the contractor (excluding penalty

levied for contractor’s fault) were to be reimbursed to the contractor on

proof of payment and assessment. This Clause 45.2 further envisaged

that during the course of contract period, deductions of sales tax on

“works contract turnover” was to be made at the source, from each bill as

per the rate and conditions prescribed under the provisions of Act of

1947. It is also not in dispute that in the course of execution of such

contracts, various running bill payments were made to the respondent No.

1 and while making such payments, deductions were indeed made

towards the amount of sales tax; and such deducted amount of sales tax

was deposited with the Sales Tax Department of the Government of

Orissa. Further, it is also borne out that reimbursement of the sales tax so

levied upon, and paid by, the respondent No. 1 in respect of the

assessments for the years 1995-1996 to 1997-1998 was allowed; but

such claim for reimbursement by the respondent No. 1 in respect of the

assessments for the years 1998-1999 to 2000-2001 was declined.
26
9.3.   As noticed, after the amendments were brought about in the Act of

1947 for levying sales tax on works contract with effect from 07.04.1984,

the Circular dated 04.11.1986 was issued by the Government of Orissa to

the effect that in case of works contract executed on or after 07.04.1984,

containing the specific clause for reimbursement of sales tax, the

Department of Irrigation and Power would be liable for reimbursement of

the amount of sales tax actually paid by the concerned contractor on

production of necessary documentary evidence. The aforementioned

reimbursements were allowed to the respondent No. 1 pursuant to these

observations and directions in the Circular dated 04.11.1986.
However,

by way of the subsequent Circular dated 07.11.2001, the Government of

Orissa came out with total volte-face on its opinion in relation to the claim

for reimbursement of sales tax paid by the contractors while stating that a

“completed item of work” in relation to a works contract was not exigible

to sales tax and, as regards the sales tax on the items which go into the

work, the contractor is expected to have included the same in the rates. It

was, therefore, observed that the question of reimbursement as per

Clause 45.2 of GCC or similar provision in other contracts did not arise.

9.4.   The High Court, in its impugned order dated 05.08.2008, has

rejected the contentions of the appellant State and has disapproved the

aforesaid Circular dated 07.11.2001 essentially with reference to the fact

that the claim for reimbursement was being made of the tax that was

levied on the turnover of the works contracts and not of the tax paid by
27
the contractor on the materials procured by it. The High Court has also

found that the sales tax was levied after necessary deductions and in

accordance with the decision in
Gannon Dunkerley
(supra) for which,

the contractor was entitled to claim reimbursement under Clause 45.2 of

GCC and that the clarification Circular dated 07.11.2001 cannot take

away the effect of statutory provisions.
10.    Having taken all the relevant aspects in comprehension and

having examined the matter in its totality, we are clearly of the view that

the High Court has rightly allowed the writ petition filed by the respondent

No. 1 and no case for interference in this appeal is made out.
11.    Before proceeding further, we may at once observe that so far as

the aforesaid Circulars are concerned, neither of them could be decisive

of the issues at hand. As noticed, in the Circular dated 04.11.1986, the

State Government expressed the view that the reimbursement in question

was required to be allowed in terms of Clause 45.2 of GCC but later on, in

the Circular dated 07.11.2001, the State Government took a diametrically

opposite view to say that such reimbursement was not to be allowed in

relation to the works contract. Obviously, the said Circulars had been

based on the given day understanding of the State Government on the

operation of the relevant provisions of law and the terms of contract. Such

vacillating understanding on the part of the State Government cannot be

determinative of the contractual obligations of the parties, which are

required to be decided with reference to the principles of law applicable
28
and on true construction of the terms of contract. Therefore, we would

ignore the said Circulars while dealing with the principal issues involved in

this matter but shall refer to them at a later and appropriate stage.
12.    Reverting to the core issues, it remains rather indisputable that as

per Clause 45.2 of GCC, the amount of sales tax on completed items of

works of the contract, as might have been levied upon, and paid by, the

contractor, except the penalty levied for contractor’s own fault, was to be

reimbursed to the contractor on proof of payment and assessment. It was

also provided in Clause 45.2 itself that, during the course of contract

period, deductions of sales tax on works contract turnover would be made

from the running bills at the prescribed rates and conditions. As noticed, it

is not in dispute that while making payment of various running bills in the

course of execution of contracts by the respondent No. 1, deductions

were indeed made towards the amount of sales tax and such deducted

amount of sales tax was deposited with the Sales Tax Department of the

Government of Orissa. Such deductions and deposits with Sales Tax

Department had clearly been in accordance with the stipulation contained

in the second part of Clause 45.2 ibid. However, and even after making

deductions in terms of the second part of Clause 45.2, the appellant State

seeks to deny the operation of first part of this Clause 45.2 (whereby the

contractor is entitled to reimbursement of the amount of sales tax) on the

grounds that: (a) the reimbursement is envisaged of the sales tax levied

on the “completed item of work” but, in works contract, such “completed
29
item” is not exigible to sales tax and hence, the question of

reimbursement does not arise; and (b) that as per Clause 45.1 of GCC

read with Clause 13.3 of ITB, the contractor is deemed to have provided

for the leviable amount of sales tax on goods/materials in its rates and

hence, the contractor cannot claim any reimbursement thereof. The

question is as to whether such contentions of the appellant against the

operation of first part of Clause 45.2 of GCC could be countenanced? In

our view, the answer could only be in the negative.
13.    Taking up the main plank of the case of the appellant about the

nature, extent and implication of the levy of sales tax in relation to a works

contract, it could be usefully recapitulated that in view of the forty–sixth

amendment to the Constitution of India, Clause (29-A) came to be

inserted to
Article 366;
and, by virtue of sub-clause (b) thereof, it became

permissible for the States to levy sales tax on the price of goods and

materials used in works contracts as if there was a sale of such goods

and materials. In other words, after the forty-sixth amendment to the

Constitution, the works contract is divided into two parts by a legal fiction:
one for sale of goods/materials and other for supply of labour/services;
and it is possible for the States to levy sales tax on the value of

goods/materials involved in such works contract. These features have

been expounded and explained by this Court in the referred cases of
Builders’ Association, Gannon Dunkerley and P.N.C. Construction

Co.
(supra) and need no further enlargement.
30
13.1.   As regards the relevant provisions of the State enactment, it is at

once clear that after the aforesaid forty-sixth amendment to the

Constitution, the State of Orissa also proceeded to carry out the

necessary amendment to the Act of 1947 and provided for levy of sales

tax in relation to a works contract, inter alia, by expanding the definition

of “Sale” so as to include therein the transfer of property in goods

involved in the execution of a works contract; and by specifying that

“taxable turnover” in respect of works contract shall be deemed to be the

gross value received or receivable by dealer for carrying out such

contract less the amount of labour and service charges incurred in

execution of the contract. On their essence and intent, what turns out of

these amended provisions of the Act of 1947 is that in relation to a works

contract, there would be deemed to be the sale of goods involved in

execution thereof; and sales tax would be leviable on the taxable turnover

(and not on the gross turnover) of such works contract.
13.2.   As noticed, it has been the consistent case of the respondent No.

1 that in the running bill payments, the amount of sales tax was deducted

and the same was deposited with the Sales Tax Department. It has also

been the consistent case of the respondent No. 1 that in the referred

orders of assessment, sales tax was levied on the applicable rates on the

“taxable turnover” in respect of the works contracts executed by it and the

claim for reimbursement was made of the amount of sales tax so levied

and paid. The High Court has also recorded a categorical finding that
31
after deducting the labour charges, service charges and the tax paid from

the gross turnover, the balance had been put to tax by the Assessing

Authority. These assertions of the respondent No. 1 as also the findings of

the High Court are not the subject matter of dispute. That being the

position, it is but evident that in relation to the works contracts executed

by the respondent No. 1, the appellant and its offices have indeed levied

the sales tax on the taxable turnover that was arrived at after due

deduction of labour/service charges, in conformity with
Section 5(2)(AA)
of the Act of 1947. There had neither been any levy of the sales tax on

the entire turnover of the works contracts nor any such levy could have

been effected because, as noticed, the taxing event of sale in a works

contract is confined to the use of the goods/materials in execution of the

contract.
14.    While the aforesaid legal and factual aspects remain more or less

indisputable, what the appellant seeks to contend is that the

reimbursement envisaged by the first part of Clause 45.2 of GCC is of the

tax levied on the “completed item of work” but in a works contract, sales

tax is not levied on the completed item of work because such completed

item in a works contract becomes an immovable property. Such a

contention of the appellant remains wholly untenable in view of the

scheme of levy of sales tax in a works contract as also the scheme of

reimbursement envisaged by Clause 45.2 of GCC.
32
14.1.   Contextually read, it is but apparent that the expression

“completed item of work” in Clause 45.2 ibid., signifies the intent that

reimbursement would be permissible only after execution of a particular

item of work has been completed and accomplished. In other words, this

expression is clearly intended to contradistinguish the cases where any

item of work remains incomplete and yet any claim for reimbursement of

the sales tax levied is sought for. This expression cannot be read to mean

as if signifying the levy of sales tax itself on the completed item of work

because such reading of this expression would be totally disjunct from the

context and would be entirely detached from the real intent.

14.2.   Viewed from another angle, it would appear that if the contention

on the part of the appellant as regards interpretation of the first part of

Clause 45.2 is accepted, it would practically result in holding that the said

Clause 45.2 is not at all applicable to a works contract. Such a result

cannot be countenanced for two major reasons: First, that if such a

clause was not to be applied to the works contract, there was no reason

to have retained the same in relation to the works contracts awarded to

the respondent No. 1. When such a stipulation forms the part of contract,

it would be rather preposterous to say that the same would stand but

would not operate. Secondly, and more significantly, in the second part of

this very Clause 45.2, it has specifically been provided that deductions of

sales tax on works contract turnover at source shall be made from each

bill. It is not far to seek, and is rather evident on a bare reading of Clause
33
45.2 in its entirety, that it is to apply in relation to the sales tax on works

contract too. As noticed, the second part of Clause 45.2 had indeed been

applied and enforced by the appellant and its offices by regularly making

deduction of the amount of sales tax in the running payments of the

respondent no. 1 and by regularly depositing the same with the Sales Tax

Department. It would again be preposterous, nay absurd, to say that the

second part of Clause 45.2 entitling the appellant and its offices to make

deduction of sales tax on works contract turnover at source could be

enforced but when it comes to reimbursement, the first part of this very

Clause 45.2 would not apply to a works contract.
14.3.   Viewed from any angle, we are satisfied that heavy reliance on

behalf of the appellant on the expression “completed item of work”, as

occurring in the first part of Clause 45.2, is entirely misplaced. The only

implication of this expression is that a claim for reimbursement of sales

tax cannot be made in relation to a particular work or item whose

execution is pending or is in progress and has not been completed. So far

the levy of sales tax in relation to a works contract is concerned, the same

is on “taxable turnover” and not on the entire turnover. It follows

necessarily that the claim for reimbursement could only be made of the

amount of sales tax that had been levied; and had been paid by the

contractor. Hence, the suggestion as if the expression “completed item of

work” refers to the end-product of a works contract is without any
34
substance. The contentions urged in that regard are required to be, and

are, rejected.
15.     We may now take up the other line of argument on behalf of the

appellant that as per Clause 45.1 of GCC read with Clause 13.3 of ITB,

the contractor is deemed to have provided for the leviable amount of

sales tax on goods/materials in its rates and hence, the contractor cannot

claim any reimbursement thereof.
15.1.   It remains trite that the terms of contract bind the parties thereto

and unless there be any case of ambiguity or violation of law, ordinarily,

the terms of contract, revealing the intent of parties, are required to be

given effect to. The submission on the part of the appellant, that first part

of Clause 45.2 of GCC would not operate because of Clause 45.1 of GCC

read with Clause 13.3 of ITB, remains entirely baseless and appears to

be of a desperate attempt to wriggle out of the contractual obligations.

Even when the contractors were given instructions in the said Clause

13.3 of ITB to include all duties taxes and other levies in the bid price and

even when the said Clause 45.1 of GCC provided that the rates quoted

by the contractor shall be deemed to be inclusive of the taxes and

royalties on all the materials which were to be procured for performance

of the contract, it was yet provided in the first part of Clause 45.2 of GCC

that the sales tax and other taxes on completed items of work, as may be

levied upon, and paid by, the contractor shall be reimbursed to the

contractor on proof of payment/on production of assessment certificate. It
35
is, therefore, crystal clear that even when the contract provided that the

rates quoted by the contractor shall be deemed to be inclusive of sales

and other taxes and royalties on the materials, it was agreed to between

the parties that sales tax and other taxes under completed items of work,

as paid by the contractor were to be reimbursed.
15.2.   It would at once appear that if the contention on the part of the

appellant on the operation of Clauses 13.3 of ITB and 45.1 of GCC is

accepted in the manner that when the rates quoted by the contractor are

inclusive of the taxes on the goods/materials to be used in performance of

the contract, reimbursement of the sales tax levied upon, and paid by, the

contractor is not to be allowed, it would practically result in rendering the

first part of Clause 45.2 otiose and redundant. Neither that had been the

intent of the parties nor could the terms of contract be construed in this

manner.
15.3.   In our view, the implication and effect of Clauses 13.3 of ITB and

45.1 of GCC had only been that while making the bid and quoting the

rates, the contractor was supposed to include the taxes, duties, royalties

etc. payable by it over the materials to be procured and utilised in

performance of the contract and hence, while raising the bills, the

contractor was not entitled to claim any amount towards any such

tax/duty/royalty paid by it on the materials purchased for performance of

the contract. These clauses, i.e., Clause 13.3 of ITB and 45.1 of GCC,

which prohibit the contractor from demanding taxes, duties, royalties etc.
36
on the materials procured by it for performance of the contract do not, and

cannot, conversely operate over the sales tax which is levied upon the

contractor and which is primarily recovered with deductions from the

running bill payments. In other words, in our view, on a plain reading of

the aforesaid relevant terms of the contract, it is clear that while the

contractor cannot claim any payment towards the taxes/duties/royalties

etc. on the goods/materials purchased by it for performance of the

contract but that does not disentitle the contractor from claiming

reimbursement of the sales tax levied upon it by the employer, of course

after proof of payment/assessment. It is also pertinent to mention that the

respondent No.1 only claimed reimbursement of the sales tax paid by it

on the turnover of the works contract and not of any tax or duty or royalty

paid by it on the material procured for the purpose of execution of the

works contract. Therefore, the contentions urged on behalf of the

appellant on the operation of Clauses 13.3 of ITB and 45.1 of GCC over

the claim of the contractor also deserve to be, and are, rejected.
16.    To summarise the discussion in the preceding paragraphs, we are

clearly of the view that by virtue of Clause 45.2 of GCC, the contractor

company is rightfully entitled to claim reimbursement of the amount of

sales tax levied on the taxable turnover of the works contracts executed

by it. A fortiori, the grounds on which the appellant seeks to resist the

claim of the contractor company for such reimbursement, i.e., with

reference to the expression “completed item of work” in the said Clause
37
45.2 and with reference to the stipulations contained in Clauses 13.3 of

ITB and 45.1 of GCC, are wholly untenable and the appellant and its

contracting offices are under obligation to honour the claim so made by

the contractor company.
17.     Before finally concluding on this matter, we are inclined to make a

few comments as regards the Circulars issued by the State Government

pertaining to the subject of reimbursement of sales tax in works contracts.

While noticing that diametrically opposite views were expressed by the

State Government in the two main Circulars dated 04.11.1986 and

07.11.2001, we had observed in the earlier part of this judgment that the

said Circulars were based on the given day understanding of the State

Government but such vacillating understanding of the State Government

was not determinative of the matter; and hence, we had ignored the said

Circulars while dealing with the principal issues involved in this matter, but

had also indicated that we shall refer to the said Circulars at a later and

appropriate stage.
17.1.   The basic reason for which we feel impelled to refer to these

Circulars now and at this concluding stage is borne out of the contents of

the Circular dated 04.11.1986, which was issued by the State

Government closely following the amendment of the Act of 1947 with

insertion of the provisions aimed at facilitating the levy of sales tax on the

goods involved in a works contract. Being aware of its obligation in terms
38
of the said Clause 45.2 of GCC (or similar clause/s in other contracts), the

instructions were issued by the State Government in the said Circular

dated 04.11.1986 for: (a) making reimbursement of the amount of sales

tax actually paid by the contractor on production of necessary

documentary evidence of such payment; (b) not making reimbursement

against the amount of penalty, if any, levied upon the contractor; and (c)

obtaining undertaking from the contractor to refund the excess amount of

reimbursement, in case of reduction of its liability towards sales tax in

appeal or revision [vide sub-paragraphs (i) to (iii) of paragraph 2 of the

Circular dated 04.11.1986]. However, the significant feature is that in the

second set of instructions in this very Circular, as contained in sub-

paragraph (iv) of paragraph 2 thereof, the Engineers-incharge were

instructed that no such clause for reimbursement of sales tax or payment

of such tax by the department to the contractor be inserted in the Notice

Inviting Tenders or Tender document; and no tender containing any

clause or condition to that effect be accepted. The said second set of

instructions in sub-paragraph (iv) of paragraph 2 of this Circular was,

obviously, meant for future contracts, but, its contrast with the first set of

instructions in the preceding sub-paragraphs fortifies the conclusion that

the State Government was fully conscious of its obligation to make

reimbursement in relation to the existing contracts which carried such

reimbursement clause/s.
39
17.2. As to what stipulations, terms and conditions are to form the part of

contract remains a matter essentially in the domain of the contracting

parties (of course, subject to the applicable requirements of law) and no

comments as regards future contracts are requisite herein but, on a

comprehensive reading of the Circular dated 04.11.1986, it is evident that

the State Government was fully conscious of its obligation towards

reimbursement under the existing terms of contracts and hence, issued

directions for due discharge of such obligation with necessary safeguards

and, at the same time, provided that henceforth, neither such a clause be

inserted in the contract documents nor any tender containing such a

clause or condition be accepted.
17.3.   Evidently, the doubts at the later stage, as indicated in the Circular

dated 27.01.2000, and converse decision against the obligation of

reimbursement, as stated in the Circular dated 07.11.2001, had only been

of unwarranted attempts to wriggle out of the contractual obligations with

rather perverse construction of the plain terms of the existing contracts.

Be that as it may, the propositions in the said ill-advised Circular dated

07.11.2001 stand disapproved with the conclusions reached by us

hereinbefore. We say no more.
18.     In the result, this appeal fails and is, therefore, dismissed with no
40
order as to costs. Pending interlocutory applications also stand disposed

 of.
.……………..………….J.
                                                 (A.M.KHANWILKAR)


                                              .………..…………….….J.
                                                (INDIRA BANERJEE)


                                              ..………..………….…….J.
                                             (DINESH MAHESHWARI)

New Delhi,
Dated: 5th June, 2020.
41