[Cites
9
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Laxmi Singh vs Rekha Singh on 19 June, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 2866, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 606
Author:
Sanjiv Khanna
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
Sanjiv Khanna
,
N.V. Ramana
NON-REPORTABLE


                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NOS.                           OF 2020
                         (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS. 10733-10734 OF 2019)



                         LAXMI SINGH AND OTHERS                                        .....   APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

                         REKHA SINGH AND OTHERS                                        ..... RESPONDENT(S)



                                                         JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
Leave granted.
2.     Sixty-four out of the ninety-two elected members of the Zila

                                Panchayat, Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh had on 1 st October 2018

                                moved a motion of no confidence (“the Motion”, for short) against

                                the Panchayat Adhyaksha, Ms. Rekha Singh, the first respondent

                                before us.
3.     The District Judge, Allahabad had thereupon nominated the
Signature Not Verified
Additional District Judge, Allahabad to act as the Presiding Officer
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2020.06.19
15:30:26 IST
Reason:
in the meeting of the Zila Panchayat summoned to consider the

                                Motion.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 10733-734 of 2019                Page 1 of 11
4.     In the meeting of the Zila Panchyat held on 25 th October 2018,

       forty-eight out of fifty-one members present had voted in favour of

       the Motion, two members had voted against the Motion and one

       vote was rejected as invalid. On the same day itself, the Presiding

       Officer had declared that the Motion was passed by majority of

       more than half of the total elected members of the Zila Panchayat.
5.     On challenge by the first respondent, the High Court of Judicature

       at Allahabad, vide the impugned judgment dated 13 th March 2019,

       has set aside the minutes of the Zila Panchayat meeting dated

       25th October 2018 approving the Motion, on the ground that some

       of the members had violated the rule of secrecy of ballot.

       Reliance was placed on the CCTV footage that was played in the

       Court, to observe that some of the members had displayed the

       ballot papers or by their conduct revealed the manner in which

       they had voted.
6.     Section 28(8) of the Uttar Pradesh Kshettra Panchayat and Zila

       Panchayat Adhiniyam, 1961 states that a motion of no confidence

       shall be put to vote in the prescribed manner by secret ballot.

       Rule 4 of the Uttar Pradesh (Zila Panchayats) (Voting on Motions

       of Non-Confidence) Rules 1966 (for short, the ‘1966 Rules’) casts

       a duty and obligation on the Presiding Officer to cause such
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 10733-734 of 2019      Page 2 of 11
arrangements to be made as would ensure secrecy of the ballot.
Our attention was also drawn to sub-rule (2) of Rule 7 of the 1966

       Rules, which requires the members to put a specified mark on the

       ballot paper to indicate their choice without disclosing their names

       and proscribes any signature or any other mark by which the

       secrecy of the ballot may be infringed. Further, we may also note

       sub-rule (3) of Rule 7 of the 1966 Rules, which requires members

       to fold their ballot paper to conceal the mark made by them and to

       put the same in the ballot box.                 The High Court held in the

       impugned judgment that there was a violation of Rules 4 and 7 of

       1966 Rules, and further held that disclosure of vote during the

       non-confidence motion was in violation of the statutory scheme

       governing the same in the State and would affect the purity of

       elections. The High Court therefore set aside the minutes of the

       non-confidence motion passed on 25th October 2018.
7.     Challenging the above finding, the Petitioner before us have

       submitted that the impugned judgment is not in line with the

       holdings of this Court regarding secrecy of voting, particularly the

       Constitution Bench decision of this Court in
S. Raghbir Singh Gill

       v. S. Gurcharan Singh Tohra and Others,1
.
1
1980 Supp SCC 53
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 10733-734 of 2019              Page 3 of 11
8.     The Petitioners claimed that the principle of secrecy of ballot is

       based on public policy aimed at ensuring that the voter cast their

       vote without fear or favour and without any apprehension of

       disclosure. These aspects were highlighted in
S. Raghbir Singh

       Gill
(supra), wherein reference was made to
Section 94
of the

       Representation of the People Act, 1951 (‘RP Act’ for short), which

       states that no witness or other person shall be required to state for

       whom he was voted in an election. Elucidating the importance of

       the provision, secrecy of ballot was appropriately styled as a

       postulate and keystone in the arch of constitutional democracy as

       the electorate or the voter should be absolutely free in exercise of

       franchise untrammelled by any constraints, including a constraint

       as to disclosure. Even a remote or distinct possibility that at some

       point, a voter under compulsion of law can be force to disclose for

       whom she has voted would act as a positive constraint and a

       check on the freedom to exercise of franchise. It is the policy of

       law to protect the right of voters to secrecy of the ballot, albeit this

       right is something which can be claimed only by the voter himself

       against unwarranted disclosure. Section 94 of the RP Act enacts

       a privilege in favour of the voter in that no one can compel him to

       disclose for whom she had voted but the privilege ends when the

       voter decides to waive the privilege and instead volunteers to

       disclose as to whom she had voted. No one can prevent a voter
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 10733-734 of 2019          Page 4 of 11
form doing so nor can a complaint be entertained from any,

       including the person who wants to keep the voter’s mouth sealed

       as to why she disclosed for whom she voted. Once the voter

       chooses to waive the privilege and volunteers to disclose, there is

       no contravention of
Section 94
or any other provision of the RP

       Act. There is no illegality involved in disclosure by the voter.
9.     The Petitioners submitted that the High Court, notwithstanding the

       aforesaid dictum, has wrongly held that the voluntary waiver

       principle could not apply to the case in hand with respect to the

       members of the Zila Panchayat voting on a no confidence motion.

       Whether such a proposition is correct or not would have to be

       tested in an appropriate case, and we desist form making any

       observations on the same as the question of law itself was not

       fully argued before us. However, the Petitioners submitted that

       certain principles ought to be highlighted regarding this important

       question.
10.    The Petitioners contented that this Court, on several occasions,2

       and as recently as in
Shiv Sena v. Union of India,3
has directed

       that a vote of confidence or a trust vote, as the case may be, to

       establish majority on the floor of the House should be conducted
2
G. Parmeshwara v. Union of India
, (
2018) 16 SCC 46, Union of India v. Harish Chandra Singh
  Rawat
, (2016) 16 SCC 744.
3
(2019) 10 SCC 809
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 10733-734 of 2019                        Page 5 of 11
by an open ballot and that the same should be captured in a video

       recording so as to ensure transparency. Earlier, in
Kuldip Nayar

       and Others v. Union of India and Others,4
a Constitutional

       Bench of five judges of this Court had inter alia examined and

       upheld the constitutional validity of open ballot system which was

       introduced in the RP Act vide an amendment brought by Act 40 of

       2003 for elections to the Council of States. The petitioner therein

       contended that the open ballot system violates the principle of

       secrecy which is the essence of free and fair elections and also

       the voter’s freedom of expression which is one of the basic

       features of the Constitution.
Rejecting the challenge to the

       constitutional validity, the Constitutional Bench under Issue II:
Secrecy of Voting had held that:
“404. This Court found that
Section 94
was meant as a
                 privilege of the voter to protect him against being
                 compelled to divulge information as to for which
                 candidate he had voted. Nothing prevents the voter if
                 he chooses to open his lips of his own free will without
                 direct or indirect compulsion and waives the privilege.
                 It was noticed that the provision refers to a “witness or
                 other person”. Thus, it is meant to protect the voter
                 both in the court when a person is styled as a witness
                 and outside the court when he may be questioned
                 about how he voted. It was found that no provision
                 existed as could expose the voter to any penalty if he
                 voluntarily chooses to disclose how he voted or for
                 whom he voted.
xx                    xx              xx
4
(2006) 7 SCC 1
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 10733-734 of 2019              Page 6 of 11
409. Thus, even under the elections that continue to
                 be based on the principle of secrecy of voting, it is for
                 the voter to choose whether he wishes to disclose for
                 whom he had voted or would like to keep the secrecy
                 intact. If he so chooses, he can give up his privilege
                 and in that event, the secrecy of ballot should yield.
Such an event can also happen if there is fraud,
                 forgery or other illegal act and the disclosure subserves
                 the purpose of administration of justice.”
11.    They also referred to the decisions in
Kuldip Nayar
(supra) and
S. Raghbir Singh Gill
(supra) to highlight that the primary

       principle and test to be applied by the courts is purity of election,

       that is, free and fair election. Secrecy of voting is an adjunct to

       the principle of purity of election.
Accordingly, in
S. Raghbir Singh

       Gill
(supra) it was observed that secrecy is not an absolute

       principle enshrined in law, but a requirement to subserve the

       larger public interest of purity of election. Secrecy cannot stand

       aloof, in isolation or in confrontation to the foundation of free and

       fair elections.
In
Kuldip Nayar
(supra), the Constitution Bench

       observed that this Court in
S. Raghbir Singh Gill
(supra) had

       rejected the apprehension that the principle of secrecy enshrined

       in Section 94 of the RP Act cannot be waived being a prohibition

       enacted in public interest and founded on public policy to hold that

       where such a prohibition is in place, the courts should be slow to

       apply the doctrine of waiver. Nevertheless, this privilege of

       secrecy could be waived by the voter voluntarily because the very
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 10733-734 of 2019             Page 7 of 11
concept of privilege inheres a right to waive it. Secrecy is for the

       benefit of the voter and conferred to advance a principle enacted

       in public interest.
12.    The aforesaid position of law was referred to in
Arikala Narasa

       Reddy v. Venkata Ram Reddy Reddygari and Another5
to

       reiterate that the principle of secrecy to vote is for the benefit of

       the voters to enable them to cast their votes freely. Though this

       principle is based on public policy, it is upon that person and no

       one else to waive such benefit.
13.    It is to be noted however, that all of the above cases cited by the

       Petitioners pertain to the RP Act and the Rules made thereunder.

       It is a trite position of law that when it comes to the interpretation

       of statutory provisions relating to election law, jurisprudence on

       the subject mandates strict construction of the provisions.
In
Shri

       Banwari Dass v. Shri Sumer Chand and Others,6
referring to

       the
Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957
, it was observed that an

       election contest is not an action at law or a suit in equity but purely

       a statutory proceeding, provision for which have to be strictly

       construed. Therefore, even in cases involving election provisions

       to prevent corrupt practices, the court and the tribunal must act

       judicially and not in an inquisitorial manner. The court cannot
5
(2014) 5 SCC 312
6
(1974) 4 SCC 817
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 10733-734 of 2019         Page 8 of 11
bridge the gap and supply an apparent omission by applying

       principles of common law and equity. Therefore, it is necessary

       for a proper determination of the issues at hand for an in-depth

       analysis of the Uttar Pradesh Kshettra Panchayat and Zila

       Panchayat Adhiniyam, 1961 and the 1966 Rules, specifically the

       interplay between Rules 4, 7 and 12 of the 1966 Rules, and the

       legal    principles      enunciated       by     this   Court   in   the   above

       pronouncements.
14.    It is to be observed that one of the fundamental principles of

       election law pertains to the maintenance of free and fair elections,

       ensuring the purity of elections. The principle of secrecy of ballots

       is an important postulate of constitutional democracy whose aim is

       the achievement of this goal. The question of whether the waiver

       of secrecy by individual voters is allowable during the election

       process, in a circumstances such as the present, where the Uttar

       Pradesh Kshettra Panchayat and Zila Panchayat Adhiniyam, 1961

       and the 1966 Rules mandate that voting in a no confidence motion

       would take place by secret ballot requires detailed argumentation

       and analysis. Whether the same is illegal de jure, or is allowable,

       or depends on the facts and circumstances of each case taking

       into account the impact on the principle of free, fair and pure
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 10733-734 of 2019                   Page 9 of 11
elections is a question where we find the reasoning of the High

       Court somewhat lacking.
15.    That said, during the course of the hearing before us, learned

       senior counsel appearing for the appellant had suggested on the

       first day of hearing that the Motion against the first respondent

       may be put to revote or fresh voting. Accordingly, we directed

       learned senior counsel for the first respondent to obtain

       instructions regarding the same, for which the case was

       adjourned. It was stated on the next date of hearing, that the

       suggestion was acceptable on a fresh motion of no confidence

       being moved. The Petitioners objected to the necessity to file a

       fresh motion, as this would imply that the Motion dated 1 st October

       2018, which was put to vote on 25 th October 2018, would have to

       be treated as rejected notwithstanding that forty-eight members

       out of fifty-one members present, that is, almost 95% of the

       members present had voted in support of the Motion. At the same

       time, counsel for the first respondent had asserted that the first

       respondent enjoys support of the Zila Panchayat and is, therefore,

       confident that any motion of no confidence moved would be

       defeated.
16.    In the light of the above, we feel that ends of justice will be met if

       the Motion dated 1st October 2018 is put to revote at a meeting of
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 10733-734 of 2019       Page 10 of 11
the Zila Panchayat by way of secret ballot with the District Judge,

       Allahabad himself or his nominee Additional District Judge,

       Allahabad, acting as the Presiding Officer on a date and time to be

       fixed by the District Judge, which shall not be later than two

       months from today. This would, in our opinion, be a just and fair

       direction in the factual matrix of the present case given the

       respective contentions and stand of the parties.
17.    The appeals are accordingly disposed of in the above terms,

       leaving the question of law open. No order as to costs.
......................................J.
                                                                             (N.V. RAMANA)



                                                              ......................................J.
                                                                       (SANJIV KHANNA)



                                                              ......................................J.
                                                                     (KRISHNA MURARI)
NEW DELHI;
JUNE 19, 2020.
Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 10733-734 of 2019                            Page 11 of 11