[Cites
9
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Shamita Singha vs Rashmi Ahluwalia on 18 June, 2020
Author:
Aniruddha Bose
Bench:
Aniruddha Bose
1



                                                    (Non-Reportable)

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                      TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1531 OF 2018




          SHAMITA SINGHA & ANR.                       ..PETITIONERS


                                           VERSUS


          RASHMI AHLUWALIA & ANR.                     ..RESPONDENTS




                                       J U D G M E N T
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J.
The petitioners in this proceeding are both

          daughters of Late Pawan Kumar Singha(deceased).

          They seek transfer of a suit for partition and
Signature Not Verified
certain other ancillary reliefs instituted in
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2020.06.19
17:42:28 IST
Reason:
the Delhi High Court. The said suit has been
2
registered       as   CS(OS)No.2888            of    2014.        The

plaintiff in that suit is Rashmi Ahluwalia, who

is   the    widow     of   the     deceased.        She    was   the

second wife of the deceased.                   The petitioners

in this proceeding, Shamita Singha and Masoom

Singha are daughters of Pawan Kumar Singha,

deceased, from his first marriage, which was

later      dissolved.       Both       of    them     have       been

impleaded        as   defendants        in     that       suit   for

partition. The third defendant in that suit is

Ms.Sanjana,       who      is    the    daughter      of     Rashmi

Ahluwalia, from her first marriage. It has been

pleaded in the plaint that after her marriage

to the deceased, Sanjana was “accepted/adopted”

by the deceased Pawan Kumar Singha as his own

daughter. Sanjana is the second respondent in

this petition. The first petitioner, Shamita

Singha     has    applied       for    grant    of    Letters      of

Administrations to the estate of the deceased

Pawan Kumar Singha on the basis of his Will
3
dated 15th January, 2014. A petition to that

effect has been filed in the Testamentary and

Intestate     jurisdiction        of     the     Bombay       High

Court.      That   petition,      filed        on    22nd    April

2016, has been registered as “T. Petition No.

821 of 2016”.          Rashmi Ahluwalia and said Ms.

Sanjana Ahluwalia, have put in appearance in

the    Testamentary       Petition.         They      question,

inter-alia,      the     legality      of      the    Will    and

contend that it is forged.
2.    So far as the suit in the Delhi High Court

is concerned, this has been instituted prior in

time, on 18th September, 2014. In the CS(OS)

No. 2888 of 2014, Rashmi Ahluwalia has claimed

partition of the estate of the deceased and has

sought declaration to the effect that she is

entitled    to   1/4th    share     of   the        estate.   The

schedule of assets forming part of the petition

for Letters of Administration and the table of
4
assets given in the suit for partition have

several    common     movable     and      immovable

properties.   Thus,    the     assets    which   the

petitioners claim to have been bequeathed to

them by the testator also forms subject-matter

of the suit for partition.
3.   The petitioners’ case argued by Ms. Arora,

learned counsel, is that the Probate Court has

exclusive jurisdiction in matters relating to

legality of a will and for that reason, her

plea is that it would be expedient that the

suit instituted in the Delhi High Court should

be transferred to the Probate Court. Ms. Arora

has relied on a decision of this Court in the

case of Nirmala Devi vs. Arun Kumar Gupta and

Others (2005) 12 SCC 505 in support of her

submission that the suit for partition can be

clubbed    together     with     a      Testamentary

proceeding. This argument is founded on the
5
reasoning that the decision in the Testamentary

proceeding on the question of validity of the

Will shall have direct impact on the partition

suit.    Ms.   Mishra,          learned     counsel      for    the

respondents, on the other hand has pressed for

continuance     of    the       suit   in    the    Delhi       High

Court.    It   is    her    submission        that       both    the

proceedings     can    simultaneously              run    in     the

respective     fora        in     which     they     have       been

instituted. Her alternative plea is that the

Suit     for   partition         having     been      instituted

before the Probate Proceeding, the latter ought

to be transferred to the Delhi High Court, if

clubbing together of the two proceedings is at

all warranted. She has drawn my attention to
Section 270
of the Indian Succession Act, 1925

to contend that the Delhi High Court also has

jurisdiction to try the Probate Proceeding.
6
4.    This Court has laid down in the case of
Chiranjilal Shrilal Goenka vs. Jasjit Singh and

Others
(1993) 2 SCC 507 the primacy of the

Probate Court on the question of validity of a

Will.
On behalf of the respondents, a decision

of this court in the case of
Kanwarjit Singh

Dhillon    vs.    Hardyal        Singh        Dhillon       &    Others
(2007) 11 SCC 357 has been cited. This case is

an    authority      on    the   point         that      the    Probate

Court     is   not        competent           to     determine      the

question of title of the properties forming

subject-matter of a Will.
In another decision,
Binapani Kar Chowdhury vs. Sri Satyabrata Basu

and    Another
(2006)       10       SCC    442    the       question

involved       was        as     to       whether           a     legal

representative        could      prosecute           a   civil     suit

filed by the Testator during his lifetime for

recovery of possession against third party. The

legal representative
in that case
wanted to be

substituted as plaintiff in the civil suit in
7
the capacity of executor and legatee of the

will of the Testator, who was plaintiff in the

suit.        Such     a     course     was    found       to     be

permissible.            This opinion of the Court was

qualified with the direction that if the suit

was ultimately decreed, the Trial Court should

make    it    clear       that   the   judgment     and    decree

would    come       into    effect     only   on   such        legal

representative            obtaining     and   producing         the

probate of the Will.             Till such time the decree

was to be kept provisional and not to be given

effect.        But ratio of this judgment does not

apply in the facts of this case.
The Delhi High

Court,       in   the     case   of
Praveer     Chandra       vs.

Aprajita & Others
(2019 SCC Online Delhi 10820)

has followed the course directed in the case of
Binapani Kar Chowdhury
(supra)                   and has held

that a partition suit and Probate Proceeding

could     proceed          simultaneously,       but      if    the

Partition suit was decreed, the decree would
8
come    into   effect   after     the     decision       in   the

Probate    proceeding.     This          view     was    taken,

however, in an application filed under
Section

10
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in

which    the   partition   suit      was        sought   to    be

stayed.
5.
In
Chitivalasa Jute Mills vs. Jaypee Rewa

Cement
[(2004)   3   SCC       85],    this     Court      has

broadly laid down the guideline to be followed

while dealing with the question of transfer of

suit under
Section 25
of the Code. In that

case, parties were substantially the same in

two suits. The disputes arose out of same set

of transactions. The cause of action of the

suit alleged by one party was its ground of

defence in the other suit. This Court found

that the same set of evidence would be needed

in both the suits. In such circumstances, this
9
Court opined that the two suits ought not to be

tried separately.
6. In the facts of this case, the outcome of

the Probate proceeding in my opinion would have

impact on the suit for partition pending before

the Delhi High Court. Majority of the assets in

respect of which Letters of Administration has

been sought for are common to those in respect

of    which   partition       is       asked    for.    Of    course,

grant of Letters of Administration, if ordered,

per   se   would     not    determine          the   title     of    the

testator      in     the     assets          scheduled        to     the

Testamentary       Petition.       I     find    from    the       joint

affidavit     of    the     respondents         herein       filed    in

support of the Chamber Summons taken out by them

in the aforesaid Testamentary Petition that they

are contending the Will to be a forged one. In

the same affidavit, the deponent of which is

Rashmi Ahluwalia, it has also been pleaded that

during     the     period    of        her   marriage    with        the
10
deceased, they had purchased various properties

together.
7.   I    have         already           observed       that       the

Testamentary          proceeding          would     have       direct

bearing     or   impact       on        the   pending       suit   for

partition. If the Letters of Administration is

granted to the petitioner in the Testamentary

proceeding, then the assets of the deceased may

not remain available as the partible estate of

Pawan Kumar Singha (deceased). In the plaint of

the suit for partition, a copy of which has

been annexed to this Transfer Petition, the

properties       of    Pawan     Kumar        Singha       (deceased)

have     been    listed       in        paragraph      2    thereof,

referring these assets as that of the deceased.

The character of these assets as joint property

of Rashmi Ahluwalia and the deceased, however,

has been only hinted in the affidavit taken out

in   support      of    the    Chamber         Summons       in    the
11
Testamentary       petition.        The       respondents        are

contesting the petition for grant of Letters of

Administration. If the partition suit proceeds

independently and plaintiffs therein succeed,

then    there      would      be        a     possibility        of

inconsistent       findings        by       two   High     Courts,

provided     the    petitioners              succeed      in    the

Testamentary proceeding.
In situations of this

nature, this Court in the cases of Balbir Singh

Wasu vs. Lakhbir Singh And Others [(2005) 12

SCC 503], Nirmala Devi (supra) and
Chitivalasa

Jute    Mills
(supra),      has          directed      clubbing

together of both proceedings for hearing. I am

satisfied    that    certain        common        issues       would

arise      for     adjudication              of    both        these

proceedings.       In the written statement of the

first and second defendants in the partition

suit, the point of execution of the Will by

Pawan Kumar Singha (deceased) has been raised.
12
8.    Ms. Mishra has argued that the suit for

partition       having      been        instituted         before    the

Testamentary Petition, her client’s suit must

be     allowed        to     proceed           first        and      the

Testamentary Petition could be transferred to

Delhi High Court, if necessary. It is also her

submission that major portion of the assets of

the    deceased       lie   in     Delhi.       A    petition        for

transfer under
Section 25
of the Code, however,

is    decided    on    consideration           of    the      ends    of

justice. The “First past the post” is not the

principle that can be applied in proceedings of

this nature. Thus, the view taken by the Delhi

High    Court    in    the       case     of
Praveer       Chandra
(supra) would not aid the respondents here, as

that    proceeding         was    founded       on     a    different

principle embodied in
Section 10
of the Code. I

am of the opinion that the Probate Court having

primacy in determining the question of grant of

Letters of Administration or Probate, it would
13
be expedient for the ends of justice that the

Bombay       High    Court,    which       is   hearing    the

Testamentary petition, should decide the suit

for partition as well. The plaintiffs in the

suit    for    partition      are   also    contesting    the

Testamentary Petition and they would not be

greatly inconvenienced in prosecuting the suit

before the Bombay High Court. The petitioners

claim that the Will has been executed in Mumbai

and    the     two   attesting       witnesses     who    have

affirmed affidavits to support the Will are

also from Mumbai. Copies of these affidavits

appear at pages 39 and 41 of the paper book

filed in connection with the Transfer Petition.

These are also factors which I have considered

in forming my opinion in favour of transfer of

the suit.
9.    I accordingly direct that the suit filed in

the    Delhi     High   Court       by   Rashmi    Ahluwalia
14
registered as C.S.(O.S.) No.2888 of 2014 be

transferred from the said High Court to the

Bombay High Court. On transfer, the said suit

is to be listed before the Hon’ble Judge before

whom Testamentary Petition No.821 of 2016 is

pending   adjudication.      The       Hon’ble    Judge   may

hear   both    the   proceedings          simultaneously,

clubbing them together, if necessary. In the

event the Hon’ble Judge before whom the said

Testamentary    Petition     is        listed    or   pending

listing does not have the determination to hear

the suit for partition as per the roster of the

Bombay High Court, then the file may be placed

before the Hon’ble Chief Justice, Bombay High

Court, for appropriate order of assignment so

that   both    the   Suit        and    the     Testamentary

petition can be heard together.
15
10. The   Transfer   Petition    is   allowed   in   the

above terms. Interim order, if any, shall stand

dissolved.
11. There shall be no order as to costs.
……………………………………………J.
                                  (Aniruddha Bose)

New Delhi
Dated: 18th June, 2020