[Cites
12
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Warad Murti Mishra vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 15 June, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 589
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Uday Umesh Lalit
,
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
,
Vineet Saran
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
         Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr.
                                                                                               1


                                                                            NON-REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.2601 OF 2020
                          (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil)No. 14036 of 2019)


                         WARAD MURTI MISHRA                                      …Appellant

                                                         Versus


                         STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH AND ANR.                        …Respondents


                                                         WITH

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.2602 OF 2020
                            (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil)No. 13973 of 2019)


                                                         WITH

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.2603 OF 2020
                            (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil)No. 14134 of 2019)


                                                         WITH

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.2604 OF 2020
                            (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil)No. 14083 of 2019)
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
MUKESH KUMAR
Date: 2020.06.15
19:26:53 IST

                                                         WITH
Reason:
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr.
                                                                             2


                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.2605 OF 2020
          (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil)No. 22167 of 2019)



                                       WITH
                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.2606 OF 2020
          (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil)No. 26080 of 2019)


                                JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.      Leave granted.
2.      These Appeals arise out of the final judgment and order dated

    30.05.2019 passed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Principal Seat at

    Jabalpur in Writ Petition No. 1712 of 2018 and other connected matters.
For facility, the facts in the lead matter viz. Civil Appeal arising out of

    Special Leave Petition (Civil)No. 14036 of 2019 are set out in detail

    hereinafter.
3.      The Appellant in the lead matter joined the service as Deputy

    Collector on 01.07.1996 after being selected by the Madhya Pradesh

    Public Service Commission. The Appellant was initially put on probation

    for two years and was required to clear a departmental examination within

    that period. In terms of the concerned Rules, the probation period can be
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
3
extended for one year but the departmental examination must be cleared

    during the extended period.     The Appellant could, however, clear the

    examination on 28.01.2001 that is more than three years after the initial

    appointment.
Consequently, the status of the Appellant and similarly situated

    persons, who could not clear the examination even within the extended

    period of probation, is the matter in issue, raising the question whether the

    persons selected in subsequent selection processes, who had cleared the

    departmental examination within the stipulated period, should rank senior

    to the Appellant and similarly situated persons.
4.      The Madhya Pradesh Civil Services (General Conditions of

    Service) Rules, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as ‘1961 Rules’) apply to

    every person holding a post or who is a member of a service in the State,

    except certain categories in Rule 3. Rule 8 deals with ‘Probation’, Rule

    12 deals with ‘Seniority’, Rule 12(1) deals with ‘Seniority of Direct

    Recruits and Promotees’,        Rule 12 (2) deals with ‘Seniority of

    Transferees’, Rule 12 (3) deals with ‘Seniority in special types of cases’

    and Rule 12(4) deals with ‘Seniority of Ad hoc employees’. Since we are

    concerned in the present matter with seniority of Direct Recruits and

    Promotees, Rules 8 and 12(1) are set out hereunder:-
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
4
“8. Probation.- (1) A person appointed to a
                   service or post by direct recruitment shall
                   ordinarily be placed on probation for such
                   period as may be prescribed.
(2) The appointing authority may, for sufficient
                   reasons, extend the period of probation by a
                   further period not exceeding one year.
(3) A probationer shall undergo such training
                   and pass such departmental examination during
                   the period of his probation as may be prescribed.
(4)    The services of a probationer may be
                   terminated during the period of probation if in
                   the opinion of the appointing authority he is not
                   likely to shape into a suitable Government
                   servant.
(5) The services of a probationer who has not
                   passed the departmental examination or who is
                   found unsuitable for the service or post may be
                   terminated at the end of the period of his
                   probation.
(6) On the successful completion of probation
                   and passing of the prescribed departmental
                   examination, if any, the probationer shall, if
                   there is a permanent post available, be
                   confirmed in the service or post to which he has
                   been appointed, either a certificate shall be
                   issued in his favour by the appointing authority
                   to the effect that the probationer would have
                   been confirmed but for the non-availability of
                   the permanent post and that as soon as a
                   permanent post becomes available he will be
                   confirmed.
(7) A probationer, who has neither been
                   confirmed, nor a certificate issued in his favour
                   under sub-rule (6), nor discharged from service
                   under sub-rule (4), shall be deemed to have been
                   appointed as a temporary Government servant
                   with effect from the date of expiry of probation
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
5
and his conditions of service shall be governed
                   by the Madhya Pradesh Government Servants
                   (Temporary and Quasi-Permanent Service)
                   Rules, 1960.
… … …
12. Seniority.- The seniority of the members of
                   a service or a distinct branch or group of posts of
                   that service shall be determined in accordance
                   with the following principles, viz.-
(1)      Seniority of Direct Recruits and
                         Promotees.- (a) The seniority of persons
                         directly appointed to a post according to
                         rules shall be determined on the basis of the
                         order of merit in which they are
                         recommended for appointment irrespective
                         of the date of joining. Persons appointed as a
                         result of an earlier selection shall be senior to
                         those appointed as a result of a subsequent
                         selection.
(b) Where promotions are made on the basis
                         of selection by a Departmental Promotion
                         Committee, the seniority of such promotees
                         shall be in the order in which they are
                         recommended for such promotion by the
                         committee.
(c) Where promotions are made on the basis
                         of seniority subject to rejection of the unfit,
                         the seniority of persons considered fit for
                         promotion at the same time shall be the same
                         as the relative seniority in the lower grade
                         from which they are promoted. Where
                         however a person is considered as unfit for
                         promotion and is superseded by a junior,
                         such person shall not, if subsequently found
                         suitable and promoted, take seniority in the
                         Higher grade over the junior persons who
                         had superseded him.
(d) The seniority of a person whose case was
                         deferred by the Departmental Promotion
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
6
Committee for lack of Annual Character
                       Rolls or for any other reasons but
                       subsequently found fit to be promoted from
                       the date on which his junior was promoted,
                       shall be counted from the date of promotion
                       of his immediate junior in the select list or
                       from the date on which he is found fit to be
                       promoted by the Departmental Promotion
                       Committee.
(e) The relative seniority between direct
                       recruits and promotees shall be determined
                       according to the date of issue of
                       appointment/promotion order:
Provided that if a person is appointed/
                       promoted on the basis of roster earlier than
                       his senior, seniority of such person shall be
                       determined according to the merit/select/ fit
                       list prepared by the appropriate authority.
(f) If the period of probation of any direct
                       recruit or the testing period of any promotee
                       is extended, the appointing authority shall
                       determine whether he should be assigned the
                       same seniority as would have been assigned
                       to him if he had completed the normal period
                       of probation testing period successfully, or
                       whether he should be assigned a lower
                       seniority.
(g) If orders of direct recruitment and
                       promotion are issued on the same date,
                       promotee persons enblock shall be treated as
                       senior to the direct recruitees.”

            The Madhya Pradesh State Administrative Service (Classification,

    Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1975 (hereinafter referred

    to as ‘1975 Rules’) apply to every member of the service, without

    prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in 1961 Rules.
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
7
Rule 13 deals with ‘Probation’, while Rule 23 deals with ‘Seniority’. Said

    Rules read as under:-
“13. Probation.- (1) Every person directly
                   recruited to the service shall be appointed on
                   probation for a period of two years.
(2)      The appointing authority may, for
                   sufficient reasons, extend the period of probation
                   by a further period not exceeding one year.
(3) The probationer shall undergo the
                   prescribed training and pass the prescribed
                   departmental examination by the higher standard
                   during the period of his probation.
(4) The services of the probationer may be
                   terminated during the period of probation, if in
                   the opinion of the appointing authority, he is not
                   likely to shape into a suitable government
                   servant.
(5) The services of a probationer who does not
                   pass the prescribed departmental examinations
                   or who is found unsuitable for the service may
                   also be terminated at the end of the period of
                   probation.
(6) On successful completion of probation and
                   the passing of the prescribed departmental
                   examinations, the probationer shall be confirmed
                   in the service provided permanent vacancies
                   exist for him otherwise a certificate shall be
                   issued in his favour by the appointing authority
                   to the effect that the probationer would have
                   been confirmed but for the non-availability of
                   the permanent post and as soon as permanent
                   post become available he will be confirmed.
The probationer shall not draw any increments
                   until he is confirmed. On confirmation his pay
                   will be fixed with reference to the total length of
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
8
service. If the probationary period is extended,
                   government will decide at the time of
                   confirmation whether arrears of increment shall
                   be paid or not. Such arrears shall ordinarily be
                   paid when the extension of the probationary
                   period is due to no fault of the probationer.
(7) A probationer who has neither been
                   confirmed, nor a certificate issued in his favour
                   under sub-rule (6) above nor discharged from
                   service under sub-rules (4) and (5) above, shall
                   be deemed to have been appointed as a
                   temporary government servant with effect from
                   the date of expiry of probation and his
                   conditions of service shall be governed by the
                   Madhya Pradesh (Temporary and Quasi-
                   Permanent Service) Rules, 1960.
23. Seniority.- The seniority of persons
                   appointed to the service shall be regulated in
                   accordance with the provisions of rule 12 of the
                   Madhya Pradesh Civil Service (General
                   Conditions of Service) Rules, 1961.”

            Since Rule 8(7) of 1961 Rules and Rule 13 (7) of 1975 Rules

    expressly refer to Madhya Pradesh Government Servants (Temporary and

    Quasi-Permanent Service) Rules, 1960 (hereinafter referred to as ‘1960

    Rules’), Rules 2 and 3 of 1960 Rules are set out as under:-
“2. In these Rules, unless there is anything
                   repugnant in the subject or context –
(a) “Allocated Government servant” means a
                       person allotted or deemed to be allotted for
                       service in the State of Madhya Pradesh under
                       the provisions of section 115 of the State Re-
organisation Act, 1956;
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
9
(b) “Quasi-Permanent Service” means temporary
                       service commenced from such date as may
                       be specified in that behalf in the declaration
                       issued under rule 3 or from the date from
                       which the Government servant concerned is
                       deemed to be in quasi-permanent service
                       under rule 3A and consisting of period of
                       duty and leave (other than extraordinary
                       leave) after that date;
(c) “Specified post” means a particular post, or
                       the particular grade or posts within a cadre,
                       in respect of which a Government servant is
                       declared to be in quasi-permanent service
                       under rule 3 or deemed to be in quasi-
permanent service under rule 3A.
(d) “Temporary service” means officiating or
                       substantive service in a temporary post, and
                       officiating service in a permanent post, under
                       State Government and also includes the
                       period of leave with allowance taken while
                       on temporary service and complete years of
                       approved war-service, which have been
                       counted for fixation of pay and seniority.
3. A Government servant shall be deemed to be
                   in quasi-permanent service.-
(i)     If he has been in temporary service in the
                          same service or post continuously for
                          more than three years; and
(ii)   If the appointing authority being satisfied
                          as to his suitability in respect of age,
                          qualifications, work and character for
                          employment in a quasi-permanent
                          capacity, has issued a declaration to that
                          effect, in accordance with such
                          instructions as the Governor may issue
                          from time to time.
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
10
Explanation.- In computing continuous
                          temporary service for the purposes of this
                          rule and period of break in service during
                          a vacation shall be counted as a period of
                          actual service where, upon re-
employment immediately after the
                          vacation, the Government servant has
                          been allowed to draw his pay and
                          allowances in respect of such period.”
5.      It may be mentioned that while issuing the Seniority List dated

    08.08.2001, the Appellant and similarly situated persons were declared as

    confirmed/permanent on the date when they had cleared the examination,

    which incidentally was later than the date of confirmation of the officers in

    the subsequent selection. The relevant order also dealt with cases of

    certain officials who had not cleared the departmental examination in the

    initial period of two years, but had cleared the concerned examination

    within the extended period.
Thus, the order dealt with three kinds of officials (a) those who

    had cleared the examination in the initial period of probation of two years;
(b) those who had cleared the examination within the extended period of

    one year of probation; and (c) those who had cleared the examination after

    the expiry of extended period of probation.
(i)   The second category of persons was dealt with as under:-
“All the abovenamed officers by not passing all
                   the departmental examinations within the
                   prescribed period of 2 years, have passed the
                   same in the extended period i.e. within 3 years.
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
11
Therefore, their seniority in State Administrative
                    Service shall remain as it as per the seniority of
                    the Select List of M.P. Public Service
                    Commission. Abovenamed officers have passed
                    the departmental examination during the
                    extended probation period, therefore, the arrears
                    of increment in pay as per Rule 13 (6) of the
                    M.P. State Administrative Service (Executive)
                    (Classification, Recruitment & Conditions of
                    Service) Rules, 1975, shall not be paid to these
                    officers.    The benefit of notional date of
                    permanency of these officers shall be available
                    only for the seniority. The benefit of notional
                    date of regularization shall not be available for
                    revision of pay.”
ii)    After setting out the names of candidates who had cleared

      the departmental examination after the expiry of extended period of

      probation, the order stated:-
“Abovenamed officers have passed departmental
                    examination after the expiry of probation period
                    of 2 years and extended period of 1 year i.e.
                    after 3 years. Therefore, by not maintaining the
                    seniority of aforementioned officers in
                    permanent cadre of the State Administrative
                    Service as it is as per the Select List of M.P.
                    Public Service Commission, and by lowering
                    their seniority as per Rule 12(1)(f) of the M.P.
                    Civil Service (General Conditions of Service)
                    Rules, 1961, same shall be revised in reference
                    to the date of passing the departmental
                    examination.”
6.    In a challenge raised by the concerned candidates, the Division

      Bench of the High Court considered the matter vide its judgment and

      order dated 17.12.2009 in Writ Appeal No. 510 of 2009 and all other
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
12
connected matters (
Suresh Kumar vs. The State of M.P. and others
).
The submission advanced in support of the challenge was noted as

      under:-
“3. … … as they could not complete the
                    probation period successfully and the same had
                    to be extended, the State Government might
                    have a right under Rule 12(1)(f) of Civil
                    Services (General Condition of Services) Rules,
                    1961 (hereinafter referred to as “Rules of 1961”)
                    to fix the seniority but the State Government
                    could not place the petitioners below the
                    candidates who were selected in subsequent
                    selections held in 1995, 1996 and/or 1997. It is
                    also contended that as the State Government
                    itself had extended the period of probation, each
                    of the petitioner was certainly entitled to the
                    increments which they had successfully earned
                    while discharging their duties as probationers.”



            After going into Rule 12 of 1961 Rules, the Division Bench

      concluded:-
“8. From perusal of Rule 12 of Rules of 1961, it
                    would clearly appear that seniority of a person
                    will have to be determined in order of merit in
                    which he is recommended for appointment
                    irrespective of date of joining.           Persons
                    appointed as a result of an earlier selection shall
                    be senior to those appointed as a result of
                    subsequent selection. A perusal of Rule 12 (1)
(a) of Rules of 1961 would make it clear that if
                    refers to inter se seniority of the persons which
                    is based upon the order of merit in which they
                    are recommended by the concerned Selection
                    Board. It would also be clear from Rule 12 (1)
(a) that a person appointed in the earlier
                    selection process shall be senior to those
                    appointed as a result of a subsequent selection.
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
13
From the language it would clearly appear that if
                   a person is appointed in the earlier year then he
                   would always be senior to a person appointed in
                   the latter year. However, Rule 12 (1) (a) of
                   Rules of 1961 would be subject to certain
                   disciplinary actions, which can be taken and the
                   seniority of such person may be adversely
                   affected. In any case, if there are no adverse
                   reports nor there is any disciplinary action the
                   seniority is to be maintained vertically and
                   horizontally. The horizontally seniority is to be
                   maintained in order of the merits in which they
                   are recommended for their appointment while
                   the vertical seniority is to be maintained in order
                   of selection of the year by holding that the
                   person who was appointed as a result of an
                   earlier selection shall be senior to those
                   appointed as a result of a subsequent selection.
…     …     …
10. At this stage, it would be necessary to
                   observe that a person who is directly appointed
                   in order of merit in which they are
                   recommended for appointment they have their
                   inter se seniority, their seniority cannot be
                   compared with any person who has been
                   appointed in a subsequent selection process.
                   The authority only has a right to fix the seniority
                   of such probationer who could not complete his
                   probation period successfully within his own
                   cadre or within the person who had been
                   selected in the same selection process. If the
                   arguments of learned Advocate General is
                   accepted, the same is likely to create an
                   administrative anarchy because in a given case a
                   person may complete the probation period
                   successfully within one year and the other may
                   not complete the same within two years and in
                   between if another selection process takes place
                   and the other person of the subsequent selection
                   process completes the probation in less than one
                   year and is confirmed then he is likely to
                   become senior to the person who still had some
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
14
valid period of probation. It is also to be seen
                   that there is always a distinction between
                   appointment and confirmation. Once Public
                   Service Commission or the appointing authority
                   undertakes the process for selection then for that
                   class this is the end of matter. After such
                   selection the persons would be appointed on
                   probation or permanently. In case persons are
                   appointed on probation then they would be
                   required to complete the period of probation
                   successfully and on completion of the period
                   they would not be reappointed or reselected but
                   they would be confirmed on the post. If there is
                   a marked and sharp distinction between
                   selection, appointment and confirmation then
                   such distinctions could not be kept in oblivion
                   by the State Government and the petitioners
                   could not be awarded seniority below the
                   persons who had been selected/appointed under
                   the subsequent selection process.”
7.    State of Madhya Pradesh, being aggrieved, challenged the

      correctness of the decision of the Division Bench by filing Special Leave

      Petition (Civil) No. 13888 of 2010 (State of Madhya Pradesh           vs.

      Sandeep Kumar Mawkin) which was dismissed by this Court on

      13.09.2010. Review Petition (Civil) No.1034 of 2011 arising therefrom

      was also dismissed by this Court on 13.04.2011.
8.    Thereafter, in view of the divergence of views expressed by two

      Division Benches of the High Court, the matter was referred to the Full

      Bench of the High Court in Writ Appeal No. 607 of 2011 (
Dr. Masood

      Akhtar vs. R.K. Tripathi
) and other connected matters, which were
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
15
dealt with by the Full Bench vide its order dated 17.02.2012. After

      considering Rules 8 and 12 of 1961 Rules, it was observed:-
“6…. …At the end of the extended period of
                   probation, when no further extension of period
                   of probation is permissible, the status of the
                   probationer in the eye of law will be that of a
                   deemed confirmed employee where he has
                   passed the departmental examination is the
                   condition precedent for confirmation either in
                   the rules or in the order of appointment. The
                   view finds support from the decision in High
                   Court of M.P. through Registrar and others vs.
                   Satya Narayan Jhavar (2001) 7 SCC 161
                   Rajindra Singh Chauhan (2005) 13 SCC 179.
                   Moreover, taking the other view i.e. an
                   employee does not get status of confirmed
                   employee on successful completion of period of
                   probation and on passing the departmental
                   examination would bring in operation rule 8(7)
                   of the 1961 Rules which would confer the status
                   of a temporary employee on the probationer. We
                   are not inclined to adopt the aforesaid
                   interpretation since the same is contrary to rule 8
                   (7) of the 1961 Rules which prescribes the
                   maximum period of probation. Besides that, by
                   such an interpretation, the confirming authority
                   can destroy the service career of a probationer
                   merely by indecision in the matter of
                   confirmation of such an employee. However,
                   where the probationer at the end of extend of
                   period of probation has not been able to pass the
                   departmental examination and that passing of
                   the departmental examination is mandatory for
                   confirmation, and confirmation has neither been
                   granted nor refused the probationer will be
                   deemed to have been refused confirmation at the
                   end of maximum permissible period of
                   probation, because even if the confirming
                   authority would have actually considered the
                   cast of probationer for confirmation, it would
                   have no option except to refuse confirmation on
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
16
the ground that the probationer has not passed
                   the departmental examination. The case of such
                   a probationer would be covered by Rule 8(7)
                   quoted above and he will be deemed to have
                   been appointed as a temporary government
                   servant with effect from the date of expiry of
                   probation and his condition of service shall be
                   covered by the 1960 Rules.”

            The Full Bench went on to observe:-
“8. In our opinion, allowing such probationer to
                   retain original seniority would have to be
                   confined to cases where such extension of
                   probation is not due to any fault or short coming
                   on part of the employee concerned.            For
                   example, where the employee could not appear
                   at the departmental examination on account of
                   illness or such other cause beyond the control of
                   the employee or where some departmental
                   inquiry was pending in which the employee is
                   ultimately exonerated. The above contingencies
                   are only illustrative and no exhaustive.
9. However, where the extension of probation is
                   made due to any short coming of the employee,
                   like not being able to pass the departmental
                   examination or not performing well during the
                   initial period of probation, his seniority would
                   have to be pushed down and
in that case
also the
                   question would arise as to the extent of
                   assignment of lower seniority to such an
                   employee. Again, decision in this regard cannot
                   be left to whim and caprice of appointing
                   authority but the same has to be based on
                   rational and reasonable criterial.
…     …    …
11. … Rule 12(1)(a) of the 1961 Rules inter alia
                   provides that persons appointed as a result of
                   earlier selection shall be senior to those
                   appointed as a result of subsequent selection
                   whereas Rule 12(1)(f) confers discretion on the
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
17
appointing authority to assign the same seniority
                   or to assign lower seniority to a probationer
                   whose probation or testing period is extended.
                   In the light of aforesaid well settled rule of
                   statutory interpretation the discretion conferred
                   on the appointing authority to assign lower
                   seniority to an employee under Rule 12(1)(f) of
                   the 1961 Rules has to be confined to the extent
                   that despite assigning lower seniority such a
                   probationer shall always rank senior to those
                   who appointed/promoted as a result of
                   subsequent selection/promotion. In other words
                   the power to assign a lower seniority to a
                   probationer has to be interpreted as stated supra
                   so as to given full effect to provision of Rule 12
                   (1)(a) of the Rules which provides that persons
                   appointed as a result of an earlier selection shall
                   be senior to those who appointed as a result of
                   subsequent selection/promotion. In view of the
                   proceeding analysis, our conclusions are as
                   under:-
i) A probationer who has passed the
                         departmental examination prescribed
                         either in he rules or in the order of
                         appointment at the end of extended
                         period of probation shall be deemed to
                         be a confirmed employee and shall be
                         assigned seniority accordingly.
ii) A probationer who has not been able to
                          pass the departmental examination
                          prescribed either in the rules or in the
                          order of appointment at the end of
                          extended period of probation shall be
                          deemed to be temporary employee under
                          Rule 8 (7) of the 1961 Rules.
iii) Under Rule 12(1)(f) an employee would
                          be allowed to retain original seniority
                          where extension of period of probation
                          is not due to any fault of shortcoming of
                          the employee.          However, where
                          extension of period of probation is on
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
18
account of fault or shortcoming on the
                        part of the employee, in such a case the
                        probationer has to be assigned seniority
                        from the date if that date can be
                        ascertained i.e. the date on which he
                        clears the departmental examination or
                        where such date cannot be ascertained,
                        the date on which he is considered
                        suitable for confirmation.
iv)The discretion to confer lower seniority
                         to a probationer under Rule 12(1)(f) is
                         confined to the extent that despite
                         assigning    lower    seniority,   such
                         probationer shall always ranks senior to
                         those who are appointed in subsequent
                         selection.”
9.      State of Madhya Pradesh challenged the decision of the Full Bench

    by filing Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 20288 of 2012 (State of M.P.

    and ors. vs. Masood Akhtar and ors.) and other connected matters, which

    were dismissed by this Court on 01.09.2017. Review Petition (Civil) No.

    2663 of 2018 arising therefrom was dismissed by this Court on

    18.09.2018.
10.     Subsequently, Writ Petitions were filed by the Appellant and

    similarly situated persons seeking direction to grant them seniority from

    the initial date of appointment in their respective batches in view of the

    provisions contained in Rule 12 (1)(a) and (f) of 1961 Rules, though they

    had not passed the departmental examination either within the initial
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
19
period of probation of two years or within the extended period of probation

       of one year.
11.     The Division Bench in its judgment, which is presently under

       appeal, considered the decision of the Full Bench and observed:-
“14. In this regard, on perusal of the provision of
                        the Rules of 1961, Rules of 1960 and Rules of
                        1975, the aforesaid interpretation do not appear
                        to be as per the provisions of the Rules.”


               After referring to the concerned Rules, the Division Bench

       observed:-
“17. Rule 7 of the Rules of 1961 specifies
                        methods of recruitment and Rule 8 deals with a
                        probation which has been referred by the Full
                        Bench in the judgment of Prakash Chandra
                        Jangre1 (Supra). As per Sub-Rule (1) of Rule 8,
                        it is clear that a person appointed to a service or
                        post by direct recruitment shall be placed on
                        probation for such a period as prescribed and for
                        the sufficient reasons the said period of
                        probation may be extended further for a period
                        not exceeding one year. Meaning thereby under
                        Rule 8, period of probation of two years has not
                        been specified but in Rule 13 (1) of the Rules of
                        1975 in specific, the period of two years
                        probation has been specified. As per Sub-Rule
                        (3), the probationer shall undergo such training
                        and pass departmental examination “during the
                        period of his probation” or as may be prescribed.
Meaning thereby, passing of departmental
                        examination either in the Rules of 1977 or in the
                        Rules of 1999 and also as per Rule 13 (3) of the
                        Rules of 1975 is necessary for confirmation.
                        Sub-Rules (4) and (5) of Rule 8 of Rules of 1961

1   (2012) 1 MPJR 375
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
20
are similar to Sub-Rules (4) and (5) of Rule 13
                   of Rules of 1975. As per Sub-Rule (6), on
                   successful completion of a probation after
                   passing the departmental examination, the order
                   of confirmation be issued on availability of a
                   permanent post by the appointing authority
                   otherwise a certificate for confirmation on
                   availability of the permanent post shall be issued
                   by such authority acknowledging the said fact.
                   Rule 13 (6) of Rules of 1975, by which the
                   services of the petitioners are governed, confers
                   more power to the authorities to regulate their
                   services. As per Sub-Rule (6) of Rule 8 of the
                   Rules of 1961, there is a distinction with Rule 13
                   (6) of the Rules of 1975. Sub-Rule (7) of Rule 8
                   ibid indicates that if a probationer has not been
                   confirmed under sub-rule (6) nor discharged
                   under sub-rule (4) then he would be deemed to
                   be a temporary government servant but Rules of
                   1975 makes it clear that in case either in Sub-
                   Rule (4) or in Sub-Rule (5) if confirmation order
                   has not been issued, in both the cases he would
                   be deemed to be the temporary government
                   servant and his service conditions shall be
                   governed by Rules of 1960.
18. In view of the foregoing facts, it is
                   apparent that the Full Bench has only considered
                   the Rule 8 of the Rules of 1961, although it
                   ought to have considered Rule 13 of the Rules of
                   1975 and if there is any inconsistency, the
                   departmental rules would govern the field as per
                   Rule 3 of the Rules of 1961 as well of the Rules
                   of 1975.”


            Finally, the Division Bench referred certain questions to be

    considered by a larger bench as under:-
“21. In view of the foregoing discussion and
                   looking to the language of the Rules of 1960,
                   the Rules of 1961, the Rules of 1975 and also
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
21
the directions issued by the Full Bench, the
                   direction No.2 relates to Rule 8(7) of the Rules
                   of 1961 but in fact Rule 13 (7) of the Rules of
                   1975 would govern the issue. It is further seen
                   that after becoming a temporary government
                   servant, how their seniority be decided, it has
                   not been discussed although Rules 3, 3A, 4, 5,
                   6, 7 of the Rules of 1960 deals the issue. In
                   case the above Rules of 1960 is made
                   applicable, the direction No. 4 do not subsist.
                   Similarly, the Court while interpreting Rule 12
                   (1)(a) and Rule 12 (1)(f) issued the direction
                   that the probationers shall be assigned the
                   lower seniority but they shall remain rank
                   senior to those who have been subsequently
                   selected. Rule 12 (1)(a) do not apply to the
                   “probationers” but it applies to the “members
                   of the service”. It is to further observe here
                   that Rule 12 (1)(f) deals a situation for grant of
                   seniority on passing the departmental
                   examination within the period of probation or
                   within the extended period of probation. It do
                   not apply to a case where the probationer has
                   not passed the departmental examination even
                   after elapse of the extended period of
                   probation.      In such circumstances, the
                   judgment of the Full Bench appears to be
                   contrary to the provisions of the rules framed
                   under proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution
                   of India, which requires reconsideration. In
                   view of the foregoing discussion, the following
                   questions arise for consideration :-
1) The judgment of the Full Bench
                            dealing the issue of probation is
                            relying upon the Rule 8 of the
                            Rules of 1961 although in the
                            light of Rule 3 which deals the
                            applicability either in the Rules of
                            1961 or in the Rules of 1975 on
                            having special provision, the
                            Rules of 1961 would not apply
                            and in the present case, the
                            service of the petitioners or the
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
22
intervenors are governed by the
                            Rules of 1975 and Rule 13 deals
                            the issue of probation, however,
                            the judgment of the Full Bench
                            requires reconsideration in the
                            said context.
2) Rule 12 and Rule 12 (1)(a) apply
                            to the “members of the service”
                            and it do not deal with the
                            seniority of the probationers, who
                            have       not    qualified     the
                            departmental examination within
                            the period of probation or within
                            the extended period of probation,
                            which shall not be more than one
                            year, however, the interpretation
                            made in Paragraph No.4 of the
                            direction applying those rules is
                            justified.
3) As per direction No. 2 of the
                            judgment of the Full Bench in the
                            case of Prakash Chandra Jangre
                            (Supra), it is held that if the
                            probationer has not qualified the
                            departmental examination within
                            the period of probation or within
                            the extended period of probation,
                            he shall be deemed to be a
                            temporary government servant
                            and shall the governed by the
                            Rules of 1960 but without dealing
                            the issue of seniority, how they
                            will achieve, as specified in Rules
                            3, 3A, 4, 5, 6, 7, the direction
                            issued in Clause 4 of the said
                            judgment, is not contrary to the
                            spirit of the Rules of 1960.
22. In view of the foregoing observation, we
                   deem it appropriate to refer the judgment of the
                   Full Bench to the Larger Bench to answer the
                   aforesaid issues.
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
23
23. Registrar (Judicial) is requested to place the
                   matter before Hon’ble Chief Justice to do the
                   needful and to take appropriate steps in this
                   regard in view of the foregoing observations.”
12.     In these appeals, the rival submissions were recorded by this Court

    in the Order dated 11.07.2019, whereafter the matters were posted for

    hearing. The relevant portion of the Order was:-
“According to Mr. Shrivastava, the controversy
                   in question had reached this Court in 2009 when
                   the special leave petitions and the review
                   petitions were dismissed affirming the view
                   taken by the Division Bench in Writ Appeal
                   No.510 of 2009 and other connected matters.
                   Thereafter, on a reference made by the Division
                   Bench, the Full Bench of the High Court had an
                   occasion to consider the matter. The judgment of
                   the Full Bench rendered in Writ Appeal No.607
                   of 2011 and connected matters was challenged
                   before this Court in SLP (C) No.20288 of 2012
                   and other connected matters. The special leave
                   petitions were dismissed by this Court on 1st
                   September, 2017 and review petitions arising
                   therefrom were also dismissed by this Court.
                   The submission of Mr. Shrivastava is that the
                   matters having been settled, the Division Bench
                   ought not to have referred the matter for further
                   consideration by a larger Bench.
Mr. Rahul Kaushik, learned counsel appearing
                   for the State relied upon the decisions of this
                   Court reported in
M.P. Chandoria vs. State of
                   M.P. & Ors.
[(1996) 11 SCC 173];
State of M.P.
                   vs. Ramkinkar Gupta & Ors.
[(2000) 10 SCC
                   77]; and
Om Prakash Shrivastava vs. State of
                   M.P. & Anr.
[(2005) 11 SCC 488] to submit that
                   the passing of the departmental examination
                   would be a relevant criteria to determine the
                   seniority and if in the intervening period a
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
24
subsequent batch had been appointed, the person
                   from the previous batch would not retain his
                   seniority as against the subsequent batch. In his
                   submission, the Division Bench was, therefore,
                   justified in making the reference to a larger
                   Bench.
Mr. P.S. Patwalia, learned senior counsel
                   appearing for some of the private respondents on
                   caveat, invited our attention to the interplay
                   between Rule 8(7) and Rule 12 of the Madhya
                   Pradesh Civil Services (General Conditions of
                   Service) Rules, 1961. According to the learned
                   counsel, by virtue of Rule 8(7), the status of
                   such a Government servant would be
                   “temporary Government servant” and he would
                   cease to be part of the regular service and,
                   therefore, Rule 12 would be completely
                   inapplicable.”
13.     We heard Mr. Ravindra Shrivastava, learned Senior Advocate for

    the Appellants, Mr. Rahul Kaushik, learned Advocate for the State and Mr.

    P.S. Patwalia, learned Senior Advocate and Mr. Puneet Jain, learned

    Advocate for the private Respondents. The parties also filed their written

    submissions.
A.     In his written submission, Mr. Shrivastava, learned Senior

    Advocate for the Appellants submitted:-
“…the question of determination of seniority of
                   those direct recruits who were unable to pass the
                   departmental examination and consequently
                   their confirmation was delayed is no longer res
                   integra, having been decided twice by the High
                   Court. …
                                     … … …
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
25
…it would be travesty of justice to allow the
                   concluded issue to be reopened once again after
                   dismissal of SLP and review in two rounds of
                   litigation in this Hon’ble Court. … …”

            It was further submitted:-
“…in the event, the impugned order is upheld
                   which has directed reference to a larger bench,
                   the High Court would be required to re-consider
                   the legal issues on merits involving
                   interpretation of law and the rules. It is
                   submitted with respect and humility, that this
                   Hon’ble Court is not called upon to examine the
                   interpretation of the law and the rules and the
                   principle of seniority applicable in the instant
                   case as the High Court in seisin of the
                   substantive matter, except perhaps for a limited
                   purpose of ascertaining for itself prima facie that
                   on earlier occasions same very rule and the
                   dispute of seniority based on the same
                   contentions has been considered.”

            B.    On the other hand, it was submitted by Mr. Kaushik,

    learned Advocate:-
“10. Thus to sum up, if the probationers do not
                   clear the departmental examination within the
                   period two years plus extended period of one
                   year as provided under rule 13 (1), 13(2) &
                   13(3) of Madhya Pradesh State Administrative
                   Services Rules, 1975 and Rule 8(1)(2)(3) of the
                   Madhya Pradesh Civil Service Rules, 1961 and
                   are not terminated as provided under rule 13(5)
                   of Madhya Pradesh State Administrative
                   Services Rules, 1975 and 8(5) of the Madhya
                   Pradesh Civil Service Rules, 1961, they would
                   be deemed to be temporary government servant
                   with effect from date of expiry of probation and
                   their condition of service are governed by
                   Madhya       Pradesh    Government      Servants
                   (Temporary and Quasi-Permanent Services)
                   Rules, 1960 as per Rule 13(7) of the Madhya
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
26
Pradesh State Administrative Services Rules,
                   1975 and Rule 8(7) of Madhya Pradesh Civil
                   Services Rules, 1961.
11. Thus, there would be a situation that a
                   person who clears the departmental examination
                   within normal period of probation and a person
                   who does not clear the departmental
                   examination within a period of two years plus
                   one year and is a temporary government servant
                   after the period of expiry of his probation and
                   does not clear the departmental examination for
                   a period of ten years and would come after ten
                   years to claim seniority with his batch. Such a
                   situation is not provided under the Rules and
                   would lead to total chaos and would be very
                   discouraging the persons who clear the
                   departmental examination within the period of
                   probation as provided under the Rules.
12. It is further submitted that the purpose of
                   departmental examination is to make the officers
                   competent for performing their duties in the
                   quasi-judicial capacity. That is why after the
                   selection of an officer, during the probation
                   period, an officer is supposed to pass
                   examination broadly of the following subjects:-
i.
Criminal Procedure Code
ii.    Civil Procedure Code
iii.   Administrative Revenue Law and
                                Procedure
                         iv.    Madhya Pradesh Panchayati Raj
                                Adhiniyam
                         v.     Accounts
                         vi.    Hindi

                   If an officer is not able to pass the examination
                   with the higher grade, he/she is not allowed to
                   work as Sub-Divisional Magistrate and Sub-
divisional Officer Revenue, as he cannot pass
                   any judicial/quasi-judicial order. The officer
                   who does not pass the examination, works only
                   as Deputy Collector and is given charge of
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
27
SDM/SDO Revenue only after he or she passes
                   the examination. Since the above departmental
                   examination procedure is very significant with
                   regard to the discharge of official duty, officers
                   who do not pass examination within the
                   probation period plus extended period, cannot be
                   equalled with the officers who pass the
                   examination within the abovesaid time limit.
                   That is why the confirmation of an officer
                   depends on the passing of the examination. The
                   moment he passes the examination, he is
                   confirmed by the department and is given the
                   seniority from that date. If, seniority of an
                   officer, is not affected by the delayed passing of
                   the examination, the significance and the very
                   basis of keeping the examination procedure,
                   would be defeated.”

              C.   It was submitted on behalf of the private Respondents as

    under:-
“(vi) The consequences of not clearing the
                   departmental examination “within the probation
                   period” has been prescribed in Rule 13(7). It
                   would entail:-
(1) The probationer shall be, from the date
                             of expiry of his probation i.e., upon
                             completion of 3 years of probation,
                             deemed to have been appointed as a
                             Temporary Government Servant. The
                             provision is in mandatory language due
                             to the use of the word “shall” and
                             creates a “deeming fiction” by which a
                             such person is “appointed” as a
                             Temporary Government Servant.
Note:- Since Rule 13(7) creates a
                            “Deeming fiction” and therefore one is
                            required to treat an imaginary state of
                            affairs as real.     It must also be
                            imagined in real the consequences and
                            incidents which inevitably flow from it.
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
28
[See –
M. Venugopal v. Divisional
                               Manager, LIC, Machilipatnam & Anr
.
(1994) 2 SCC 323 (para 11).
(2) The Rule also provide that conditions
                                of such government servant would be
                                “…governed by the Madhya Pradesh
                                (Temporary and Quasi-Permanent
                                Service) Rules, 1960…”. Thus, the
                                probationer,     upon      unsuccessful
                                completion of the probation period
                                ceases to be part of the 1975 Rules and
                                is now to be governed by a separate set
                                of rules applicable to Temporary
                                Government Servants.
(vii) Due to the “Deeming Fiction” created by
                      13(7), after expiry of 3 years, the probationer
                      Ceases to be a probationer and becomes a
                      “Temporary Government Servant”. He would
                      then cease to be a member of the State
                      Administrative Service due to the application of
                      Rule 13(7) (or rule 8(7) of the 1961 Rules)
                      which have remained the same and have not
                      undergone any amendment.
In
M.P. Chandoria
                      vs. State of Madhya Pradesh
(1996) 11 SCC
                      173 it was therefore specifically held as under:-
“… …If however, the period of
                            probation of any direct recruit is
                            extended…. Date of passing of the
                            test.”
14.     While considering 1961 Rules vis-à-vis the status and rights of a

     probationer, in
M.P. Chandoria         vs.   State of Madhya Pradesh
and

     others2, this Court had stated:-
“4. … …The probationer has to undergo such
                      training and pass such departmental examination
                      during the period of his probation as may be
                      prescribed. Sub-rules (4) and (5) are not relevant
2 (1996) 11 SCC 173
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
29
and are omitted. Sub-rule (6) of Rule 8 is
                   relevant for the purpose of the case which
                   envisages that on successful completion of
                   probation and passing the prescribed
                   departmental examination, if any, the
                   probationer shall, if there is a permanent post
                   available, be confirmed in the service or post to
                   which he has been appointed. Otherwise a
                   certificate shall be issued in his favour by the
                   appointing authority to the effect that the
                   probationer would have been confirmed but for
                   the non-availability of the permanent post. As
                   soon as a permanent post becomes available, he
                   will be confirmed. Under sub-rule (7), a
                   probationer, who has neither been confirmed nor
                   a certificate issued in his favour under sub-rule
                   (6), nor is he discharged from service under sub-
                   rule (4), he shall be deemed to have been
                   appointed as a temporary government servant
                   w.e.f. the date of expiry of probation and his
                   conditions of service shall be governed by the
                   Madhya       Pradesh     Government      Servants
                   (Temporary and Quasi-Permanent Service)
                   Rules, 1960.
5. Under Rule 12, the seniority of the members
                   of the service of a district branch or group of
                   posts of that service, shall be determined in
                   accordance with the principles laid down
                   therein. Sub-clause (i) of clause (a) envisages
                   that the seniority of a directly recruited
                   government servant appointed on probation shall
                   count during his probation from the date of his
                   appointment; the proviso is not relevant. Sub-
                   clause (ii) envisages that the same order of inter
                   se seniority of direct recruits is maintained by
                   confirmation of the normal period of probation.
                   If, however, the period of probation of any direct
                   recruit is extended, the appointing authority
                   should determine the date from which the
                   candidate should be assigned seniority. Until the
                   probation period is completed and he is
                   confirmed in the post, he does not become a
                   member of the service on successful completion
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
30
of the probation and passing of the prescribed
                     tests or conditions precedent to declaration of
                     completion of the probation period. So, mere
                     passage of time of one year does not entitle a
                     probationer to be a member of the service. He
                     remains to be on temporary service. On
                     completion of probation period, the appointing
                     authority should confirm him in a pending post
                     available or grant him a quasi-permanent status.
                     As soon as the post is available, he should be
                     confirmed. In view of the admitted position that
                     he did not pass the test, the appointing authority
                     considered that his seniority would be counted
                     w.e.f. the date of his passing the test. Rule 12(a)
(ii) clearly empowers the appointing authority to
                     assign, in these circumstances, the seniority in
                     lower level than the one assigned by the Public
                     Service Commission. We do not find any
                     illegality committed by the authorities in giving
                     seniority from the date of his passing the test.”
15.      To similar effect are the observations of this Court in
State of

     M.P. vs. Ramkinkar Gupta
and others3:-
“7. It is quite evident that Respondent 1, who
                     had neither been confirmed, nor had certificate
                     been issued in his favour under sub-rule (6), nor
                     was he discharged from service under sub-rule
                     (4) would fall within the category of those
                     officers referred to in sub-rule (7) of Rule 8. In
                     other words, he was to be deemed to be a
                     temporary government servant with effect from
                     the date of expiry of probation.
…      …     …
9. According to sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of
                     Rule 12 in a case like the present where a person
                     had been allowed to continue in service after the
                     period of probation had been completed and he
                     is confirmed subsequently, it is for the
3 (2000)10 SCC 77
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
31
appointing authority to decide as to from what
                      date he should be assigned seniority. In the
                      present case the decision of the State
                      Government was that he should be assigned
                      seniority w.e.f. 19-1-1984. The aforesaid rules
                      have been considered by this Court in the case
                      of
M.P. Chandoria v. State of M.P.3 The
principle
laid down by
this Court in Chandoria
                      case3 was that if a person does not pass the test
                      then the appointing authority is empowered to
                      assign seniority in a lower level than the one
                      which was assigned by the Public Service
                      Commission. That being so the decision to
                      assign seniority to Respondent 1 w.e.f. 19-1-
                      1984 is in accordance with rules.”
16.    The principles were reiterated by this Court in
Om Prakash

       Shrivastava vs. State of M.P.
and another4 as under:-
“10. A bare reading of sub-clause (ii) of clause
(a) of Rule 12 makes the position clear that the
                      appointing authority has to decide as to from
                      what date the direct recruit is to be assigned. It
                      has to be decided whether seniority as assigned
                      to him if he had been confirmed on the expiry of
                      the normal period of probation or whether he
                      should be assigned a lower seniority. The
                      original probation period is two years.
Therefore, a combined reading of Rules 8, 12
                      and Rule 13 of the Executive Rules makes the
                      position clear that seniority can be assigned by
                      taking the relevant date to be the date of expiry
                      of normal period of probation. In the case of
                      Ram Rao Bhosley, it was 8-5-1992. So far as the
                      appellant is concerned, the appointing authority
                      has been given power to determine the date from
                      which the candidate should be assigned seniority
                      if the period of probation of any direct recruit is
                      extended depending on the date of his passing
                      the departmental examination. As was noted in
                      M.P. Chandoria case3 until the probation period

4 (2005) 11 SCC 488
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
32
is completed, and he is confirmed in the post,
                   the employee does not become a member of the
                   service on successful completion of the
                   probation and passing of the prescribed tests or
                   conditions precedent to declaration of
                   completion of the probation period. Mere
                   completion of one year period does not entitle
                   the person to be a member of the service. He
                   continues to be in temporary service on the
                   completion of probation period. The appointing
                   authority is to confirm him in a pending post
                   available or grant him a quasi-permanent status.
                   Unless he passes departmental examination,
                   there is no question of completion of probation
                   and for all practical purposes the employee
                   continues to be in temporary service.
11. Reiterating the principles in M.P. Chandoria
                   case3 it was held in Ramkinkar Gupta case4 that
                   if a person does not pass the test then the
                   appointing authority is empowered to assign
                   seniority in a lower level than one which has
                   been assigned by the Public Service
                   Commission. A person who has neither been
                   confirmed, nor had a certificate in his favour in
                   terms of sub-rule (6), nor discharged from
                   service under sub-rule (4) would fall within the
                   category of those officers referred to in sub-rule
                   (7) of Rule 8 of the Rules. In other words, he is
                   to be deemed to be a temporary government
                   servant with effect from the date of expiry of
                   probation. The position is different in case of an
                   officer,   who     passes     the    departmental
                   examination within an extended period of
                   probation.”
17.     It is submitted by the learned counsel for the Appellants that the

    issue stands concluded in their favour by the decisions of the Division

    Bench and the Full Bench of the High Court, as stated hereinabove, while

    it is submitted by the State and the private Respondents that the seniority
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
33
issue ought to be determined in the light of the aforementioned decisions

       of this Court.
It is true that the decisions of the Division Bench and the Full

       Bench were challenged and not only the Special Leave Petitions but the

       Review Petitions were also dismissed. But as observed by the Division

       Bench in the instant case, the effect of Rule 13 of 1975 Rules was not

       considered on the earlier occasions. Since the Division Bench has now

       made a reference to a larger bench, we do not propose to enter into the

       matter and decide the controversy but leave it to the High Court to

       consider and decide all the issues.
18.     It was, however, submitted by the learned counsel for the

       Appellants that going by the settled parameters of “re-consideration”
laid

       down in
Pradip Chandra Parija and others vs.           Pramod Chandra

       Patnaik
and others5 and in
Sakshi vs. Union of India and others
6, no

       reference could and ought to have been made unless the earlier decisions

       were so “palpably wrong” or so “very incorrect” that reference was called

       for and in any case, the reference ought to have been to a bench of equal

       strength (three Judges) in keeping with the law
laid down by
this Court in




5   (2002) 1 SCC 1
6   (2004) 5 SCC 518
Civil Appeal No. 2601 of 2020 @ SLP(Civil)No.14036 of 2019 etc. etc.
Warad Murti Mishra vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and anr
.
34
Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community and another vs. State of

       Maharashtra
and another7.
19.      Whether the reference was justified or not will certainly be

       considered by the bench answering the reference. We, however, accept the

       latter submission and direct that the matters shall first be placed before a

       bench of three Judges, which may consider whether the decision of the

       Full Bench on the earlier occasion requires reconsideration. The bench

       may consider the effect of non-consideration of Rule 13 of 1975 Rules on

       the earlier occasion as well as the impact of the decisions of this Court

       quoted hereinabove on the controversy in question. The matters shall be

       considered purely on merits and without being influenced by the dismissal

       of Special Leave Petitions by this Court on the earlier occasions or

       dismissal of the Review Petitions. We have not and shall not be taken to

       have expressed any view touching the merits of the matters.
20.      The Appeals stand disposed of in aforestated terms. No costs.
….…..………………….J.
                                                            [Uday Umesh Lalit]


                                                        ….…..………………….J.
                                                              [Indu Malhotra]
       New Delhi;
June 15, 2020.
7   (2005) 2 SCC 673 – paras 5 and 12