[Cites
12
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Siri Chand (Deceased) Thr. Lrs. vs Surinder Singh on 17 June, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 3249, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 593
Author:
Ashok Bhushan
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
M.R. Shah
,
Ashok Bhushan
1


                                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2617 OF 2020
                           (arising out of SLP (C) No. 9866 of 2019)


         SIRI CHAND (DECEASED) THR. LRS.                                   ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                    VERSUS

         SURINDER SINGH                                                   ...RESPONDENT(S)



                                             J U D G M E N T
ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
Leave granted.
2.              This    appeal      has     been         filed    questioning       the

         judgment                of    Punjab      and    Haryana         High    Court     dated

         05.09.2018                   dismissing     the      revision       filed     by     the

         landlord-appellant.
3.              Brief facts giving rise to the appeal are: -
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
3.1 The       appellant         is   a    landlord       of   a    shop
MEENAKSHI KOHLI
Date: 2020.06.17
15:56:28 IST
Reason:
measuring 14 sq. yds.                Respondent took the

                                shop    on   rent        @Rs.2,000/-        per    month     for
2
running   a     hair    cutting   and   dressing      work.
The respondent-tenant on 27.07.1993 executed

    an agreement/rent deed undertaking to pay a

    sum of Rs.2,000/- each month. The rent deed

    was to be applicable w.e.f. 28.07.1993.                The

    house     tax     and       electricity   bills        were

    undertaken to be paid by the tenant.                  Rent

    was to be paid up to 5th day in each month to

    the owner.       In event, the tenant failed to

    make the payment of rent up to the prescribed

    date in advance, the owner shall have right

    to get the shop vacated.           The shop owner, if

    is in need of the shop, can serve notice of

    one month and get the shop vacated from the

    tenant.       The tenant also undertook to make

    the payment of rent money by increasing 10

    per cent each year.
3.2 An   application        under
Section   13
of   East

    Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949 was

    filed     by     the        appellant-landlord        dated

    18.03.2006 praying for eviction of the tenant

    along with arrears of rent and house tax and
3
interest     on    the       arrears      of   rent.    The

    appellant’s case was that rent is not paid

    from    28.01.2004           to    28.07.2004    and    from

    29.07.2004 to 28.02.2005.                 House tax since

    1999 to 2005 amounting to Rs.22,302/- was not

    paid.
3.3 The tenant filed objection to the application

    and contended that rate of rent is Rs.1,000/-

    per month.        It was further pleaded that at

    the time of taking shop in question, no other

    condition was agreed or settled.                   However,

    the signatures were obtained on some blank

    paper   as   security         by    the   landlord,    which

    appears to have been fabricated as alleged

    rent note.    The tenant claimed to have paying

    the rent @Rs.1,000/- per month till February,

    2006, after which landlord refused to accept

    the rent.
3.4 The copy of the rent note dated 27.07.1993

    was brought on the record as Exh. A-1. The
4
Rent Controller held Exh.A-1- rent deed as

    proved.         The Rent Controller held that rent

    note – Exh.A-1 is not signed by both the

    parties.         The Rent Controller further held

    that although time is not specified, but it

    is    not   a    lease    deed,   so   not    compulsorily

    registrable.        The Rent Controller also held

    that tenant was liable to pay the house tax.

    The    respondent        tendered     rent   @   Rs.2,000/-

    w.e.f. 28.01.2004, which was accepted under

    protest. The Rent Controller held that tenant

    was in arrears of rent and house tax so the

    respondent-tenant is liable to eviction from

    the premises in dispute. The Rent Controller

    held    that       there      exist     relationship     of

    landlord and tenant between the parties. The

    Rent Controller allowed the application of

    the appellant and directed eviction of the

    respondent from the premises in question.



3.5 An appeal was filed by the tenant against the

    order of the Rent Controller.                The Appellate
5
Court did not agree with the findings of the

Rent Controller that document Exh. A-1 was

not     compulsorily         registrable.         Appellate

Court observed that perusal of the document

Exh.A-1 reveals that there would be increase

in the rent to the tune of 10% every year,

hence the document was not executed for a

period     of    less     than     a     year   rather    the

intention of the parties is clear that it was

executed for more than one year, hence the

document was required to be registered under
Section    17(1)(d)
of     the    Registration      Act,

1908.     However, the Appellate Court rejected

the claim of the tenant that rate of rent was

Rs.1,000/- only.             The Appellate Court after

holding     that        document        was     compulsorily

registrable      took    the     view    that    the   clause

regarding       10%     yearly     increase      cannot     be

relied and judgment of Rent Controller was

accordingly      set     aside     and    the    appeal   was

allowed.
6
3.6 The appellant aggrieved by the order of the

          Appellate Court filed a revision before the

          High Court.         The High Court dismissed the

          revision    referring     to      the     finding       of    the

          Appellate Court that rent note – Exh.A-1 was

          compulsorily      registrable.          The    case     of    the

          landlord to enforce condition in lease deed

          regarding     increase       of    the        rent     was    not

          relied.     Aggrieved by the said judgment, this

          appeal has been filed.
4.   We have heard learned counsel appearing for the

appellant.     No     one   appeared        for    the     respondent,

though served.
5.   Learned counsel for the appellant in support of

the appeal contends that rent note dated 27.07.1993,

which was signed by the tenant was valid Rent note

and was covered within the definition of lease as

given in the
Registration Act, 1908
.                     The document

was not registrable under
Section 17(1)(d)
.                        It is

further   contended     that     the        Appellate          Court    has

without   recording     the    finding       that       there     was    no
7
default on the part of tenant in payment of rent and

house      tax    has     set       aside      the    order       of    the     Rent

Controller.
6.     We have considered the submissions of the learned

counsel         for    the     appellant         and        has    perused         the

records.
7.     First issue, which has arisen for consideration

in this appeal is as to whether the rent note dated

27.07.1993, which is brought on record as Annexure P-

3    to    the    appeal       was    a       document,       which      required

compulsory registration under
Section 17(1)(d)
of the

Registration           Act,   1908.           The    second        issue      to    be

considered is as to whether the Appellate Court could

have      set     aside       the     decree         of     eviction       without

recording finding that there was no default on the

part of the tenant in payment of rent and house tax

etc.      and    the    amount       deposited         by    the       tenant      was

sufficient to save him from eviction.
8
8.
The   Registration        Act,      1908
contains        the

definition of a “lease” under
Section 2(7)
, which is

to the following effect: -
“(7) “lease”   includes   a   counterpart,
       kabuliyat, an undertaking to cultivate or
       occupy, and an agreement to lease;”
9.     We may notice that in the present case, the rent

note is not claimed to be signed by the landlord-

appellant rather it is signed only by the respondent-

tenant.      The trial court after considering materials

on record has returned the findings that appellant

has proved the rent note.             The case of the respondent

that    appellant    has   got   his     signatures     on   a   blank

paper has not been accepted.               RW1- Surinder Singh,

respondent in his cross-examination has admitted his

signatures on the rent note.              The trial court also

held that by virtue of clause (9) of the rent note,

the respondent is liable to pay increased rate @10%

every year and further he was liable to pay house

tax.      Landlord having paid the house tax, he was

entitled      to    recover      the     house    tax    from      the

respondent.
9
10.
Section 17(1)(d)
of the Registration Act deals

with documents of which registration is compulsory.
Section 17(1)(d)
, which is relevant for the present

case and has been relied by the Appellate Court is as

follows: -
“17. Documents of which registration is
      compulsory.—(l) The following documents
      shall be registered, if the property to
      which they relate is situate in a district
      in which, and if they have been executed
      on or after the date on which, Act No. XVI
      of 1864, or the
Indian Registration Act,
      1866
, or the
Indian Registration Act,
      1871
, or the
Indian Registration Act,
      1877
, or this Act came or comes into
      force, namely:—

                      XXXXXXXXXXXXXX
(d) leases of immovable property from year
      to year, or for any term exceeding one
      year, or reserving a yearly rent;”
11. As   per
Section   17(1)(d)
,       leases    of    immovable

property from year to year, or for any term exceeding

one   year,    or   reserving       a   yearly    rent    requires

compulsory registration.        Whether the rent deed can

be treated to be a lease of immovable property – (i)
10
from year to year, (ii) for any term exceeding one

year, (iii) or reserving a yearly rent?
12. We need to notice the relevant clauses of the

rent deed to find out as to whether
Section 17(1)(d)
was   applicable        in   the   facts   of   the   present   case

making        Exh.A-1    compulsorily       registrable.         The

agreement/rent deed, which is written and signed by

the respondent alone contains 16 clauses, which were

promises made by the respondent written in the rent

deed.        Clause 1 to 3, 9, 10, 14, 15 and 16, which are

relevant, are as follows: -
“1)    I will make the payment of the sum of
               Rupees 2,000/- (Two Thousand only)
               each   month  in   advance  in   cash
               currency up to date 5 (Five) to the
               owner of the shop, Sri Chand.
2)     The rent deed will be applicable from
               28.07.1993

        3)     The amount of the house tax and the
               electricity   bills   regarding    the
               abovesaid shop will be paid by me.

                         XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

        9)     I will be bound for making the
               payment   of  the rent  money  by
increasing 10% (ten percent) each
               year.
11
10)   If I may not make the payment of the
           rent up to the prescribed date in
           advance and then there will be right
           to the shop owner that he can get the
           shop vacated.
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
14)   I have paid the amount of Rupees
           3600/- (Three Thousand Six Hundred
           only)   to  the   shop  owner   as a
           security, vacating the shop, handing
           over the possession to the shop
           owner, I will be entitled for the
           refunding of this security amount.
15)   If the shop owner is in need of this
           shop and then serving the notice of
           one-month period, he can get the shop
           vacated from me, there will be no
           objection to me in this regard.
16)   If in any situation, I may not comply
           with this agreement/rent deed and
           then there will be right to the shop
           owner   that    vacating   the   shop
           forcible, he can take over the
           possession from me and may dispossess
           me, there will be no objection and
           claim of mine or any of my legal
           heir.”
13. Clause (1) of the rent deed specifically makes it

clear that monthly tenancy was created on payment of

rent of Rs.2,000/- per month.   The payment was to be

made before 5th of each month to the owner.   The rent
12
deed does not provide for any specific period for

which      the    rent    deed    was        executed.      When   a    rent

deed/lease deed does not provide for a period and

when it provides for payment of rent monthly, whether

tenancy can be treated from year to year or for any

term exceeding one year or reserving a yearly rent?

The rent deed does not reserve yearly rent, hence the

third      condition as        noted above          is not   applicable.

The   rent       deed    is    not    also      a   lease   of   immovable

property from year to year.                    There is no mention in

the rent deed that it is a lease from year to year,

hence the said condition is also not applicable.
14. Only clause which need to be, thus, considered is

as    to    whether      the     rent        deed   was   “for   any    term

exceeding one year”.                 The present is a case where

rent deed does not prescribe any period for which it

is executed.            When the lease deed does not mention

the     period     of    tenancy,        other      conditions     of    the

lease/rent deed and intention of the parties has to

be gathered to find out the true nature of the lease

deed/rent deed.           The two conditions written in the
13
rent note are also relevant to notice.                 First, if

payment of rent in any month is not made up to 5th of

month, owner shall have right to get the shop evicted

and second if the owner is in need of shop, he by

serving notice of one month can get the shop vacated.

This Court had occasion to consider the provision of
Section 106
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and

noted     the   rule    of   construction,   which     is   to   be

applied when there is no period agreed upon between

the parties in a lease deed.
In
Ram Kumar Das Vs.

Jagdish Chandra Deo, Dhabal Deb and Another
, AIR 1952

SC 23 after quoting
Section 106
of the Transfer of

Property Act, 1882, this Court held that when there

is   no    period      agreed   upon   between   the    parties,

duration has to be determined by referring to the

purpose and object with which the tenancy is created.

Following observations were made: -
“13. The section lays down a rule of
        construction which is to be applied when
        there is no period agreed upon between the
        parties. In such cases the duration has to
        be determined by reference to the object
        or purpose for which the tenancy is
        created. The rule of construction embodied
        in this section applies not only to
        express leases of uncertain duration but
        also to leases implied by law which may be
14
inferred from possession and acceptance of
      rent and other circumstances. It is
      conceded that in the case before us the
      tenancy was not for manufacturing or
      agricultural purposes. The object was to
      enable the lessee to build structures upon
      the land. In these circumstances, it could
      be regarded as a tenancy from month to
      month, unless there was a contract to the
      contrary……………………………………”
15.   This
Court further held
that “it has no doubt

been recognised in several cases that the mode in

which a rent is expressed to be payable affords a

presumption     that   the   tenancy      is   of      a    character

corresponding    thereto.    Consequently,        when      the     rent

reserved   is an    annual rent,         the presumption           would

arise that the tenancy was an annual tenancy unless

there is something to rebut the presumption.”
16. Clauses    of   the   rent    note    makes   it       clear   that

there was a categorical promise that tenancy is a

monthly tenancy and rent is paid every month by 5 th of

every month.     It is true that although in clause (9),

it was mentioned that the tenant will be bound for

making the rent money by increasing 10% each year,

that was promise by the tenant to increase the rent
15
by 10% each year for the period of tenancy, though

the period of tenancy was unspecified.                          Clause (9)

may or may not operate in view of specific clauses

reserving right of landlord to evict the tenant on

committing default of non-payment of rent by 5th of

every month or when landlord requires shop by giving

one    month’s    notice.        Clause       (9)    was   a    contingent

clause which binds the tenant to increase the rent by

10% each year, which was contingent on tenancy to

continue for more than a year, but that clause cannot

be read to mean that the tenancy was for a period of

more than one year.              We may notice a judgment of

Allahabad High Court in
Kashi Nath and Ors. Vs. Abdur

Rahman Khan and Ors.
, AIR 1922 All. 54.                          Allahabad

High    Court    had    occasion         to   consider     an    agreement

where defendant had contracted to pay eight annas a

year   as   a    rent   of    the    site.
Section     17
of    the

Registration       Act,      1866    was      also    referred       to    and

relied by the High Court.                 The High Court held that

when the terms of the lease are looked at, one sees

that    though     in     fact      it     might     continue        for   an

undefined       number of      years, there          was no      certainty
16
that it would last for more than one year, hence

lease was held not exceeding a term of one year.

Following was held by the High Court:-
“……………………………………The terms of the kabuliyat
      have been read to us. Shortly, they are to
      the effect that the Zamindar let the site
      to Sheo Prasad on a payment of eight annas
      a year and incidental obligations but the
      kabuliyat provided that if the eight annas
      was not paid in any one year, or if the
      tenant failed to make the incidental
      payments for marriages et cetra, the lease
      would thereby some to an end. Furthermore,
      the lease would also come to an end if the
      lessee did not conduct himself properly
      towards the Zemindar. Therefore, when the
      terms of the lease are looked at one sees
      that though in fact it might continue for
      an undefined number of years, there was no
      certainty that it would last beyond the
      term of one year. Therefore, it did not
      come within the classification of
Section
      17(d)
as being a lease for a term
      exceeding one year. That being so, it was
      not a document which had compulsorily to
      be registered……………………………….”
17. We may notice another judgment of Lahore High

Court in Mengh Raj Vs. Nand Lal and Ors., AIR 1939

Lah.558.   In the above case, in the lease, rate of

rent was payable per mensem, condition of payment of

annual rent was also mentioned there. The High Court

noted the condition of the lease and has also applied

the    provisions   of
Section   17(1)(d)
of   the
17
Registration Act, 1908
and held that the said lease

was not registrable.   In paragraph 1 of the judgment,

the contents of the lease have been quoted, which are

to the following effect: -
“……………………The main provisions of the lease
     in question may be translated as follows:
We, Nand Lal and Murli, sweepers of
        Hazro, have taken on rent a house
        from   Mengh   Baj   of  Hazro   on
        condition of payment of an annual
        rent of     Rs. 40-8-0 for a period
        of one year certain. We agree that
        we will live as tenants in this
        house and will pay rent at the rate
        of Rs. 3-6-0 per mensem, month by
        month on a receipt being granted to
        us by the landlord. In default of
        payment of rent the landlord can
        eject us and recover arrears of
        rent in any manner he likes. After
        the expiry of the term it will be
        the option of the landlord to give
        the house to us on rent or eject us
        and give it to other tenants. We
        will have no objection to this. The
        term of the lease is from the 1st
        Har, Sambat 1984 to the end of
        Jeth, Sambat 1985. We have been
        tenants under the landlord for a
        long time and have been paying
        rent.”
18. After considering the conditions of the lease and

referring to
Section 17(1)(d)
, the High Court laid

down following in paragraph 3: -
18
“3. On a construction of the above deed it
     is obvious that it is not a lease from
     year to year, nor for a term exceeding one
     year, and the sole question is whether or
     not by it a yearly rent has been reserved
     which brings it within the letter of the
     Section. In Mt. Aishan v. Municipal
     Committee Lahore 92 Ind.Cas. 526 Campbell
     J. held that a mere recital of an annual
     rate of rent did not constitute the lease,
     a lease reserving a yearly rent within the
     meaning of
Section 17
, Registration Act.
     The lease in that case was determinable at
     any time at the will of the landlord. In
     the present case after the expiry of one
     year for which the lease was granted, this
     lease too was determinable at the end of
     Jeth, Sambat 1985. In this aspect the
     present lease constituted no more than a
     tenancy-at-will after the expiry of the
     first year and so appears to be covered by
     the decision of Campbell, J. referred to
     above. There is considerable body of
     authority for the proposition that where
     there is a tenancy-at-will created even
     though the rent is fixed and is payable
     annually, the document is not subject to
     compulsory registration. Reference in this
     connexion may be made to Muhammad Masam
     Khan v. Mt. Bakhtawar (1895) 70 P.R. 1895
     where   a  Division    Bench   held  on   a
     construction of the document before them
     that only those leases must be registered
     which are in terms for a period exceeding
     one year, a lease reserving a yearly rent,
     and   containing    no    other   provision
     establishing   a  tenancy-at-will,    being
     presumably a lease from year to year.”
19. We may notice that in the above case although the

annual rent was mentioned but, however, payment of
19
monthly rent was mentioned in the lease deed.                         The

rent    note, which       we are     considering contains             only

monthly rent and payment month by month.
As per law

laid down by this Court in
Ram Kumar Das
(supra) there

shall    be    a    presumption     that      the    tenancy     in    the

present case is monthly tenancy. When the clauses of

rent note are cumulatively read, the intention of the

tenant    is   more      than   clear     that      tenancy    was    only

monthly tenancy, which could have been terminated on

default of payment of rent by 5th day of any month or

by notice of one month.           The rent deed did not confer

any right to tenant to continue in the tenancy for a

period of more than one year nor it can be said that

tenancy was created for a period of more than one

year.    Clause (9), which noticed the promise of the

tenant of payment of rent by increasing 10% each year

was a promise contingent on tenancy being continued

beyond one year but cannot make the tenancy year to

year or tenancy for a period of more than one year.

Present was a case of tenancy for which no period was

specified          and    looking        to    all      the      clauses

cumulatively, we find that the rent note was not such
20
kind   of    rent        note,     which       requires        compulsory

registration under
Section 17(1)(d)
.
20. We may further notice that Rent Controller had

returned     a     finding       regarding       rate     of     rent     @

Rs.2,000/-       per    month    and    further    the     tenant       was

liable to pay the house tax, which was not paid from

1999 to 2005 and the decree of eviction was passed

accordingly.       The Appellate Court although accepted

the finding of the Rent Controller that rate of rent

was @ Rs.2,000/- and not Rs.1,000/- but merely on the

finding that landlord cannot claim 10% increase of

rent every year since the document was not registered

had allowed the appeal and set side the judgment.

There is no specific finding by the Appellate Court

regarding    the       liability   of    the    tenant    to     pay    the

house tax.        The Appellate Court after holding that

document-rent deed was compulsorily registrable and

having not registered allowed the appeal.                  No finding

was returned by the Appellate Court that tenant was

not in default and tenant has deposited the necessary

amount to save himself from eviction.                   We, thus, are

of the view that the judgment of the Appellate Court
21
is unsustainable on the above ground also.       We, thus,

are of the view that the judgment and decree of the

Rent Controller directing eviction ought not to have

been interfered by the Appellate Court.
21. In result, the appeal is allowed.         The judgment

and decree of the Rent Controller directing eviction

of the tenant is restored.        No costs.
......................J.
                                      ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )


                                   ......................J.
                                       ( M.R. SHAH )


                                   ......................J.
                                    ( V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN )

New Delhi,
June 17, 2020.