[Cites
6
, Cited by
14
]
Supreme Court of India
Nand Kishore Mishra vs U.O.I. And Ors on 8 January, 2013
Bench:
Ranjana Prakash Desai
,
Aftab Alam
REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                      CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 377-378 OF 2013
            (Arising out of SLP (Civil) Nos. 10130-10131 of 2011)


      |NAND KISHORE MISHRA                       |......APPELLANT(S)       |
|                                          |                         |
|VERSUS                                    |                         |
|UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                     |.....RESPONDENT(S)       |




                                  O R D E R
Leave granted.
The appellant was a candidate for grant of Permanent/ Short
      Service Commission in the Army Medical  Corps(AMC)(Non-Technical)  for
      which     applications     were     invited     vide      Notification
      No.32433/PC/SSC/AMC(NT)/07/DGAFMS/DG-1A(1)  dated  January  19,  2007.
      Though successful in the selection and recommended for  the  grant  of
      Short Service Commission in the AMC, he was denied the  Commission  on
      the ground that he was not eligible being in Medical  Category  SHAPE-
      II.
In the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents
      before the Armed Forces Tribunal, the reason assigned  for  denial  of
      Commission to the appellant was stated as under:
“(a)  No 13989183K L/NK/HA Nand Kishor Mishra who has  been
                 recommended for grant of Short Service  Commission  in  AMC
                 (NT) by 17 SSB was found medically unfit by the SMB, CH(AF)
                 Banglore on 24 Dec.07 on account of disability  'Amputation
                 Ring  Finger  Left  Hand'  Individual  is  in  Low  Medical
                 Category SIHI A2(P) PIEI since 1998 for the disability.”


                 It may be explained here that the fitness of a  person  for
      medical classification is assessed under five factors indicted by  the
      acronym SHAPE.  The acronym stands for: S-Psychological, H-Hearing, A-
Appendages, P-Physical Capacity and E-Eye-Sight.
From the counter affidavit of the  respondents,  it,  thus,
      appears that the appellant was in  Category-I  under  the  other  four
      factors but on account of the loss of the left ring finger he was  put
      in Category-II under the factor Appendages and,  hence,  was  assigned
      the Medical Classification SHAPE-II.
Mr. S.G. Hasnen, learned senior advocate appearing for  the
      appellant, submitted that the respondent-authorities  wrongly  applied
      the criterion of medical eligibility and contended that  in  terms  of
      the Notification for the grant of commission the case of the appellant
      should have been  considered  under  medical  category  SHAPE-II.   He
      pointed out that  the  medical  criterion  regarding  eligibility,  as
      stated in the Notification dated January 19, 2007, was as under:-
“(ii)  The candidate must be in medical category  SHAPE-ONE
                 at the time of final selection for grant of PC.  In case of
                 those who possess  exceptional  merit  or  those  who  have
                 suffered disability  owing  to  active  service  or  a  war
                 casualty, the medical category upto grade TWO, under any of
                 the SHAPE factors, except “S”, will be acceptable, on merit
                 of  each  case,  provided  it  is  a  result  of  the  same
                 disability."
Learned counsel stated that on  July  5,  1998,  while  the
      appellant was working as a  Nursing  Assistant  in  the  Army  Medical
      Corps, he was travelling from Lucknow to Allahabad on  his  motorcycle
      to join his duty at 181, Military Hospital, Allahabad. On the  way  he
      was attacked  by  some  miscreants  who  wanted  to  snatch  away  his
      motorcycle.  He put up resistance  whereupon  one  of  the  miscreants
      fired a shot at him causing injury to his  left  ring  finger.   As  a
      result of the injury, his left ring finger had to be amputated.
In the Court of Inquiry, it was found  and  held  that  the
      appellant had received the injury while on duty vide Annexure P-2  and
      the appellant's Commanding Officer had also noted that the injury  was
      caused when the appellant was shot by unknown miscreants while he  was
      coming to join his duty and further that the injury sustained  by  him
      was not due to any  neglect  or  misconduct  on  his  part.  From  the
      findings of  the  Court  of  Inquiry  and  from  the  opinion  of  the
      Commanding Officer, it is clear that the appellant  received  injuries
      while he was on duty.
The issue for consideration now is, whether being  on  duty
      would satisfy the terms of the Notification where the expressions used
      are 'active service' or 'war casualty'.  The appellant does not  claim
      to come under the expression 'war  casualty',  but  he  claims  to  be
      covered by the expression 'active service'.
The expression 'active service' is defined in
Section  3(1)
of the Army Act, 1950 as under:
“3.  Definitions.  -  In  this  Act,  unless  the   context
                 otherwise requires. -
(i) “active service”, as applied to  a  person  subject  to
                 this Act, means the time during which such person -
(a) is attached to, or forms part of, a force which  is
                     engaged in operations against an enemy, or
(b) is engaged in military operations in, or is on  the
                     line of march to, a country or place wholly  or  partly
                     occupied by an enemy, or
(c) is attached to or forms part of a force which is in
                     military occupation of a foreign country;
xx      xx   xx”
Section 9
of the Act empowers  the  Central  Government  to
      declare persons to be on active service.
Section 9
reads as under:
“9.  Power to declare persons to be on  active  service.  -
                 Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (I) of
section
                 3
, the Central Government  may,  by  notification,  declare
                 that any person or class of persons  subject  to  this  Act
                 shall, with reference to any area  in  which  they  may  be
                 serving or with reference to any provision of this  Act  or
                 of any other law for the time being in force, be deemed  to
                 be on active service within the meaning of this Act.”


                 In exercise of the power under
Section 9
, the  Ministry  of
      Defence issued a Notification  dated  November  29,  1962,  which  was
      published in the Gazette of India (Extra.) Part II –
Section  4
No.6.
      The Gazette Notification reads as follows:
“S.R.O. 6.E – New  Delhi,  the  28th  November  1962  –  In
                 exercise of the powers conferred by
section 9
of  the  Army
                 Act, 1950 (46  of  1950),  the  Central  Government  hereby
                 declares that all persons subject to that Act, who are  not
                 on active service under clause (I) of
section  3
thereof,
                 shall, wherever they may be serving, be  deemed  to  be  on
                 active service within the  meaning  of  that  Act  for  the
                 purposes of the said Act and of any other law for the  time
                 being in force.”




                 It is to be seen that the  Notification  is  in  very  wide
      terms and covers all persons wherever they may be serving.
It may further  be  noticed  that  a  similar  Notification
      issued under
Section  9
of  the  Air  Force  Act,  1950  came  under
      consideration before this Court in
Balbir Singh &  Anr.  v.  State  of
      Punjab
, (1995) 1 SCC 90. In that case this Court held that  by  virtue
      of the Notification issued under
Section 9
of the  Air  Force  Act,  a
      person, even while on casual leave, would be deemed to be  on  'active
      service'.  In paragraphs 13 and 14 of the judgment, it  was  held  and
      observed as follows:
“13.  Thus, the effect of the notification is that  whether
                 or not a person is covered by  the  definition  of  “active
                 service” as spelt out in
Section 4(i)
of the Act they still
                 would be deemed to be so wherever they  may  be  'serving'.
                 Can a person governed by the Act be deemed to be “on active
                 service” while on casual leave?  The answer to the question
                 can only be  found  by  a  reference  to  the  leave  rules
                 governing the armed forces read with the provisions of  the
                 Act.
14.   The  Central  Government  has  framed  certain  rules
                 regarding the conditions of leave of the persons subject to
Army Act
and it would be profitable to refer to some of the
                 relevant  rules  dealing  with  “casual  leave”.   Relevant
                 portion of Rule 9 of the Rules of the service  provides  as
                 follows:
“9.  Casual leave counts as duty except as provided  for
                    in Rule 10(a).”


                 Rule 9 of the Rules (supra) thus specifically  states  that
                 casual leave counts as duty except as provided for in  Rule
                 10(a).  It therefore follows that a person subject  to  the
                 Act would be deemed to be “on active service” even when  he
                 is on casual leave.  Learned counsel for  the  parties,  in
                 view of this legal  position,  did  not  dispute  that  the
                 appellant, though on casual leave, would be deemed to be on
                 “active service” in view of the  notification  dated  5-12-
                 1962 (supra).”


                 On the basis of the Notification dated November  29,  1962,
      therefore, the appellant must be held  to  have  received  the  injury
      while on active service.
He  was  undeniably  in  Medical  Category  SHAPE-II   and,
      therefore, his case ought to have been considered by  the  authorities
      under that category for having received the  injury  while  on  active
      service.
We have carefully gone through the order  of  the  Tribunal
      and it appears to us that the attention of the Tribunal was not  drawn
      to the Notification, dated November 29, 1962 issued by the  Government
      of India under
Section 9
of the Army Act and it was on account of that
      omission that the Tribunal did not accept  the  appellant's  case  and
      rejected his application.
On hearing  counsel  for  the  parties  and  on  a  careful
      consideration of the materials on record, we are  satisfied  that  the
      appellant's case is fully covered by the medical  criterion  regarding
      eligibility, as stipulated  in  the  Notification  for  the  grant  of
      Commission dated January 19, 2007 and his  case  ought  to  have  been
      considered under Medical Category SHAPE-II.
We, accordingly, allow the appeals, set aside the order  of
      the Tribunal and direct the concerned authorities to consider the case
      of the appellant under Medical Category  SHAPE-II  and  since  he  was
      otherwise selected for the grant  of  Commission,  to  grant  him  the
      Commission in terms of the Notification.
No costs.
……………………...................J.
                                            (AFTAB ALAM)








                                              ……………………....................J.
                                            (RANJANA PRAKASH DESAI)
      NEW DELHI,
      JANUARY 08, 2013.
-----------------------
1