[Cites
8
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Secretary Managing Committee Bsmpg ... vs Dr. Samrat Sharma on 8 August, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2457
Author:
L. Nageswara Rao
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
L. Nageswara Rao
Non-Reportable


           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6189 OF 2019
     (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No.32520 of 2017)

Secretary Managing Committee BSMPG
College Roorkee                .... Appellant (s)
                      Versus

Dr. Samrat Sharma & Others            …. Respondent (s)



                    JUDGMENT
L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.
Leave granted.
1.     The judgment of the High Court of Uttarakhand

allowing the Writ Petition filed by Respondent No.1- Dr.

Samrat Sharma and setting aside the order of termination

of the services of Respondent No.1 is in challenge in this

Appeal.   The High Court directed the reinstatement of

Respondent No.1 with all consequential benefits.
2.   The Appellant is a private aided college, affiliated to

Hemwati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal Central University,

Srinagar, Pauri Garhwal (for short “the HNBG University”).
1
Respondent No.1 was an Assistant Professor (Hindi) in the

Department of Hindi in the said College. Respondent No.5-

Dr. (Smt.) Kamlesh Sharma made a complaint to the

Principal   of        the    College     on   04.09.2012      alleging

misbehavior by Respondent No.1 on 01.09.2012 during

the meeting of the teaching staff of the College.                     An

explanation was sought from Respondent No.1 which was

submitted on 12.10.2012.               Not being satisfied with the

explanation given by Respondent No.1, the Managing

Committee        of    the   College     decided    to   constitute    a

committee to enquire into the charges levelled by

Respondent No.5 in her letter dated 04.09.2012. Dr. I.D.

Kansal and Mr. K.S. Sharma, Members of the Managing

Committee were requested to conduct an enquiry.                     The

statement of Respondent No.5- and other witnesses were

recorded by the Enquiry Committee.                  In spite of the

opportunity given to Respondent No.1 to defend himself,

he did not appear before the Enquiry Committee.                     The

Enquiry Committee came to a conclusion that Respondent

No.1   used      indecent      language       and   behaved    in     an

aggressive manner in the staff meeting on 01.09.2012.

As Respondent No.1 was found guilty of the charges

levelled    against          him,      the    Enquiry      Committee
2
recommended initiation of action against Respondent

No.1. The Enquiry Committee also recommended criminal

prosecution to be launched against Respondent No.1.
3.   On the basis of the recommendations of the Enquiry

Committee,    three   charges       were   framed        against

Respondent No.1 which are as follows:
“CHARGE NO.01- PARA 04 OF COMPLAINT LETTER
     DATED 04.09.2012:-
On 01.09.2012 at 10.00 O’clock in the
     morning, the Principal had called a meeting of his
     entire teaching staff in the Principal room. At the
     very same, in your presence, Dr. Samrat Sharma,
     Assistant Professor, Hindi Department has leveled
     allegations against me with regard to the time
     table and he has used very filthy words to me in a
     very aggressive manner and thus he has behaved
     me like that without any reason. The said time
     table   had   been   prepared     according    to    his
     consent.
CHARGE NO.02- PARA 06 OF COMPLAINT LETTER
     DATED 04.09.2012:-
“Apart in your room, he has conducted same
     indecent behavior in the Staff room also. He has
     developed such a habit to behave like this with
     the female teachers. Such act is generally done
3
by a person who has lost his mental balance.
There is a clear example that his wife Smt. Jayanti
      Adjariya alongwith his son has left his house and
      for which cases are going on between them in the
      Courts at Roorkee, Jhansi, Nainital and Allahabad.
Charge No.03- Para No.7 of Complaint Letter
      Dated 04.09.2012:-
Due   to   this    continuous    insult   and   mental
      harassment, I, who is a senior most teacher who
      has 38 years of teaching experience, and who
      has   been        looking   after/   performing    the
      administrative duties and responsibilities of a
      Vice President while you go on leave, request you
      to kindly protect my dignity and seniority.”
4.      Respondent No.1 was informed that he should

submit his written statement by 14.02.2014. Respondent

No.1 was also given an opportunity to produce witnesses

in his defense. He was also informed that he can cross-

examine the witnesses during the fact-finding enquiry by

a committee consisting of Dr. Dushyant Kumar, Vice

President of the Managing Committee and Mr. Vikash

Sharma, Advocate. The Fact Finding Committee submitted

its report on 14.02.2014 holding Respondent No.1 guilty of

all the three charges. The Committee recommended the

termination of the services of Respondent No.1 as he was
4
found guilty of Sub-Section 17.04 of Section 49(j) of the

First Statute of the University of Hemwati Nandan

Bahuguna, Garhwal, 1978 (for short “the First Statutes”).
5.   Thereafter, a supplementary charge sheet was

issued on 02.07.2014. The following charges were framed

and communicated to Respondent No.1:
“CHARGE NO.1:-
You are posted in this Non-Governmental
     College on the post of Associate Professor and this
     College   is   affiliated   to   the    H.N.B.    Garhwal
     University,    Srinagar.          You     have      acted
     insubordinately and made false complaints against
     the   Chairman/      Secretary    of    the      Managing
     Committee and also against the Principal, have
     written following letters directly to the Director,
     Higher Education, Uttarakhand, Haldwani:-
1) First Letter dated 04.01.2014
2) Second Letter dated 31.01.2014
3) Third Letter dated 06.02.2014
4) Fourth Letter dated 28.02.2014
5) Fifth Letter dated 01.03.2014
6) Sixth Letter dated 12.04.2014

     The aforesaid letters having been sent by you
     directly without any proper channel and the same is
     in clear violation of the Point No.05 of the
     Agreement having been given in Appendix “Gha” of
5
the Garhwal University Srinagar Regulation.                      You
have written letter to the Director of Education,
Higher Education, Haldwani intentionally, in clear
disobedience    and        in    violation     of    the   Degree
Arth/8(21)/1671/2011-12 dated 05.05.2011 (which
contained your signature also) and of which there
are adequate proof against you.                       The Inquiry
Committee,         after         perusing            the       entire
correspondences, has found you guilty for sending
letters directly and without any proper channel to
the Director, Higher Education, Uttarakhand.
CHARGE NO.02:-
You after hearing of the Appeal bearing
No.A(HR.)/12074      119(3)/2013             filed    before     the
Hon’ble   Information           Commission,          Uttarakhand,
Dehradun,    the     Hon’ble          Commissioner         of    the
Information Commission Shri Vinod Nautiyal in his
disposal order dated 16.09.2013 has found you to
be guilty for forging in the bills towards the
educational equipments having been purchased
from the grant amount received from the U.G.C.
and has directed the Public Information Officer/
Principal to register a First Information Report
against you in the nearest Police Station.                       The
Public Information Officer/ Principal in compliance of
the   directions     of         the    Hon’ble        Information
Commissioner,       has         got     registered         a    First
Information Report against you with the Kotwali P.S.
Gangnahar Roorkee on 12.10.2013 for the offence
under Sections 467, 468, 469 and 471 of the Indian
6
Penal Code.            On 12.10.2013, the P.S. Kotwali
Gangnahar, Roorkee has registered a case against
you bearing Crime Case No.269/ 13 at Serial
No.276/13 under the aforesaid Sections.                  The
Investigation Officer in the aforesaid criminal case,
after recording the statements of the Principal Dr.
Vipin Pratap Gautam, Member of the Purchasing
Committee Dr. Surjeet Singh, Dr. Vijay Kumar, Shri
Vijendra Singh, Shri Sandeep Poswal, Shri Amit
Sharma, (Assistant Accountant) and after recording
your statements also and obtaining signatures of
all, has filed charge sheet in the Court on
31.10.2013 which is pending consideration before
the said Hon’ble Court. You in order to save from
the charges leveled against you with regard to
forgery after having conspired, the details of the
letters which you have written against the Principal,
Chairman Managing Committee and the Secretary
of the Managing Committee and against me directly
to    the     Police   Administration   as   also   to   the
Government of Uttarakhand, is given below:-
***
***

Charge No.3:- As per directions of the Hon’ble
Commissioner of Information Shri Vinod Nautiyal,
after getting registered an FIR against you before
the    P.S.     Kotwali    Gangnahar     Roorkee     dated
12.10.2013 against you and on the basis of the said
FIR, the police registered a Crime Case No.296/13
and after conducting investigation in respect of the
7
said case, charge sheet has been filed before Court
on 31.10.2013.
The case in which you are an accused, against the
same sections and with regard to the same
charges, you have been given an application on
13.5.2014 before the Court of Additional Civil Judge/
S.D./J.M. Roorkee for filing a false case against Shri
Manohar         Lal     Sharma,       Chairman,     Managing
Committee, Dr. Vipin Pratap Gautam, Principal. The
Members of the Purchasing Committee namely Dr.
Surjeet Singh, Dr. Vijay Kumar, Shri Vijendra Singh,
Shri Sandeep Poswal, Shri Amit Sharma (Assistant
Accountant) for making them an accused for the
purpose of registering an FIR under
section 156(3)
of the Cr.P.C. with P.S. Kotwali Gangnahar, Roorkee.
After receiving the report of the Investigating
Officer of the P.S. Gangnahar Kotwali, Roorkee, the
learned Judge i.e. Additional Civil Judge/ S.D.J.M.
Roorkee finding the allegations as leveled by you in
your application filed before the learned judge,
Additional Civil Judge/ S.D./JH.M. Roorkee, has
rejected    your        application     vide    order   dated
26.05.2014.           The   Hon’ble     Judge     has   clearly
mentioned/ written in its judgment and order dated
26.05.2014 that the report is received from the
concerned Police Station. According to the report
received from the concerned Police Station, in
respect    of     the    aforesaid      case,   Crime    Case
No.296/2013 under
Sections 467
/
468
/
469
/
471
of
the Indian Penal Code has been registered in
8
respect of the aforesaid case in which the applicant
      Samrat Sharma is an accused and the respondents
      in the aforesaid case are the complainant of the
      case, in which Charge Sheet No.180/2013 dated
      31.10.2013 has been sent.”
6.    Respondent No.1 was directed to appear before the

Enquiry Committee, failing which an ex parte decision will

be taken against him. Responding to the supplementary

charge   sheet    dated   02.07.2014,   Respondent     No.1

submitted his explanation on 04.07.2014.       Respondent

No.1 did not appear before the Enquiry Committee on

12.07.2014.      The Enquiry Committee found that the

charges levelled against Respondent No.1 were proved.

The   Enquiry    Committee   recommended      stern   action

against Respondent No.1 for indulging in the acts of

insubordination, indiscipline and violation of the First

Statutes and the provisions of the
U.P. State Universities

Act, 1973
(for short “
Universities Act
”).   The services of

Respondent No.1 were terminated by an order dated

13.07.2014. The approval of the Vice Chancellor, HNBGC

University, Srinagar was sought by the BSM (PG) College,

Roorkee (Haridwar)- Appellant herein, which was granted

on 16.09.2014.
9
7.    Respondent No.1 filed a Writ Petition in the High

Court of Uttarakhand challenging the order of termination

of his services dated 13.07.2014 and the approval granted

by the Vice Chancellor on 16.09.2014.            During the

pendency of the departmental enquiry, Respondent No.1

was placed under suspension on 31.01.2014. The order of

suspension was also assailed by Respondent No.1 in the

Writ Petition. The High Court allowed the Writ Petition and

set   aside   the   order   of   termination   and   directed

reinstatement of Respondent No.1 and the Management

of the College was directed to pay the salary for the

period during which he was placed under suspension. The

High Court was convinced that Respondent No.1 did not

get sufficient opportunity to defend himself in the

departmental enquiry. Commenting on the merits of the

allegations against Respondent No.1, the High Court was

of the opinion that sufficient evidence was not available to

hold Respondent No.1 guilty of the charges. In any event,

the High Court held that the imposition of penalty of

termination of service was not commensurate with the

allegations made against Respondent No.1.
10
8.   Mr. Ajay Veer Pundir, learned counsel appearing for

the Appellant- College submitted that the procedure

prescribed under the
Universities Act
and the First

Statutes made thereunder were scrupulously followed by

the Management in conducting the enquiry against

Respondent No.1. He argued that the High Court ought

not to have interfered with the order of termination of

services of Respondent No.1 by re-appreciating the

evidence which was subject matter of the departmental

enquiry.   He    submitted   that       serious   allegations   of

harassment were made by Respondent No.5 against

Respondent No.1 which amounted to misconduct under

the First Statutes and no lenience can be shown to

Respondent No.1. Mr. V.K. Shukla, learned Senior Counsel

appearing for Respondent No.1 argued that the enquiry

that was conducted against Respondent No.1 was in

contravention of the First Statutes that were framed under

the
Universities Act
. According to him, no opportunity was

given to Respondent No.1 to defend himself in the

enquiry, especially regarding the supplementary charges.

He   submitted    that   within        ten   days   of   making

supplementary charges against Respondent No.1, the

order of termination of his services was passed.                He
11
further submitted that the decision of the Management is

vitiated by bias as Respondent No.5 and the Principal of

the Management Committee have conspired to get rid of

Respondent No.1 from the College.
9.    The First Statutes were framed in exercise of the

powers conferred by sub-section (1) of
Section 50
of the

Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973. Chapter XVII

Part I of the First Statutes deals with the Conditions of

Services of Teachers of Affiliated Colleges. Clause 17.04

of the First Statutes is as follows :
“17.04. (1) A teacher of an affiliated college (other
     than a Principal) may be dismissed or removed or his
     services terminated on one or more of the following
     grounds:
(a) wilful neglect of duty;
(b) misconduct, including disobedience to the orders
     of the Principal;
(c) breach of any of the terms of contract of service;
(d)dishonesty connected with the University or
     college examinations;
(e) scandalous conduct or conviction for an offence
     involving moral turpitude;
(f) physical or mental unfitness;
(g) incompetence;
(h) abolition of the post with the prior approval of the
     Vice-Chancellor.
12
(2) A Principal of an affiliated college may be
dismissed or removed or his services terminated on
grounds mentioned in Clause (1) or on the ground of
continued mismanagement of the college.
(3) Except as provided by Clause (4), not less than
three months notice or where notice is given after
the month of October, then three months notice or
notice   ending   with   the     close   of   the   session
(whichever is longer) shall be given on either side
terminating the contract of service or in lieu of such
notice, salary for three months (or longer period as
aforesaid) shall be paid or refunded, as the case may
be:
Provided that where the Management dismisses or
removes or terminates the services of a teacher,
under Clause (1) or Clause (2) or when the teacher
terminates the contract for breach of any of its terms
by the Management, no such notice shall be
necessary:
Provided further that the parties will be free to waive
the condition of notice, in whole or, in part by mutual
agreement.
(4) In the case of any other teacher appointed in a
temporary or officiating capacity his service shall be
terminable, by one month’s notice or on payment of
salary in lieu thereof, on either side.”
13
10.   Clause 17.06 of the First Statutes provides for the

procedure to be followed before a member of teaching

staff of an affiliated College is either dismissed, removed

or terminated from service.      After a charge has been

framed and communicated to the teacher and action is

proposed to be taken against him, the teacher is entitled

for an adequate opportunity of submitting a written

statement of his defense, of being heard in-person if he so

desires and of calling and examining such witnesses in his

defense as he may desire.
11.   The only point that arises for our consideration is

whether   the   enquiry   that    was   conducted   against

Respondent No.1 was in conformity with the First Statutes

mentioned above. A careful examination of the material

on record would disclose that Respondent No.1 was not

given sufficient opportunity to defend himself.        The

enquiry was conducted in three stages.          Initially, a

committee was constituted to conduct a preliminary

enquiry into three charges. On the basis of the report of

the said committee, a fact-finding enquiry was held

regarding the said three charges. Later, a supplementary

charge sheet was issued in which fresh charges were

communicated to Respondent No.1 on 02.07.2014. Within
14
ten days thereafter, a final report was submitted regarding

the supplementary charges and an order was passed

terminating     the   services   of   Respondent       No.1   on

13.04.2014. Though, Respondent No.1 was also guilty in

not utilizing the opportunity that was given to him, the

manner in which the enquiry was conducted by the

Management is in clear violation of the procedure

prescribed under the First Statutes.
12.   We are in agreement with the contentions made by

Mr. Pundir that the High Court committed an error in re-

appreciating evidence in coming to the conclusion that

the   charges     against   Respondent        No.1    were    not

established.    It is well settled law that it is the decision

making process and not the decision itself which can be

the subject matter of judicial review. Interference by the

courts can only be in cases where there is no evidence.

Sufficiency of evidence for proof of the charges against

delinquent officers is completely within the domain of the

administrative authority. Courts cannot re-appreciate the

evidence to come to a different conclusion. We are afraid

that the High Court has transgressed the permissible

limits of judicial review in holding that the evidence on

record   did    not   warrant    an   order    of    termination.
15
Interference with the penalty imposed on delinquent

officers is permissible only when it shocks the conscience

of the court.      We are not dealing with any of the

submissions made on behalf of the parties relating to the

truth or otherwise of the allegations made against

Respondent No.1 as we have held that the procedure

prescribed under the First Statutes was violated while

conducting the departmental enquiry against Respondent

No.1.    Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the High

Court by which the order of termination of the services of

Respondent No.1 was set aside.           We also uphold the

direction relating to the entitlement of Respondent No.1 to

claim salary for the period of his suspension.         However,

we are of the opinion that the Appellant- College should

be permitted to conduct a fresh enquiry into the charges

that have been communicated to Respondent No.1, if they

so wish.
13.     The Appeal is disposed of accordingly.
………....................................J.
                                     [ L. NAGESWARA RAO ]



                                ………….................................J.
                                          [ HEMANT GUPTA ]
16
New Delhi,
August 08, 2019.
17