[Cites
51
, Cited by
46
]
Supreme Court of India
Nareshbhai Bhagubhai vs Union Of India on 13 August, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 837, (2019) 10 SCALE 811 (2019) 8 MAD LJ 91, (2019) 8 MAD LJ 91
Author:
Indu Malhotra
Bench:
Indu Malhotra
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
REPORTABLE

                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6270         OF 2019
                         (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 32055 of 2018)



          Nareshbhai Bhagubhai & Ors.                               …Appellants


                                            versus


          Union of India & Ors.                                   …Respondents


                                             WITH




                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6271        OF 2019
                         (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 32056 of 2018)




          Ravibhai Vallabhbhai Sutariya & Ors.                      …Appellants


                                            versus

Signature Not Verified


          Union of India & Ors.
Digitally signed by
NEELAM GULATI
Date: 2019.08.13
                                                                  …Respondents
15:56:49 IST
Reason:




                                               1
                              WITH
             CIVIL APPEAL NO.       6272   OF 2019
          (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 32057 of 2018)



Ishwerbhai Bhikabhai Patel & Ors.                    …Appellants


                             versus


Union of India & Ors.                              …Respondents
                              WITH


             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6273         OF 2019
          (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 32058 of 2018)



Vallabhbhai Chanabhai Ahir & Ors.                    …Appellants


                             versus


Union of India & Ors.                              …Respondents


                        JUDGMENT
INDU MALHOTRA, J.
Leave granted.
2
1.   The present Civil Appeals have been filed to challenge the

     Final Judgment and Order dated 25.07.2018 passed by the

     Gujarat High Court, whereby the Special Civil Application

     Nos. 19409 of 2015, 12711 of 2016, 14000 of 2016, and

     14001 of 2016 have been dismissed.
2.   Since a common issue arises in all 4 Civil Appeals, they are

     being disposed of by the present common Judgment and

     Order.
3.   The factual matrix in which the present Civil Appeals have

     been filed is as under :
3.1. On 08.02.2011, a Notification was issued under
Section 20A
of the Railways Act, 1989 [hereinafter

           referred to as “the said Act”] by the Ministry of

           Railways notifying its intention to acquire the lands

           specified in 18 Villages, situated in District Surat,

           Gujarat for the public purpose of construction of the

           Western Dedicated Freight Corridor.
3
The total land under acquisition was a stretch of 131

       kms. The land owned by the Appellants, comprising of

       approximately    6   kms,    was      included    under   the

       Notification.
3.2.   The Appellants along with other land­owners filed

       written    Objections       between      06.04.2011       and

       07.04.2011 under
Section 20D(1)
of the Act before the

       Competent Authority/ Special Land Acquisition Officer,

       Surat [hereinafter referred to as “the Competent

       Authority”],    Surat   to    challenge     the    proposed

       acquisition.
3.3.   The Competent Authority vide letter dated 15.07.2011,

       informed the land­owners that the acquisition was for

       a necessary public purpose i.e. the development of the

       Western Dedicated Freight Corridor. It was stated that

       compensation would be paid to all affected land­

       owners in accordance with
Sections 20F
and
20G
of

       the Railways Act, 1989.
The land­owners were asked to remain present with

       necessary proofs at the time of personal hearing, the

       date of which would be intimated to them.
4
3.4.   The Competent Authority vide letter dated 19.07.2011,

       directed the land­owners to appear for a personal

       hearing on the Objections on 30.07.2011.
3.5.   The land­owners appeared before the Competent

       Authority on 30.07.2011 for personal hearing, and

       submitted further written Objections on 31.07.2011.
3.6.   The Competent Authority submitted its Report to the

       Central Government under
Section 20E(1)
of the Act on

       03.01.2012.
On 06.02.2012, the Ministry of Railways issued a

       Notification under
Section 20E(1)
of the Railways Act,

       1989 stating that 59 Objections had been received in

       respect of the proposed acquisition, which had been

       considered and disallowed by the Competent Authority.
3.7.   On 06.02.2013 and 07.02.2013, Awards were passed

       by the Competent Authority under
Section 20F
of the

       Railways Act, 1989.
3.8.   On 13.08.2013, Shri Ghanshyamsinh Gambhirsinh

       Vashi, a land­owner, filed an RTI Application before the

       Competent Authority seeking a certified copy of the

       Order passed on the Objections filed by the land­

       owners.
3.9.   The Competent Authority replied to the said RTI

       Application on 05.09.2013, and stated that the reply to
5
the Objections raised by the land­owners had already

      been communicated vide letter dated 15.07.2011.
3.10. The Appellants herein challenged the acquisition

     proceedings by filing Special Civil Application Nos.

     19409 of 2015, 12711 of 2016, 14000 of 2016, and

     14001 of 2016 before the Gujarat High Court.
        The principal ground of challenge raised by the

     Appellants was that no Order had been passed on the

     Objections in accordance with
Section 20D(2)
of the

     said Act.
The Appellants prayed for quashing and setting aside

     the   Notification     issued     under
Section    20A
on

     08.02.2011, and the Declaration issued under
Section

      20E
on 06.02.2012.
3.11. During the pendency of the proceedings, the High

     Court vide Interim Order dated 12.07.2018, directed

     the Respondents to file an Affidavit giving specific

     details pertaining to the disposal of the Objections after

      personal hearing was granted on 30.07.2011.
3.12. The Chief Project Manager, Dedicated Freight Corridor

     Corporation of India Limited filed Affidavit dated

     17.07.2018 on behalf of the Respondents before the

     High Court, wherein it was stated that :
“4. I state that the clarification/reply given vide
       letter dated 15/7/2011 does not indicate the
6
decision/order/predetermination      of     the
      Competent Authority. The Competent Authority
      has merely clarified the purpose of acquisition
      and provision of
Railway Amendment Act
2008
      to be considered while awarding compensation.
      On the contrary, in the said letter dated
      15/7/2011, the Competent Authority has clearly
      informed the objector to remain present with all
      the relevant documents on a date which was to
      be intimated later.
…
8. I state that the Competent Authority, after
      hearing all the objectors of land under
      acquisition, has passed two orders dated
      28//11/2011 and 3/1/2012 disallowing all the
      objections raised by the objectors in public
      interest. Annexed hereto and marked as
      Annexure VI Colly. Are the copies of the orders
      dated 28/11/2011 as well as 3/1/2012.”

3.13. The High Court vide Final Judgment and Order dated

    25.07.2018 dismissed the Special Civil Applications

    filed by the Appellants.
The Court took the view that in matters involving

    highly technical and scientific fields, courts would be

    extremely slow in overruling the decision taken by the

    Government after due deliberation. Unless it was

    pointed out that relevant considerations were not

    properly weighed, or that the decision was blatantly

    mala fide, courts would not attempt to substitute their

    understanding of such complex subjects for that of the

    Government. The Appellants failed to produce any
7
material to support their objection that the proposed

railway line was not advisable.
It was, however, held that
Section 20D
of the Act

confers a valuable right on a person interested in the

land under acquisition, to raise objections, and be

heard on such objections. The objections raised by a

person interested have to be considered and disposed

of, after a hearing is given by the competent authority.

If the objections received by persons interested have

not been disallowed by the competent authority, it

would not be open for the Central Government to

proceed to issue the Declaration under
Section 20E(1)
of the Act.
The High Court recorded its concern about the

manner in which the entire matter was dealt with by

the Respondents. The land­owners were informed that

their objections were not valid even prior to the

personal hearing took place.
After the personal hearing took place on 30.07.2011,

the Competent Authority disposed of the objections on

the office file, but never conveyed the decision to the

objectors. The Competent Authority had not fulfilled
8
the important stage of disposal of the objections prior

           to the Declaration being issued under
Section 20E
.
             It was further observed that the Competent Authority

           gave a completely wrong reply to the RTI Application

           filed by the land­owners. This was an act of utter

           carelessness which had serious ramifications.
The Competent Authority vide Report dated

           03.01.2012, informed the Chief Project Manager,

           Dedicated   Freight   Corridor     Corporation   of   India

           Limited that all the Objections raised by the Appellants

           were heard at length, and orally answered.
             The Special Civil Applications were dismissed by the

           High Court, and the Competent Authority was directed

           to pay Costs of Rs. 50,000/­ in each of the Special Civil

           Applications.
3.14. Aggrieved by the aforesaid Judgment, the Appellant –

           Land­owners filed the present Civil Appeals.
4.   We have heard the learned Counsel for the parties, and

     perused the pleadings and written submissions filed by the

     parties.
5.   Mr. C. A. Sundaram, Senior Counsel appearing for the

     Appellants inter alia submitted that :
9
5.1.   The Objections raised by the Appellants were not

       decided in accordance with the provisions of
Section

       20D(2)
of the Act. The non­compliance of the same

       would render the entire acquisition proceedings null

       and void.
5.2.   It was further    submitted   that   the   Reply   dated

       05.09.2013 given by the Respondents to the RTI

       Application filed by the land­owners, clearly showed

       that there was no application of mind on the part of

       the Respondents. The said Reply simply stated that the

       Order disposing of the Objections raised by the land­

       owners had already been communicated to them on

       15.07.2011.
5.3.   The letter dated 15.07.2011 cannot be construed to be

       an Order as contemplated by
Section 20D(2)
of the Act,

       since it was issued prior to the personal hearing which

       took place on 30.07.2011, and filing of the final

       objections on 31.07.2011.
5.4.   The letter dated 15.07.2011 was not an Order, but

       merely a direction to the Appellants to remain present

       with necessary proofs and documents at a time and

       date which would be subsequently intimated.
10
5.5.   It was submitted that even though the land­owners

            were granted a personal hearing, there was no order

            passed either allowing or disallowing the objections as

            per the mandate of
S. 20
D(2) of the Act.
     5.6.   The orders dated 28.11.2011 and 03.01.2012 were not

            communicated to the land­owners. They were merely

            notations made on the internal files of the Competent

            Authority.
The rejection of the Objections vide an endorsement

            or file noting would not constitute an order in the eyes

            of the law. An order passed by a statutory authority

            must be a speaking order supported by cogent reasons,

            which is required to be communicated to the objectors.
6.   Mr. Sanjay Jain, Additional Solicitor General appearing for

     the Union of India inter alia submitted that :
6.1. The land acquisition proceedings in the present case

            have been undertaken in compliance with
Chapter IV A

            of the Railways Act, 1989
.
6.2.
Chapter IV A of the Railways Act, 1989
is a self­

            contained code. The Court should not resort to, or seek

            the aid of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
to interpret

            the provisions of the
Railways Act
, particularly since
Section 20N
of the Act makes the provisions of the
11
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
inapplicable to acquisitions

       under the
Railways Act
.
6.3.   The process for filing objections under
Section 20D(2)
of the Act is two­fold. First, the Competent Authority

       permits objections to be filed within 30 days of the

       publication of the Notification under
Section 20A
by

       the Central Government notifying its intention to

       acquire land.
Thereafter, the Competent Authority has the

       discretion to call for a personal hearing in order to

       conduct a further enquiry if deemed necessary.
6.4.   In the present case, the Objections raised by the

       Appellants were received in writing on 06.04.2011. The

       Competent    Authority    after   considering   the   said

       Objections, passed an Order on 15.07.2011 which was

       communicated to each of the Appellants. Thereafter,

       personal hearing was granted on 30.07.2011, which

       was in the nature of a further enquiry.
          The Objections raised by the Appellants in the

       personal hearing on 30.07.2011 were almost identical

       to those raised earlier on 06.04.2011. The Objections

       raised by the Appellants had effectively been dealt with
12
vide letter dated 15.07.2011, which was communicated

            to each of the Appellants.
6.5.   It was further submitted that no order was required to

            be passed after the personal hearing dated 30.07.2011,

            because no fresh material came on record.
7.   The issues which arise for our consideration are :
i)   Whether the provisions of
Section 20D(2)
have not been

            complied with by the Competent Authority in the

            present case?
ii)    If so, what would be the consequences of the non­

            compliance of
Section 20D(2)
with respect to the

            acquisition   proceedings,   and   the   rights   of   the

            Appellants?
8.   Relevant Statutory Provisions
     To determine the issues raised by the Appellants in the

     present proceedings, the statutory provisions of the
Railways

     Act, 1989
as amended in 2008, would require to be

     considered.
The statutory provisions for acquisition of land for a

     Special Railway Project are contained in
Chapter IV A of the

     Railways Act, 1989
. Chapter IV A is a complete self­contained

     code for the acquisition of land.
13
Chapter IV A was incorporated vide Amendment Act 11 of

2008. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Railways

(Amendment) Act, 2008 states that :
“2. There is a need to provide for land
        acquisition provisions in the
Railways Act, 1989
to empower the Central Government in the
        Ministry of Railways for land acquisition on fast
        track basis for the special railway projects on
        the lines of the land acquisition provisions
        available in the
National Highways Act, 1956
.”



   Chapter IV A comprises of
Section 20A
to
20P
of the

amended Act. The relevant provisions under Chapter IV A are

set out hereinbelow for ready reference :
“20A. Power to acquire land, etc.

        (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied
        that for a public purpose any land is required for
        execution of a special railway project, it may, by
        notification, declare its intention to acquire such
        land.
(2) Every notification under sub­section (1), shall
        give a brief description of the land and of the
        special railway project for which the land is
        intended to be acquired.
(3) The State Government or the Union territory,
        as the case may be, shall for the purposes of
        this section, provide the details of the land
        records to the competent authority, whenever
        required.
(4) The competent authority shall cause the
        substance of the notification to be published in
        two local newspapers, one of which shall be in a
        vernacular language.
14
20D. Hearing of objections, etc.

(1) Any person interested in the land may, within
a period of thirty days from the date of
publication of the notification under sub­section
(1) of
section 20A
, object to the acquisition of
land for the purpose mentioned in that sub­
section.
(2) Every objection under sub­section (1), shall be
made to the competent authority in writing, and
shall set out the grounds thereof and the
competent authority shall give the objector an
opportunity of being heard, either in person or by
a legal practitioner, and may, after hearing all
such objections and after making such further
enquiry, if any, as the competent authority
thinks necessary, by order, either allow or
disallow the objections.
Explanation.­­For the purposes of this sub­
section, “legal practitioner” has the same
meaning as in clause (1) of sub­section (1) of
section 2
of the Advocates Act, 1961(25 of 1961).

(3) Any order made by the competent authority
under sub­section (2) shall be final.



20E. Declaration of acquisition

(1) Where no objection under sub­section (1) of
section 20D
has been made to the competent
authority within the period specified therein or
where the competent authority has disallowed
the objections under sub­section (2) of that
section, the competent authority shall, as soon
as may be, submit a report accordingly to the
Central Government and on receipt of such
report, the Central Government shall declare, by
notification, that the land should be acquired for
the purpose mentioned in subsection (1) of
section 20A
.
(2) On the publication of the declaration under
sub­section (1), the land shall vest absolutely in
the   Central     Government     free  from    all
encumbrances.
15
(3) Where in respect of any land, a notification
has been published under subsection (1) of
section 20A
for its acquisition, but no declaration
under sub­section (1) of this section has been
published within a period of one year from the
date of publication of that notification, the said
notification shall cease to have any effect:
Provided that in computing the said period of one
year, the period during which any action or
proceedings to be taken in pursuance of the
notification issued under sub­section (1) of
section 20A
is stayed by an order of a court
shall be excluded.
(4) A declaration made by the Central
Government under sub­section (1) shall not be
called in question in any court or by any other
authority.
20G. Criterion for determination of market­
value of land

(1) The competent authority shall adopt the
following criteria in assessing and determining
the market­value of the land,­­
(i) the minimum land value, if any, specified in
the Indian Stamp Act, 1899(2 of 1899), for the
registration of sale deeds in the area, where the
land is situated; or
(ii) the average of the sale price for similar type
of land situated in the village or vicinity,
ascertained from not less than fifty per cent, of
the sale deeds registered during the preceding
three years, where higher price has been paid,
whichever is higher.
(2) Where the provisions of sub­section (1) are
not applicable for the reason that:­­
(i) the land is situated in such area where the
transactions in land are restricted by or under
any other law for the time being in force in that
area; or
16
(ii) the registered sale deeds for similar land as
mentioned in clause (i) of sub­section (1) are not
available for the preceding three years; or
(iii) the minimum land value has not been
specified under the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899
(2 of
1899) by the appropriate authority, the
concerned State Government shall specify the
floor price per unit area of the said land based
on the average higher prices paid for similar
type of land situated in the adjoining areas or
vicinity, ascertained from not less than fifty per
cent, of the sale deeds registered during the
preceding three years where higher price has
been paid, and the competent authority may
calculate the value of the land accordingly.

(3) The competent authority shall, before
assessing and determining the market­value of
the land being acquired under this Act,­­
(a) ascertain the intended land use category of
such land; and
(b) take into account the value of the land of the
intended category in the adjoining areas or
vicinity, for the purpose of determination of the
market­value of the land being acquired.

(4) In determining the market­value of the
building and other immovable property or assets
attached to the land or building which are to be
acquired, the competent authority may use the
services of a competent engineer or any other
specialist in the relevant field, as may be
considered necessary by the competent
authority.
(5) The competent authority may, for the purpose
of determining the value of trees and plants, use
the services of experienced persons in the field of
agriculture, forestry, horticulture, sericulture, or
any other field, as may be considered necessary
by him.
(6) For the purpose of assessing the value of the
standing crops damaged during the process of
land acquisition proceedings, the competent
authority may utilise the services of experienced
17
persons in the field of agriculture as he
considers necessary.
20I. Power to take possession

(1) Where any land has vested in the Central
Government under sub­section (2) of
section
20E
, and the amount determined by the
competent authority under
section 20F
with
respect to such authority by the Central
Government, the competent authority may, by
notice in writing direct the owner as well as any
other person who may be in possession of such
land to surrender or deliver possession thereof to
the competent authority or any person duly
authorised by it in this behalf within a period of
sixty days of the service of the notice.

(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with
any direction made under sub­section (1), the
competent authority shall apply—
(a) In case of any land situated in any area
falling within the metropolitan area, to the
Commissioner of Police;
(b) In case of any land situated in any area
other than the area referred to in clause (a), to
the Collector of a district,

And such Commissioner or Collector, as the case
may be, shall enforce the surrender of the land,
to the competent authority or to the person duly
authorised by it.
20J. Right to enter into land where land
has vested in Central Government

Where the land has vested in the Central
Government under
section 20E
, it shall be lawful
for any person authorised by the Central
Government in this behalf, to enter and do other
act necessary upo0n the land for carrying out
the building, maintenance, management or
18
operation of the special railway project or part
                thereof or nay other work connected therewith.


                20N.
Land Acquisition Act
1 of 1894 not to
                apply

                Nothing in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 shall
                apply to an acquisition under this Act.”
9.   The scheme of Chapter IV A is as follows :
i)    The Central Government is empowered under
Section

           20A
to issue a preliminary Notification, notifying its

           intention to acquire land for a public purpose required

           for the execution of a special railway project.
ii)
Section 20D
provides for filing of objections and grant

           of personal hearing. The provision is in two parts :
a) Sub­section (1) states that any person interested in

                  the land, may within a period of 30 days from the

                  date of publication of the notification under sub­

                  section (1) of
Section 20A
, file objections to the

                  acquisition of land for the purpose mentioned in

                  that sub­section.
b)     Under sub­section (2) of
Section 20D
, the mandate

                  of the statute is that :
 Every objection shall be made in writing to the

                      Competent Authority;
19
   The Competent Authority is mandated to give

                an opportunity of hearing to the Objector, either

                in person or by a legal practitioner;
               That “after hearing” all objections, and after

                making such further enquiry, if any, the

                Competent    Authority   may   either    allow   or

              disallow the objections by an order.
c)   Sub­section (3) of
Section 20D
states that an order

            passed by the Competent Authority under
Section

          20D (2)
shall be final.
iii)   Sub­section (1) of
Section 20E
provides that if no

       objections are received, or if the objections are

       disallowed, then the Competent Authority shall submit

       a report to the Central Government.
iv)    On receipt of such report from           the     Competent

       Authority, the Central Government shall declare by

       notification, that the land should be acquired for the

       purpose mentioned in sub­section (1) of
Section 20A
.
v)     On the publication of the declaration under
Section

       20E(1)
, the land shall vest absolutely in the Central

       Government free from all encumbrances.
vi)    Sub­section (3) of
Section 20E
states that if the

       declaration is not published within a period of one year

       from the date of publication of the Notification under
20
Section 20A(1)
, the Notification shall cease to have any

       effect.
vii)   Sub­section   (4)   of
Section   20E
states   that   the

       declaration made by the Central Government under

       sub­section (1) shall not be called in question in any

       court of law or by any authority.
9.1.   A reading of the aforesaid statutory provisions shows

       that the land­owner or interested person has been

       granted a limited right to file objections under
Section

       20D
of the Railways Act, 1989. The scope of the

       objections is limited to the purpose for which the

       acquisition is made. It is not a general right to file

       objections as under
Section 5A
of the Land Acquisition

       Act, 1894.
9.2.   The statute has mandated a strict procedure to be

       followed under
Section 20D
with respect to the

       submission and hearing of objections.
         The statute mandates that the order is required to be

       passed by the Competent Authority “after hearing” the

       land­owners. The order cannot precede the hearing of

       objections. If an order is passed prior to the personal

       hearing, and enquiry by the Competent Authority, it
21
would be contrary to the statute, invalid, and vitiated

          by a pre­determined disposition.
10. In the present case, it is the admitted position that after the

    personal hearing took place on 30.07.2011, no decision was

    passed on the objections submitted by the land­owners,

    either allowing or disallowing their objections; nor was any

    communication sent to them.
This is confirmed by the Affidavit of the Competent

    Authority dated 18.07.2018 filed before the High Court (pgs.

    296 – 301, Volume II), wherein it is stated as follows :­
            “7. It is respectfully submitted that personal
            hearing was fixed in between 30.07.2011 to
            18.08.2011 and 21.10.2011 to 03.01.2012 and
            alongwith the objections raised by the
            petitioners, in total 88 objectors are given
            opportunity of hearing in the aforementioned
            time period, and as the date qua the present
            petitioners was fixed for providing hearing on
            30.07.2011, the personal hearing was provided
            wherein the same kind of objections were raised
            as raised by way of objection application dated
            06.04.2011 and therefore the objection was
            recorded in the hearing memo dated 30.07.2011
            and after completion of the hearing proceedings
            qua all the objectors, on 28.11.2011 and
            03.01.2012 respectively the noting was
            prepared by endorsing that all the objections are
            rejected and therefore the proposal was
            submitted before the Dedicated Freight Corridor
            Corporation for further procedure. I crave leave
            to produce the original file at the time of hearing
            of the present matter.
8. It is most humbly and respectfully submitted
            that so far as the averment regarding reply
            dated 05.09.2013 under RTI application is
22
concerned, I say and submit that the applicants
        have asked for certified copy of the decision
        taken for hearing provided to the objector,
        wherein vide reply dated 05.09.2013 the reply
        was given from the office of the answering
        respondent by stating that “the reply to the
        objection application given by you against
        Notification under the provisions of
Section 20A
of the Railway Amendment Act has already
        been given to you by this office (copy is
        enclosed). Moreover, necessary hearing in that
        behalf has also been afforded to you. No order
        regarding objection application is passed after
        such hearing, because reply regarding objection
        application has already been given to you.”

                                    (emphasis supplied)


10.1. It is abundantly clear that in the absence of an order

      being passed as contemplated by
Section 20D
of the

      said Act, no further steps could have been taken by the

      Competent Authority in the acquisition in question.
10.2. During the hearing of the Special Civil Applications,

      the High Court called for the office files of the

      Respondent. On a perusal of the files, the Court

      chanced upon a hand­written note sent by the

      Competent Authority to the Chief Project Manager,

      Dedicated     Freight    Corridor    Corporation      of   India

      Limited, which is set out hereinbelow :
“Finally after due consideration and taking in to
        view the nationwide infrastructure, long lifetime
        permanent utility and hence public utility is
        greater than that of person, all the 59 objection
        were disallowed by order by the undersigned
23
and their applications for objection were filed at
           this end.”


            The file noting in the office files of the Competent

         Authority cannot be considered to be an order on the

         objections.
11.
Section 20D
is a mandatory provision which confers a

   substantive and valuable right on the land­owners, to object

   to the proposed acquisition, before they are forcibly divested

   of their right, title and interest in the land by an

   expropriatory legislation.
The right to file objections under
Section 20D
of the

   Railways Act, 1989 is pari materia to
Section 5
­
A of the Land

   Acquisition Act, 1894
even though the scope of objections

   may be more limited.
The judgments rendered by this Court on the nature of the

   right to object under the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
are

   equally applicable to the
Railways Act
.
      Sub­section (2) of
Section 20D
mandates the Competent

   Authority to give the objectors an opportunity of hearing,

   either in person or through a legal practitioner.
24
The Competent Authority after hearing all objections, and

     after making such further enquiry, if any, is mandated to

     pass an order either allowing or disallowing the objections.
       There are a catena of judgments passed on
Section 5
­
A of

     the Land Acquisition Act, 1894
, which are relevant for the

     interpretation of
Section 20D(2)
of the said Act.
        This Court has held that the rules of natural justice have

     been ingrained in the scheme of
Section 5
­A of the 1894 Act

     with a view to ensure that before any person is forcibly

     deprived of his land by way of compulsory acquisition, he

     must be provided with an opportunity to oppose the decision

     of the Government.1
         This Court has held that the hearing given to a person

     must be an effective one, and not a mere formality.

     Formation of opinion with regard to the public purpose, as

     also suitability thereof, must be preceded by application of

     mind having due regard to the relevant factors.
Section 5
­
A of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894
confers a

     valuable right on the land­owners. Having regard to the

     provisions contained in Article 300­A of the Constitution, the

     right to raise and file objections has been held to be akin to a

     fundamental right.2

1
Union of India v. Shivraj
, (2014) 6 SCC 564.
2 Ibid.
25
In
Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd. v. Darius Shapur

     Chenai,3
this Court held that:
“6. It is not in dispute that
Section 5
­
A of the Act
confers a valuable right in favour of a person
                whose lands are sought to be acquired. Having
                regard to the provisions contained in Article 300­
                A of the Constitution, the State in exercise of its
                power of “eminent domain” may interfere with
                the right of property of a person by acquiring the
                same but the same must be for a public purpose
                and reasonable compensation therefor must be
                paid.
…
9. It is trite that hearing given to a person must
                be an effective one and not a mere formality.
Formation of opinion as regards the public
                purpose as also suitability thereof must be
                preceded by application of mind as regards
                consideration of relevant factors and rejection of
                irrelevant ones. The State in its decision­making
                process must not commit any misdirection in
                law. It is also not in dispute that
Section 5
­
A of
                the Act
confers a valuable important right and
                having regard to the provisions contained in
                Article 300­A of the Constitution it has been held
                to be akin to a fundamental right.
(emphasis supplied)



       In
N. Padmamma v. S. Ramakrishna Reddy
, this Court held
     that :
“21. If the right of property is a human right as
                also a constitutional right, the same cannot be
                taken away except in accordance with law.
                Article 300­A of the Constitution protects such
                right. The provisions of the Act seeking to divest
                such right, keeping in view of the provisions of
                Article 300­A of the Constitution of India, must
                be strictly construed.”
                                               (emphasis supplied)
3 (2005) 7 SCC 627.
26
In
Om Prakash v. State of U.P.,4
this Court held that :
“21. Our attention was also invited by Shri
                Shanti Bhushan, learned Senior Counsel for the
                appellants to a decision of a two­Judge Bench of
                this Court in the case of
State of Punjab v.
                Gurdial Singh
[(1980) 2 SCC 471] wherein
                Krishna Iyer, J. dealing with the question of
                exercise of emergency powers under
Section 17
of the Act observed in para 16 of the Report that
                save in real urgency where public interest did
                not brook even the minimum time needed to give
                a hearing, land acquisition authorities should
                not, having regard to
Articles 14
and
19
, burke
                an inquiry under
Section 17
of the Act. Thus,
                according to the aforesaid decision of this Court,
                inquiry under
Section 5
­A is not merely statutory
                but also has a flavour of fundamental rights
                under
Articles 14
and
19
of the Constitution
                though right to property has now no longer
                remained a fundamental right, at least
                observation regarding
Article 14
, vis­à­vis,
Section 5
­
A of the Land Acquisition Act
would
                remain apposite.
The said decision has been cited with approval
                in
Union of India v. Krishan Lal Arneja
[(2004) 8
                SCC 453].”
                                              (emphasis supplied)


     11.1. The limited right given to a land­owner/interested

             person to file objections, and be granted a personal

             hearing under
Section 20D
cannot be reduced to an

             empty formality, or a mere eye­wash by the Competent

             Authority.
The Competent Authority was duty­bound to

             consider the objections raised by the Appellants, and




4 (1998) 6 SCC 1.
27
pass a reasoned order, which should reflect application

             of mind to the objections raised by the land­owners.
                 In the present case, there has been a complete

             dereliction of duty by the Competent Authority in

             passing a reasoned order on the objections raised by

           the Appellants.
11.2. In the present case, it is the undisputed position that

             no order as contemplated in the eyes of law was passed

             by the Competent Authority in deciding the objections

             raised by the Appellants.
A statutory authority discharging a quasi­judicial

             function is required to pass a reasoned order after due

             application of mind.
In
Laxmi Devi v. State of Bihar,5
this Court held that :
“9. The importance of
Section 5
­A cannot be
                overemphasised. It is conceived from natural
                justice and has matured into manhood in the
                maxim of audi alteram partem i.e. every person
                likely to be adversely affected by a decision
                must be granted a meaningful opportunity of
                being heard. This right cannot be taken away by
                a side wind, as so powerfully and pellucidly
                stated in
Nandeshwar Prasad v. State of U.P.
[AIR 1964 SC 1217]. So stringent is this right
                that it mandates that the person who heard and
                considered the objections can alone decide them;
                and not even his successor is competent to do so
                even on the basis of the materials collected by
                his predecessor. Furthermore, the decision on
                the objections should be available in a self­
                contained, speaking and reasoned order;
                reasons cannot be added to it later as that
                would be akin to putting old wine in new bottles.
                We can do no better than commend a careful
5 (2015) 10 SCC 241.
28
perusal of
Union of India v. Shiv Raj
[(2014) 6
                SCC 564 : (2014) 3 SCC (Civ) 607] , on these as
                well as cognate considerations.”
                                             (emphasis supplied)

                In
Raghbir Singh Sehrawat v. State of Haryana,6
this

             Court held that :
“40. Though it is neither possible nor desirable
                to make a list of the grounds on which the
                landowner can persuade the Collector to make
                recommendations       against     the   proposed
                acquisition of land, but what is important is that
                the Collector should give a fair opportunity of
                hearing to the objector and objectively consider
                his plea against the acquisition of land. Only
                thereafter, he should make recommendations
                supported by brief reasons as to why the
                particular piece of land should or should not be
                acquired and whether or not the plea put
                forward by the objector merits acceptance.
In
                other words, the recommendations made by the
                Collector must reflect objective application of
                mind to the objections filed by the landowners
                and other interested persons.”
                                             (emphasis supplied)

                In
Usha Stud & Agricultural Farms (P) Ltd. v. State of

             Haryana,7
this Court held that,
                “The ratio of the aforesaid judgments is that
Section 5
­A(2), which represents statutory
                embodiment of the rule of audi alteram partem,
                gives an opportunity to the objector to make an
                endeavour to convince the Collector that his land
                is not required for the public purpose specified in
                the Notification issued under
Section 4(1)
or that
                there are other valid reasons for not acquiring
                the same. That section also makes it obligatory
                for the Collector to submit report(s) to the
                appropriate      Government      containing     his
                recommendations on the objections, together
                with the record of the proceedings held by him
                so that the Government may take appropriate

6 (2012) 1 SCC 792.
7 (2013) 4 SCC 210.
29
decision on the objections.
Section 6(1)
provides
  that if the appropriate Government is satisfied,
  after considering the report, if any, made by the
  Collector under
Section 5
­A(2) that particular
  land is needed for the specified public purpose
  then a declaration should be made. This
  necessarily implies that the State Government is
  required to apply mind to the report of the
  Collector and take final decision on the
  objections filed by the landowners and other
  interested persons. Then and then only, a
  declaration can be made under
Section 6(1)
.”

                                (emphasis supplied)

 In
Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd.
(supra), this

Court held that:
“16. However, considerations of the objections
  by the owner of the land and the acceptance of
  the recommendations by the Government, it is
  trite, must precede a proper application of mind
  on the part of the Government. As and when a
  person aggrieved questions the decision­making
  process, the court in order to satisfy itself as to
  whether one or more grounds for judicial review
  exist, may call for the records whereupon such
  records must be produced. The writ petition was
  filed in the year 1989. As noticed hereinbefore,
  the said writ petition was allowed. This Court,
  however, interfered with the said order of the
  High Court and remitted the matter back to it
  upon giving an opportunity to the parties to raise
  additional pleadings.
…
19. Furthermore, the State is required to apply
  its mind not only on the objections filed by the
  owner of the land but also on the report which is
  submitted by the Collector upon making other
  and further enquiries therefor as also the
  recommendations made by him in that behalf.
The State Government may further inquire into
  the matter, if any case is made out therefor, for
  arriving at its own satisfaction that it is
  necessary to deprive a citizen of his right to
  property. It is in that situation that production of
  records by the State is necessary.
30
…
28. Although assignment of reasons is the part
                of principles of natural justice, necessity thereof
                may be taken away by a statute either
                expressly or by necessary implication. A
                declaration contained in a notification issued
                under
Section 6
of the Act need not contain any
                reason but such a notification must precede the
                decision of the appropriate Government. When a
                decision is required to be taken after giving an
                opportunity of hearing to a person who may
                suffer civil or evil consequences by reason
                thereof, the same would mean an effective
                hearing.”
                                               (emphasis supplied)
                In
Kranti Associates (P) Ltd. v. Masood Ahmed Khan,8
this Court held that:
“12. The necessity of giving reason by a body or
                authority in support of its decision came up for
                consideration before this Court in several cases.
Initially this Court recognised a sort of
                demarcation between administrative orders and
                quasi­judicial orders but with the passage of
                time the distinction between the two got blurred
                and thinned out and virtually reached a
                vanishing point in the judgment of this Court
                in
A.K. Kraipak v. Union of India
[(1969) 2 SCC
                262 : AIR 1970 SC 150]
                …
47. Summarising the above discussion, this
                Court holds:
(a) In India the judicial trend has always been to
                record reasons, even in administrative decisions,
                if such decisions affect anyone prejudicially.
(b) A quasi­judicial authority must record
                reasons in support of its conclusions.
(c) Insistence on recording of reasons is meant to
                serve the wider principle of justice that justice
                must not only be done it must also appear to be
                done as well.
(d) Recording of reasons also operates as a valid
                restraint on any possible arbitrary exercise of
                judicial and quasi­judicial or even administrative
                power.
8 (2010) 9 SCC 496.
31
(e) Reasons reassure that discretion has been
exercised by the decision­maker on relevant
grounds and by disregarding extraneous
considerations.
(f)   Reasons have        virtually become        as
indispensable a component of a decision­making
process as observing principles of natural justice
by judicial, quasi­judicial and even by
administrative bodies.
(g) Reasons facilitate the process of judicial
review by superior courts.
(h) The ongoing judicial trend in all countries
committed to rule of law and constitutional
governance is in favour of reasoned decisions
based on relevant facts. This is virtually the
lifeblood of judicial decision­making justifying
the principle that reason is the soul of justice.
(i) Judicial or even quasi­judicial opinions these
days can be as different as the judges and
authorities who deliver them. All these decisions
serve one common purpose which is to
demonstrate by reason that the relevant factors
have been objectively considered. This is
important for sustaining the litigants' faith in the
justice delivery system.
(j) Insistence on reason is a requirement for both
judicial accountability and transparency.
(k) If a judge or a quasi­judicial authority is not
candid enough about his/her decision­making
process then it is impossible to know whether
the person deciding is faithful to the doctrine of
precedent or to principles of incrementalism.
(l) Reasons in support of decisions must be
cogent, clear and succinct. A pretence of reasons
or “rubber­stamp reasons” is not to be equated
with a valid decision­making process.
(m) It cannot be doubted that transparency is the
sine qua non of restraint on abuse of judicial
powers. Transparency in decision­making not
only makes the judges and decision­makers less
prone to errors but also makes them subject to
broader scrutiny. (See David Shapiro in Defence
of Judicial Candor [(1987) 100 Harvard Law
Review 731­37] .)
(n) Since the requirement to record reasons
emanates from the broad doctrine of fairness in
decision­making, the said requirement is now
32
virtually a component of human rights and was
        considered part of Strasbourg Jurisprudence.
        See Ruiz Torija v. Spain [(1994) 19 EHRR 553]
        EHRR, at 562 para 29 and Anya v. University of
        Oxford [2001 EWCA Civ 405 (CA)] , wherein the
        Court referred to
Article 6
of the European
        Convention of Human Rights which requires,
        “adequate and intelligent reasons must be given
        for judicial decisions”.
(o) In all common law jurisdictions judgments
        play a vital role in setting up precedents for the
        future. Therefore, for development of law,
        requirement of giving reasons for the decision is
        of the essence and is virtually a part of “due
        process”.”
                                      (emphasis supplied)

11.3. File Notings and lack of Communication
        It is settled law that a valid order must be a reasoned

      order, which is duly communicated to the parties. The

      file noting contained in an internal office file, or in the

      report submitted by the Competent Authority to the

      Central Government, would not constitute a valid order

      in the eyes of law.
In the present case, there was no order whatsoever

      passed rejecting the objections, after the personal

      hearing was concluded on 30.07.2011.
        It is important to note that the Competent Authority

      did not communicate the contents of the file noting to

      the Appellants at any stage of the proceedings. The

      said file noting came to light when the matter was
33
pending before the High Court, and the original files

             were summoned.
The High Court, upon a perusal of the files, came

             across the file noting recording rejection of the

             objections   only   on    the   ground   that   the   matter

             pertained to an infrastructure project for public utility.
In
Bachhittar Singh v. State of Punjab,9
a Constitution

             Bench held that merely writing something on the file

             does not amount to an order. For a file­noting to

             amount to a decision of the Government, it must be

             communicated to the person so affected, before that

             person can be bound by that order. Until the order is

             communicated to the person affected by it, it cannot be

             regarded as anything more than being provisional in

             character.
Similarly, in
Shanti Sports Club v. Union of India,10
this Court held that notings recorded in the official

             files, by the officers of the Government at different

             levels, and even the Ministers, do not become a

             decision of the Government, unless the same are

             sanctified and acted upon, by issuing an order in the


9 AIR 1963 SC 395.
10 (2009) 15 SCC 705.
34
name of the President or Governor, as the case may be,

             and are communicated to the affected persons.
In
Sethi Auto Service Station v. DDA,11
this Court held

             that:
“14. It is trite to state that notings in a
                departmental file do not have the sanction of law
                to be an effective order. A noting by an officer is
                an expression of his viewpoint on the subject. It
                is no more than an opinion by an officer for
                internal use and consideration of the other
                officials of the department and for the benefit of
                the final decision­making authority. Needless to
                add that internal notings are not meant for
                outside exposure. Notings in the file culminate
                into an executable order, affecting the rights of
                the parties, only when it reaches the final
                decision­making authority in the department,
                gets his approval and the final order
                is communicated to the person concerned.
                …
16. To the like effect are the observations of this
                Court in Laxminarayan R. Bhattadv. State of
                Maharashtra [(2003) 5 SCC 413] , wherein it
                was said that a right created under an order of a
                statutory authority must be communicated to the
                person concerned so as to confer an enforceable
                right.”
                                               (emphasis supplied)
11.4. Contradictory Stand taken by the Respondents

                 The mandate of the law is that the order on the

             objections is required to be passed by the Competent

             Authority “after the personal hearing” is granted.
The Respondents had filed an Affidavit dated

             17.07.2018 before the High Court wherein it was

11 (2009) 1 SCC 180.
35
stated that the reply given vide letter dated 15.07.2011

      does not indicate the decision/order/pre­determination

      of the Competent Authority. The Competent Authority

      had informed the objectors to remain present with all

      material documents at the time of personal hearing,

      the date of which would be notified later.
         At the time of arguments before this Court, it was

      sought to be contended by the Additional Solicitor

      General for the Union of India that the letter dated

      15.07.2011 was an order passed under
Section 20D(2)
of the Act.
We find that the stand taken by the Respondents

      before the High Court and this Court is completely

      contradictory, and does not commend acceptance.
11.5. In any event, the order under
Section 20D(2)
cannot be

      passed prior to the personal hearing. The mandate of

      the law is that the order must be passed “after” the

      grant of personal hearing, and after any further

      enquiry is made by the Competent Authority.
         The whole process of granting a personal hearing

      would be reduced to an empty formality and a farcical

      exercise, if the order on the objections precedes the
36
grant of personal hearing. This would be clearly

              contrary to the provisions of
Section 20D(2)
of the Act.
                It is well settled that where a statute provides for a

              thing to be done in a particular manner, then it has to

              be done in that manner and in no other manner.12 The

              provisions       of   an     expropriatory        legislation,      which

              compulsorily deprives a person of his right to property

              without his consent, must be strictly construed. 13
The

              Railways Act, 1989
being an expropriatory legislation,

           its provisions have to be strictly construed. 14
     11.6.
The Competent Authority being a quasi­judicial

              authority, is obligated by law to act in conformity with

              mandatory statutory provisions. It is important to note

              that this is the only opportunity made available to a

              land­owner, as on submission of the Report to the

              Central Government, there is no further consideration

              that takes place. The Central Government acts upon

              the Report of the Competent Authority, and issues the

              Declaration under
Section 20E
of the said Act.

12
Nazir Ahmad v. King Emperor
, (1875) LR 1 Ch D 426 followed in
Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh
v. State of Vindhya Pradesh
, AIR 1954 SC 322;
State of U.P. v. Singhara Singh
, AIR 1964 SC
358;
J&K Housing Board v. Kunwar Sanjay Krishan Kaul
, (2011) 10 SCC 714;
Kunwar Pal
Singh v. State of U.P.
, (2007) 5 SCC 85.
13 Jilubhai Nanbhai Khachar v. State of Gujarat, 1995 Supp (1) SCC 596; See also Khub
Chand v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1967 SC 1074; CCE v. Orient Fabrics (P) Ltd., (2004) 1 SCC
597.
14
Indore Vikas Pradhikaran v. Pure Industrial Coke & Chemicals Ltd.
, (2007) 8 SCC 705.
37
This is in contradistinction with the provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
.
Section 6
of the Land

          Acquisition Act requires the satisfaction of Central

          Government before the Declaration is issued.
    11.7. In the absence of an order passed under
Section

          20D(2)
, the subsequent steps taken in the acquisition

          would consequentially get invalidated.
12. The issue which remains to be decided is that in the absence

    of an order passed on the objections under
Section 20D
,

    should the consequential steps be invalidated.
      We find that the challenge before this Court has been made

    by the Appellants with respect to a stretch of land

    admeasuring approximately 6 kms, out of the total stretch of

    131 kms. The remaining stretch of land comprising of 125

    kms   has   been   acquired,     and   stands   vested   in   the

    Government. The Respondents have stated on Affidavit that

    pre­construction activity and earth work has been completed

    on most parts of the stretch. Furthermore, most of the

    bridges are either in progress, or have already been

    completed.
The Senior Counsel representing the Appellants in all the

    present Civil Appeals, after taking instructions from his
38
clients, submitted that since the land was being acquired for

     a public utility project, his clients would be satisfied if they

     were granted compensation by awarding the current rate for

     acquisition of land.
Admittedly, no mala fides have been alleged by the

     Appellants against the Respondents in the acquisition

     proceedings. The larger public purpose of a railway project

     would not be served if the Notification under
Section 20A
is

     quashed. The public purpose of the acquisition is the

     construction and operation of a Special Railway Project viz.

     the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor in District Surat,

     Gujarat.
In these extraordinary circumstances, we deem it fit to

     balance the right of the Appellants on the one hand, and the

     larger public purpose on the other, by compensating the

     Appellants for the right they have been deprived of. The

     interests of justice persuade us to adopt this course of

     action.
In
Savitri Devi v. State of U.P. & Ors.,15
this Court held that:
“Thus, we have a scenario where, on the one
                hand, invocation of urgency provisions under
Section 17
of the Act and dispensing with the
                right to file objection under
Section 5A
of the Act,
                is found to be illegal. On the other hand, we
                have a situation where because of delay in
                challenging these acquisitions by the land

15 (2015) 7 SCC 21.
39
owners, developments have taken in these
           villages and in most of the cases, third party
           rights have been created. Faced with this
           situation, the High Court going by the spirit
           behind the judgment of this Court in
Bondu
           Ramaswamy and Others
(supra) came out with
           the solution which is equitable to both sides. We
           are, thus, of the view that the High Court
           considered the ground realities of the matter and
           arrived at a more practical and workable
           solution by adequately compensating the land
           owners in the form of compensation as well as
           allotment of developed Abadi land at a higher
           rate i.e. 10% of the land acquired of each of the
           land owners against the eligibility and to the
           policy to the extent of 5% and 6% of Noida and
           Greater Noida land respectively.”
                                        (emphasis supplied)

     In the present case, the relief is being moulded by granting

   compensation to the Appellants, to be assessed under
Section 20G
of the said Act as per the current market value

   of the land. The Competent Authority is directed to compute

   the amount of compensation on the basis of the current

   market value of the land, which may be determined with

   reference to
Section 20G(2)
of the Act.
13. With respect to the remaining 125 kms stretch of land, the

   land­owners were satisfied with the amount awarded, and

   have not approached this Court.
Under these circumstances, despite our finding that the

   Respondents have breached the mandatory provisions of the
40
Act, we do not think this is a fit case to set aside the entire

   acquisition proceedings.
The relief granted in the present case is confined to the

   Appellants herein, and would not become a precedent for

   other land­owners who have not challenged the acquisition

   proceedings before this Court.
The Civil Appeals are allowed in the aforesaid terms. All

   pending Applications, if any, are accordingly disposed of.


   Ordered accordingly.
.......................................J.
                                     (ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE)




                                    ...…...............………………J.
                                               (INDU MALHOTRA)

New Delhi;
August 13, 2019.
41