[Cites
39
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Bgp Products Operations Gmbh And Hagene ... on 22 August, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 924, (2019) 11 SCALE 325
Author:
Indu Malhotra
Bench:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
,
Indu Malhotra
REPORTABLE


               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
              Civil Appeal Nos.6588­6591 of 2019
        (Arising out of SLPs (Civil) Nos. 3296­3299 Of 2019)


 UNION OF INDIA & ANR. ETC                          APPELLANTS


                              Versus


 BGP PRODUCTS OPERATIONS GMBH
 AND HAGENE IMMERMATT WEG. & ANR. ETC. RESPONDENTS


                         JUDGMENT
INDU MALHOTRA, J.
Leave granted.
1. The issue which arises for consideration in the present appeals
  is the validity of the Notification dated 27.04.2018 issued under
Section 26A
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (hereinafter
  referred to as the “Act”) by the Ministry of Health and Family
  Welfare.
The impugned notification restricts the manufacture of
  Oxytocin formulations for domestic use, only by public sector
1
undertakings or companies, to the complete exclusion of the
  private sector companies. However, the manufacture of the drug
  for export purposes is open to both public and private sector
  companies.
It was notified that the notification would come into force on
  01.07.18.
By a subsequent notification dated 29.06.2018, the date was
  extended to 01.09.18.
2. Till the issuance of the impugned notification, Oxytocin was

  being manufactured by private sector companies to meet the
  entire need in the country.
After the issuance of the impugned notification, Karnataka
  Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (“KAPL”), a public sector
  company has commenced the manufacture of Oxytocin in May
  2018.
3. The Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (“API”) or the bulk drug is
  manufactured in India only by one private sector company in
  India, viz. Hemmo Pharmaceuticals Pvt Ltd. (“Hemmo Pharma”).
4. The impugned Notification dated 27.04.2018 was challenged in
  a group of Writ Petitions by various private sector companies
  who are inter alia manufacturing the drug Oxytocin in W.P.(C)
  No. 6084/2018, W.P.(C) No. 8555/2018, W.P.(C) No. 8666/2018
  and W.P.(C) No. 9601/2018 before the Delhi High Court on
  various grounds. The Delhi High Court granted stay of the
  operation of the impugned notification vide Interim Order dated
  31.08.2018. The order of stay was extended by subsequent
2
Orders, which remained in force till 15.12.2018. The Delhi High
  Court vide a detailed Judgment and Order dated 14.12.2018
  has quashed the impugned notification. As a consequence, the
  impugned notification did not come into force at all.
5. The Appellant­Union of India has filed the present Special Leave
  Petitions before this Court, to challenge the judgment passed by
  the Delhi High Court.
6. The subject matter of the present appeals is the drug Oxytocin,
  which is notified as an essential drug by the World Health
  Organization (WHO) Model List of Essential Medicines since
  2002. The concept of “Essential Medicines” was first introduced
  by the WHO in 1977, and has now been adopted by many
  countries, NGOs and international non­profit supply agencies.
  Oxytocin continues to be notified in the 21 st edition of the WHO
  Model List of Essential Medicines published in 2019. It is listed
  under the head “Medicines For Reproductive Health And
  Perinatal Care” and the recommended form of dosage is
  “Injection: 10 IU in 1­ mL”.
6.1.   Oxytocin is an essential life­saving drug, which is included
        in the National List of Essential Medicines, 2011 (“NLEM”).
        It continues to be listed at S.No. 26.1.5 in the latest
        notification published in 2015. The NLEM is published
        under the 1st Schedule to the Drugs (Prices) Control Order,
        2013   (“DPCO”)   under
Section   3
of   the   Essential
        Commodities Act, 1955 (“
EC Act
”).
The NLEM specifies the recommended dosage and
        strength of Oxytocin injection as 5IU per 1 ml and 10IU per
3
1 ml. Oxytocin injection in the form of “5 IU per ml in 1ml
        ampoule pack” is included in the “Essential Drug List for
        the year 2016­2018” at Serial No. 228 published by the
        National Health Mission, Department of Health and Family
        Welfare, Government of Himachal Pradesh.
6.2.    The objective of the National List of Essential Medicines
        (NLEM) is that the drugs included in it are adequate to
        meet the contemporary health needs of the general
        population of the country.1 It is one of the key instruments
        in balanced healthcare delivery system of a country. The
        first NLEM was prepared and released in 1996. This list
        was subsequently revised in 2003, 2011 and 2015.
NLEM contains those essential medicines “that satisfy
        the primary health needs of the country‘s population.” NLEM
        medicines are required to be made available at all times in
        adequate quantities in the appropriate dosage forms to
        serve the larger public interest. The primary purpose of the
        NLEM is to promote rational use of medicines considering
        three important aspects i.e cost, safety and efficacy. The
        list is considered to include the most cost­effective
        medicines for a particular indication.
The criteria for the inclusion of a medicine in the
        NLEM inter alia includes that the medicine should be
        approved/licensed in India; the medicine should have




1 Press Release on “Essential Drugs” dated 15.03.2013 by the Press Information Bureau,
Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
4
proven efficacy and safety profile based on valid scientific
        evidence; the medicine should be cost effective etc. 2

              The NLEM is prepared by an Expert Core Committee
        constituted by the Director General of Health Services
        (DGHS) out of the World Health Organization (WHO) Model
        List of Essential Medicines, Essential Drugs Lists of
        various States, and medicines used in various National
        Health Programmes and Emergency Care Drugs.3

6.3.    Oxytocin is recommended as the first line drug for
        prevention and treatment of post­partum haemorrhage
        (excess bleeding immediately after child­birth). 4 Oxytocin is
        the drug of choice used for pregnant women to induce or
        augment labour at the time of delivery, to control post­
        partum bleeding and uterine hypo­tonicity and is placed
        under Schedule H1 of the said Act.5 Oxytocin is also
        included in the Indian Pharmacopoeia published in 2010,
        2014, and 2018.
6.4.    The misuse of Oxytocin has been the subject matter of
        discussion because of rampant misuse of the drug on
        milch animals. The issue was under deliberation by the
        Drugs Technical Advisory Board (“DTAB”) and the Drugs
        Consultative Committee (“DCC”), which are statutory
        bodies constituted under the said Act.
2 Executive Summary, Report of the Core Committee for Revision of the National List of
Essential Medicines published in 2015.
3 Paragraph 3.1(ii) of the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 2012 (NPPP­2012) dated
07.12.12 published by the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Government of India
4 World Health Organisation Recommendations For The Prevention And Treatment Of
Postpartum Haemorrhage, 2012
5 Fifty­Ninth Report Of Parliamentary Standing Committee On Health And Family Welfare
On The Functioning Of Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
5
The DTAB is a statutory body established under
Section 5
of the said Act. The DTAB consists of technical
       experts to advise the Central Government and State
       Governments on technical issues arising under the said
       Act.
The DCC has been constituted under
Section 7
of the
       said Act, which consists of representatives of the Central
       Government, and one representative of each of the State
       Governments to advise the Central and State Governments,
       and the DTAB, on any matter relating to secure uniformity
       in the administration of the Act.
6.5.   The deliberations on the issue of rampant misuse of the
       drug commenced from 1997 onwards.
It is necessary to advert to the deliberations of the
       meetings of these statutory bodies to understand the
       background in which the impugned notification was
       passed.
6.6.   The misuse of Oxytocin came up for discussion first in the
       31st    meeting   of   the   DCC     held   on   21.08.1997   and
       22.08.1997. The DCC noted that it had received several
       complaints on the misuse/abuse of Oxytocin in veterinary
       practice.    Oxytocin   injections    were being     misused to
       artificially extract milk from cows and buffaloes. The
       members of the Committee were requested to collect more
       information on the issue.
6.7.   At the 48th meeting of the DTAB held on 08.07.1999, the
       DTAB discussed the misuse of Oxytocin in milch animals
6
and the deleterious effects due to consumption of such
       milk on consumers. The DTAB considered the suggestion
       of imposing a general ban on the manufacture of Oxytocin.
       However, 11 members opined that as the drug is
       “essential” in the medical field, and is included in the
       “Essential Drug list”, the same could not be prohibited.
The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing, an
       invitee to the meeting mooted a suggestion that “perhaps
       restricting the manufacture of Oxytocin to PSUs, and
       thereafter keeping a track on its distribution” may be
       considered.
The representative of the Department of Consumer
       Affairs agreed that the whole issue of use and misuse of
       Oxytocin injection requires an in­depth examination and
       suggested that a detailed paper be prepared based on the
       outcome of such study.
6.8.   At the 36st meeting of the DCC held on 23.07.05 and
       24.07.05, the DCC advised not to ban Oxytocin injection
       since it formed a part of the NLEM. The DCC noted that the
       sale of Oxytocin had been regulated by amending the
       package size of Oxytocin to “single blister packs”, as
       against the earlier prescribed larger packaging of 50­100
       ampoules.
6.9.   At the 40th Meeting of the DCC held on 29.06.2009, it was
       observed that the misuse of Oxytocin injection had been
       reported in many parts of the country, and a strong
       vigilance was required to stop the clandestine manufacture
7
of the drug. The DCC observed that the drug has a definite
     place in medical treatment, and is used by gynaecologists
     universally. The DCC urged the members/representatives
     of each State to ensure that the clandestine manufacture of
     the drug under their jurisdiction is curbed through
     extensive surveys and raids.
6.10. At the 43rd meeting of the DCC held on 14.11.2011, the
     DCC observed that there was an increasing misuse of the
     drug by dairy owners, because of the clandestine supply of
     the drug through illegal channels, and recommended that
     its    misuse   can   only   be    curbed   through   increased
     surveillance.
6.11. At the 44th meeting held on 20.07.2012, the DCC noted the
     importance of continuous surveillance to stop the misuse
     of the Oxytocin. After deliberations, it was agreed that
     diversion of the bulk drug to illegal channels could be
     curtailed to a large extent, if it was ensured that the bulk
     drug is sold to licensed manufacturers only.
6.12. On 12.11.2013, the DCC convened its 46th meeting,
     wherein the misuse of oxytocin injections to milch animals
     came up for further discussion.
After deliberations, the DCC recommended that the
     manufacture and sale of Oxytocin injections should be
     banned for veterinary use under
Section 26A
of the Act
     coupled with the condition that the manufacturers of the
     bulk     drug    Oxytocin        should   supply   the   Active
8
Pharmaceutical     Ingredient      (“API”)    only    to     licensed
     manufacturers of Oxytocin formulations for human use.
6.13. At the 65th meeting of the DTAB held on 25.11.2013, the
     misuse of Oxytocin by dairy owners to extract milk from
     milch animals and its harmful effects on animals and
     human       consumption      was   deliberated       upon.     While
     acknowledging that Oxytocin had proven medical use for
     inducing labour, and to control post­partum bleeding and
     uterine hypotonicity, the DTAB recognized the abundant
     availability and use of the drug in a clandestine manner,
     which was a matter of great concern for public health. In
     spite of the action taken by the authorities to place the
     drug under Schedule H of the Drugs & Cosmetics Rules,
     1945, which requires the drug to be dispensed only on the
     prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner, the
     manufacture and sale of the drug in a clandestine manner
     in large quantities, and its misuse by the farmers or dairy
     owners was rampant.
The opinion of the Department of Animal Husbandry,
     Dairying and Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture, was sought
     with respect to the proposal for banning Oxytocin for
     Animal use. It was opined that ban on the production and
     use    of   Oxytocin   for   veterinary      purposes,     was   not
     recommended, since the drug has therapeutic application
     in case of expulsion of foetus, and retention of placenta
     even in animals.
9
After deliberations, the DTAB noted that since the drug
      has a definite use for therapeutic purposes, it need not be
      prohibited. It was, however, opined that the manufacturer
      of the bulk drug should supply the API only to licensed
      manufacturers of the drug and veterinary hospitals. It was
      further recommended that the State Drugs Controllers be
      asked to curb the misuse of the drug through increased
      surveillance and raids conducted on the possible hideouts
      of clandestine manufacture and sale of the drug, and take
      strict action against the offenders.
6.14. Pursuant to the recommendations made by the DTAB in
      the 65th meeting, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
      issued     a    Notification       G.S.R      29(E)      dated      17.01.2014
      restricting the manufacture and sale of Oxytocin as under :
“Whereas the Central Government is satisfied that the drug Oxytocin has a
        definite therapeutic use in certain medical conditions;
And whereas the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary and
        expedient to regulate and restrict the manufacture, sale and distribution of
        the said drug in the country to prevent its misuse in public interest.
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by
Section 26A
of the
        Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940), the Central Government
        hereby directs that the drug oxytocin shall be manufactured for sale or for
        distribution or sold in the manner specified below, in addition to the
        provisions contained in the said Act and Rules made thereunder, namely: ­
1. The manufacturers of bulk oxytocin drug shall supply the active
        pharmaceutical drug only to the manufacturers licensed under the Drugs
        and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 for manufacture of formulations of the said
        drug.
2. The formulations meant for veterinary use shall be sold to the veterinary
        hospitals only.”
                                                        (emphasis supplied)

6.15. The validity of the aforesaid Notification dated 17.01.2014
      was challenged before the Punjab & Haryana High Court in
      Narang Medical Store v. Union of India [W.P.(C) No.
10
7135/2014], inter alia on the ground that it was not in
     consonance with the provisions of
Section 26A
of the Act.
The High Court vide judgment and order dated 28.01.2016,
     upheld the validity of the Notification, to avoid the misuse
     of the bulk drug or Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient used
     in Oxytocin injections.
6.16. At the 67th meeting of the DTAB held on 01.04.14, the
     DTAB once again recognized that the drug Oxytocin has a
     definite role in the medical field for both humans and
     animals, and as such the legitimate manufacture and sale
     of the drugs cannot be stopped by banning the drug. Even
     if   the   domestic   manufacturers   are   prohibited   from
     manufacturing the drug, the bulk drug is liable to be
     smuggled from the neighbouring countries for illegal use.
     Misuse can only be contained by enhanced surveillance by
     the regulatory authorities, followed by strict action against
     the violators.
After deliberations, the DTAB recommended that at the
     time of sale of oxytocin by retail chemists, the name and
     address of the purchaser, the name of the patient, and the
     quantity supplied shall be recorded. Such records shall be
     maintained for three years, and shall be kept open for
     inspection. This would help in not only maintaining the
     legitimate supply of the drug, but also to curb misuse of
     the drug through the legitimate sale channels.
6.17. The recommendations of DTAB came to be given statutory
     effect by an amendment to Rule 65 of the Drugs and
11
Cosmetics Rules,1945 vide Notification dated 30th August
        2013 published by the Ministry of Health and Family
        Welfare.
6.18.   On 05.11.2014, a meeting was convened by the Minister
        for Women and Child Development Ministry (MWCD),
        which was attended by Secretaries from various other
        Ministries. In this meeting, a suggestion was mooted that
        on account of the rampant misuse of Oxytocin, which led
        to cows and animals contracting diseases, and the illegal
        use for increasing milk production, could be effectively
        controlled if a “Government of India owned company may
        be allowed for production of this drug in the country and the
        private companies may be prohibited for the same.”

6.19. At the 69th DTAB meeting held on 22.04.15, the DTAB
        reiterated its earlier recommendation that Oxytocin “need
        not be prohibited as it has definite use for therapeutic
        purposes. Shri A. K. Tiwari of IVRI stated that the drug
        oxytocin is an essential drug in the veterinary practice. He
        added that the Department of animal husbandry had also
        earlier given his opinion that the ban on production and use
        of oxytocin for veterinary used is not recommended.” The
        DTAB observed that the misuse of the drug can be
        controlled by stricter control over the manufacture and sale
        of the drug, especially through clandestine channels. The
        DTAB noted that “Constant surveillance by the State Drug
        Regulatory Authorities and other regulatory authorities can
        only curb the misuse of the drug.”
12
6.20. In its 70th meeting dated 18.08.15, the DTAB was informed
     that dairy owners were getting the drug manufactured at
     dubious premises from unscrupulous suppliers. The DTAB
     noted that the raw material or the bulk drug was being
     clandestinely smuggled into the country from the border
     States, which was then being crudely manufactured
     clandestinely and sold to dairy owners at a very cheap rate.
     The DTAB reiterated its recommendation that “the drug
     legitimately manufactured is required for medical purposes
     and as such cannot be prohibited. The misuse of the drug in
     a crude form, can only be curbed through constant
     surveillance by the Regulatory Authorities.”

6.21. On 16.10.2015, the DCC in its 49th Meeting discussed the
     rampant misuse of Oxytocin through clandestine channels.
     It was inter alia recommended that officials from the State
     Drug Regulatory Authority must conduct periodic raids
     with the assistance of the Police at suspected outlets; and
     that the manufacture and sale of oxytocin formulations by
     the licenced manufacturers in the State, should be
     monitored regularly.
6.22. On 12.02.2018, the DTAB in its 78 th meeting considered
     the proposal to restrict the supply of Oxytocin formulations
     for human use only to registered hospitals and clinics in
     public and private sector to prevent misuse of the drug.
     The members deliberated upon the matter and “agreed on
     a draft notification for regulating, restricting the Oxytocin
13
formulations for human use to be supplied only to registered
     hospitals and clinics in public and private sector.”

          The DTAB accepted in principle the proposal to amend
     Rule 96 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 to ensure
     that bar­coding system is adopted for the manufacture and
     sale of Oxytocin formulations so as to ensure track and
     traceability of the product, to avoid its misuse.
The DTAB had further agreed to prohibit the import of
     Oxytocin formulations under
Section 10A
of the said Act
     for human as well as animal use.
6.23. On 09.04.2018, the DCC at the 53rd meeting was informed
     about the recommendations of the 78 th DTAB meeting held
     on 12.02.2018 to address the misuse of Oxytocin. The
     DCC, in principle, agreed with the recommendations of the
     DTAB.
6.24. On 18.04.2018, The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
     issued a Notification, containing “Draft Rules” viz. the
     “Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Rules, 2018, on which
     objections and suggestions were invited to within 45 days.
     The Draft Rules proposed to amend Rule 96 of the Drugs
     and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 to ensure that a 3­tier bar­
     coding system is adopted by licensed manufacturers of
     Oxytocin formulations to facilitate and trace their products.
The relevant extracts of Rule 1 and 2 are extracted
     hereinbelow for ready reference:
DRAFT RULES
         “1. (1) These rules may be called the Drugs and Cosmetics ( Amendment) Rules,
         2018.
14
(2) These rules shall come into effect after one hundred eighty days of the publication
           of the final rules in the Gazette of India. 2. In the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945,
           in rule 96, in sub-rule (1), after clause (xii) the following clause shall be inserted,
           namely:-
"(xiii) (A) The manufacturers of drug formulations of oxytocin shall print the details
           specified below to facilitate tracking and tracing of their products, namely:-
a. at primary level packaging of two dimensional barcode encoding unique and
           universal global product identification code in the 14 digits Global Trade Item
           Number format along with batch number, expiry date and a unique serial number of
           the primary pack;
b. at secondary level packaging of one or two dimensional barcode encoding unique
           and universal global product identification code in the 14 digits Global Trade Item
           Number format along with batch number, expiry date and a unique serial number of
           the secondary pack;
c. at tertiary level packaging of one dimensional barcode encoding unique and
           universal global product identification code in the 14 digits Global Trade Item
           Number format along with batch number, expiry date and a unique serial number of
           the Tertiary pack.
(B) The manufacturer of drug formulation shall maintain the data in the parent —
           child relationship for all three level of packaging and their movement in its supply
           chain.
(C) The data referred to in sub-rule (2) shall be uploaded on the central portal of the
           Central Government by the manufacturer or its designated agency before release of
           the drugs for sale or distribution. (D) The responsibility of the correctness,
           completeness and ensuring timely upload of data on the Central portal shall be that of
           the manufacturer.”

           The Central Government did not proceed with these
     Draft Rules, since the Impugned Notification came to be
     passed on 27.04.2018. As a consequence, the Draft Rules
     lapsed.
6.25. On 24.04.18, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in
     exercise of its powers under
Section 10A
of the Act issued a
     Notification completely prohibiting the import of ‘Oxytocin
     and its formulation in any name or manner’ into India.
6.26. On 27.04.18, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in
     exercise of its powers under
Section 26A
of the Act issued
     the      Impugned              Notification,            which          superseded               the
     Notification dated 17.01.2014, and directed that the drug
     Oxytocin shall be manufactured only by public sector
     undertakings or companies for domestic use. However, the
     manufacture of Oxytocin formulations for export purposes
     shall be open to both public and private sector companies.
15
The impugned Notification date 27.04.2018 is extracted
herein below for ready reference:
“G.S.R. 411(E).—Whereas the Hon’ble High Court of Himachal Pradesh,
    Shimla, has, in its judgment dated 15.3.2016 in CWPIL No. 16 of 2014
    titled ‘Court on its own motion’ versus State of Himachal Pradesh and
    others, observed that there is large scale clandestine manufacture and
    sale of the drug Oxytocin leading to its grave misuse, which is harmful to
    animals and humans;
And whereas, the said Hon’ble High Court also observed that the
    feasibility of restricting the manufacture of Oxytocin only in public sector
    companies and also restricting and limiting the manufacture of Oxytocin
    by companies to whom licenses have already been granted should be
    considered;
And whereas, the Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted under
section 5
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) considered
    the said issue in its meeting held on the 12th February 2018 and
    recommended that Oxytocin formulations for human use be regulated
    and restricted to be supplied only to registered hospitals and clinics in
    public and private sector to prevent misuse of the said drug;
And whereas, the Central Government, on the basis of the
    recommendations of the said Board and after examination of the matter,
    is satisfied that unregulated and illegal use of the drug Oxytocin is likely
    to involve risk to human beings or animals and that in the public interest
    it is necessary and expedient to regulate and restrict the manufacture,
    sale and distribution of the drug Oxytocin in the country to prevent its
    misuse by unauthorised persons or otherwise;
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by
section 26A
of the
    said Act, and in supersession of the notification number G.S.R. 29(E)
    dated 17th January, 2014, the Central Government hereby directs that
    the drug Oxytocin shall be manufactured for sale or for distribution or
    sold in the manner specified below, namely:­
(i)     The manufacture of Oxytocin formulations for domestic use shall
    be by public sector undertakings or companies only and the label of the
    product shall bear barcodes.
(ii)     The manufacture of Oxytocin formulations for export purposes
    shall be open to both public and private sector companies and the packs
    of such manufacture for exports shall bear barcodes.
(iii)   The manufacturers of active pharmaceutical ingredient of
    Oxytocin shall supply the active pharmaceutical ingredient only to the
    public sector manufacturers licensed under the Drugs and Cosmetics
    Rules, 1945 for manufacture of formulations of the said drug for domestic
    use.
(iv)    The manufacturers of active pharmaceutical ingredient of
    Oxytocin shall supply the said active pharmaceutical ingredient to the
    manufacturers in public and private sector licensed under the Drugs and
    Cosmetics Rules, 1945 for manufacture of formulations of the said drug
    for export purpose.
(v)     The Oxytocin formulations manufactured by the public sector
    companies or undertakings licensed under the Drugs and Cosmetics
    Rules, 1945 for domestic use shall supply the formulations meant for
    human and veterinary use only,­
16
(a) to the registered hospitals and clinics in public and private sector
         directly; or (b) to the Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana
         (PMBJP) and Affordable Medicines and Reliable Implants for Treatment
         (AMRIT) outlets or any other Government entity which may be specified
         by the Central Government for this purpose in the country which shall
         further supply the drug to the registered hospitals and clinics in public
         and private sector.
(vi)    The Oxytocin in any form or name shall not be allowed to be sold
         through retail Chemist.”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)

6.27. On 25.07.18, the DTAB in its 80th meeting recommended
     the amendment of the Impugned Notification by deleting
     Clause (v) and Clauses (vi) of the impugned Notification
     dated 27.04.18, so as to ensure availability of the drug for
     human use.
6.28. The Impugned Notification was subsequently amended by
     Notification     dated       21.08.18.        The     Notification        dated
     21.08.18 substituted clauses (v) and (vi), with the following
     amended clause (v),

     “(v) The Oxytocin formulations manufactured by the public sector
     companies or undertakings licensed under the Drugs and Cosmetics
     Rules, 1945 shall be distributed or sold in accordance with such
     rules.”

         As a consequence of this amendment, the effect of the
     impugned        notification        was      diluted,       and       Oxytocin
     formulations could be sold and distributed by the public
     sector companies or undertakings in accordance with the
     Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 as against the earlier
     restriction wherein Oxytocin formulations could only be
     supplied to the registered hospitals and clinics in public
     and private sector directly; or through the Pradhan Mantri
     Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) and Affordable
17
Medicines and Reliable Implants for Treatment (AMRIT)
     outlets.
6.29. On 30.07.2018, the DCC convened the 54 th meeting where
     the Chairman of the DCC apprised the Committee of the
     Notification dated 27.04.2018 (“Impugned Notification”) to
     restrict the manufacture for sale, sale or distribution of
     Oxytocin     to   only     to    public      sector     undertakings           or
     companies for domestic use.
The Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
     requested the State Drug Controllers to ensure the
     availability of Oxytocin in their respective States by placing
     purchase orders in time with Karnataka Antibiotics &
     Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (“KAPL”).
6.30. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare issued another
     Notification on the same date i.e. 21.08.18, wherein
     Oxytocin, which was included under Entry No. 382 of
     Schedule ‘H’ of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules,1945 was
     now shifted to Schedule ‘H1’ at Entry No. 47. Schedule H1
     refers to Rules 65 and 97 of the Drugs and Cosmetics
     Rules,1945.
As per the said Rules, Schedule H1 prescription drugs
     provide for stricter control and additional precautions
     when compared with Schedule H drugs.
The relevant extracts of the Rules are set out herein
     below for ready reference:
“65. Conditions of licences. ­ Licences in Forms 20, 20­A, 20­B, 20­F,
          20­G, 21 and 21­B shall be subject to the conditions stated therein and
          to the following general conditions­
18
….
(3)(1) The supply of any drug [other than those specified in Schedule X]
on a prescription of a registered medical practitioner shall be recorded
at the time of supply in a prescription register specially maintained for
the purpose and the serial number of entry in this regard shall be
entered on the prescription. The following particulars shall be entered in
the register:­
(a) serial number of the entry,
(b) the date of supply,
(c) the name and address of the prescriber,
[(d) the name and address of the patient, or the name and address of
the owner of the animal if the drug supplied is for veterinary use,]
(e) the name of the drug or preparation and the quantity or in the case of
a medicine made up by the licensee, the ingredients and quantities
thereof,
(f) in the case of a drug specified in Schedule C or Schedule H and
Schedule H1, the name of manufacturer of the drug, its batch number
and the date of expiry of potency, if any,
(g) the signature of the [registered Pharmacist] by or under whose
supervision the medicine was made up or supplied
…..
(h) the supply of a drug specified in Schedule H1 shall be
recorded in a separate register at the time of the supply giving
the name and address of the prescriber, the name of the patient,
the name of the drug and the quantity supplied and such
records shall be maintained for three years and be open for
inspection.
….
(6) The licensee shall produce for inspection by an Inspector appointed
under the Act on demand all registers and records maintained under
these Rules, and shall supply to the Inspector such information as he
may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of
the Act and Rules thereunder have been observed.
(7) Except where otherwise provided in these Rules, all registers and
records maintained under these Rules shall be preserved for a period of
not less than two years from the date of the last entry therein.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Rule it shall not be
necessary to record particulars in a register specially maintained for the
purpose if the particulars are recorded in any other register specially
maintained under any other law for the time being in force.
9) (a) Substances specified in Schedule H and Schedule H1 or
Schedule X shall not be sold by retail except on and in
accordance with the prescription of a Registered Medical
Practitioner and in the case of substances specified in Schedule X, the
prescriptions shall be in duplicate, one copy of which shall be retained
by the licensee for a period of two years.
(b) The supply of drugs specified in Schedule H and Schedule H1
or Schedule X to Registered Medical Practitioners, Hospitals,
Dispensaries and Nursing Homes shall be made only against the
signed order in writing which shall be preserved by the licensee
for a period of two years.
19
….
(11) The person dispensing a prescription containing a drug specified in
           Schedule H and Schedule H1 and Schedule X shall comply with the
           following requirements in addition to other requirement of these rules.
(a) the prescription must not be dispensed more than once unless the
           prescriber has stated thereon that it may be dispensed more than once;
(b) if the prescription contains a direction that it may be dispensed a
           stated number of times or at stated intervals it must not be dispensed
           otherwise than in accordance with the directions;
(c) at the time of dispensing there must be noted on the prescription
           above the signature of the prescriber the name and address of the seller
           and the date on which the prescription is dispensed.
…..
(11­A) No person dispensing a prescription containing substances
           specified in Schedule H and Schedule H1 or X, may supply any other
           preparation, whether containing the same substance or not, in lieu
           thereof.
97. Labelling of medicines.— 1 [(1) The container of a medicine for
           internal use shall—
(b) if it contains a substance specified in Schedule H, be labelled with
           the symbol Rx and conspicuously displayed on the left top corner of the
           label and shall also be labelled with the following words in legible black
           coloured font size in completely red rectangular box:
‘Schedule H Prescription Drug­ Caution: Not to be sold by retail without
           the prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner’
(e) if it contains a drug substance specified in Schedule H1, be
           labelled with the symbol Rx, which shall be in red and
           conspicuously displayed on the left top corner of the label, and
           shall also be labelled with the following words in legible black
           coloured font size in completely red rectangular box:
“SCHEDULE H1 PRESCRIPTION DRUG – CAUTION. –
           ­    It is dangerous to take this preparation except in
           accordance with the medical advice.
­    Not to be sold by retail without the prescription of a
           Registered Medical Practitioner.
(emphasis supplied)
7. The Impugned Notification dated 27.04.18 was challenged by

  the Respondents – BGP Products Operations GmBH, Mylan
  Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd., All India Drug Action Network, Neon
  Laboratories Ltd. and Ciron Drugs And Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd
  before the Delhi High Court in May 2018.
20
8. The Delhi High Court vide the Impugned Judgment dated

  14.12.2018       quashed   the   impugned   Notification   as   being
  arbitrary and unreasonable. It was held there was no scientific
  basis, and insufficient data to support the conclusion that the
  existing availability or manner of distribution of Oxytocin posed
  a risk to human life or animals, which is one of the pre­
  conditions for exercise of power under
Section 26A
of the Act.
The High Court held that the trigger and catalyst to the passing
  of the impugned Notification was the decision of the High Court
  of Himachal Pradesh, Shimla dated 15.03.2016 in Court
On Its
  Own Motion vs State of Himachal Pradesh6
, which did not
  consider that Oxytocin was an essential drug which was
  included in the NLEM. It was further held that the Central
  Government did not adequately weigh the danger to the lives of
  the users of Oxytocin i.e pregnant women and young mothers,
  nor did it consider the deleterious effect to the public generally
  and women particularly, of the possible restricted supply of a
  life­saving drug, if the manufacture is confined to one single
  public sector enterprise, namely Karnataka Antibiotic and
  Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (“KAPL”), which admittedly has no prior
  experience in manufacturing the drug. The High Court opined
  that the risk of such a consequence can be drastic since the
  scarcity of the drug, or even a restricted availability can lead to
  increased maternal fatalities during childbirth, impairing lives of
  thousands of innocent young mothers. It was held that there is
  no provision in the Act, including
Section 26A
, which authorized
  the Central Government to create a State monopoly in favour of
6 CWPIL No. 16 of 2014
21
one licensee, which did not fall within the protective ambit of
Article 19(1)(6)(ii).
9. We have heard the learned Counsel for the parties, and perused
   the pleadings and written submissions filed by the parties.
10. Mr.    Tushar     Mehta,      Learned       Solicitor   General      and    Mr.
   Vikramjeet Banerjee, Learned Additional Solicitor General of
   India appeared on behalf of the Appellant­Union of India.
The Senior Counsel for the Union of India assailed the
   impugned Judgment on the ground that the High Court had
   exceeded its jurisdiction by reviewing the sufficiency of the
   material relied upon by the Central Government in exercise of
   its legislative powers under
Section 26A
of the Act. The Counsel
   for the Union of India­Appellants submitted as follows:
10.1.       The exercise of power under
Section 26A
being
          legislative in     nature, the grounds for judicial review are
          limited. The       Court should exercise judicial restraint in
          review of policy         matters and cannot sit in appeal over a
          policy decision.         Since        the   impugned          notification
          creates a general restriction          with respect to all licensed
          manufacturers, it would not            amount     to     an     executive
          action.
10.2.       It   was    further       submitted   that    there      is   a
          presumption in favour of constitutionality or validity of a
          subordinate        legislation and the burden is upon the
          Respondents to show             that it is invalid. Reliance was
          placed on
Akadasi Pradhan              vs State of Orissa7, State
of

  7 1963 Supp (2) SCR 691 : AIR 1963 SC 1047
22
T.N. v. P. Krishnamurthy8,
UOI v.                  Cynamide          India   Pvt
.
Ltd9;
E    Merck      (India)        Limited    v.    UOI10
;
Macleods
       Pharmaceuticals Limited v. UOI11
,
Drug Controller                        General
       of India vs West Bengal Small Scale Manufacturers
12,
Uni­
       San Pharmaceuticals Ltd.& Anr. v UOI13
10.3.         It was further argued that the Court cannot
       exercise judicial          review over a legislative act on the
       basis of sufficiency or             insufficiency        of     material.    The
       Court cannot weigh and sift                through evidence or material
       relied upon by the Central Government in exercise of its
       powers under
Section 26A
. The Court cannot substitute its
       wisdom in place of the              wisdom          of         the       Central
       Government, particularly, in matters                     of     public     health
       and public interest.
Reliance was placed on
Union         of
       India vs Pfizer Ltd.14
,
Khoday Distilleries Ltd. v State                      of
       Karnataka15
,
Shimnit Utsch India (P) Ltd. v West Bengal
       Transport       Infrastructure        Development             Ltd.   &    Ors.
16,
Directorate of Film Festivals v. Gaurav Ashwin Jain & Ors.
17,
Academy of Nutrition Improvement v Union of India
18,
Vincent       Panikurlangara         v     Union    of    India
19,
Systopic
       Laboratories v Dr. Prem Gupta20
.
8 (2006) 4 SCC 517
9 1987 (2) SCC 720
10 2001 (90) DLT 16
11 2012 SCC Online Mad 1735
12 AIR 2000 Cal 133
13 AIR 2002 Ker 72: (2001) 1 KLJ 822
14 (2018) 2 SCC 39
15 (1996) 10 SCC 304
16 (2010) 6 SCC 303.
17 (2007) 4 SCC 737
18 (2011) 8 SCC 274
19 (1987) 2 SCC 165
20 (1994) Suppl. 1 SCC 160
23
10.4.       It was submitted that
Section 26
­A confers wide
powers on the Central Government to either regulate,
restrict or prohibit the manufacture, sale or distribution of
a drug, if the Central Government is “satisfied” that the
conditions mentioned in
Section 26
­A exist.
Section 26
­
A of the Act
reads as under:
26A. Powers of Central Government to prohibit manufacture, etc., of
    drug and cosmetic in public interest.­­­Without prejudice to any other
    provision contained in this Chapter, if the Central Government is
    satisfied, that the use of any drug or cosmetic is likely to involve any
    risk to human beings or animals or that any drug does not have the
    therapeutic value claimed or purported to be claimed for it or contains
    ingredients and in such quantity for which there is no therapeutic
    justification and that in the public interest it is necessary or
    expedient so to do, then, that Government may, by notification in the
    Official Gazette, regulate, restrict or prohibit the manufacture, sale or
    distribution of such drug or cosmetic.”


    The      Central        Government             was       not      bound     by
recommendations of the DTAB or the DCC. The Central
Government could independently arrive at a satisfaction
with regard to the factum of misuse of the drug.
10.5.       The      misuse         of    Oxytocin         was       consistently
deliberated by the DCC and DTAB since the past 21 years
from 1997 onwards, and formed the basis of the impugned
Notification. The minutes of the meetings of the DTAB and
DCC reveal the factum of misuse of Oxytocin and its
harmful effects on         milch animals and humans through
consumption of such milk. The subjective “satisfaction” of
the Central Government was arrived at after considering
24
the factum of   misuse which was deliberated by the DTAB
and DCC. Reliance was placed on a Chart on Oxytocin Data
Compilation from April 2015 to August 2018, which showed
that licensed manufacturers were manufacturing far more
Oxytocin than the legitimate national requirement, and
there was a considerable amount of “leakage” in the
production. The licensed manufacturers were responsible
for this leakage as they were supplying the bulk drug or API
manufactured by Hemmo Pharma to small illegal local
units for production of spurious Oxytocin. The Central
Government in public interest decided to strike a balance
between two competing interests i.e animal and human
health, and issued the impugned notification.
10.6.The   impugned    Notification   does   not   violate   or
extinguish the right to carry on any trade or business or
occupation of the Respondent­Manufacturers under
Article
19(1)(g).
The   Impugned Notification does not create a
State Monopoly in   favour of KAPL, since the Respondent­
manufacturers still have a right to export Oxytocin and sell
their products overseas. They are restricted only insofar as
domestic manufacture and distribution of Oxytocin is
concerned. The Impugned Notification merely regulates the
manufacture of Oxytocin, and does not completely prohibit
it.
Even otherwise, the High Court in the impugned
judgment has held in favour of the Appellants to the extent
that the power to restrict or prohibit under
Section 26A
can be used to “partially ban the manufacture of a drug i.e
25
prohibit its production by private manufacturers, and
         reserve it, so to speak for the public sector”.
Such a measure cannot be said to be ultra vires the
         power under the statute.
10.7.The Impugned Notification is protected under
Article
         19(6)
of the Constitution of India. It was contended that
Article 19(6)(ii)
of the Constitution empowers the State to
         enact laws with regard to any trade, business, industry or
         service,     to the complete or partial exclusion of citizens
         and private        entities.
In the alternative, even if the impugned notification
         does create a State monopoly, there is no requirement
         under
Article 19(6)
to enact legislation for the creation of
         the same. Restrictions on trade can be created by way of
         notification as well. Such a measure should be presumed
         to be reasonable and constitutional. Reliance was placed
         on
Akadasi    Pradhan       vs    State   of    Orissa
21,
Khoday
         Distilleries Ltd. v State of Karnataka22
,
Daruka & Co v Union
         of India & Ors.23
,
Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v.
         Punjab Drugs Manufacturers Assn.24
,
Municipal Committee,
         Amritsar v State of Punjab25
.
10.8.        It was further submitted that the impugned
         notification was          issued in furtherance of legitimate
         public interest towards          protection     of     bovine      heath,


21   1963 Supp (2) SCR 691 : AIR 1963 SC 1047
22   (1995) 1 SCC 574
23   (1973) 2 SCC 617
24   (1999) 6 SCC 247
25   (1966) 1 SCC 475
26
maintenance of animal         husbandry                standards       and
       protection of the environment. The impugned notification is
       also aimed to prevent the ill            effects of Oxytocin, which
       may affect human life due to             prolonged      consumption     of
       milk from milch animals injected                with    the    drug.   The
       Appellants placed reliance on
Articles 48
,                    48A
and
51A(g)
of the Constitution, which form part of the Directive
       Principles of State Policy.
11. Mr. Kapil Sibal, Mr. Colin Gonsalves and Mr. S. Ganesh, Senior
    Advocates appeared on behalf of the Respondents. Ms.
    Meenakshi Arora, Senior Advocate appeared for the Federation
    of Obstetric and Gynaecological Societies of India, and Mr.
    Jayant Mehta, Advocate appeared on behalf of the Indian
    Medical Association (Intervenors).
The Respondents submitted as follows:
11.1 The Respondents – BGP Products Operations GmBH,
        Mylan Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd., and Ciron Drugs And
        Pharmaceuticals     Pvt.     Ltd        have    been     manufacturing
        Oxytocin injections I.P. 5IU per 1 ml under a license issued
        under Part VII of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 for
        over three decades in India. They manufacture the drug
        only   for   domestic   use.       It    was    submitted      that   the
        Respondents have at least 50% of the market share in
        terms of manufacturing the drug. It was submitted that the
        Respondent­manufacturers do not sell the drug directly to
        the end consumer and only sell by way of wholesale dealing
        to licensed distributors and licensed retail chemists, and
        use the very same chain of distribution that KAPL uses.
27
The license issued to the manufacturers under
Part VII
     of the Act
also carries with it the license to sell by way of
     wholesale dealing within the territory of India.
As a consequence of the Impugned Notification, the
     license issued to these Respondents, for all practical
     purposes, stood cancelled and terminated.
The impugned Notification impinges and violates
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution in as much as it has
     completely      prohibited        the       Respondents        from
     manufacturing Oxytocin as they do not have a license to
     export the drug.
11.2 It was submitted that the Act provides for a level playing
     field in relation to the manufacture, distribution and sale of
     drugs by any person. Reliance was placed on
Section 16
read with
Schedule II of the Act
, to contend that the Act is
     concerned with “what” is manufactured, distributed or
     sold;   and, not with     “who”        is   the   manufacturer    or
     distributor or seller of the drug.
11.3 It was submitted that there was no relevant material or
     evidence placed before the Central Government for it to
     arrive at a “satisfaction” to completely prohibit the
     manufacture and sale of the drug by the Respondent­
     Manufacturers. It was submitted that neither the DCC nor
     DTAB    had   recommended         or    approved     the    complete
     prohibition   of   manufacture         of   Oxytocin   by    private
     licensees. It was further submitted that the statutory
     bodies had never recommended that the manufacture of
28
Oxytocin for domestic use be exclusively reserved for the
       public sector.
11.4 It     was     submitted      that      the   basis   of   the    impugned
       Notification was the decision of the High Court of Himachal
       Pradesh, Shimla dated 15.03.2016 in Court
On Its Own
       Motion     vs      State   of   Himachal      Pradesh26
,       which   was
       completely irrelevant for forming a “satisfaction” while
       issuing the Impugned Notification.
11.5 The Respondent­Manufacturers had never been prosecuted
       or even issued a Show­Cause Notice under the Act for any
       misuse or abuse of the drug, or violation of any provisions
       of the Act. There was no material or evidence to show any
       illegal or clandestine manufacture of Oxytocin by the
       Respondent­manufacturers who are licensed in accordance
       with law. The Chart on Oxytocin Data Compilation from
       April 2015 to August 2018 relied on by the Central
       Government to show unutilised quantity of the bulk drug
       or the API is wholly irrelevant, and was only prepared in
       August 2018, much after the impugned Notification was
       passed.
11.6 It was submitted that at the 78th meeting of the DTAB
       dated 12.02.18, which forms the basis of the Impugned
       Notification, the DTAB did not recommend to restrict the
       manufacture of Oxytocin to public sector companies only,
       nor did it determine that Oxytocin is likely to pose a risk to
       animals or humans.
26 CWPIL No. 16 of 2014
29
Rather, the DTAB agreed on a draft notification for
     regulating      and   restricting   the   supply   of   Oxytocin
     formulations only through registered hospitals and clinics
     in the ‘public and private sector’.
11.7 It was submitted that the Draft Rules published by the
     Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on 18.04.2018
     suggested and recommended a 3­tier system of barcoding of
     all   Oxytocin     formulations     manufactured   by   licensed
     manufacturers “so as to ensure track and traceability of the
     product to avoid its misuse”. The Central Government after
     10 days i.e., on 27.04.2018, took the drastic course of
     prohibiting the manufacture of the drug by all private
     sector licensees, and arbitrarily issued the impugned
     notification.
It was submitted that there is no material on record to
     show on what basis the Central Government suddenly
     changed its stand between 18.04.2018 and 27.04.2018
     from a 3­tier system of barcoding to that of complete
     prohibition on the manufacture of the drug by licensed
     private sector manufacturers.
11.8 It was submitted that the impugned notification is
     arbitrary, unreasonable and issued with complete non­
     application of mind. The power under
S. 26A
cannot be
     used in respect of a licensed drug, or in respect of a
     spurious,       misbranded,    adulterated   and    illegally   or
     clandestinely manufactured drug. The “use of any drug” as
     used in
Section 26A
means its use only for the intended,
30
declared and avowed purpose, and does not cover its
       misuse. Therefore,
Section 26A
could not have been
       invoked to prohibit/regulate/restrict the misuse of an
       essential and licensed drug.
11.9
Section 26A
cannot be invoked where the manufacture,
       sale or distribution of a drug is already “prohibited” under
Section 18
of the Act.
The Act
and the accompanying Rules
       provide for a robust mechanism for countering any
       contravention of the Act by licensed manufacturers.
       Therefore, there was no public necessity to completely
       prohibit all licensed manufacturers from manufacturing
       the drug.
11.10 The exercise of power under
Section 26A
cannot be said to
       be    legislative   in   nature,   since    it    is   based    on    the
       “satisfaction” of the Central Government alone. The Central
       Government in exercise of its executive/administrative
       powers under
Section 26A
, cannot create a State monopoly
       in the manufacture for domestic sale of a drug, and claim
       the protection of
Article 19(6)
of the Constitution. Reliance
       was placed on
Rai Sahab Ram Jawaya Kapur & Ors. v
       State of Punjab27
.
11.11 It was further submitted that Memorandum of Delegated
       Legislation     accompanying       the     Bill    No.65       of    1982
       introducing insertion of
Section 26A
in the Act, makes no
       reference to the exercise of powers under
Section 26A
as a
       form of delegated legislation.
27 (1955) 2 SCR 225
31
11.12 It   was   submitted        that    the   Impugned        notification
      discriminates        between         private     sector       licensed
      manufacturers and public sector manufacturers as a State
      monopoly has been created in favour of one public sector
      company, viz. KAPL. It was submitted that the impugned
      notification is hit by
Article 14
of the Constitution of India
      as being arbitrary, unreasonable, discriminatory and
      disproportionate.
11.13 By virtue of the Impugned Notification, only one public
      sector     company      viz.        Karnataka        Antibiotic     and
      Pharmaceuticals      Ltd.    (“KAPL”),    would      be   allowed    to
      manufacture the drug for domestic purposes. This would
      create a monopoly in favour of a public sector corporation,
      which could have a disastrous effect on the supply and
      availability of the drug to hospitals and patients in the
      country. It was further submitted that KAPL is completely
      inexperienced, since it obtained a license to manufacture
      the drug as recently as in April 2018 i.e. a couple of weeks
      before the impugned notification was passed. It was
      submitted that the manufacturing activity commenced in
      May 2018, after the impugned notification was passed.
11.14 It   was   further    submitted        that    the     Drug   Control
      Department, Drug Testing Laboratory Karnataka had
      found that several drugs manufactured by KAPL, as
      recently as in October 2018 were of Non­Standard Quality
      (NSQ).
32
11.15 It was further submitted that on 01.11.2017, the Cabinet
        Committee on Economic Affairs had given its in­principle
        approval for the strategic disinvestment of the Central
        Government’s 100% equity stake in KAPL though an
        auction sale. Since the Central Government owns at least
        51% equity stake in KAPL, this would mean that upon
        such disinvestment KAPL would no longer be a public
        sector company/undertaking.
11.16 It was contended that the Central Government could not
        have invoked
Section 26A
of the Act, since Oxytocin is an
        “essential drug” enlisted under the NLEM. The NLEM is
        listed in the 1st Schedule to the DPCO notified by the
        Central Government in exercise of its powers under
Section
        3
of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. It was submitted
        that power under
Section 26A
cannot be exercised in
        respect of NLEM drugs.
Section 6
of the EC Act gives the
        DPCO an overriding effect over other statutes. The
        impugned notification issued under Section 26A is ultra
        vires the said provision since it runs counter to the DPCO
        and the
Section 6
of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955.
12.   After having heard the Senior Counsel appearing for parties
      on both sides, we are of the view that the present group of
      appeals raise serious issues having far reaching implications.
      The twin issues which arise for consideration are on the one
      hand, the unregulated and clandestine manufacture of the
      drug Oxytocin, which is reportedly misused in milch animals;
      and on the other hand, the continued supply of an essential
      life­saving drug, which is used as the first line drug for
33
prevention and treatment of post­partum haemorrhage at the
time of childbirth.
The following substantial questions of law arise for
 consideration:
(i) Whether a drug included in the National List of Essential

   Medicines published under Schedule 1 of the Drugs

   (Prices Control) Order, 2013 notified under
Section 3
of

   the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 would be subject to

   the provisions of
Section 26A
of the Drugs and Cosmetics

   Act, 1940?
(ii) Whether    the impugned notification has resulted in

   creating a monopoly in favour of public sector companies,

   to the complete exclusion of private sector companies, and

   if so, whether it would be protected by
Article 19(6)(ii)
read

   with
Article 14
of the Constitution?
(iii) Whether   the   classification   made   by   the   impugned

   notification between licensed public sector and private

   sector companies, in the manufacture of the drug

   Oxytocin for domestic use, would achieve the object and

   purpose of preventing the unregulated and illegal use of

   the drug?
34
(iv) Whether it would be in public interest to restrict the

    manufacture of a life­saving drug for domestic use, to a

    single   public   sector   undertaking,    to   the   complete

    exclusion of the private sector companies, particularly in

    view of the high maternal mortality rates in the country?
(v) Whether there was relevant and objective material before

    the Central Government to form the basis of satisfaction

    to exercise the power to prohibit the manufacture of the

    drug by the private sector companies for domestic use,

    under
Section 26A
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940?
(vi) Whether   the   object    of   curbing    the   clandestine

    manufacture and unregulated use of the drug Oxytocin,

    which is covered by
Section 18
of the Drugs and

    Cosmetics Act, 1940, can be achieved by taking recourse

    to
Section 26A
by imposing a ban on the manufacture of

    licensed drugs by private sector companies?
(vii) Whether the exercise of power by the Central Government

    under
Section 26A
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940

    is legislative or executive in nature?
35
13.   We are of the considered view that this is a fit case to refer
      the matter to a larger Bench of three Judges to consider the
      aforesaid questions of law, and authoritatively pronounce
      upon the same. Accordingly, we direct the Registry to place
      the present group of appeals before the Hon’ble Chief
      Justice of India for necessary directions.
.......................................J.
                                       (ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE)




                                       ...…...............………………J.
                                                  (INDU MALHOTRA)

 New Delhi;
August 22, 2019.
36
REPORTABLE
           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

          CIVIL APPEAL Nos.6588­6591 OF 2019
     (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) Nos.3296­3299 of 2019)


Union of India & Anr. Etc.Etc.            ….Appellant(s)


                      VERSUS


BGP Products Operations GMBH
& Hagene Immermatt Weg. & Anr.
Etc.Etc.                                ….Respondent(s)


                  JUDGMENT

Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1.      I have had the advantage of going through an

elaborate drafted judgment proposed by my learned

sister Justice Indu Malhotra. I entirely agree with the

reasoning and the conclusion arrived at by her.
2.      I need not set out the facts and submissions of

learned counsel for the parties as the same have been

succinctly set out by my learned sister in her draft

judgment.
1
3.   Indeed, having heard very learned and persuasive

arguments of Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor

General for the appellants and Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned

senior counsel for the respondents at length and on

perusal of the record, I am also of the considered

opinion that having regard to the nature of controversy

and the myriad issues, which arise in the appeals,

they have far reaching consequences on the rights of

the citizens qua State and, in particular, the abstract

legal issues such as what is the nature of powers

exercised by the Central Government under
Section

26
­
A of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act
, whether it is

legislative or executive, because we find that there is

no decision of this Court so far on this issue. (see

observations of this Court in Union of India & Anr.
vs. Pfizer Ltd. & Ors., 2018 (2) SCC 39)
4.   Secondly, what are the essential ingredients for

invoking the powers under
Section 26
­
A of the Drugs

and Cosmetics Act
in relation to any Drug and
2
whether such power is in conflict with the exercise of

powers conferred under the
Essential Commodities

Act
.
5.     Thirdly,     whether    issuance      of    impugned

notification      has   resulted   in   creating   monopoly

(whether partial or full) in favour of the State and, if

so, whether it has satisfied the rigor of
Article 14
read

with
Article 19 (6)(ii)
of the Constitution of India.
6.     Lastly, depending upon the answer to the nature

of exercise of powers under
Section 26
­
A of the Drugs

and Cosmetics Act
, whether material relied on by the

Central Government can be held as sufficient to

sustain the impugned action.
7.     In my opinion, if the exercise of power under
Section 26
­
A of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act
is held

as being legislative in nature, the parameters to

examine the legality of the impugned notification

would be different whereas if it is held to be executive

in nature, the parameters to examine the legality of
3
impugned notification would be somewhat different

than the former one.
8.    In my considered opinion, the decision either way

on any of these questions will have its far reaching

effect on the rights and health of public at large and

especially on the rights and health of the teenage girls,

pregnant females and milching animals. It will also

decide the scope of the powers of the Central

Government under
Section 26
­
A of the Drugs and

Cosmetics Act
qua the rights of the persons, who are

engaged in business of manufacture and sale of Drugs

specified under the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act
read with
Essential Commodities Act
.
9.    In effect, in my opinion, it will not be a judgment

inter party but it will be in rem laying down the law on

the questions.
10.   It is for all these reasons, we have formulated the

questions for being answered on their respective
4
merits   in   paragraph   12   of   my     sister’s    drafted

judgment.
11.   Let the matter, therefore, be placed before

Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India under Rule VI (2) of

the Supreme Court Rules for being dealt with by the

larger bench for their authoritative pronouncement on

the questions framed and for the disposal of the

appeals accordingly.
12.   Since I have also formed an opinion to refer the

matter to be dealt with by the larger bench under VI

(2) of the Supreme Court Rules, I also do not consider

it necessary to give my opinion in detail on the

questions formulated.
……...................................J
                           [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]


New Delhi;
August 22, 2019
5