[Cites
24
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Vinit Garg vs University Grants Commission, on 29 August, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 961, (2019) 11 SCALE 658, (2019) 4 SCT 245, (2020) 1 ALL WC 276
Author:
Sanjiv Khanna
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
Uday U. Lalit
REPORTABLE


                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                            WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1510 OF 2018


                         VINIT GARG AND OTHERS                           …..       PETITIONERS(S)

                                                         VERSUS

                         UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
                         AND OTHERS                                      …..      RESPONDENT(S)



                                                           JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
The petitioners, 92 in number, in this writ petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India have prayed for directing the

                                 University Grants Commission, (hereinafter referred to as ‘UGC’)

                                 to issue a clarification that the degrees of Bachelor of Technology

                                 (hereinafter referred to as ‘B.Tech.’) acquired by them through

                                 open and distance learning mode from the Thapar Institute of

                                 Engineering and Technology, Patiala, (hereinafter referred to as

                                 ‘TIET, Patiala’) are valid, recognised and should be treated at par
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
RACHNA
Date: 2019.08.29
16:52:19 IST
Reason:
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                              Page 1 of 35
with degrees granted to regular students who have undertaken

        such courses in TIET, Patiala and other recognised universities.
2.      UGC is refusing to treat the technical degrees issued by TIET,

        Patiala under distance learning mode as valid, primarily for the

        reason that the B.Tech. courses conducted by TIET, Patiala were

        without their approval and approval of the All India Council for

        Technical Education (hereinafter referred to as ‘AICTE’).
3.      The petitioners who are diploma holders in Civil/ Computer

        Science/ Electrical/ Mechanical Engineering and working in the

        Government of Punjab have stated that they were selected for the

        B.Tech. degree course through the distance mode programme on

        the basis of competitive examination conducted by TIET, Patiala,

        which is deemed to be a university under
Section 3
of the

        University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to

        as ‘
UGC Act
’). The petitioners highlight that TIET, Patiala, rated as

        one of the premier engineering universities/colleges by the

        Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India,

        was set up in 1956 for promoting the study of technical education

        and has a 250 acre campus located in Patiala with teaching

        faculty strength of 391, including 301 Ph.D. holders, and
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                              Page 2 of 35
undertakes 11 undergraduate courses and 23 postgraduate

        courses. The total strength of students is more than 8000 with

        nearly 700 research students         doing Ph.D.     The   National

        Assessment and Accreditation Council, an autonomous body

        established by the Ministry of Human Resource Development,

        Government of India, has accredited the said institution/deemed to

        be university Grade ‘A’ status besides placing the institution in

        Tier-I accreditation. Distance Education Council (hereinafter

        referred to as ‘DEC’) vide its letter dated 3rd September, 2007 had

        granted provisional recognition to TIET, Patiala for offering

        programmes through distance mode for a period of one year on

        the basis of which TIET, Patiala had offered B.Tech.
degree in

        Civil / Computer Science / Electrical / Mechanical Engineering to

        working professionals who already had a diploma and had at least

        two years’ experience in the respective branches in engineering in

        the academic years 2007-08 and 2008-09. No admissions were

        made after 29th July, 2009. The petitioners had taken admission

        in the prestigious deemed to be university verily believing that all

        approvals were in place. The petitioners, relying on the judgment

        of this Court in
Bharathidasan University and Another v. All
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                             Page 3 of 35
India Council
for Technical Education and Others,1 have

         argued that a deemed to be university is not required to seek prior

         approval of the AICTE to start a department for imparting a course

         or a programme in technical education.
Reference was made to

         paragraph 49 of the judgment of this Court in
Orissa Lift

         Irrigation Corporation Limited v. Rabi Sankar Patro and

         Others2
(hereinafter referred to as Orissa Lift Irrigation

         Corporation Limited-I) to assert that TIET, Patiala, being a

         premier institution authorised to undertake courses and issue

         degrees in the aforesaid technical fields, was not required to take

         any approval of the AICTE.             Reliance was also placed on the

         order and judgment dated 10th April, 2018 in Civil Appeal Nos.
3697-3698        of    2018     in
Jawaharlal   Nehru   Technological

         University        v.    The     Chairman    and    Managing    Director,

         Transmission Corporation of Telangana Limited
. There were

         no off-campus centres or study centres and all instruction,

         practicals and examinations were conducted on the campus of

         TIET, Patiala using the same faculty and infrastructure as used in

         the traditional B.Tech. courses. The studies were of high standard

         as the students had to pass 42 subjects with practicals to earn the

1   (2001) 8 SCC 676
2   (2018) 1 SCC 468
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                  Page 4 of 35
degree. Out of 1168 students admitted to the B.Tech. courses

        through distance learning mode, only 822 students were awarded

        degree.
4.      We may at the outset record that the petitioners have given up

        and not raised the contention that the decision authored by one of

        us (Uday Umesh Lalit, J.) in Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation

        Limited-I is per incuriam for the ratio is contrary to the decision in
Bharathidasan University
(supra).
Indeed, such contention

        cannot be accepted as the latter decision has been considered in

        Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation Limited-I.
5.      We record our inability to accept the contentions raised by the

        petitioners, for they are misconstruing the judgment of this Court

        in Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation Limited-I which settles the

        controversy beyond any doubt and debate.
6.
The UGC Act
was legislated for coordination and determination of

        standards of higher education in India with commandment to the

        UGC to take such steps as may be necessary for promotion and

        coordination of higher education in universities and institutions.

        The UGC, therefore, fixes and ensures maintenance of standards

        in teaching, examination and research in higher education. To fix
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                              Page 5 of 35
and enforce these standards, the UGC has framed rules and

         regulations, and issues guidelines under the
UGC Act
.
7.       Referring to the UGC Act in Annamalai University Represented

         by Registrar v. Secretary to Government, Information and

         Tourism Department and Others,3 this Court had observed that

         no relaxation can be granted with regard to the basic things

         necessary for conferment of a degree and if the mandatory

         provisions are not complied with by an administering authority, the

         action would be void.           Decision of this Court in Annamalai

         University (supra) has some relevance for it had examined the

         interplay between the provisions of the
UGC Act and Indira

         Gandhi National Open University Act, 1985
(hereinafter referred to

         as ‘
Open University Act
’) and the purported repugnance between

         the two.
The UGC Act
, it was observed, was enacted to make

         provisions for coordination and determination of standards in

         universities and for this purpose, the UGC was established by the

         Central Government in terms of
Section 4
of the UGC Act with its

         powers and functions laid down in Chapter III.
Section 12
of the

         UGC Act provides for functions of the UGC, relevant provisions of

         which are reproduced as under:
3   (2009) 4 SCC 590
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                              Page 6 of 35
“12. Functions of the Commission.⎯It shall be the
                        general duty of the Commission to take, in
                        consultation with the Universities or other bodies
                        concerned, all such steps as it may think fit for the
                        promotion and co-ordination of University
                        education and for the determination and
                        maintenance      of   standards     of    teaching,
                        examination and research in Universities, and for
                        the purpose of performing its functions under this
                        Act, the Commission may⎯
                                   x            x            x
(d)   recommend to any University the measures
                         necessary for the improvement of University
                         education and advise the University upon the
                         action to be taken for the purpose of implementing
                         such recommendation;
x            x            x
(i)   require a University to furnish it with such
                         information as may be needed relating to the
                         financial position of the University or the studies in
                         the various branches of learning undertaken in
                         that University, together with all the rules and
                         regulations relating to the standards of teaching
                         and examination in that University respecting each
                         of such branches of learning;”
Section 22
of the UGC Act relates to the rights of a

        university/deemed university/institution to confer degrees and sub-
section (1) thereof reads as under:
“22. Right to confer degrees.⎯(1) The right of
                        conferring or granting degrees shall be exercised
                        only by a University established or incorporated by
                        or under a Central Act, a
Provincial Act
or a State
                        Act or an institution deemed to be a University
                        under
Section 3
or an institution specially
                        empowered by an Act of Parliament to confer or
                        grant degrees.”
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                            Page 7 of 35
In Annamalai University (supra), the
Open University Act
, it

        was held, was enacted to establish and incorporate an open

        university at the national level for the introduction and promotion

        of open university and distance education systems in the

        educational pattern of the country and for coordination and

        determination of standards in such system. Recording the

        contention that the distance education programme attenuates the

        rigidity of the traditional system requiring attendance in class

        rooms that disincentivises many learners, this Court in Annamalai

        University (supra), referring to the
UGC Act
and the role of the

        UGC, had observed as under:
“40.
The UGC Act
was enacted by Parliament in
                        exercise of its power under Entry 66 of List I of the
                        Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India
                        whereas the
Open University Act
was enacted by
                        Parliament in exercise of its power under Entry 25
                        of List III thereof. The question of repugnancy of
                        the provisions of the said two Acts, therefore, does
                        not arise. It is true that the Statement of Objects
                        and Reasons of Open University Act shows that
                        the formal system of education had not been able
                        to provide an effective means to equalise
                        educational opportunities. The system is rigid inter
                        alia in respect of attendance in classrooms.
                        Combinations of subjects are also inflexible.
41. Was the alternative system envisaged under the
Open University Act
in substitution of the formal
                       system is the question. In our opinion, in the
                       matter of ensuring the standard of education, it is
                       not. The distinction between a formal system and
                       informal system is in the mode and manner in
                       which education is imparted.
The UGC Act
was
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                          Page 8 of 35
enacted for effectuating co- ordination and
                          determination of standards in universities. The
                          purport and object for which it was enacted must
                          be given full effect.
42. The provisions of the
UGC Act
are binding on all
                       universities whether conventional or open. Its
                       powers are very broad. The Regulations framed
                       by it in terms of clauses (e), (f), (g) and (h) of sub-
section (1) of
Section 26
are of wide amplitude.
                       They apply equally to open universities as also to
                       formal conventional universities. In the matter of
                       higher education, it is necessary to maintain
                       minimum standards of instructions. Such minimum
                       standards of instructions are required to be
                       defined by UGC. The standards and the co-
ordination of work or facilities in universities must
                       be maintained and for that purpose required to be
                       regulated. The powers of UGC under
Sections
                       26(1) (f)
and
26(1) (g)
are very broad in nature.
                       [...]”
8.       Annamalai University (supra) makes a reference to an earlier

         judgment in
State of Tamil Nadu and Another v. Adhiyaman

         Educational and Research Institute and Others4
in which this

         Court had, with regard the enactment of the
UGC Act
by

         Parliament in exercise of power under Entry 66 of List-I, observed

         as under:
“41. What emerges from the above discussion is as
                        follows:
(i) The expression ‘coordination’ used in Entry 66 of
                           the Union List of Seventh Schedule of the
                           Constitution does not merely mean evaluation. It
                           means harmonisation with a view to forge a
                           uniform pattern for a concerted action according to

4   (1995) 4 SCC 104
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                           Page 9 of 35
a certain design, scheme or plan of development.
It, therefore, includes action not only for removal
                         of disparities in standards but also for preventing
                         the occurrence of such disparities. It would,
                         therefore, also include power to do all things which
                         are necessary to prevent what would make
                         ‘coordination’ either impossible or difficult. This
                         power is absolute and unconditional and in the
                         absence of any valid compelling reasons, it must
                         be given its full effect according to its plain and
                         express intention.”


                 Reference        was    also   made   to
Osmania       University

         Teachers’ Association v. State of Andhra Pradesh and

         Another5
wherein, with regard to the responsibility entrusted upon

         the UGC under the
UGC Act
, it was held as under:
“30. The Constitution of India vests Parliament with
                        exclusive authority in regard to coordination and
                        determination of standards in institutions for higher
                        education. The Parliament has enacted the
UGC
                        Act
for that purpose. The University Grants
                        Commission has, therefore, a greater role to play
                        in shaping the academic life of the country. It shall
                        not falter or fail in its duty to maintain a high
                        standard in the universities. Democracy depends
                        for its very life on a high standard or general,
                        vocational      and      professional     education.
                        Dissemination of learning with search for new
                        knowledge with discipline all round must be
                        maintained at all costs. It is hoped that University
                        Grants Commission will duly discharge its
                        responsibility to the nation and play an increasing
                        role to bring about the needed transformation in
                        the academic life of the Universities.”




5   (1987) 4 SCC 671
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                      Page 10 of 35
9.      Accordingly, in Annamalai University (supra) it was held that the
UGC Act
would prevail over the
Open University Act
, observing:
“59. The provisions of the
UGC Act
are not in conflict
                        with the provisions of the
Open University Act
. It
                        is beyond any cavil of doubt that the
UGC Act
shall prevail over the
Open University Act
. It has,
                        however, been argued that the
Open University
                        Act
is a later Act.        But we have noticed
                        hereinbefore that the nodal Ministry knew of the
                        provisions of both the Acts. The Regulations were
                        framed almost at the same time after passing of
                        the
Open University Act
. The Regulations were
                        framed at a later point of time. Indisputably, the
                        Regulations embrace within its fold the matters
                        covered under the
Open University Act
also.”
10.     In Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation Limited-I, reference was

        made to All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1989

        (hereinafter referred to as ‘
AICTE Act
’) and distinction was drawn

        between ‘technical education’ and ‘technical institution’ as defined

        in
Section 2(g)
and
2(h)
respectively to observe that functions of

        the AICTE stipulated under sub-clauses (a), (d), (e), (f), (l) and (n)

        of
Section 10
of the AICTE Act are concerned with the broader

        facets of ‘technical education’, while functions enumerated under

        sub-clauses (k), (m), (p) and (q) deal with matters concerning

        ‘technical institutions’ and the functions as set out in sub-clauses
(g) and (o) apply to both ‘technical institutions’ and universities

        imparting ‘technical education’.        Sub-clauses (b), (d) and (f) of
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                    Page 11 of 35
Section 10
deal with, inter alia, coordination of the technical

        education in the country at all levels; promoting innovation,

        research and development, establishment of new technologies,

        generation, adoption and adaptation of new technologies to meet

        the development requirements; and promoting effecting link

        between technical education and systems and other relevant

        systems. Drawing on the distinction between ‘technical education’

        and ‘technical institution’ and multifarious functions of the AICTE

        prescribed by
Section 10
of the AICTE Act, it was held that the

        AICTE is the sole repository of power to lay down parameters or

        qualitative norms for ‘technical education’ and it would, therefore,

        not matter whether the term ‘technical institution’ would exclude a

        university/deemed to be university.       What should be course

        content, what subjects should be taught and what should be the

        length and duration of the courses as well as the manner in which

        those courses be conducted is a part of the larger concept of

        ‘technical education’. Any idea or innovation in that field is also a

        part of the concept of ‘technical education’ and must, as a matter

        of principle, be in the exclusive domain of the AICTE.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                             Page 12 of 35
11.     Accordingly, the Court in Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation

        Limited-I distinguished the decision in
Bharathidasan University
(supra), which had, relying upon the definition in clause 2(h) on

        the meaning of the term ‘technical institution’, held that a deemed

        to be university established under a state law was entitled to start

        courses in ‘technical education’ without any approval of the

        AICTE. This was done by limiting Bharathidasan University’s

        (supra)         application      to    courses/programmes            integrally

        adjunct/connected to the sanctioned and permitted courses and

        programmes, and not to new and different courses/programmes

        like award of B.Tech. degrees through distance learning mode.

        On role of the AICTE and distance learning as a mode for

        acquiring B. Tech degrees, it was held in Orissa Lift Irrigation

        Corporation Limited-I that:
“48. Technical education leading to the award of
                        degrees in Engineering consists of imparting of
                        lessons in theory as well as practicals. The
                        practicals form the backbone of such education
                        which is hands-on approach involving actual
                        application of principles taught in theory under the
                        watchful eyes of demonstrators or lecturers. Face
                        to face imparting of knowledge in theory classes is
                        to be reinforced in practical classes. The practicals,
                        thus, constitute an integral part of the technical
                        education system. If this established concept of
                        imparting technical education as a qualitative norm
                        is to be modified or altered and in a given case to
                        be substituted by distance education learning, then
                        as a concept AICTE ought to have accepted it in
                        clear terms. What parameters ought to be satisfied
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                      Page 13 of 35
if the regular course of imparting technical
                         education is in any way to be modified or altered, is
                         for AICTE alone to decide. The decision must be
                         specific and unequivocal and cannot be inferred
                         merely because of absence of any guidelines in
                         the matter. No such decision was ever expressed
                         by AICTE.
On the other hand, it has always
                         maintained that courses leading to degrees in
                         Engineering cannot be undertaken through
                         distance education mode. Whether that approach
                         is correct or not is not the point in issue. For the
                         present purposes, if according to AICTE such
                         courses ought not to be taught in distance
                         education mode, that is the final word and is
                         binding—unless rectified in a manner known to
                         law. Even National Policy on Education while
                         emphasising the need to have a flexible, pattern
                         and programmes through distance education
                         learning in technical and managerial education
,
laid down in
Para 6.19 that AICTE will be
                         responsible for planning, formulation and
                         maintenance of norms and standards including
                         maintenance of parity of certification and ensuring
                         coordinated and integrated development of
                         technical and management education. In our view,
                         whether subjects leading to degrees in
                         Engineering could be taught in distance education
                         mode or not is within the exclusive domain
                         of AICTE. The answer to the first limb of the first
                         question posed by us is therefore clear that without
                         the guidelines having been issued in that behalf
                         by AICTE expressly permitting degree courses in
                         Engineering through distance education mode, the
                         deemed to be universities were not justified in
                         introducing such courses.”


                From the dictum laid down above, it is plainly clear that

        approval of the AICTE was mandatory for starting the aforesaid

        courses. Admittedly, approval of the AICTE was not obtained by

        TIET, Patiala.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                      Page 14 of 35
12.     We would now revert to the question of approval of the UGC. In

        Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation Limited-I, reference was

        made to paragraphs 4 and 5 of the ‘Guidelines for Establishing

        New Departments Within the Campus, Setting Up of Off-Campus

        Centre(s)/Institution(s)/Off-Shore Campus and Starting Distance

        Education Programmes by the Deemed Universities’ (hereinafter

        referred to as ‘2004 Guidelines’), issued by the UGC which dealt

        with the procedure to be followed by deemed to be universities

        offering distance education programmes, which read as under:
“4.   Distance education.—The deemed to be
                         university could offer the distance education
                         programmes only with the specific approval of the
                         Distance Education Council (DEC) and the
                         University Grants Commission (UGC). As such,
                         any study centre(s) can be opened only with the
                         specific approval of Distance Education Council
                         and UGC.
5.    Ex    post      facto    approval.—The      deemed
                         universities shall obtain the ex post facto approval
                         of the GOI/UGC/DEC, whichever applicable within
                         a period of six months in the following cases:
I.    Continuation of all the departments opened in the
                         campus of the deemed universities and off-campus
                         study     centre(s)/institutions/off-shore  campus
                         started without the prior approval of the UGC.
II.   Distance education programme(s)/study centre(s)
                         started without the specific approval of the
                         DEC/UGC.”


                Paragraph 4 makes it crystal clear that post the 2004

        Guidelines, every deemed to be university would require
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                     Page 15 of 35
approvals of the UGC and DEC, for starting any degree course

        through open and distance learning mode. The condition of

        approval was mandatory. It is not the case of the petitioners or

        TIET, Patiala that the latter had taken prior approval of the UGC

        for the B.Tech. degrees obtained through distance learning mode.
Paragraph 5 relates to ex-post facto approval of the UGC/DEC for

        continuation of distance education programmes/study centres

        started without specific approval of the UGC/DEC. Paragraph 5 is

        not applicable in the present case as the degree courses were

        started post enactment of the 2004 Guidelines.
13.     Faced and conscious of the clear violation of paragraph 4 of the

        2004 Guidelines and absence of the AICTE’s approval, learned

        senior counsel for the petitioners had relied on paragraph 49 of

        Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation Limited-I, which reads as

        under:
“49. We now move to the second limb of the first
                        question. Under the 1994 AICTE Regulations, “no
                        courses or programmes shall be introduced by any
                        technical institution, university including a deemed
                        university or university department or college
                        except with the approval of the Council”.
                        Bharathidasan declared the said Regulation to the
                        extent it required a university to have approval for
                        introducing any courses or programmes in
                        technical education, to be bad. Same thought was
                        amplified in Assn. of Management of Private
                        Colleges to say that affiliated colleges of the
                        University were entitled to the same protection.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                    Page 16 of 35
The question is, whether a deemed to be university
                         is also entitled to the same protection. The matter
                         can be considered under two categories:
(a) The first category could be of a deemed to be
                       university, which was conferred such status for its
                       excellence in a field of technological subject, is now
                       desirous of introducing courses or programmes
                       integrally connected with the area in respect of
                       which it was conferred deemed to be university
                       status. For example, an Engineering college which
                       because of its excellence in the field was conferred
                       deemed university status, now wishes to introduce
                       courses in subjects like Robotics or Nano
                       Technology which are Engineering subjects and
                       integrally connected with its own field of excellence.
(b)   The second category could be of a deemed to be
                         university which was conferred such status for its
                         excellence in subjects which are completely
                         unrelated to the field in which new courses are
                         sought to be introduced. For example, an
                         institution engaged in teaching Fine Arts and
                         Music, for its excellence in that chosen field—or for
                         that matter an institution engaged in teaching Law
                         had been conferred such status. Can such a
                         deemed to be university claim immunity from
                         regulatory control of AICTE and say that it is
                         entitled, as a matter of right, to introduce courses
                         in Engineering on the strength of the decision of
                         this Court in Bharathidasan?”


                In our opinion, the petitioners and TIET, Patiala are

        misconstruing paragraph 49 of Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation

        Limited-I.          The aforesaid paragraph refers to the 1994

        Regulations issued by the AICTE under which no courses or

        programmes could be introduced by any technical institution/

        university, including a deemed university or a university
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                      Page 17 of 35
department or college, except with approval of the AICTE.
In
Bharathidasan University
(supra) this mandate of the 1994

         Regulations was declared to be bad to the extent that it had

         required the university to take approval for introducing any course

         or programme in technical education.
Same opinion was

         expressed in
Association of Management of Private Colleges

         v. All India Council
for Technical Education and Others6 to

         state that affiliated colleges of the university are entitled to the

         same          protection.       Thereupon,   in   Orissa   Lift   Irrigation

         Corporation Limited-I a distinction was made by creating two

         categories of deemed to be universities – Category-I, i.e. such

         deemed to be universities that have been conferred status of

         ‘excellence’ in the field of technical subjects and desire to

         introduce courses or programmes ‘integrally connected’ with the

         area of subjects for which they had been conferred deemed to be

         university status. Clarifying this, the Court had cited an example of

         an engineering college of excellence that has been conferred

         deemed to be university status and now wish to introduce courses

         in new or specialised subjects like robotics and nanotechnology,

         which subjects were integrally connected to the university’s own


6   (2013) 8 SCC 271
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                     Page 18 of 35
field of excellence. Category-II would be of those universities that

        have been conferred deemed to be university status for

        excellence in subjects, but want to introduce new courses

        unrelated to the field for which they were conferred status of

        excellence. In the latter category, the deemed to be university

        cannot claim immunity from regulatory control of the AICTE and

        must take approval of the AICTE. Paragraph 49, we would like to

        clarify, deals with universities including deemed to be universities

        imparting higher education for degree courses/programmes

        through regular mode. This paragraph does not specifically deal

        with or confer any right upon the deemed to be universities to start

        distance education courses, even if integrally connected with the

        approved regular courses.
14.     The foregoing analysis becomes clear when we read Orissa Lift

        Irrigation Corporation Limited-I in its entirety, particularly the

        immediately preceding paragraph, i.e. paragraph 48 as quoted

        above, wherein it has been specifically stipulated and mandated

        that whether subjects leading to degrees in engineering would be

        taught in distance education mode or not is within the exclusive

        domain of the AICTE.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                            Page 19 of 35
15.     In view of the aforesaid statutory provisions and lack of prior

        approval of the UGC or AICTE, we do not think that TIET, Patiala

        was competent to award graduation degrees in technical courses

        via distance mode.
16.     In Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation Limited-I, the Court also

        made a distinction between students who had taken admission in

        deemed to be universities offering technical degrees through

        distance learning in the academic years 2001 to 2005 and 2005-

        2006 onwards. The reason for distinction was paragraph 5 of the

        2004 Guidelines and ex-post facto approvals granted by the UGC

        and DEC to deemed to be universities that had offered technical

        degrees in the academic years 2001-2005. It was held that the

        said exercise of grant of ex-post facto approvals was completely

        uncalled for and contrary to law and illegal. Accordingly, the ex

        post facto approvals were set aside with the consequential

        directions to recall all the engineering degrees granted pursuant to

        the said approvals. However, conscious that the ex post facto

        approvals were in terms of paragraph 5 of the 2004 Guidelines,

        while suspending the degrees awarded to students who had been

        enrolled during the academic years 2001 to 2005, the Court had

        given these students an opportunity to appear and clear such
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                            Page 20 of 35
examination under joint supervision of the AICTE-UGC. It was

        observed:
“57. [T]he matter is required to be considered with
                        some sympathy so that interest of those students
                        who were enrolled during the academic sessions
                        2001-2005 is protected. Though we cannot wish
                        away the fact that the concerned Deemed to be
                        Universities flagrantly violated and entered into
                        areas where they had no experience and started
                        conducting courses through distance education
                        system illegally, the over bearing interest of the
                        concerned students persuades us not to resort to
                        recall of all the degrees in Engineering granted in
                        pursuance of said ex-post-facto approval.
                        However, the fact remains that the facilities
                        available at the concerned Study Centres were
                        never checked nor any inspections were
                        conducted. It is not possible at this length of time
                        to order any inspection. But there must be
                        confidence and assurance about the worthiness of
                        the concerned students. We, therefore, deem it
                        appropriate to grant some chance to the
                        concerned students to have their ability tested by
                        authorities competent in that behalf. We,
                        therefore, direct that all the degrees in
                        Engineering granted to students who were
                        enrolled during the academic years 2001 to 2005
                        shall stand suspended till they pass such
                        examination under the joint supervision of AICTE-
                        UGC in the manner indicated hereinafter. Further,
                        every single advantage on the basis of that
                        degree shall also stand suspended.”


                The aforesaid directions were not in respect of any

        engineering degree granted by deemed to be universities to

        candidates admitted/enrolled post the academic year 2004-2005.
Grant of any degree for students enrolled post the academic year

        2004-2005 was held as contrary to law and illegal, and could not
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                     Page 21 of 35
be treated as regular and at par with the regular degrees.
Therefore, paragraph 49 would not be of any avail to the

          petitioners.
17.       We would also refer to the second round of litigation as

          applications were filed seeking clarification and modification of the

          directions in Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation Limited-I. The

          decision dated 22nd January, 2018 in
Orissa Lift Irrigation

          Corporation Limited v. Rabi Sankar Patro and Others7
(hereinafter referred to as ‘Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation

          Limited-II’) had decided several applications of diploma holders

          who had enrolled for engineering or B.Tech. degree in deemed to

          be universities through distance learning mode. One of the

          contentions raised in the applications was that the deemed to be

          universities awarding engineering degrees through distance

          learning mode in Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation Limited-I

          were not institutes of excellence in the field of engineering and,

          thus, there would be a distinction between engineering degrees

          awarded through distance education mode by deemed to be

          universities declared as institutions of excellence and the degrees

          awarded by other deemed to be universities. This contention was
7
(2018) 2 SCC 298
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                               Page 22 of 35
squarely rejected by referring to the fact that engineering degrees

        through distance education mode awarded by Vinayaka Mission’s

        Research Foundation in Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation

        Limited-I had been also declared to be invalid, though the said

        institution in its field of activity and excellence included the subject

        of engineering.           Dealing with other contentions raised by the

        applicants, the Court in Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation

        Limited-II held as under:
“25. We now turn to the general submission advanced
                        by all the learned counsel that the candidates after
                        securing the degrees in Engineering through
                        distance education mode, have advanced in career
                        and that their ability was tested at various levels
                        and as such requirement of passing the
                        examination in terms of the judgment be dispensed
                        within their case. We cannot make any such
                        exception. The infirmity in their degrees is basis
                        and fundamental and cannot be wished away. At
                        the same time, we find some force in their
                        submission that if the suspension of their degrees
                        and all advantages were to apply as indicated in
                        the judgment, the candidates concerned may lose
                        their jobs and even if they were to successfully
                        pass the test, restoration of their jobs and present
                        position would pose some difficulty.
The Court, therefore, granting a one-time relaxation to the

        candidates who had enrolled themselves during the academic

        years 2001-2005, held that candidates would, in terms of the

        judgment in Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation Limited I, be

        eligible to appear for the test conducted by the AICTE.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                    Page 23 of 35
18.     Given the aforesaid ratio, we reject the plea that the petitioners

        are entitled to relief as was granted to the petitioners in Orissa

        Lift Irrigation Corporation Limited I and II. This contention is

        unacceptable for the reason that in Orissa Lift Irrigation

        Corporation Limited I and II, no relief was granted to the

        candidates who had taken admission in 2005 or thereafter. Relief

        in the form of one-time relaxation vide examination to be

        conducted          by       the   AICTE   was   granted   to    those

        candidates/students who had taken admission in academic years

        beginning from 2001 and till 2004-2005.
19.     TIET, Patiala in their additional affidavit have referred to the

        correspondence with the DEC expressing their desire to start

        B.Tech. courses in Civil Engineering/ Computer Sciences and

        Engineering/ Electrical Engineering/ Mechanical Engineering

        through distance learning programme, vide their letter dated 17th

        May, 2006 and reply of the DEC vide its letter dated 16th June,

        2006 that such approvals can only be granted after evaluation of

        the course material by an expert committee and for which TIET,

        Patiala should apply in the prescribed format with requisite fee.

        Thereupon, TIET, Patiala had submitted an application in the

        required format and an expert committee constituted by the
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                             Page 24 of 35
Chairman of the DEC had evaluated infrastructure and other

        services etc., provided by TIET, Patiala. The expert committee,

        which      included the          Director,   School   of   Engineering   and

        Technology, IGNOU, gave a favourable report subsequent to

        which the letter of provisional recognition dated 31st August, 2007

        was issued by the DEC permitting TIET, Patiala to start the

        course. Reference was also made to the press note dated 23rd

        May, 2007 released by Press Information Bureau, Government of

        India, which had published a list of universities including deemed

        to be universities offering distance education.               This list also

        included TIET, Patiala.
20.     As already stated, the petitioners have also relied upon letter

        dated 3rd September, 2007 written to TIET, Patiala by the DEC

        providing them provisional recognition for one year in programmes

        offered through distance mode. The said letter reads as under:
“INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY
                   Maindan Garhi, New Delhi – 110068, India
                   Phone: (O) 91-11-29535923-32, 29533340 (O)
                   Telefax: 91-11-295536668
                   Email:
[email protected]
Website: www.ignou.ac.in/www.dec.ac.in

                                DISTANCE EDUCATION COUNCIL

                   F.No. DEC/Univ/State/07/5580
                   Dated: 03.09.2007
                   Prof. Swaraj Basu
                   Director
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                    Page 25 of 35
Sub: Provisional Recognition

                   Dear Sir,

                       This has reference to your application to the
                   Distance Education Council requesting for recognition of
                   programmes offered through distance mode by your
                   University.
We would like to inform you that your university has
                   been granted provisional recognition for offering
                   programmes (approved by the statutory bodies of your
                   university) through distance mode for a period of one-
                   year w.e.f. the date of issue of this letter.
However, for recognition of your institution for
                   offering programmes through distance mode in the next
                   academic year, i.e. from June-July, 2008, you are
                   requested to submit a fresh application in the prescribed
                   format developed by the DEC which may be
                   downloaded from the DEC website: www.dec.ac.in.
We would also like to inform you that that DEC has
                   decided not to insist on territorial jurisdiction to be
                   allowed by institutions in offering programmes through
                   distance mode and on that matter, universities should
                   be governed by their own Acts and Statutes.
With regards,

                                                            Yours sincerely
                                                                       Sd/-
(Swaraj Basu)

                   The Vice Chancellor
                   Thapar University
                   Patiala – 147004, Punjab”


                The aforesaid letter states that TIET, Patiala had made an

        application to the DEC requesting for recognition of programmes

        offered through distance mode and that they had been granted
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                    Page 26 of 35
provisional recognition for offering such programmes. The letter

        records that an application was submitted by TIET, Patiala but no

        specific reference was made to the programmes or courses

        offered nor the date when the application was filed is indicated.
The letter also does not refer to approval by the AICTE or UGC. It

        had further required TIET, Patiala to submit a fresh application for

        the next academic year from June-July 2008.
21.     We have already referred to the 2004 Guidelines issued by the

        UGC and the AICTE Act to hold that TIET, Patiala had failed to

        take their prior approval before starting B. Tech. degree courses

        through distance education mode. Provisional recognition by the

        DEC being contrary to the law would not matter for at best the

        DEC would be equally guilty for violating the law in terms of 2004

        Guidelines issued by the UGC and the AICTE Act.              The legal

        issue stands foreclosed and cannot be argued in view of the clear

        dictum and ratio enunciated in Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation

        Limited-I. We would also refer to the notification issued by the

        Government of India on 1st March 1995 quoted in Orissa Lift

        Irrigation       Corporation     Limited-I   on   distance   education

        programme by deemed to be universities etc., which was to the

        following effect:
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                               Page 27 of 35
“On the recommendation of the Board of Assessment
                   for Education Qualifications, the Government of India
                   has decided that all the qualifications awarded through
                   Distance Education by the Universities established by
                   an Act of Parliament or State Legislature, Institutions
                   Deemed to be Universities under
Section 3
of the UGC
                   Act, 1956 and Institutions of National importance
                   declared under an Act of Parliament stand automatically
                   recognized for the purpose of employment to posts and
                   services under the Central Government, provided it has
                   been approved by Distance Education Council, Indira
                   Gandhi Nation Open University, K 76, Hauz Khas, New
                   Delhi-110016 and wherever necessary by All India
                   Council for Technical Education, I.G. Sports Complex,
                   I.P. Estate, New Delhi.”


                Clearly, therefore, in terms of the said notification also

        approval of the AICTE was required.
22.     TIET, Patiala accepts that no approval, provisional or otherwise,

        was granted for the next academic year, i.e. June-July 2008, yet

        B.Tech. degree programmes through distance mode for the

        academic year June-July 2008 were offered by TIET, Patiala

        contrary to the statutes and law.
23.     TIET, Patiala, to justify admissions in the academic year 2008-

        2009 in their additional affidavit, have referred to correspondence

        and submission of application to the UGC for offering B. Tech.

        degree courses through distance education programme for the

        academic session i.e. 2008-2009.           This is surprising as TIET,

        Patiala had not applied to the UGC for the previous academic
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                  Page 28 of 35
session i.e. 2007-2008. Thereafter, the additional affidavit refers

        to correspondence exchanged between the DEC and TIET,

        Patiala pursuant to which a Joint Expert Committee was

        constituted comprising of members of the UGC, DEC and AICTE

        to assess the administration and management of distance learning

        programmes offered by TIET, Patiala, which panel had visited

        their premises on 2nd June, 2009 and had recommended the

        recognition of as many as seven programmes for a period of five

        years.      However, the Central Government had, in exercise of

        powers under
Section 20
of the UGC Act and in terms of a policy

        decision, issued a notification on 29th July, 2009 that the B.Tech.

        degrees would not be offered through open distance learning

        programme.           In view of this policy decision, the DEC had to

        immediately withdraw the permission to various institutions to

        conduct B.Tech. degree courses through distance education

        mode and no further student was admitted in the current year and

        thereafter. However, the notification states that those who had

        already been admitted would have to pass practicals and written

        examination as may be prescribed so as to obtain the B.Tech.

        degrees through distance education.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                             Page 29 of 35
24.     The submission/contention of the petitioners and TIET, Patiala

        completely overlooks several developments, correspondence and

        policy decisions taken which have been noticed in Orissa Lift

        Irrigation Corporation Limited-I, particularly the notification

        issued by the AICTE on 28th November, 2005 clearly stating that

        no technical institution of the Government/ Government aided/

        private institution, whether affiliated or not to any University, shall

        start new courses or increase the intake for the same without

        approval of the AICTE. Notification issued by the Ministry of

        Human Resource Development, Government of India on 5th April,

        2006 in exercise of powers vested in the Central Government

        under
Section 20(1)
of the UGC Act and
Section 20(1)
of the

        AICTE Act had clarified the role of the UGC and AICTE for

        maintaining standards of education and that the deemed to be

        universities       are     required   to   maintain   minimum   standards

        prescribed by the AICTE for various courses within the jurisdiction

        of the said Council. This was followed by a joint public notice

        issued by the AICTE, UGC and DEC on 4th February, 2007 to the

        following effect:
“It has come to the notice of the University Grants
                   Commission (UGC), the All India Council for Technical
                   Education (AICTE) and the Distance Education Council
                   (DEC), that some Universities, Institutions Deemed to
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                  Page 30 of 35
be Universities and other institutions are offering
                   technical education programmes in the ‘distance mode’
                   without the approval of the concerned Statutory Council.
All Universities, Institutions, Deemed to be
                   Universities and other institutions are hereby cautioned
                   that running such programmes and giving misleading
                   advertisements regarding unapproved ‘distance mode
                   courses and programmes of study, shall attract severe
                   action under the provisions of applicable laws, including
                   that of de-recognition and withdrawal of institutional
                   approval;
It is hereby clarified, in the public interest that there
                   are a number of courses or programmes of study
                   leading to Degree/Diploma or other awards in
                   Engineering & Technology, Management, Computer
                   Applications, Architecture & Town Planning, Pharmacy,
                   Hotel Management & Catering Technology, Applied Arts
                   and Crafts, etc. which have not been approved by the
                   appropriate Statutory Council for being conducted in the
                   ‘distance mode’. It is also reiterated that all courses or
                   programmes of study in the ‘distance mode’ require the
                   approval of DEC.”


                The public notice had cautioned that the universities/

        institutions/deemed to be universities offering technical education

        programme through distance education mode without approval of

        concerned statutory authorities were doing so in contravention of

        the law and would be treated severely. The last sentence of the

        notification had made it clear that in addition to the concerned

        statutory councils, all courses and the programmes offered for

        study in distance mode would require approval of the DEC. A

        memorandum of understanding was arrived at on 10th May, 2007

        among the UGC, AICTE and DEC to work in close co-operation in
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                         Page 31 of 35
pursuit of excellence in technical and general education being

        imparted through distance and mixed mode in the country.
25.     In any case these aspects and contentions were fully considered

        in Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation Limited-I and it has been

        held that B.Tech. degrees could not have been awarded through

        distance learning mode without the approval of the DEC and

        without any specific approval of the AICTE and UGC and award of

        such degrees without approval of the three were invalid and

        cannot be recognised.
26.     Functioning of the DEC has come in for rather strong criticism in

        several quarters. Till 2006, the DEC had approved about 45

        programmes           of     23   universities   out   of   applications   for

        approximately 200 programmes. In 2007, the DEC repealed the

        programme approval process and the system of institutional

        recognition was started.           As per this decision, all programmes

        approved by respective authorities of the institution were deemed

        to have recognition of the DEC. As a result of this decision, within

        a short span, the number of approved programmes increased to

        over 3000 in 2010. The provisional recognition letter of the DEC

        would uniformly state that before starting such programmes, the
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                    Page 32 of 35
required approvals from other regulatory bodies have to be

        obtained but the said stipulation was not followed in most cases

        and provisional recognition was granted by the DEC to technical

        programmes through distance mode without recognition/approval

        of the AICTE or UGC. This had paved way for commercialisation

        and was a retrograde step which had resulted in deterioration of

        the quality of open learning programmes/degrees. After burning

        its fingers, the DEC switched back to programme recognition. The

        DEC itself was finally wound up in 2013.
27.     In Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation Limited-I, this Court, took

        note of the order dated 29th December, 2012 issued by the

        Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India

        in view of the recommendations suggested in the Madhava Menon

        Committee report for regulating the standards of education being

        imparted through distance mode to hold that the unilateral

        approvals of the DEC were invalid. It was observed:
“55. Para 3 of the notification dated 22.11.1991 which
                        constituted DEC shows that there was no
                        representation for any Member or representative
                        of AICTE. The provisions of
IGNOU Act
show that
                        the Study Centres as defined in the
IGNOU Act
are that of IGNOU and not of any other University
                        or Institution. The concept of distance education
                        under sub-clause (v) of
Section 5
is also in relation
                        to the academic programmes of IGNOU. It
                        undoubtedly has powers under Clauses (vii), (xiii)
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                      Page 33 of 35
and (xxiii) to cooperate with other Universities but
                         the
IGNOU Act
nowhere entitles IGNOU to be the
                         Controlling Authority of the entire field of distance
                         education of learning across the Country and in
                         relation to programmes of other Universities or
                         Institutions as well. The Order dated 29.12.2012
                         issued by MHRD therefore correctly appreciated
                         that DEC created under statute 28 of
IGNOU Act
could not act as a regulator for other Universities.
                         In any event of the matter, the policy Guidelines
                         issued from time to time made it abundantly clear
                         that DEC alone was not entitled to grant
                         permission for open distance learning and
                         appropriate permissions from the requisite
                         authorities were always required and insisted
                         upon. Despite such policy statements, DEC went
                         on granting permissions without even consulting
                         AICTE. Such exercise on part of DEC was
                         completely without jurisdiction.
The said order, the Court noted, had definitively vested the

        UGC and AICTE, among other statutory regulators, with powers to

        regulate technical courses imparted through distance learning

        mode and made it mandatory for institutions intending to impart

        such courses to seek their approval and recognition, observing as

        under:
“[T]he Central Government in exercise of the powers
                   conferred by sub-
section 1
of
section 20
of the UGC
                   1956 and the
AICTE Act, 1987
hereby directs: -
The UGC and AICTE as already empowered under
                   their respective Acts, would also act as a regulator for
                   Higher Education (excluding Technical Education) and
                   Technical Education through open & Distance Learning
                   (ODL) mode respectively Universities are empowered
                   under their respective Act to offer any programme
                   course including in Technical Education in the
                   conventional mode. However, if they offer any
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                       Page 34 of 35
programme/course in ODL mode they would require
                   recognition from the UGC, AICTE, NCTE and other
                   such regulators of the conventional mode of education
                   in those areas of study.”
28.     In view of the aforesaid discussion, we do not find any merit in the

        present Writ Petition and the same is dismissed. However, in the

        facts of the case, there would be no order as to costs.
.....................................J.
                                                                  (UDAY U. LALIT)




                                                     ......................................J.
                                                              (SANJIV KHANNA)

NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 29, 2019.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1510 of 2018                                        Page 35 of 35