[Cites
97
, Cited by
10
]
Supreme Court of India
Vithaldas Jagannath Khatri (D) Through ... vs The State Of Maharashtra Revenue And ... on 29 August, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1021, (2019) 11 SCALE 704
Author:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench:
K.M.Joseph
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Reportable

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.6006 OF 2009


                         VITHALDAS JAGANNATH KHATRI (D)
                         Through SHAKUNTALA ALIAS SUSHMA & ORS.                      ...Appellant(s)

                                                        VERSUS

                         THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA REVENUE
                         AND FOREST DEPARTMENT & ORS.                              ...Respondent(s)

                                                   JUDGMENT
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1.    The socialistic agenda of the nascently formed Indian State with

                         large landless poor population was given an impetus inter alia by a

                         number of State legislations for re-distribution of agricultural land, by

                         putting a ceiling limit on the same, and then allotting it to the landless

                         poor. We are concerned here with the
Maharashtra Agricultural Lands

                         (Ceiling on Holdings) Act
1961 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘said Act’).
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2019.08.30
17:22:35 IST
The said Act also went through many amendments top fine tune different
Reason:
aspects, most importantly the aspect of plugging loopholes, whereby
1
owners having land in excess of the ceiling limit would endeavour to

somehow re-distribute it among the family to bring it within the ceiling

limit, or at least, to reduce the excess land. The objective of the said Act

can well be deciphered from its preamble, which reads as under:
“
An Act
to impose a maximum limit (or ceiling) on the holding of
      agricultural land in the State of Maharashtra; to provide for the
      acquisition and distribution of land held in excess of such ceiling;
      to provide that the lands taken over from undertakings and the
      integrity of which is maintained in compact blocks, for ensuring
      the full and efficient use of the land for agriculture and its efficient
      management through corporations (including a company) owned
      or controlled by the State, be granted to such corporations or
      company; and for matters connected with the purposes aforesaid”
2.    Chapter III of the said Act made provisions restricting transfers and

acquisitions and the consequences of contraventions.           The relevant

Sections falling in the Chapter are reproduced hereunder:
“
Section 8
- Restriction on transfer

      Where a person, or as the case may be, a family unit holds land in
      excess of the ceiling area on or after the commencement date, such
      person, or as the case may be, any member of the family unit shall
      not, on and after that date, transfer any land, until the land in
      excess of the ceiling area is determined under this Act.
Explanation :- In this section, "transfer" means transfer, whether by
      way of sale, gift, mortgage with possession, exchange, lease,
      assignment of land for maintenance, surrender of a tenancy or
      resumption of land by a landlord or any other disposition, whether
      by act of parties made inter vivos or by decree or order of a court,
2
tribunal or authority (except where such decree or order is passed
in a proceeding which is instituted in such Court, Tribunal or
before such authority before the 26th day of September, 1970), but
does not include transfer by way of sale or otherwise of land for
the recovery of land revenue or for sums recoverable as arrears of
land revenue, or acquisition of land for a public purpose under any
law for the time being in force.”

….           ….            ….           ….            ….
Section 10
- Consequences of certain transfers and acquisitions
of land

(1) If -
(a) any person or a member of a family unit, after the 26th day of
September, 1970 but before the commencement date, transfers any
land in anticipation of or in order to avoid or defeat the object of
the Amending Act, 1972, or
(b) any land is transferred in contravention of
section 8
, then, in
calculating the ceiling area which that person, or as the case may
be, the family unit, is entitled to hold, the land so transferred shall
be taken into consideration, and the land exceeding the ceiling area
so calculated shall be deemed to be in excess of the ceiling area for
that holding, notwithstanding that the land remaining with him or
with the family unit may not in fact be in excess of the ceiling area.
If by reason of such transfer, the holding of a person, or as the case
may be, of the family unit is less than the area so calculated to be
in excess of the ceiling area, then all the land of the person, or as
the case may be, the family unit shall be deemed to be surplus
land; and out of the land so transferred and in possession of the
transferee [unless such land is liable to forfeiture under the
provisions of sub-section (3)], land to the extent of such deficiency
shall, subject to rules made in that behalf, also be deemed to be
surplus land, notwithstanding that the holding of the transferee
may not in fact be in excess of the ceiling area.
3
Explanation :- For the purposes of clause (a) 'transfer' has the same
meaning as in
section 8
.
All transfers made after the 26th day of September, 1970 but
before the commencement date, shall be deemed (unless the
contrary is proved) to have been made in anticipation of or in order
to avoid or defeat the object of the Amending Act, 1972.

Explanation :- For the purposes of this sub-section, a transfer shall
not be regarded as made on or before 26th September, 1970 if the
document evidencing the transfer is not registered on or before that
date or where it is registered after that date, it is not presented for
registration on or before the said date.

(2) If any land is possessed on or after the commencement date by
a person, or as the case may be, a family unit in excess of the
ceiling area, or if as a result of acquisition (by testamentary
disposition, or devolution on death, or by operation of law) of any
land on or after that date, the total area of land held by any person,
or as the case may be, a family unit, exceeds the ceiling area, the
land so in excess shall be surplus land.

(3) Where land is acquired in wilful contravention of
section 9
,
then as a penalty therefor, the right, title and interest of the person,
or as the case may be, the family unit or any member thereof in the
land so acquired or obtained shall, subject to the provisions of
Chapter IV, be forfeited, and shall vest without any further
assurance in the State Government:
Provided that, where such land is burdened with an encumbrance,
the Collector may, after holding such inquiry as he thinks fit and
after hearing the holder and the person in whose favour the
encumbrance is made by him, direct that the right, title and interest
of the holder in some other land of the holder equal in extent to the
land acquired in wilful contravention of
section 9
, shall be
forfeited to Government.
4
Section 11
- Restriction on partition

      Where any land held by a family is partitioned after the 26th day of
      September, 1970, the partition so made shall be deemed (unless the
      contrary is proved) to have been made in anticipation of or in order
      to avoid or defeat the object of the Amending Act, 1972, and shall
      accordingly be ignored, and any land covered by such partition
      shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be the land held by
      the family; and the extent of share of each person in the land held
      by the family shall be taken into consideration for calculating the
      ceiling area in accordance with the provisions of
section 3
.
Explanation :- For the purposes of this section, 'partition' means
      any division of land by act of parties made inter vivos, and
      includes also partition made by a decree or order of a court,
      tribunal or authority.”
3.    A reading of the aforesaid provisions would show that a fiction is

sought to be created (whereby a transfer made from a prior date, of

26.9.1970, is sought to be nullified, other than by way of a bona fide

transaction) by the Amendment Act of 1972, by providing for the cut-off

date of 26.9.1970 qua any transactions or transfers, transactions after

which date being deemed to be transfers in anticipation, or in order to

defeat the object of the Amendment Act of 1972. It may also be noticed

that it is only by the Amendment Act of 1975 that the commencement

date was specified as 2.10.1975. Thus, while normally all the relevant

provisions of the legislation, having come into force from 2.10.1975, the
5
provisions would have applied from that date, i.e. 2.10.1975, a legal

fiction was created to apply the provisions retrospectively, from

26.9.1970. It does appear from the submissions that as the legislation

appears to have been debated and been in contemplation for some time,

the apprehension of transactions during this window of time, in

anticipation of the amendments, was taken care of by the aforesaid

provisions.
4.    The factual matrix has to be examined in the context of the

aforesaid provisions, and in the present appeal we are practically

concerned with one document, which is the Partition Deed dated

31.1.1970, which has been duly registered, i.e., both the document and its

registration are undisputedly before the cut-off date of 26.9.1970.
5.    The Partition deed has been executed between five parties – late

Shri Vithaldas Jagannath Khatri and his then minor son and three minor

daughters. It may, however, be noticed that two of the minor daughters

attained majority before the commencement date of 2.10.1975, though

they were not major on 26.9.1970.        In terms of this document, the

agricultural land of the Hindu Undivided Family (‘HUF’) is sought to be

divided by mentioning all the parties as part of the HUF. The lands were
6
stated to be used jointly and shares in the lands were given to both, the

minor son and the daughters stating as under:
“….Party No.2 to 51 have to take the education & to see that each
      of them take it freely & to provide for the expenses therefore and
      to see that each of them will meet the expenses out of their own
      property and that no dispute took place between them in future,
      therefore we are executing & keeping with us this deed of
      partition…..”
6.         After setting out the aforesaid recital, the property falling to each

of the parties is mentioned and post that, before the signatures, it is

further stated as under:
“In this way we have partitioned over estate, the property fallen to
           the share of party have taken its possession & became the full
           owner thereof. Now nobody is concerned with the property of
           others. Out of us for the education & marriage purpose of party
           No.2 to 5 and for the benefits of our family and for the successful
           future, we of our free will & consideration executed & kept this
           deed of partition, on this 31st day of January 1970.”
7.         We may also notice that the prelude to the aforesaid Partition Deed

on account of an earlier Partition Deed executed between Vithaldas and

his father Jagannath, on 20.1.1955, when a separate provision was also

made through a Gift Deed by Jagannath, in favour of the wife of

Vithaldas.
8.         On the provisions of the said Act coming into force, the Surplus
1
Children of Vithaldas
7
Lands Distribution Tribunal (for short ‘SLDT’) instituted proceedings in

exercise of suo moto powers in respect of the return filed under
Section

12
of the said Act by Vithaldas, which Section falls in Chapter IV, dealing

with ‘surplus land’.     In the course of the assessment proceedings

regarding surplus land, the holdings of the entire family were taken into

consideration, as in terms of
Section 2 (11)
of the said Act, the family

would include an HUF, which is joint in estate, or possession, or

residence.   A family unit, under
Section 11-A
of the said Act, for

definition, has referred to
Section 4
, defining ‘land held by a family unit’.

In terms of order dated 19.11.1976, 60 acres and 27 gunthas of land of

late Vithaldas was declared surplus. This order was assailed before the

Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal, Bombay Bench, Nagpur, which

dismissed the appeal on 16.2.1977, resulting in proceedings being filed

by Vithaldas, before the Bombay High Court, Nagpur Bench. In terms of

order dated 2.3.1982, learned Single Judge of the Nagpur Bench of the

Bombay High Court remitted the matter back to the SLDT for fresh

inquiry, on the ground of lack of adequate opportunity provided to

Vithaldas and others to present their case.
9.    On remand, a fresh order was passed by the SDO, Chikhali
8
District, Buldana on 7.5.1984. Various aspects of holding of Vithaldas

were examined. On the matter being revisited in these proceedings, land

measuring 59 acres and 35 gunthas was deemed surplus, under
Section

3(2)
of the said Act, while excluding (a) Potkharab land of Vithaldas, to

the extent of 12.16 acres; (b) Field Survey No.106, which was stated to

be vesting with the wife of Vithaldas, having been gifted by her father-in-

law Jagannath, and found that the same continued to be in possession of

Jagannath, as also recorded in the Record of Rights and crop statements;
(c) the land allotted to the two major daughters of Vithaldas, Shakuntala

and Durgadevi.
10.   The appeal proceedings were lodged by Vithaldas, his wife, the son

and the third daughter, Beladevi, under
Section 33
of the said Act. The

other two minor daughters, who had attained majority before 2.10.1975,

however, did not file the appeal as they were apparently satisfied with the

view adopted by the SDO.          The State also filed cross-objections

challenging the exclusion of the land by the SDO qua (b) & (c) aforesaid.

Since the two elder daughters were not aggrieved, they were neither the

appellant, nor the respondent before the appeal proceedings. Nor did the

State take care to implead them, despite having filed cross-objections qua
9
their land. The appeal court, however, dismissed the appeal, and allowed

the cross-objections vide order dated 3.12.1984. Since the land of the

two elder daughters is the only concern, in this matter, the rationale for

allowing the cross-objections has been set forth.
11.   The principal plea, which found favour with the appellate

authority, was that the Partition Deed dated 31.1.1970 was against the

principles of Hindu law to the extent it gave a share to minor daughters in

ancestral land. The land is stated to have also continued in the possession

of Vithaldas. Even though the Partition Deed was pre the cut-off date of

26.9.1970, it was opined that the document could be looked into, in a

case like the present one, where the property was apportioned to the two

daughters who were not entitled to a share.
12.   The aforesaid appellate order was challenged by Vithaldas and his

wife in the writ proceedings before the Bombay High Court, Nagpur

Bench, but that petition was dismissed vide oral judgment dictated over a

period of 7.9.1987 to 15/16.9.1987. There were certain other aspects also

urged in those proceedings, but they are not relevant for the present

appeal. The High Court agreed with the finding that the daughters, not

having a share in the property, a Partition Deed could not have conferred
10
any interest on them, albeit it was before the cut-off date of 26.9.1970.
13.   An intra-court appeal was preferred, which was dismissed vide

impugned order dated 27.11.2007. The Division Bench agreed with the

findings that the partition effected vide Partition Deed dated 31.1.1970

was unnatural as it alienated properties to minor daughters, and that a

female child could not get a share in the ancestral property, even though

it was effected before the relevant date of 26.9.1970. Once again, as

reflected in the records, the factum of cultivation of land by late Vithaldas

was taken into account. The attainment of the age of majority by the

elder two daughters, before the commencement date, 2.10.1975, was also

ignored as irrelevant.
14.   The appellants before the Division Bench also sought to raise the

issue of the two elder daughters not being arrayed as parties in the cross-

objections, even though their existing rights were being affected.

Further, it was argued that none of the members of the HUF had assailed

the Partition Deed on any account. These pleas also did not find favour

on the ground that it was late Vithaldas who sought to lose the land and,

in effect, it was for him to see how to confer the rights on his two elder

daughters. The two elder daughters were held to form part of the family
11
unit.
15.     The Special Leave Petition (‘SLP’) was filed only by late

Vithaldas, through his legal representatives. The two elder daughters are,

thus, appellants as legal heirs of late Vithaldas, in the present

proceedings. This is of significance as the contention of respondents is

that the two elder daughters only stepped into the shoes of late Vithaldas,

and that they cannot de novo start proceedings in their own rights. Leave

was granted on 31.8.2009, and the interim order of status quo was

directed to continue throughout. On 23.11.2016, during the course of

hearing, an order was passed to obtain clarity, whether in pursuance of

the Partition Deed, the transfer of rights was ever reported to the revenue

authorities, in terms of Sections 148 & 149 of the Maharashtra Land

Revenue Code, 1966. The action, if any, taken by the revenue authorities

was also not apparently reflected in the records before the Court. Time

was granted to place on record the requisite material qua the

developments post the execution of the Partition Deed.
16.     An additional affidavit was filed on behalf of the appellants,

affirmed in March, 2017. On the appellants seeking the record from the

Tehsil Office of the concerned district, they received a response,
12
informing them that records from 1970 to 1975 are in a mutilated

condition and that the mutation register for the period from 1964 to 1978

is not traceable. The crop statement was not available for the period

1970-1972 for Village Mangrul, while for Village Babulgaon the crop

statement was not available for the period 1970-1973, for Survey No.14.

It was thus notified that the crop statement for Survey No. 12 was not

available for the period 1971-1972. The records made available, however,

do show that from 1972- 1976, for Survey No. 12, and from 1973-1976,

as gathered for Survey No. 14, the two daughters were shown as

occupants, but through their guardian. It may be noted that somehow, on

attaining the age of majority, apparently no endorsement was made qua

the elder two daughters on that aspect. The Record of Rights also shows

a similar position.
17.   The picture which emerges from the documents produced is that in

pursuance of the Partition Deed, which was obviously produced, both for

the Record of Rights and the Crop Register, the names of the two elder

daughters were entered though through their guardian, late Jagannath (the

grandfather), as they were minors at the relevant time, while the

corresponding endorsement on their attaining majority, before the
13
commencement date 2.10.1975 was seemingly not made.
18.     We heard Mr. Krishnan Venugopal, learned Senior Counsel for the

appellants and Mr. N.R. Katneshwarkar, Advocate on behalf of the

respondent-State.
Deemed Fiction:
19.     The legislation in question is a beneficial piece of legislation and,

indeed, must be given the widest amplitude, the object being to distribute

land among the landless. The preamble quoted aforesaid sets forth the

object of the said Act.             But, it is equally true that in giving wider

amplitude to such legislation, it cannot be that the Court interprets the

words of the statute beyond its plain reading reflecting the intent of the

legislation. A preamble has its limitations insofar as being treated as an

aid for the interpretation of a statute. It cannot restrict or enlarge the

provisions of the Act.2 Thus, the provisions have to be read, to see

whether there is any ambiguity, requiring any further aid for construction

of those sections, or whether they are explicit and clear in their meaning.3
20.     On a reading of the provisions of Chapter III, including
Sections 8
,
2
Raymond Ltd. v. State of Chattisgarh (2007) 3 SCC 79;
State of West Bengal v. Union of India
AIR
1963 SC 1241
3
The Sussex Peerage Case (1844) 11 Cl & Fin 85 (HL).
14
10 & 11 of the said Act, there is no ambiguity as would require any aid to

construct the meaning of those Sections.
21.     The commencement date would be the date from which the

provisions would come into force. However, the amendment of 1972

created a deemed fiction by inserting the provision for setting at naught

transactions that may have occurred on a prior date, i.e., from 26.9.1970.

The result is that the transactions or transfers in this window of about five

years would also be hit by the provisions of the said Act insofar as the

determination of surplus land is concerned. The object was “to prevent

circumvention by dubious and indirect methods.4” This is the view also

adopted by this Court in
Gurdit Singh v. State of Punjab
, 5 but then this

Court had gone on to observe that that was no reason why a construction

should be put on the Section which its language could hardly bear.
The

legislation in question in
Gurdit Singh v. State of Punjab6
was a similar

one,
The Pepsu Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1955
. It would be

difficult to accept and countenance a situation where, irrespective of

limitations imposed in considering the past time period, any transaction

could be so assailed.
In the wisdom of the legislature, the window of five
4
Gurdit Singh v State of Punjab
(1974) 2 SCC 260
5
(supra)
6
(supra)
15
years is provided as sufficient for scrutinizing transactions which could

be called “dubious and indirect methods” to evade the result of the said

Act. This is also reinforced by the provisions of
Section 18
, dealing with

determination of the surplus area of land where clause (b) specifically

provides as under:
“18. (a)       xxxx        xxxx          xxxx       xxxx
(b) whether any land transferred between the period from 26 th day
      of September, 1970 and the commencement date, or any land
      partitioned after the 26th day of September, 1970, should be
      considered or ignored in calculating the ceiling area as provided by
      sub-section (1) of
section 10
or
section 11
;”


      Thus, once again, it is clearly stated that the lands transferred
between the period 26.9.1970 and the commencement date (2.10.1975) is
what is to be ignored in calculating the ceiling area.
22.   The effect of the aforesaid provision is that any land, even if it is

obtained by partition or other transfer, after the date of 26.9.1970 would

be included for the purposes of calculation of surplus land, as land of the

person who so transferred the same.
23.   The legislature has also taken another caution.         The second

Explanation to sub-section (1) of
Section 10
also provides that documents
16
evidencing such transfer even before 26.9.1970 would not be exempted if

they are not registered on or before that date, or even if they are

registered after that date, they are not presented for registration on or

before that date. The requirement is for the transfer document to be, both

executed and presented for registration before the cut-off date. Thus, the

possibility of evading the land ceiling limits by creating documents on a

back date and subsequently producing them for registration is obviated.
24.
Section 11
specifically talks about the partition deed in a similar

manner and, thus, not only transfers whether by way of sale, gift,

mortgage with possession, exchange, lease, assignment of land for

maintenance, surrender of a tenancy or resumption of land by a landlord

or any other disposition, are included, even the avenue by way of a

partition deed has been shut out, unless it has been executed prior to the

cut-off date. There is no doubt that in the present case, the partition deed

was executed before the cut-off date of 26.9.1970 and registered even

prior to that date.
25.    On behalf of the appellants, a number of judgments have been

referred to, on how a deemed fiction should be construed. Thus, a legal

fiction is to be limited for the purpose for which it is created and should
17
not be extended beyond that legitimate field7. There are a number of

judgments referred to in the context of taxing statutes, but then the rules

of interpretation of taxing statutes, to be construed strictly, would be

different and there is no purpose in referring to these judicial

pronouncements. In the context of the
Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1964
,

the issue of legal fiction was, once again, examined8.                             The same

proposition was, once again, reiterated while observing that a legal

fiction is not to be extended beyond the purpose for which it is created,

and that it cannot be extended by importing another fiction. In the

context of Section 4A of that Act, it was held to be circumscribed by

express words – a mortgagee in possession was stated to be one who, for

a continuous period of not less than 50 years immediately preceding the

commencement of that Section held that capacity.                                  The words

“immediately preceding the commencement” were required to be given

their ordinary and full meaning as reflecting the legislative intent and

thus, only such type of cases where a mortgagee was in possession,

immediately preceding the commencement of the Section, was

extendable for a period of 50 years in the past alone. It was further
7
Bengal Immunity Co Ltd. v. State of Bihar
: (
1955) 2 SCR 603
8
Mancheri Puthusseri Ahmed v. Kuthiravattam Estate Receiver
(1996) 6 SCC 185
18
observed as under:
“….However beneficial may be the scope and ambit of the legal
          fiction created by the legislature while enacting Section 4-A such
          fiction can arise only when the express language of the section
          laying down the conditions precedent for raising of such a fiction
          is complied with by the mortgagee-in-possession concerned
          seeking the benefit of such a deeming fiction. Such a fiction cannot
          be extended by the court on analogy or by addition or deleting
          words not contemplated by the legislature.”
26.       This judgment has found support in a subsequent judgment of this

Court in
Raj Kumar Johri v. State of M.P.
9 Thus, the aforesaid being the

manner of interpreting a provision for deeming fiction, the relevant dates

provided, of 26.9.1970 and 2.10.1975, giving a window of five years for

the State to take action and prevent any dubious transaction during this

period of time, cannot be expanded to an unlimited prior period of time.
27.       This Court, in
Uttar Chand v. State of Maharashtra,10
while

dealing with the very statute has opined that the cut-off date would be

sacrosanct. The factual contours dealt with partition before the cut-off

date, as also sale of land. Once the cut-off date is provided, it was

observed that they fell completely outside the ambit of the provisions of

the Act and, thus, the High Court would not be justified in presuming that
9
(2002) 3 SCC 732
10
(1980) 2 SCC 292
19
the transfers made were either collusive or fraudulent.




The appellate authority allowing the cross-objections:
28.   The order passed by the competent authority, being the SDO,

insofar as the two elder daughters are concerned, held in their favour as

far as the lands vested in them, in pursuance of the Partition Deed.

There was, thus, no occasion for them to file an appeal, nor did they so

file an appeal. Other members of the family, who filed the appeal, did

not implead them as parties. Once again, naturally so, as they would not

be the interested parties, or even pro forma parties in that behalf.

However, once the State decided to file cross-objections and, in that,

impugned even that portion of the order of the SDO which held in favour

of the two elder daughters, there is no hesitation in stating that they were

necessary parties to those proceedings. It is no answer to say that since

the effect of the land ceiling would be to restrict the area of their father,

late Vithaldas, it is for Vithaldas to see how he can benefit his daughters.

This fundamental defect cannot be cured in the subsequent proceedings,

as the right of appeal is a statutory right and an important one. This

aforesaid view is reinforced by a catena of judicial pronouncements. It
20
has been held that
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 does not

contemplate filing of cross-objections against a party who is not a party

to the appeal11. In case such objections have to be filed two distinct

operations are necessary. He must implead the persons as parties qua

whom he intends to file cross-objections then he must file the

memorandum of cross-objections12. The position would be no different

qua a judicial or quasi-judicial authority as a party to be effected must get

a right of hearing13. Thus, unqualified imprimatur can be lent to this view.
29.     Thus, for the aforesaid reason also the cross-objection could not

have disturbed the status of the two elder daughters.


Unmarried daughters’ claim in HUF property:
30.     It has already been observed that non-impleadment of the two elder

daughters would be fatal to the appellate proceedings. But, they are fatal

for more than that reason. In fact, the view taken by both the learned

Single Judge and the Division Bench would equally fall foul of the legal

treatise, enunciating the rights of an unmarried daughter. The view taken
11
Rajendra Nath Chatterjee v. Moheshata Debi
AIR 1926 Cal 533
12
Venkatapathi v. Veerayya
AIR (30) 1943 Madras 609
13
Udit Narayan Singh Malpharia v. Additional Member, Board of Revenue, Bihar
AIR 1963 SC 786
(WS)
21
is that since these lands were given to minor unmarried daughters, they

having no share in the HUF property, such grant is contrary to law at that

point of time.
31. It may be noticed, of course, that the lis has been pending, and the

current scenario is one where even daughters have been given rights in

the ancestral/HUF property, in terms of the amendment made to
Section 6
of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956. The State of Maharashtra, where the

land is located was a step ahead inasmuch as vide
Maharashtra Act
39 of

1994, which was brought into force on 22.6.1994, such rights were

conferred on women by making them also a coparcener by birth.

However, even on the date when the Partition Deed was executed, the

legal position was not as has been enunciated.
32.        It has been observed that a father can make a gift within reasonable

limits of ancestral immovable property to his daughter as part of his

moral obligations, at the time of her marriage or even thereafter. In fact,

there is an observation made that gift made of 1/6 th of the total holding of

the ancestral property is valid14. This is in view of the fact that such gifts

made are for pious purposes, but the alienation must be by an act inter

vivos15.
14
Pugalia Vettorammal and Anr. v. Vettor Goundan
(
1912) 22 MLJ 321
15
R. Kuppayee v. Raja Gounder
(2004) 1 SCC 295
22
33.       In Guramma Bhratar Chanbasappa Deshmukh v. Mallappa

Chanbasappa & Ors.16, the legal position has been summarized as under:
“15… In Madhaviya, pp. 41 and 42, a text of Katyayana is cited
     authorizing the gift of immovable property by a father to his
     daughters besides a gift of movables up to the amount of 2000
     phanams a year…

          …Manu says
          “To the unmarried daughters by the same mother let their brothers
          give portions out of their allotments respectively, according to the
          class of their several mothers. Let each give one-fourth part of his
          own distinct share and those who refuse to give it shall be
          degraded.”

          These and similar other texts indicate that Hindu law texts not only
          sanction the giving of property to daughters at the time of partition
          or at the time of their marriage, as the case may be, but also
          condemn the dereliction of the said duty in unequivocal terms. It is
          true that these Hindu law texts have become obsolete. The
          daughter has lost her right to a share in the family property at the
          time of its partition. But though the right has been crystallized into
          a moral obligation on the part of the father to provide for the
          daughter either by way of marriage provision or subsequently…

          …The decision in Kudutamma v. Narasimhacharyalu [(1907) 17
          MLJ 528] is rather instructive. There, it was held that a Hindu
          father was entitled to make gifts by way of marriage portions to his
          daughters out of the family property to a reasonable extent…

          …Wallis, J. in his judgment pointed out that unmarried daughters
          were formerly entitled to share on partition and that right fell into
16
(1964) 4 SCR 497
23
desuetude, a gift made to a daughter was sustained by courts as a
provision for the married couple. The learned Judge summarised
the position thus, at p. 532:
“… although the joint family and its representative, the father or
other managing member, may no longer be legally bound to
provide an endowment for the bride on the occasion of her
marriage, they are still morally bound to do so, at any rate when
the circumstances of the case make it reasonably necessary.”…

…Another Division Bench of the Madras High Court considered
the question in Sundaramya v. Seethamma [(1911) 21 MLJ 695,
699] and declared the validity of a gift of 8 acres of ancestral land
by a Hindu father to his daughter after marriage when the family
was possessed of 200 acres of land. The marriage took place about
forty years before the gift. There was no evidence that the father
then had any intention to give any property to the daughter. The
legal position was thus expounded by the learned Judges. Munro
and Sankran Nair, JJ.:
“The father or the widow is not bound to give any property. There
may be no legal but only a moral obligation. It is also true that in
the case before us the father did not make any gift and discharge
that moral obligation at the time of the marriage. But it is difficult
to see why the moral obligation does not sustain a gift because it
was not made to the daughter at the time of marriage but only
some time later. The moral obligation of the plaintiff's father
continued in force till it was discharged by the gift in 1899.”…

...Venkataramana Rao, J. in
Sithamahalakshmamma v. Kotayya
[(1936) 71 MLJ 259] had to deal with the question of validity of a
gift made by a Hindu father of a reasonable portion of ancestral
immovable property to his daughter without reference to his son.
Therein, the learned Judge observed at p. 262:
24
“There can be no doubt that the father is under a moral obligation
to make a gift of a reasonable portion of the family property as a
marriage portion to his daughters on the occasion of their
marriages. It has also been held that it is a continuing obligation till
it is discharged by fulfilment thereof. It is on this principle a gift of
a small portion of immovable property by a father has been held to
be binding on the members of the joint family.”
Adverting to the question of the extent of property he can gift, the
learned Judge proceeded to State:
“The question whether a particular gift is reasonable or not will
have to be judged according to the State of the family at the time of
the gift, the extent of the family immovable property, the
indebtedness of the family, and the paramount charges which the
family was under an obligation to provide for, and after having
regard to these circumstances if the gift can be held to be
reasonable, such a gift will be binding on the joint family members
irrespective of the consent of the members of the family.”
This decision was followed by Chandra Reddy, J. of the Madras
High Court in
Annamalai v. Sundarathammal
[(1952) II MLJ 782,
784]…

16… The legal position may be summarized thus: the Hindu law
tests conferred a right upon a daughter or a sister, as the case may
be, to have a share in the family property at the time of partition.
That right was lost by efflux of time. But, it became, crystallized
into a moral obligation. The father or his representative can make a
valid gift, by way of reasonable provision for the maintenance of
the daughter regard being had to the financial and other relevant
circumstances of the family. By custom or by convenience, such
gifts are made at the time of marriage, but the right of the father or
his representative to make such a gift is not confined to the
marriage occasion. It is a normal obligation and it continues to
25
subsist till it is discharged. Marriage is only a customary occasion
          for such a gift. But the obligation can be discharged at any time,
          either during the lifetime of the father or thereafter. It is not
          possible to lay down a hard and fast rule, prescribing the
          quantitative limits of such a gift as that would depend on the facts
          of each case and it can only be decided by courts, regard being had
          to the overall picture of the extent of the family estate, the number
          of daughters to be provided for and other paramount charges and
          other similar circumstances...”…


          In the aforesaid case, a discussion took place in respect of a Gift

      Deed executed with respect to a daughter. The acceptability of gifting

      of a reasonable part of the ancestral property, in favour of daughters,

      for marriage purposes, was held to be valid, and in accordance with

      Mitakshara law. There is a discussion of even the Manusmriti to

      conclude that, though it may not reflect the current legal position, but

      consistently, the Hindu texts not only sanction the giving of properties

      to daughters at the time of partition, or at the time of marriage, but

      even provisions can be made in advance, for the same.
34.       The     judicial   pronouncement    in
Annamalai      Ammal      v.

Sundarathammal & Ors.17
may also be noticed, where it has been

observed as under:
17
AIR 1953 Mad 404
26
“5. If the obligation is moral and continuing one and could be
           made long after the marriage, could it be said that it is not within
           the competence of a father to make such a gift before the marriage?
           In my opinion, there is not much difference in principle between a
           gift after the marriage, and a gift before the marriage, the object of
           such a gift being to make a future provision for the bridal couple.
6. This leads me to the next question whether the circumstance that
           a gift is not described as a marriage provision under the document
           renders it an invalid one? To my mind, it appears it does not affect
           the validity of the gift. When a father makes a gift of a reasonable
           portion of the property to an unmarried daughter it may be
           assumed that it was meant to be a marriage provision. It is to be
           observed in this case that under Ex. P. 1 the plaintiff was given
           only a vested remainder and the gift in her favour would take effect
           only after the lifetime of the first defendant.”
35.        The aforesaid judgment received the imprimatur of this Court in

Guramma Bhratar Chanbasappa Deshmukh & Ors.                        v. Mallappa

Chanbasappa & Ors.18.
36.        The legal view, thus, is very clear:
a. A provision for marriage of unmarried daughters can be made

              out of ancestral property.
b. Such provision can be made before, at the time, or even after

              the marriage.
c. The provision is being made out of pious obligation, though the

               right of women got diluted over a period of time. However,
18
(supra)
27
with the amendment to the
Hindu Succession Act
, in 2005, a

         specific right is now conferred on women to get a share on

         partition of ancestral property, including the right to claim

         partition. As mentioned above this change was brought about

         in Maharashtra in 1994, itself.
37.   If the facts of the present case are averted to, the aforesaid is

exactly what has been done under the Partition Deed. A provision was

made for the marriage of the daughters. In fact, the provision is for

education and marriage purposes. In the context of where the society is

today, such an endeavour should be commended as salutary, rather than

be frowned upon. It was sustainable in law then, and it is more than just

merely sustainable in law now. Thus, there is no doubt that there was

nothing prohibiting such a provision from being made. If the law permits

so, it can hardly be called fraudulent. Thus, the very premise of allowing

the cross-objection has no sustenance in law.
38.   It may also be noticed the fact that the two elder daughters, whose

rights have been debated actually, even attained majority before the

commencement date, i.e., they were major unmarried daughters on the

date when the amendments came into force.          They were, thus, not
28
included even in the family unit in terms of the definition contained

under
Section 4
, which reads as under:
“
Section 4
- Land held by family unit
      (1) All land held by each member of a family unit, whether jointly
      or separately, shall for the purposes of determining the ceiling area
      of the family unit, be deemed to be held by the family unit.
Explanation :- A "family unit" means,-
(a) a person and his spouse (or more than one spouse) and their
      minor sons and minor unmarried daughters, if any; or
(b) where any spouse is dead, the surviving spouse or spouses, and
      the minor sons and minor unmarried daughters; or
(c) where the spouses are dead, the minor sons and minor
      unmarried daughters of such deceased spouses.

      (2) For the purposes of this section, all declarations of dissolution
      of marriage made by a Court after the 26th day of September,
      1970, and all dissolutions of marriage by custom, or duly made,
      pronounced or declared on or after that date shall, for the purposes
      of determining the ceiling area to be held by a family unit, be
      ignored; and accordingly, the land held by each spouse shall be
      taken into consideration for that purpose, as if no dissolution had
      taken place. But, if a proceeding for dissolution of marriage has
      commenced before any Court before the aforesaid date, then the
      dissolution of marriage shall have full effect (whether the marriage
      is dissolved before or after that date), and shall be taken into
      consideration in determining the ceiling area of a family unit.”
29
The question of including the daughters would only arise if the

document of partition deed was found to be fraudulent. Thus, for this

reason also, the property cannot be included and clubbed with the land of

late Vithaldas.
39.       As observed above, the form of the document is not important in

this behalf. Such provision can be made in a partition deed. It may be in

the nature of a gift. So what? None of the members of the family have

ever sought to assail or challenge the same. It is with the consensus of

the family, apart from the legality of the same. The judgment of the

Kerala High Court in
Ponnu & Anr. v. Taluk Land Board, Chittur
&

Ors.,19may also be referred to, where, while dealing with the issue of a

ceiling case, the conferring of rights on the son, under a partition deed,

was held to be valid as being capable of being construed as a gift. The

provisions of
Section 122
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882

(hereinafter referred to as the ‘
TP Act
’), read with Section 123, were

discussed. A gift, being a transfer of property made voluntarily and

without consideration, has to be made by a registered instrument. A gift

is essentially a transfer. Thus, even if there were no pre-existing rights, it
19
(1981) KLT 780
30
could be a valid gift, so long as the said requirements are met. In the

facts of that case, the partition deed was not even between the joint

owners or co-owners, but between the persons who owned the land

exclusively and another person who held no existing title or right. It was

held that a tribunal could go behind and look at the real nature of the

transaction.
Reliance was placed on
Made Gouda v. Chenne Gowda,20
where a person who was not a co-owner was also a party to a transaction,

and it was held that the transaction in regard to that particular item of

property was really a gift and, thus, the requirements of a valid gift deed

should be met.
Similarly, in
Ramaswami Pattamali v. Lakshmi21
, on a

proper understanding of a transaction, the document was construed as a

composite deed of partition and assignment.
Also, in
Namburi Basava

Subrahmanyam v. Alapati Hymavathi & Ors.22
, while deciding whether

the document in question was a will or a settlement, it was held held that

the nomenclature of the document is not conclusive, and instead its

substance would be determinative . In a nutshell, the view is that too

much importance should not be attached to the nomenclature of a

document and one can look behind the façade of the document to
20
AIR 1925 Mad 1174
21
AIR 1962 Ker 313
22
(1996) 9 SCC 388
31
decipher the true nature of the transaction.
40.   The aforesaid enunciation of the law reflects the correct legal

position. In the given facts of the case it is not in dispute that the Deed

was a registered document. Thus, even if one construes it as a partition-

cum-gift deed, it would make no difference as the requirements of a gift

deed, under
Sections 122
&
123
of the TP Act stand satisfied.
41.   Legal position in the context of the facts of the present case, thus,

show that even if the document is effectively a gift deed, and Hindu Law

permits the making of a provision for the daughter for her marriage, the

execution of a partition deed, which has the effect of such a gift would

not nullify the effect of the deed. This is so as a provision made for the

daughter out of the ancestral property would be in compliance of the

pious obligation.
42.   In the end, it may be noted that the only aspect on which the debate

occurred was the share of the two elder daughters, and the right to retain

the land as their separate land, without it being adjusted with the lands of

late Vithaldas. The findings above, thus, lead to the conclusion that the

view taken by the SDO vide order dated 7.5.1984, regarding the land of

the two elder daughters, is the correct view, and the subsequent view by
32
the appellate authority faulted on more than one reason, as mentioned

aforesaid. The further imprimatur of that view by the learned Single

Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court, thus, also cannot be

sustained.
43.   The impugned orders of the appellate authority, the learned single

Judge and the Division Bench are, thus, liable to be set aside and the

view taken by the SDO, restored, qua the lands located in Survey Nos.12

& 14 of Babhulgaon, giving rights to the two elder daughters, who are

the appellants in the present proceedings.
44.   If any consequential orders are to be passed by the competent

authority, arising from the aforesaid finding, the needful be done within a

period of two months of the order being placed before the said authority.
45.   The appeal is accordingly allowed. The parties are left to bear

their own costs.
...……………………………J.
                                                  [Sanjay Kishan Kaul]

New Delhi.
August 29, 2019.
33
REPORTABLE

               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

               CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6006 OF 2009


VITHALDAS JAGANNATH KHATRI (DEAD)THROUGH
SHAKUNTALA ALIAS SUSHMA & ORS.         …APPELLANTS(S)

                               VERSUS

STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ORS                       …RESPONDENT(S)


                         JUDGMENT


K. M. JOSEPH, J.
1.   Having perused the judgment authored by Brother

Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul, notwithstanding the highest

respect that I maintain for him, I express my inability

to concur with his judgment.
2.   This appeal is filed by the appellants against the

judgment of the High Court of Bombay, dismissing the

appeal filed by their father, Late Shri Vithaldas and

their mother and confirming the judgment of the Learned

Single   Judge     in   the   Writ   Petition   filed    by   their

parents and also the order of the Tribunal under the
1
Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings)

Act, 1961
hereinafter referred to as the Act.
3.    Late Shri Vithaldas was married and had three

daughters and a son. He purported to enter into a

partition which was registered on 31.01.1970. At the

heart of the controversy in this case, is the allotment

of shares to his two elder daughters, namely, Smt.

Shakuntala and Smt. Durga Devi. They are hereinafter

referred to as the elder daughters.         They are appellant

1 and 2 in this Court. Both of them were minors at the

time of partition, and the question is whether 31 acres

and 29 guntas of land allotted to them is to be excluded

from the account of the family unit of Shri Vithaldas

in    determining   the   surplus    land    under    the   Act.

Appellants 3 and 4 before this Court are the son and

the third daughter of Late Shri Vithaldas.
4.    Vithaldas filed a return under
Section 12
of the

Act   on   02.10.1975.    The   authority    passed   an    order

declaring the total holdings of Vithaldas to be 118

acres and 17 guntas. 60 acres and 27 guntas were held

to be surplus land and in excess of the ceiling area.
2
The Tribunal dismissed the appeal filed by Vithaldas

as also cross objections by the State. By order dated

02.03.1982, the writ petition filed by Shri Vithaldas

came to be allowed on the score that principles of

natural justice were violated.     Thereafter, the Sub-

Divisional   Officer   passed   order   dated   07.05.1984

whereunder he excluded the land given to his elder

daughters, viz., Shakuntala and Durga Devi, under the

partition deed. The land which is allotted to the elder

daughters by   the partition deed, was      comprised in

village Babulgaon. It comprised of a total 31 acres and

29 guntas. In Survey No. 12, the area is 17 acres 23

guntas and in Survey No. 14, the area is 14 acres and

6 guntas. He further found that the family unit was

entitled to retain 60 acres and 15 guntas. 6 acres 15

guntas were found to be Pot kharab lands and adding the

same to 54 acres, (the limit for the lands in question)

the family unit was found entitled to hold 60 acres and

15 guntas. It was further found that 59 acres and 35

guntas were deemed to be surplus land under
Section

3(2)
of the Act. The land gifted to his wife Kamla Devi

by Shri Jagannath Khatri (fathr of Vithaldas) was found
3
as having remained with him (the donor) and his name

appeared in the record of rights. Thus, after excluding

the 31 acres and 29 guntas of land, allotted to the

elder daughters and the land which was gifted to the

wife of Vithaldas but continued to be in possession of

the donor, the total land was 119 acres and 50 guntas.
5.   Ceiling Appeal No. 59 of 1984 came to be filed by

Vithaldas, his wife and appellants 3 and 4 who are the

son and youngest daughter of Vithaldas.
6.   The State of Maharashtra, on the other hand, filed

cross objections. The subject matter of                  the cross

objection was as follows:
Land   gifted     to    Kamla    Devi,    wife    of

         Vithaldas       was    wrongly    excluded      from    the

         account of the family.
Thereafter, in regard to the partition

         deed    which    is    the    subject   matter    of    the

         controversy before us, the following is stated

         in the cross-objections:-
The State objects to the partition deed at the
4
record page No. 71 on following counts-
i.The unnatural partition of minor sister is

   resorted to when the natural guardians are

   alive and nothing untowards is proved against

   them.
ii.That instead of the present appellants who is

   the father of the minors and major and de facto

   guardian; the present partition deed shows the

   guardianship with Jagnnath Khatri who is the

   grandfather of the minors.
iii.The female child although gets the right to

   inherit the succession “opens” for her only on

   the death of the parents. Thus the partition

   deed is un-natural and against the sequence of
Hindu Act
of Maintenance.
These   are   the    national   Acts   passed   by

   Parliament. The unnaturally therefore needs to

   be done away with.
The entire area with the appellants, wife and

   appellants are to be clubbed together as per

   the definition of the family unit.
5
7.   In the reply filed by Shri Vithaldas and his wife

to the cross-objections, in so far as it is related to

the partition, it was stated as follows:
The appellants further denied the contention

         raised by the Respondent State so far as the

         partition      or    allotment       of     share   to     the

         daughters is concerned. The nomenclature is

         immaterial one. The factum of possession and

         cultivation is material one. The learned Sub

         Divisional Officer has rightly excluded the

         Survey      Nos.    13   and   14    of    Babalgaon      from

         counting in the holding and the said finding

         need not any interference from this Tribunal.
The   contention         raised     in    this   ground    are

         denied.
8.   The Tribunal dismissed the appeal filed by the

appellants     and     allowed        the     cross       objections.

Resultantly, the land, which is the subject matter of

partition deed and which stood allotted to the elder

daughters and the property which was the subject matter

of gift deed in favour of his wife came to be included
6
in total land holding of the family. The total extent

of land was found to be 181 acres and 26 guntas. 111

acres and 39 guntas were declared surplus land.
9.   Shri Vithaldas and his wife challenged the order

before the High Court. Therein, appellants 1 and 2

before us were respondents 6 and 7. Appellants 3 and 4

before this Court were respondents 4 and 5. The learned

Single Judge, by judgment, upheld the order of the

Tribunal, in regard to viz., the property, which was

subject matter of the gift in favour of the second

appellant (wife) and the properties which were set

apart for the two elder daughters. On the basis of an

error determined by the learned Single Judge, the

surplus land was held to be 103 acres and 36 guntas.

It was Shri Vithaldas and his wife who preferred the

Letters Patent Appeal No. 3 of 1991. By judgment dated

27.11.2007, which is impugned in this      appeal, the

Division Bench upheld the view taken by the learned

Single Judge. His wife Smt. Kamladevi, though the 2nd

appellant before the High Court is made a proforma

respondent.
7
10. It is relevant to consider the findings of the

Tribunal:
In regard to the partition deed dated

        31.01.1970, the contention of the State was

        that the daughters were not coparceners.
They had no right to share in partition of

        ancestral property. Their right opened only

        upon the death of the father. The partition

        was attacked as unnatural. His wife, who

        was entitled to a share, was not given any

        share. The grandfather was shown as the

        guardian of the minor children though both

        the parents were living. The contention of

        the   appellants   was   noted   that   what   is

        material is the factual position          as to

        cultivation. The Ceiling Authorities are

        not entitled to go behind the partition

        which took place before 26.09.1970. If the

        appellants-Vithaldas was not holding these

        lands on 26.09.1970 and thereafter, they

        could not be included.
8
11. Reliance was placed on the judgment of the Bombay

High Court:
“In the first place it is contended that
         Kiran the major unmarried daughter who is
         not included in the concept of “Family
         unit” under
Section 4
of the Act was
         entitled to share on partition of the
         ancestral and joint family property and
         therefore, land to the extent of her share
         should be excluded in “terms of
Section
         3(3)(i)
read with
section 4
of the Act.
         This point has merely to be stated to be
         rejected. Hindu Law is clear what only
         certain females such as wife, widow, widow
         mother, grand mother only are entitled to
         share on partition. Unmarried daughters
         major or minor, married or unmarried does
         not belongs to that category of females.”
12. Reliance    was   also   placed    on     judgment    in   Writ

Petition No. 2791 of 1976 by the Nagpur Bench of the

Bombay High Court. Therein it was found that the High

Court had ignored a partition with the declarant’s

mother, by registered partition deed dated 09.01.1970.
13. The appellants-elder daughters, who were allowed

shares   in    partition,    were     found     to   be   minors.

Shankuntala, whose date of birth was 03.11.1955 was 14

years of age and Durga Devi, whose date of birth is

29.08.1957, was 12½ years old, when the partition was
9
effected on 31.01.1970.
14. Vithaldas continued to be the owner as title had

not passed to the two daughters by a legally valid

instrument.
15. As far as the actual possession was concerned, the

Crop Statement in respect of Survey No. 14 for the year

1970-1971 and 1971-1972, showed the cultivation by

Vithaldas. For the years 1972-1973 to 1974-1975, it was

shown as jointly cultivated by Vithaldas and daughter

Durga Devi.
16. In respect of Survey No.12, the property allotted

to daughter Shakuntala, it was found that it was being

cultivated by Vithaldas along with daughter Shakuntala.
17. That crop statements for other years were not filed

it was noted. Ludicrous it was found that the minor

daughters had the necessary wherewithal to cultivate

the land independently. It was found that Vithaldas

continued to hold the lands.
18. The writ petition was filed, viz., [Writ Petition
10
No. 111 of 1985] by Vithaldas and his wife and wherein

respondent 6 was Smt. Shakuntala and respondent 7 was

Smt. Durga Devi, the elder daughters. Be it noted that

the elder daughters did not challenge the order of the

Tribunal. The learned Single Judge has proceeded to

uphold the findings of the Tribunal except as we have

noticed.
19. Learned Single Judge referred to Bhagwandas Heda

and others v. State of Maharashtra and others1, and the

decision     in   Writ   Petition   No.   2997   of   1976,   and

thereafter, proceeded to hold as follows:
“8. Moreover, it may be seen that
            although the respondents 6 and 7 were major
            on the commencement date i.e. 2-10-1975,
            they were still minor being aged 14 and 12
            and    half    years,     respectively,    on
            31.01.1970,    when    the   partition    was
            affected. In fact, their father, was,
            therefore, in possession of their alleged
            shares   in   field   S.No.14    of   village
            Babhulgaon and the crop statements for the
            years   1970-71   and    1971-72   show   his
            cultivation, while crop statements for the
            years 1972-73 to 1974-75 show the joint
            cultivation by him and his daughter
            Durgadevi. As regards field Survey No. 12,
            during   the   year   1974-75    the   father
            Vithaldas    along    with    his    daughter

1   1983 Mh. L.J. 825
11
Shakuntala is shows as jointly cultivating
            the said filed. AS regards filed Survey No.
            14 for the years 1970-71 and 1971-72
            Vitthaldas is shown to have cultivated the
            said field. It is on the basis of these
            facts that the learned M.R.T. held that the
            petitioner Vithaldas was holding field
            survey no. 12 admeasuring 17 acres 28
            gunthas and survey no. 14 admeasuring 14
            acres 6 gunthas of village Babulgaon, which
            is alleged to be allotted to the shares of
            the respondents 6 and 7, respectively, in
            the alleged partition deed dated 31-1-1970.
In my view, the above finding is correct,
            or not any rate cannot be said to be
            perverse on the basis of the evidence on
            record in the instant case. It, therefore,
            deserves to be upheld.”


       Though the appeal was filed before the Division

Bench, by Shri Vithaldas (appellant No.1) and his wife,

during the pendency of the appeal Vithaldas passed

away.      Thereafter, the impugned judgment would show

Respondents 4 to 7 as LRs of appellant No.1.
20. Before      the   Division    Bench,   attention   of   the

judgment in this regard in Uttar Chand (Dead) by Lrs.

v. State of Maharashtra and another2, was invited. The

said judgment will be referred to later on. The State



2   AIR 1980 SC 806
12
pointed out that the partition involved in the said

case decided by this Court was among persons who had

an existing interest in the property. The fact that

wife of Vithaldas who had a right in the partition was

not given a share, was taken note of. The argument of

the State was that the partition deed did not effect

any transfer in favour of the elder daughters, and

therefore, there was no question of recognizing any

transfer effected prior to 26.09.1970.
21. Thereafter,   the   findings   are   to   be   found   in

paragraphs 9, 10, 11, 12:
“9. We have carefully considered the
        rival submissions. First, in 1970,
        there could be no question of daughters
        being entitled to a share of family
        properties in a partition during the
        life-time of their parents. Further,
        showing father of appellant No. 1, as
        their guardian in such a partition,
        would not result in severing them from
        the appellants' family. Had appellant
        No.1 so wished, he could have gifted the
        properties to respondent Nos.6 and 7,
        but that too would not have mattered so
        long as respondent Nos.6 and 7 continued
        to be a part of his family. The judgment
        of the Supreme Court in
Uttar Chand v.
        State of Maharashtra
, reported at AIR
        1980 SC 806, on which the learned
        Advocate for the appellants places
13
reliance, does not help the appellants,
since
in that case
, the Apex Court was
considering actual transfers effected
before the relevant date, whereas in the
case at hand, there are no such actual
transfers, but only attempted evasion,
if we may so describe the partition
dated   31-1-1970. Further, as rightly
observed by the learned Single Judge,
the 7/12 extracts of the fields in
question show that they were in joint
cultivation of appellant No.1 and his
daughters right up to the year 1975.
10. It is not necessary to dissect
the expression used by the Tribunal
while discussing the effect of these
transfers. As held in the judgment of
this Court in
Dadarao v. State of
Maharashtra
, reported at 1969 Mh.L.J.
813, on which the learned Advocate for
the appellants has placed reliance,
such partition may be valid or invalid
as between the parties. The question is
whether it is to be recognized for the
purpose of determining the ceiling area
or not. Herein, since there was no
transfer by the instrument dated 31-1-
1970 in favour of respondent Nos.6 and
7, there was no question of recognizing
and   transfer  for   the  purpose   of
determining surplus land of appellant
No.1.
11. The learned Advocate for the
appellants submitted that the partition
had not been questioned by the concerned
members of the family and, therefore,
there was no reason whatsoever for
ignoring such partition. He submitted
that the question whether respondent
14
Nos.6 and 7 were entitled to a share in
        such   partition,    could   have  been
        agitated   only   by   respondent  No.4
        Anilkumar and appellant No.2 Kamladevi
        and it was not open for the State to
        question the rights created in favour
        of respondent Nos.6 and 7 by a document
        dated 31-1-1970.
12. This fallacious contention was
        rightly repelled by the learned AGP by
        pointing out that the State was as much
        an interested party as the family
        members, because operation of the
        provisions of the Act entitled the State
        to secure the surplus land for the
        purpose of their distribution. If the
        argument of the learned Advocate for the
        appellants   were   to    be   accepted,
        fictitious transfer, in which the
        transferor or the transferee had no
        dispute, would have taken out the entire
        surplus land out of the provisions of
        the Act. Therefore, this contention of
        the learned Advocate for the appellants
        has to be rejected.”
22. As regards the flaw in entertaining the cross

objection filed by the State, it came to be dealt with

by the High Court on the footing that under
Section 33
of the Act,
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 was to

be followed. It was found that the observation of the

Tribunal about State not being required to pay court

fee, was not proper but non-payment of court fee was
15
not     a   matter   over    which   a   litigant   could      take

advantage. State could approach the Tribunal to make

the deficiency good.          Thereafter, the question was

posed whether the Tribunal could have entertained the

cross objection which affected the rights of the elder

daughters without their presence in the party array

before the Tribunal.
23. The High Court dealt with the judgments of the High

Court of Judicature at Allahabad in
Kundomal Ganga Ram

v. Topamal Chotamal3
and
Malireddi Venkatapathi and

others      v.   Malireddi   Veerayya
and   others4   for    the

principle that a respondent maintaining cross objection

could do so after a person affected by the cross

objection was brought on the party array and proceeded

to hold as follows in paragraphs 21 and 23:
“21. We have carefully considered
            these submissions. Apart from the question
            whether respondent Nos.6 and 7 had any
            right in the concerned fields, it seems to
            us that there was absolutely no possibility
            of    their   rights,    if   any,    being
            prejudicially affected by inclusion of
            concerned lands in the holding of appellant
            No.1. It would be appellant No.1, who would
            stand to lose corresponding acreage after

3   AIR 1953 Allahabd 710
4   AIR 1943 Madras 609
16
adjusting the claims of respondent Nos.6
and 7, if he was so keen to ensure that
they got what he desired to give them. The
order passed by the Tribunal was not one
directed against respondent Nos.6 and 7,
but was one which affected the rights of
the appellant. There is no similarity with
the facts of the unreported judgment in the
case of Balkrishna Maharaj Mandir
,
referred
to above
, because
in that case
, Tarasingh
was a tenant, who was also a party before
the Surplus Land Determination Tribunal.
Therefore, we do not find any force in the
submissions   made   on   behalf   of   the
appellants as the proxy of respondent Nos.6
and 7.
xxx          xxx          xxx
23. To sum up, we hold that validity
of the partition dated 31-1-1970 has not
been questioned by the Tribunal. All that
the Tribunal and the learned Single Judge
did was to take into account the fact that
lands continued to be with appellants as
there was no severance of respondent Nos.6
and 7 from appellants’ family. As for
court-fees on cross-objection, though we
disapprove observations of the Tribunal,
the defect is curable and cannot help
appellants in pocketing a chunk of land,
which should become available to the State
for distribution. Respondent Nos.6 and 7
were not necessary parties to the cross-
objection, first, because of absence of
subsisting interest in the properties, and
secondly, because appellants could be
trusted to take care of their daughters’
interests from their own property, rather
than resorting to what may be proverbially
described as “Robbing Peter to pay Paul”.
Lastly, claim for exclusion of field survey
no.106 of Sawangi, contending that the gift
dated 20-1-1955 was not actually received,
17
while   at   the   same   time   taking   a
           diametrically opposite stand about document
           dated 30-1-1970, amounts to blowing hot and
           cold in the same breath.”

    And on this basis the appeal came to be dismissed.


CONTENTION OF THE APPELLANTS
24. The    arguments       addressed    by   the   learned    senior

counsel for the appellants run thus:
There    was    a   partition      entered     into    and

    registered       on    31.01.1970.       Thereunder,     certain

    lands have been set apart to the daughters of Shri

    Vithaldas. Shri Vithaldas had three daughters and

    one son besides his wife. All the three daughters

    were minors as on 31.01.1970. The commencement day

    is 02.10.1975. The elder daughters turned major

    prior    to     the   appointed     day.   Therefore,     having

    regard to the meaning of the words “family unit”,

    as contained in
Section 4
of the Act, the property

    held by the elder daughters, which were acquired

    under     the     registered        partition     deed    dated

    31.01.1970, must be excluded in calculating the

    land    holding by       the    family unit.     He    seeks   to
18
buttress his position by pointing out that the

Legislature has fixed the cut off date after which

partition deed would be ignored for the purpose of

calculation of the ceiling limit.     Indeed,
Section

11
of the Act, declares that any partition after

the 26th Day of September, 1970 shall be deemed

unless the contrary is proved to have been made in

anticipation or in order to avoid or defeat the

objective of the Amending Act, 1972 and shall

accordingly   be   ignored.   Consequently,   the   land

covered by such partition shall, for the purpose

of this Act, be the land held by the family. The

appellants placed further store by Section (10) of

the Act which again contemplates 26.09.1970 as the

date beyond which transfers would be held to be

infirm as executed for defeating the object of the

Amending Act, 1972.
Section 10
of the Act further

proceeds to declare that the ceiling account will

be determined ignoring such transfers. As far as
Section 8
of the Act is concerned, it is directed

against transfer made on or after the commencement

date, viz., 02.10.1975. The explanation supplies
19
the meaning of the word “transfer” for the purpose

    of this Section in a most wide manner and I need

    not be detained further by the contours of the said

    definition.
The argument of the appellants is that the

    Legislation      in      question     is        expropriatory.

    Therefore, such a Statue must be interpreted, no

    doubt,    by    giving    full    play     to    the   express

    provisions but it cannot go beyond the same. In

    other words, having regard to the fact that the

    partition deed, at the heart of the controversy in

    this case, is executed and registered on 31.01.1970

    much before even 26.09.1970 and many years before

    the commencement day, the partition deed must be

    given    full   operation       resultantly.      Properties,

    which stood allotted to elder daughters under the

    partition deed, must be excluded from the account

    of the family unit as by the said day, the elder

    daughters had become major, and could no longer be

    members of the family unit.
25. It is contended by the learned senior counsel for
20
the     appellants       that   there    is    no   case   for    the

respondent-State that the partition was a collusive

one. The further contention raised by                  the learned

senior counsel for the appellants is that the Tribunal

acted illegally in allowing the cross objection of the

respondent-State          and   thereafter      holding    that   the

partition deed dated 31.01.1970 is to be ignored.
26. The        learned     counsel     for    the   appellants    has

contended that a legal fiction should not be extended

beyond the purpose for which it was created.
In this

regard, appellants relied on the following case law –
Bihar Immunity Company Ltd. v. State of Bihar and

Others5
;
Commissioner of Income-Tax v. Bombay City I
,
Bombay v. Amarchand N. Shroff
by his heirs and legal

Representatives6;
Commissioner of Income Tax, Kanpur v.

Mother         India     Refrigeration       Industries    (P)Ltd.7
;
Bijender Singh v. State of Haryana
and another8.
27. It is also sought to be contended that the purpose

of the legal fiction is to be ascertained from the


5   (1955) 2   SCR 603
6   AIR 1963   SC 1448
7   (1985) 4   SCC 1
8   (2005) 3   SCC 685
21
plain language of the provisions that creates it (See
Commissioner of Income-Tax, Delhi v. S. Teja Singh9
).
28. Irrespective of how beneficial the object of the

Statute may be, the deeming fiction cannot be extended

beyond      the    purpose   of     creating    the   fiction      (See
Mancheri Puthusseri Ahmed and Others v. Kuthiravattam

Estate Receiver10
).
29. Still         further,   it     is   contended     that       while

interpreting        the   deeming    fiction,    recourse     to   the

object of the Statute would be permissible only where

the language is ambiguous (See (2009) 1 SCC                       540).

There can be no quarrel with these principles.


CONTENTIONS OF THE STATE
30. Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent-

State would seek to support the order of the High Court.

He would point out that despite and notwithstanding the

so-called partition deed dated 31.01.1970, it was the

father who continued to be in possession and to take

the      income.     He    was    equally      carrying     out    the


9    AIR 1959 SC 352
10     (1996) 6 SCC 185
22
cultivation. Partition deed, therefore, was a ruse and

it is not to be taken into account for determining the

extent of the land and the land seemingly allotted to

the    elder     daughters     must     also     be   taken       into

consideration     which   is    what    has    been   done   by   the

Tribunal and approved of by the High Court. He would

point out that the court must lose sight of the fact

that   the     Legislation     is   a   beneficial     Legislation

intended to empower the landless by endowing them with

property rights over land and the judgment of the High

Court does not warrant interference.
THE ‘ACT’: SINCE ITS ENACTMENT AND CHANGES RELEVANT TO
THE CONTROVERSY
31. It is necessary to appreciate the scheme of the

Act.
The Act
was enacted in the year 1961.
Section

2(4)
defined the appointed day as meaning “the day on

which this Act comes into force”.
The Act
as such came

into force on 26.01.1962. It is relevant to note that

drastic changes have been brought about subsequent to

the enactment in 1961. To understand its impact, the

provisions of
Sections 3
,
4
and
5
as originally enacted
23
are referred to here under: -
Section 3
read as follows: -
“In order to provide for the more
      equitable distribution of agricultural
      land amongst the peasantry of the State
      of Maharashtra (and in particular, to
      provide that landless persons are given
      land for personal cultivation), on the
      commencement of this Act, there shall be
      imposed to the extent, and in the manner
      hereinafter provided, a maximum limit (or
      ceiling) on the holding of agricultural
      land throughout the State.”
Section 4
read as follows:-
“4(1) Subject to the provisions of this
      Act, no person shall hold land in excess
      of the ceiling area, as determined in the
      manner hereinafter provided.
Explanation.- A person may hold exempted
      land to any extent.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act,
      all land held by a person in excess of
      the ceiling area, shall be deemed to be
      surplus land, and shall be dealt with in
      the manner hereinafter provided for
      surplus land.”
Section 5
provided for the ceiling area

    Chapter III in which
Sections 8
and
9
11
fell, is

to be noticed.
“8. No person who, on or after the
      appointed day, holds land in excess of
      the ceiling area, shall on or after that
      day transfer or partition any land until
      the land in excess of the ceiling is
24
determined under the Act;
Explanation.- In this Section “transfer”
      means transfer by act of parties (whether
      by sale, gift, mortgage with possession,
      exchange, lease or any other disposition)
      made inter-vivos; and “partition” means
      any division of land by act of parties
      made inter-vivos.”


The appointed day, it has been noticed was the

26th day of January, 1962.
“9. No person shall, at any time on or
      after the appointed day, acquire by
      transfer or partition any land, if he
      already has land in excess of the ceiling
      area, or land which together with any
      other land already held by him will exceed
      in the total the ceiling area.
Explanation.- In this section, “transfer”
      and “partition” have the same meaning as
      in
Section 8
.”
Section 12
fell under Chapter IV under Chapter

Heading    Surplus   Land   and    it   provided   for   filing

returns.
Reference is made to the far-reaching changes which

were brought out by the
Maharashtra Act
No. XXI of

1975. The preamble reads as follows:
“WHEREAS, in the State of Maharashtra,
      the   Maharashtra   Agricultural  Lands
      (Ceiling on Holdings) Act, 1961 imposed
25
for the first time, in the public interest
       the maximum limit (or ceiling) on the
       holding   of   agricultural    land,   and
       provided for the acquisition of land held
       in excess of the ceiling for distribution
       thereof amongst the peasantry of the
       State, and in particular, among landless
       persons; and for other purposes therein
       stated;
AND WHEREAS, it is now expedient to lower,
       in the public interest, the maximum limit
       (or   ceiling)    on   the   holding    of
       agricultural land in the State for making
       available additional land as surplus, so
       as to secure a still more equitable
       distribution of land, and for the purpose
       of removing economic disparities, and
       thereby for assisting more effectively
       landless and other persons; and generally
       for the purpose of so distributing the
       agricultural resources of the community
       as best to subserve the common good, and
       also to prevent the concentration of the
       means of agricultural production and
       wealth to the common detriment.”
                             (Emphasis supplied)

It was to come into force on such day, as it was

notified. It came into force from 19/09/1975.
32.
Section 2(6A)
of the Act defines the “commencement

date” to mean the 2nd Day of October, 1975.
33. “Family” is defined in
Section 2 (11)
of the Act:
“2(11) “family” includes, a Hindu
         undivided family, and in the case of other
         persons, a group or unit the members of
26
which by custom or usage, are joint in
          estate or possession or residence;”
34.
Section   2(14)
is   relied   upon   by   the   learned

counsel for the State and it defines the words “to hold

land”:
“2(14)“to hold land”, with its grammatical
         variations and cognate expressions, means to
         be lawfully in actual possession of land as
         owner or as tenant; and “holding” shall be
         construed accordingly;
35.
Section 2(21)
also relied on by the State defines

the word “owner”:
“2(21)“owner”, in relation to any land,
          includes the person holding the land as
          occupant, 4[or superior holder as defined
          in the Code], or as lessee of Government,
          a mortgagee-in-possession, and a person
          holding land for his maintenance;”
36.
Section 3(1)
contains the actual prohibition in

the matter of holding land and it reads as follows:
“3(1)Subject to the provisions of this
          Chapter and Chapter III, no person or
          family unit shall, after the commencement
          date, hold land in excess of the ceiling
          area,   as   determined  in  the   manner
          hereinafter provided.
Explanation.–A person or family unit may
          hold exempted land to any extent.”
27
37.
Section 3(3)
may also shed light:
“(3) Where any land–
(a) is held by a family of which a
                person is a member,
(b) is held in or operated by a co-
operative society of which a
                person is a member,
(c) is held by a person jointly with
                others,
(d) is held by a person as a partner
                in a firm

            and the holding of such person or of a
            family unit of which such person is a
            member[including the extent of share
            of such person, if any, in the land
            answering to any of the descriptions
            in clauses (a), (b), (c) or (d) above]
            exceeds the ceiling area on or before
            he commencement date or on any date
            thereafter (hereinafter referred to as
            the relevant date), then for the
            purpose of determining the ceiling area
            and the surplus land in respect of that
            holding, the share of such person in
            the land aforesaid shall be calculated
            in the following manner :–
(i)   in the land held by a family
                       of which the person is a
                       member, the share of each
                       member of the family shall
                       be determined so that each
                       member who is entitled to a
                       share on partition, shall be
                       taken    to    be    holding
                       separately   land   to   the
                       extent of his share, as if
                       the land had been so divided
28
and separately held on the
                        relevant date;
(ii)   in the land held in or
                        operated by a co-operative
                        society or held jointly with
                        others or held by a firm,
                        the share of the person
                        shall be taken to be the
                        extent of land such person
                        would hold in proportion of
                        his   share   in   the   co-
operative society, or his
                        share in the joint holding
                        or his share as partner in
                        the firm, as if the land had
                        been    so    divided    and
                        separately   held   on   the
                        relevant date.”
38.
Section 5
provides for “ceiling area”.
Section

5(1)
and
5(2)
reads as follows:
“5. Ceiling Area.- (1) In each of the
        districts and talukas specified in column
        1 of the First Schedule, for each class of
        land described in columns 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6
        thereof, the ceiling area shall be the area
        mentioned under each such class of land
        against such district or taluka.
(2) If a person, or a family unit,
        holds land of only one class, the ceiling
        area for his or its holding shall be the
        ceiling area for that class of land.”
39. I may now note
Sections 8
,
9
,
10
and
11
of the Act,

which substituted the earlier provisions:
29
“8.Restrictions on transfer.- Where a person,
or as the case may be, a family unit holds
land in excess of the ceiling area on or after
the commencement date, such person, or as the
case may be, any member of the family unit
shall not, on and after that date, transfer
any land, until the land in excess of the
ceiling area is determined under this Act.
Explanation.–In this section, “transfer”
 means transfer, whether by way of sale,
 gift ,mortgage with possession, exchange,
 lease, assignment of land for maintenance,
 surrender of a tenancy or resumption of
 land   by   a   landlord   or   any   other
 disposition, whether by act of parties made
 inter vivos or by decree or order of a
 court, tribunal or authority(except where
 such decree or order is passed in a
 proceeding which is instituted in such
 court, tribunal or before such authority
 before the 26th day of September 1970), but
 does not include transfer by way of sale or
 otherwise of land for the recovery of land
 revenue or for sums recoverable as arrears
 of land revenue, or acquisition of land for
 a public purpose under any law for the time
 being in force.
9. Restrictions on acquisition of land in
 excess of ceiling area.-
No person or a member of a family unit shall
 at any time, on or after the commencement
 date, acquire by transfer any land if he,
 or as the case may be, the family unit
 already holds land in excess of the ceiling
 area or land which together with any other
 land already held by such person, or as the
 case may be, the family unit, will exceed
 in the total the ceiling area.
Explanation.–In this section, transfer has
 the same meaning as in
section 8
.
30
10. Consequences of certain transfers and
acquisitions of land.- (1) If-
(a) any person or a member of a family unit,
after the 26th day of September 1970 but
before the commencement date, transfers any
land in anticipation of or in order to avoid
or defeat the object of the Amending Act,
1972 or
(b)    any   land    is    transferred   in
contravention of
section 8
then, in
calculating the ceiling area which that
person, or as the case may be, the family
unit, is entitled to hold, the land so
transferred    shall    be     taken   into
consideration, and the land exceeding the
ceiling area so calculated shall be deemed
to be in excess of the ceiling area for
that holding, notwithstanding that the land
remaining with him or with the family unit
may not in fact be in excess of the ceiling
area.
If by reason of such transfer, the holding
of a person, or as the case may be, of the
family unit is less than the area so
calculated to be in excess of the ceiling
area, then all the land of the person, or
as the case may be, the family unit shall
be deemed to be surplus land; and out of
the land so transferred and in possession
of the transferee [unless such land is
liable to forfeiture under the provisions
of sub -section (3)], land to the extent of
such deficiency shall, subject to rules
made in that behalf, also be deemed to be
surplus land, notwithstanding that the
holding of the transferee may not in fact
be in excess of the ceiling area.
Explanation. – For the purposes of clause
(a) ‘ transfer ‘ has the same meaning as in
section 8
.
31
All transfers made after the 26th day of
September 1970 but before the commencement
date, shall be deemed (unless the contrary
is   proved)   to   have   been   made   in
anticipation of or in order to avoid or
defeat the object of the Amending Act,1972.
Explanation. – For the purposes of this sub
-section, a transfer shall not be regarded
as made on or before 26th September 1970 if
the document evidencing the transfer is not
registered on or before that date or where
it is registered after that date, it is not
presented for registration on or before the
said date.
(2) If any land is possessed on or after
the commencement date by a person, or as
the case may be, a family unit in excess of
the ceiling area, or if as a result of
acquisition (by testamentary disposition,
or devolution on death, or by operation of
law) of any land on or after that date, the
total area of land held by any person, or
as the case may be, a family unit, exceeds
the ceiling area, the land so in excess
shall be surplus land.
(3) Where land is acquired in wilful
contravention of
section 9
, then as a
penalty therefor, the right, title and
interest of the person, or as the case may
be, the family unit or any member thereof
in the land so acquired or obtained shall,
subject to the provisions of Chapter IV, be
forfeited, and shall vest without any
further assurance in the State Government:
Provided that, where such land is burdened
with an encumbrance, the Collector may,
after holding such inquiry as he thinks fit
and after hearing the holder and the person
in whose favour the encumbrance is made by
him, direct that the right, title and
32
interest of the holder in some other land
        of the holder equal in extent to the land
        acquired in wilful contravention of
section
        9
, shall be forfeited to Government.
11. Restriction on partition:- Where any
        land held by a family is partitioned after
        the 26th day of September 1970, the
        partition so made shall be deemed (unless
        the contrary is proved) to have been made
        in anticipation of or in order to avoid or
        defeat the object of the Amending Act,
        1972, and shall accordingly be ignored, and
        any land covered by such partition shall,
        for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to
        be the land held by the family; and the
        extent of share of each person in the land
        held by the family shall be taken into
        consideration for calculating the ceiling
        area in accordance with the provision of
section 3
.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this
        section, ‘ partition ‘ means any division
        of land by act of parties made inter vivos,
        and includes also partition made by a
        decree or order of a court, tribunal or
        authority.”
40.
Section   12
falling   in   Chapter   IV   deals   with

submission of returns and provides for submission of

returns.
Section 12(1)
reads as follows:
“12: SUBMISSION OF RETURNS – [If any
      person or family unit -
(1)(a) has at any time after the 26th day
      of   September   1970   but  before   the
      commencement date held, or
(b) on or after the commencement date
      acquires, holds or comes into possession
33
of, any land (including any exempted
      land), in excess of the ceiling area, or”
41.
Section 14
provides for the power of the Collector

to hold inquiry:
“14. Power of Collector to hold enquiry.-
(1)As soon as may be after the expiry of
        the period referred to in
section 12
or the
        further period referred to in sub-section
        (2) of
section 13
, the Collector shall
        either suo motu whether or not a return had
        been filed or] on the basis of the returns
        submitted to him under either of those
        sections, and such record as he may
        consider it necessary to refer to, hold an
        enquiry in respect of every person2[or
        family unit] holding and in excess of the
        ceiling area, and shall, subject to the
        provisions of this Chapter, determine the
        surplus land held by such person2[or family
        unit.
(2) Where a person or family unit holds
        land in two or more talukas of the same
        district, the enquiry shall be held by such
        officer or authority exercising the powers
        of the Collector whom the Collector-in-
charge of the district may by order in
        writing designate.
(3) Where a person4[or family unit]
        holds land in two more districts of the
        same division, the enquiry shall be held by
        the Collector whom the Commissioner may, by
        order in writing, designate.
(4) Where a person4[or family unit]
        holds lands in different divisions, the
        enquiry shall be held by the Collector whom
34
the State Government may, by order in
        writing, designate.5[(4A)Where a person
        holding land in an industrial undertaking,
        the enquiry may be held by the Collector
        whom the State Government may, by order in
        writing, designate].(5)The Collector so
        designated, shall for the purposes of the
        enquiry,   be    competent   to   exercise
        jurisdiction under this Act in respect of
        such person6[or family unit] and the lands
        held by him[or it].”
42.
Section 18
is of vital importance to consider the

question and it reads as follows:
“18. Collector to consider certain
        matters.-18.On the day fixed for hearing
        under
section 14
, or any other day or days
        to which the inquiry is adjourned, the
        Collector shall, after hearing the holder
        and other persons interested and who are
        present and any evidence adduced, consider
        the following matters, that is to say,–
(a) what is the total area of land
                 which was held [by the holder on
                 the 26th day of September, 1970;
(b) whether     any    land   transferred
                 between the period from the 26th
                 day of September 1970 and the
                 commencement date, or any land
                 partitioned after the 26th day of
                 September      1970,    should    be
                 considered      or     ignored    in
                 calculating the ceiling area as
                 provided by sub-section (1) of
section 10
or
section 11
;
(bb) whether the holder has any share
                 in the land held by a family or
                 held or operated by any co-
35
operative society or held jointly
      with others or held as a partner
      in a firm; and the extent of such
      share;
(c)   What is the total area of land held
      [by the holder on the commencement
      date?
(d)   whether any transfer or partition
      of land is made by the[holder] in
      contravention of
section 8
or 11
      and if so, whether the land so
      transferred or partitioned should
      be considered or ignored] in
      calculating the ceiling area under
      the provisions of sub-section (1)
      of section [10 or
section 11
?]
(e)   whether any land has been acquired
      or    possessed     on    or    after
      commencement date by transfer or
      by partition?
(f)   whether any land has been acquired
      on or after the [commencement
      date] by testamentary disposition,
      devolution     on    death   or    by
      operation of law?
(g)   what is the total area of land held
      at the time of the enquiry, and
      what    is   the    area   of    land
      which10[the holder] is entitled to
      hold?
(h)   whether any land is held by [the
      holder] as tenant, and if so,
      whether    his    landlord    has   a
      subsisting right of resumption of
      the land for personal cultivation,
      under the relevant tenancy law
      applicable thereto?
(i)   whether any land held by[the
      holder] is to be forfeited to
      Government under sub-section (3)
      of
section 10
, or of
section 13
,
      or should be deemed to be surplus
      land under any of the provisions
36
of this Act?
(j) whether the proposed retention of
                  land by [the holder] is in
                  conformity with the provisions of
section 16
?
(k) which particular lands out of the
                  total land held by1[the holder]
                  should be entitled as delimited as
                  surplus land?
(l) any other matter which, in the
                  opinion of the Collector, is
                  necessary to be considered for the
                  purpose of calculating the ceiling
                  area, and delimiting any surplus
                  land.”
43.
Section 21
provides that the Collector is to make

a declaration regarding surplus land, etc., after the

inquiry.
44.
Section 22
provides for compensation for any land

acquired. The Section provides for the procedure and

method of payment.
45. Chapter   VI   comes   under   the   Chapter   heading

“Distribution of Surplus Land”.
46. Matters including the priority to be observed are

indicated.
47. Chapter VII deals with provision of appeal.
48.
Section 33
provides that an appeal lies against
37
the   order     or   award   of   the   Collector,    before   the

Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal. Since it                may have a

bearing    on    the   argument    based   on   the    illegality

committed by the Tribunal allegedly in allowing the

cross objection, it is referred to and it reads as

follows:
“33. Appeals.- (1)An appeal against
           an order or award of the Collector shall
           lie to theMaharashtra Revenue Tribunal in
           the following cases :–
               (1) an order under sub-sections (2)
                    and (3) of
section 131
[not being
                    an order underwhich a true and
                    correct return complete in all
                    particulars is required to be
                    furnished;
(2) a    declaration2[or    any   part
                    thereof] under section 21;3[(2a)
                    an order under section 21-A;
(3) an award under
section 25
;
(4) an order refusing sanction to
                    transfer or divide land under
section 29
;
(5) an order of forfeiture under sub-
section (3) of
section 29
;
(6) an amendment of declaration or
                    award under
section 37
; and
               (7) an order of summary eviction under
section 40
.
(1A) Any respondent, though he may
                 not have appealed from any part of the
                 decision, order, declaration or award,
                 may not only support the decision,
                 order, declaration or award, as the
                 case may be, on any of the grounds
                 decided against him but take cross-
38
objection to the decision, order,
             declaration or award which he could
             have taken by way of an appeal:
Provided that, he has filed the
             objection in the Maharashtra Revenue
             Tribunal within thirty days from the
             date of service on him of notice of the
             day fixed for hearing the appeal, or
             such further time as the Tribunal may
             see fit to allow and thereupon, the
             provisions of Order 41, rule 22 of the
             First Schedule to
the Code of Civil
             Procedure
,1908,    shall    apply    in
             relation to the cross-objection as they
             apply in relation to the cross-
objection under that rule

                 (2) Every petition of appeal under
             sub-section (1), shall be accompanied
             by a copy of the decision, order,
             declaration or award, as the case may
             be, against which the appeal is made.
(3) In deciding such appeal the
             Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal shall
             exercise all the powers which a court
             has and follow the same procedure which
             a court follows, in deciding appeals
             from the decree or order of an original
             court,   under
the  Code   of   Civil
             Procedure
, 1908. (V of 1908).”
49. The power of the Tribunal is provided under
Section

34
, which reads as follows:
“34. Power of Maharashtra Revenue
             Tribunal    to    confirm,    etc.-.The
             Maharashtra    Revenue   Tribunal,   in
39
deciding an appeal under
section 33
,may
             confirm,   modify    or   rescind   the
             decision, order, declaration or award
             or the amended declaration or award,
             as the case may be.”
50.
Section 41
bars the jurisdiction of Civil Court

and it reads as follows:
“41. Bar of jurisdiction.- No civil
         court shall have jurisdiction to settle,
         decide or deal with any question which is
         by or under this Act required to be
         settled, decided or dealt with by the
         Commissioner, Collector, Tribunal, the
         officer 40uthorized under
section 27
, the
         Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal or the State
         Government.
Explanation.–For the purpose of this
         section a civil court shall include a
         Mamlatdar’s Court constituted under the
         Mamlatdar’s
Court Act, 1906
.(Bom.II of
         1906)”
51. No doubt,
Section 44(B)
excludes pleaders, etc..

It reads as follow:
“SECTION 44B: PLEADERS, ETC. EXCLUDED FROM
         APPEARANCE.-Notwithstanding       anything
         contained in this Act or any law for the
         time being in force, no pleader shall be
         entitled to appear on behalf of any party
         in any proceedings under this Act before
         the Authorised Officer, the Tribunal, the
         Collector, the Commissioner, the State
         Government or the Maharashtra Revenue
         Tribunal:
40
Provided that, where a party is a minor or
             lunatic, his guardian may appear, and in
             the case of any other person under
             disability,   his  authorised   agent  may
             appear.
Explanation. - For the purposes of this
             section, the expression "pleader " includes
             an advocate, attorney, vakil or any other
             legal practitioner.”
52.    Among the changes that have been ushered in the

definition clause, the following are noted: -
In
section 2
, sub-Section(5A) was added and it

defined ‘Code’ to mean Maharashtra Land Revenue Code,

1966    and    sub-section      6A,    which   was   added   as    the

‘commencement date’ means date on which the Amending

Act, 1972, comes into force.
Section 2 (11A)
was

inserted and it purported to define ‘family unit’ to

mean family unit as explained in
Section 4
.
In
Section   2(20)
,    definition     of   ‘member      of   a

family’ was substituted and it reads as follows:-
“(20) ‘member of a family’ means father,
            mother,    spouse,    brother,  unmarried
            dependent sister, divorced and dependent
            sister,   son,   son’s    wife, unmarried
            daughter,     divorced     and  dependent
            daughter, sons’s son, son’s unmarried
            daughter, son’s divorced and dependent
            daughter.”
41
A completely different Chapter came to be inserted

as Chapter II. This was done by way of substitution of

the earlier Chapter, the Chapter contained in the Act

prior to the amendment.
53.    The    following    questions         would   arise     for

consideration by the Court:-
1. Whether the authorities under the Act have the

      power to find that the partition entered into

      before 26.9.1970, was sham or collusive and thereby

      ignore the same?
2. Notwithstanding      the    registered    partition     dated

      31.01.1970, whether the property allotted to the

      elder daughters of Shri Vithaldas is liable to be

      included in the account of the family unit?
3. What is the effect of the cross-objections of the

      State   being    allowed    in   the   absence   of    elder

      daughters, in the appeal before the Tribunal?
POWER OF AUTHORITIES UNDER THE ACT OVER TRANSACTION
PRIOR TO 26.09.1970
54. In    order   to   appreciate      the   intention   of    the
42
Legislature in this regard, the word “transfer” and

“partition” as employed in
Section 10
and
11
of the Act

must    be    understood    as    meaning    a    transfer    and   a

partition which is genuine. In other words, a transfer,

be it by any means, as defined under
Section 8
, must

actually result in the divesting of rights of the

previous owner and vesting of rights in the transferee.

The word “transfer” must be understood, as describing,

cases where under the law, by means of the devices

mentioned in the Explanation to
Section 8
, the previous

owner   ceases    to   be   the    owner    and    the    transferee

acquires his rights. The legislative intention was that

such transfers, which otherwise would pass muster as

genuine      transactions   and    therefore      would    have   the

effect of defeating the object of the Act as contained

in particular in
Section 3
and the Chapter relating to

distribution      of   surplus     land     should   be    rendered

ineffective. The same is the position in respect of the

partition under
Section 11
of the Act. Even if there

is a genuine partition by which shares are in fact

allotted to the parties and the parties enjoy the

properties as separate owners of what was previously
43
joint ownership, their rights will be subsumed and

overwhelmed by the laudable object underlying
Section

3
of the Act and the prohibition would have full sway.
55. I have noticed the matters to be considered by the

Collector under
Section 18
of the Act. Apart from

clauses (a) and (b), he is duty bound to ascertain

other matters. Clause (c) of
Section 18
of the Act

specifically mandates that the Officer must find out

what is the total area of land held by the holder on

the commencement date. Clause (l) of
Section 18
of the

Act also contemplates that the Collector may take into

consideration any other matter which in his opinion is

necessary for calculating the ceiling area inter alia.
Section 3
of the Act read in conjunction with
Section

18(c)
and     (l),   inter   alia,   establishes   that   the

Collector has power and it becomes his duty, in fact,

to ascertain what is the area held on the appointed

day,    viz.,    02.10.1975.    I   have   noticed   that   the

Legislature has defined the words “to hold” means, “to

be lawfully in actual possession of land as owner or

as tenant”. Word “owner” is further defined to mean,
44
“in relation to any land includes a person holding the

land as occupant, superior holder as defined in the

Code,       lessee    of      Government,     as        it    is    commonly

understood”. If the person is holding the land as

occupant, he would be an owner. The word ‘occupant’ is

defined with reference to its definition in the code.

It is noteworthy that the word ‘owner’ includes the

specified categories. If a person is owner as it is

commonly       understood,         then      he        is    comprehended.

Therefore, if a person is in possession as an occupant

as on the appointed day, the extent of land so held by

him, would be considered for the purpose of calculating

the   ceiling        limit.    Equally,      if    the       person   is    in

possession as lessee of the Government, he would incur

the wrath of
Section 3
of the Act, should he have land

in excess of the ceiling limit inclusive of the land

which he holds as lessee of the Government.                         The same

is    the    position       with   respect        to    a    mortgagee     in

possession      and     a     person   who    holds          land   for    his

maintenance.
56. The Collector, therefore, is duty bound in the
45
course of the inquiry to enquire and ascertain as to

what exactly is the holding (as defined in the Act) as

on the commencement day. In the mater of gleaning the

meaning of a Statute and demystifying the words of a

Statute      and      discovering          the    intention       of    the

legislation,        the     court    must    bear   in    mind    certain

presumptions.         The     court        will   presume     that      the

Legislature        has    taken     into    consideration        the   felt

necessities of the times. It will further assume that

the Legislature was aware of the law as it exists. It

will not begin with the assumption that the Legislature

is ignorant of the opinions expressed by the courts on

points of law. It will presume that the Legislature was

aware of the decisions rendered by the courts on points

of law.
57.
In
Sree      Meenakshi       Mills       Ltd.,     Madurai      v.

Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras11
, this Court had

occasion to consider what the word “benami” has come

to denote:
“30. Now, the assumption underlying
            this argument is that the Tribunal had

11   AIR 1957 SC 49
46
found in its order that the intermediaries
were benamidars for the appellants, but
there is no basis for this in the order. In
this connection, it is necessary to note
that the word ‘benami’ is used to denote
two classes of transactions which differ
from each other in their legal character
and incidents. In one sense, it signifies
a transaction which is real, as for example
when A sells properties to B but the sale
deed mentions X as the purchaser. Here the
sale itself is genuine, but the real
purchaser is B, X being his benamidar. This
is the class of transactions which is
usually termed as benami. But the word
‘benami’ is also occasionally used, perhaps
not quite accurately, to refer to a sham
transaction, as for example, when A
purports to sell his property to B without
intending that his title should cease or
pass to B. The fundamental difference
between these two classes of transactions
is that whereas in the former there is an
operative transfer resulting in the vesting
of title in the transferee, in the latter
there   is   none  such,    the   transferor
continuing     to    retain     the    title
notwithstanding   the   execution   of   the
transfer deed. It is only in the former
class of cases that it would be necessary,
when a dispute arises as to whether the
person named in the deed is the real
transferee or B, to enquire into the
question as to who paid the consideration
for the transfer, X or B. But in the latter
class of cases, when the question is
whether the transfer is genuine or sham,
the point for decision would be, not who
paid the consideration but whether any
consideration was paid. …”

                        (Emphasis supplied)
47
58.
In
Kalwa Devadattam and others v. The Union of

India
and others12, the matter arose under
Sections 25A
,
67
and
30
of the Income Tax Act, 1922. One of the

questions      which      arose     was    whether      the   partition

involved in the said case was sham. The High Court

relied upon the circumstances to find out that the deed

of     partition       involved     in    the    said    case,     though

registered, was nominal. The object of the partition,

it was contended, was to protect the interest of the

minor sons against the father who was not even living

with the family and was acting to the detriment of his

sons.     Though    the    deed     showed      apparently    an    equal

distribution of the property into four shares of the

same value, the property allotted to the share of

Nagappa was in reality not worth the amount shown. It

was found that the intention of Nagappa was to make it

appear to the Income Tax Department that no useful

purpose will be served by taking steps.                 In the course,

the Court proceeded to hold, inter alia, as follows:
“14.   …   The    deed       of   partition     was

12   AIR 1964 SC 880
48
undoubtedly executed and was registered,
        but the mere execution of the deed is not
        decisive of the question whether it was
        intended to be effective. The circumstances
        disclosed by the evidence clearly show that
        there was no reason for arriving at a
        partition. Counsel for the plaintiffs
        practically   conceded   that   fact,   and
        submitted that Nagappa's desire to defeat
        his creditors, and to save the property for
        his sons, was the real cause for bringing
        the deed of partition into existence.
Counsel claimed however that Nagappa had
        adopted the expedient of effecting a
        partition with the object of putting the
        property out of the reach of his creditors
        and the genuineness of that partition
        should not be permitted to be blurred by
        the unmeritorious object of Nagappa. But
        the continued management of the property by
        Nagappa since the partition, and the
        interest shown by him in prosecuting the
        suits do clearly support the inference that
        the deed of partition was a nominal
        transaction which was never intended to be
        acted upon and was not given effect to. …”

                               (Emphasis supplied)
59. The Legislature, when it enacted the Act, must be

presumed to know the state of the law to be that a

transfer deed by way of a sale or lease or a mortgage,

may be nothing but a nominal and a sham transaction.

In a sham transaction, be it a sale or a partition,

though it has all the trappings of a transfer or a

partition and it may be registered as such, in effect,
49
the transferor continues to be the owner. The person

who was the previous owner, would, in the case of the

partition which is sham, continue to be the owner. A

clever camouflage or a document ingenuously disguised

as a sale or a partition, cannot be permitted to defeat

the intention of the Legislature. If the surrounding

circumstances      and     the    actual     reality     behind     the

transaction is objectively probed and it is established

that the transferor or the previous owner, as the case

may be, in the case of a transfer or a partition,

respectively, continued to hold the property as such

on the appointed day, it must be ignored.
60. A sham transaction demonstrated to be one when the

appointed day dawns must certainly be treated as such,

and the consequences, that are well-established in law,

must   afflict   such      a   pretense      of   a   transfer     or   a

partition. Such a power must indeed vest with the

Collector under
Section 18
read with
Section 3
of the

Act. To deny the Collector such power as the appellants

would attempt to persuade the court to hold, would

involve   asking     the       court    to   take     leave   of    its

commonsense and to place               an interpretation on the
50
Statute which will result in an absurd, besides an

unjust situation. The interpretation canvassed by the

appellants would result in defeating the object of the

Statute. The interpretation that the Legislature knows

the existing law and that the Legislature does not

waste words and further that an interpretation which,

while on the one hand, furthers the object of the

Statue, and equally importantly, is one, which the

plain language of the Statute is capable of bearing,

would persuade this Court to hold that the Collector,

when in the course of an inquiry under
Section 18
of

the Act, has before it, materials to show that an

ostensible transfer or a partition is nothing but a

sham and a person or a member of the family continues

to hold the land as on the commencement day, it would

be well within his powers to act as per the mandate of

the   Act   and   include   the   land   for   the   purpose   of

calculating the ceiling limit.
61.
Section 30
of the Act sets out the powers of the

Collector when he holds that inquiry under the Act. It

declares that the Collector shall have same powers as

are vested in the courts under the Code of Civil
51
Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as ‘
the CPC
’)

in trying a suit in respect of the following matters:
(i)      Proof of facts by affidavit;

(ii)     Summoning and enforcing attendance of any person

         and examining him on oath;
(iii) Compelling the production of documents.
Under
Section 31
of the Act, the Collector is

obliged to set down reasons for his decision. Thus, the

Collector is endowed with the powers of the civil court

in     the   matter       of   both       summoning       and     enforcing

attendance of any person. The person summoned can be

examined     on        oath.   He   has     power     also       to   compel

production        of     any   document.      For     the       purpose   of

determining       whether      a    document    is    a     collusive,    a

fraudulent or a sham transaction, it would indeed be

argued that the Authority to so decide must be in a

position to consider relevant evidence in the form of

deposition of witnesses as also evaluate documentary

evidence which may throw light on the matter. Such

powers are expressly conferred on the Collector and the

powers are the same as that which the civil court enjoys
52
in this regard.
62. The argument of the appellants that the remedy open

to the State would be to have a suit instituted and

invite a civil court to adjudicate and pronounce a

decree   declaring     a   transaction       as   sham,   does     not

commend to me. The Legislature has indeed clothed the

Collector with jurisdiction and the power to determine

such questions. It would indeed amount to placing an

interpretation      which      would      render    the        Statute

unworkable. On the other hand, the interpretation that

if materials exist in the form of oral or documentary

evidence,   which      clearly    shows    that    the    purported

transfer or partition prior to 26.09.1970 was a sham

transaction,     the   object     of   the    Statute     would     be

furthered   by      allowing     the      Collector       or     other

authorities to decide the matter accordingly.
63.
In
Uttar Chand
(supra), this Court in fact was

considering the provisions of the Act where at a time

when
Sections 8
,
10
and
12
had not been amended into

its present avtar.
The Act
itself exempted lands which

were acquired or transferred prior to 04.08.1959. This

was provided in
Sections 8
,
9
and
12
of the Act, as it
53
stood. In the said case, the High Court has found the

transfer    to   be   collusive.   So   also,   was   a   decree

involved in the said case under which a large extent

of land was given to his mother by the adopted son.

This Court held “there was neither any pleading nor any

case made out either before the Deputy Collector or

before the Commissioner to indicate that the transfer

of the lands in favour of the adopted son and the

transfer by Nemichand in favour of his mother, were

collusive or tainted by fraud”. The transaction had

been entered into five years before the Act was brought

into force. Thereafter, no doubt, this Court went on

to hold as follows:
“3. … Even the Act clearly exempts
           lands which may have been acquired or
           transferred prior to 4-8-1959. Ss. 8, 10
           and 12 which deal with the subject clearly
           enjoin that only those transfers would be
           hit by the Act which are made at any time
           on or after 4-8-1959. As both the transfers
           mentioned above were prior to 4-8-1959, it
           is obvious that they fell completely
           outside the ambit of the provisions of the
           Act. The High Court was thus not justified
           in presuming that the transfer made by the
           appellant in favour of his adopted son and
           the transfer by the adopted son Nemi Chand
           to his mother were either collusive or
           fraudulent.    There   was    neither   any
54
foundation in the pleadings nor any
         evidence to support this conjecture of the
         High Court.”
                                (Emphasis supplied)
64.   This was in fact a case where the finding of the

court is based on there being no foundation in the

pleadings nor any evidence to support the finding that

the transactions were collusive or tainted by fraud.

The transactions had taken place a good five years

before   the    Act   came       into   force.     On    a    proper

appreciation     of   the    decision,    though        it   may   be

contended that the decision should be understood as

declaring that a transaction, even if it is collusive,

having been entered into prior to the cut off date, it

cannot be impeached, it may not be the correct way of

looking at the decision. If there were pleadings or

material to support the finding that it was collusive,

the decision of this Court may not have been the same.

There being no material to find that the transaction

was either collusive or fraudulent, necessarily the

transfer being genuine, there was no provision in the

Act   which    extended     to   invalidate      the    transaction
55
entered into five years prior to the Act.
65.
Section 41
of the Act bars the jurisdiction of a

civil court with respect to any matter which is to be

settled, decided or dealt with by the authorities under

the Act including the Collector and the Tribunal. In

this    view,   the   bar    under
Section    44(B)
would    be

insufficient to deprive the            authority of       power to

declare a sham transfer as such.
66.     Another argument raised by the appellants is that

the partition cannot be impeached on the ground that

properties are allotted to the daughters when under the

prevalent law the daughters did not have any right to

a share. If at all, anybody could impeach the said

partition, it would be only the affected parties, viz.,

the persons who are legitimately entitled to a share

in partition. This would be for the reason that they

would be affected parties as their legitimate share

would    be   illegally     reduced   as   a    result   of   giving

properties by way of a share to those who are not

legally entitled to the same, viz., the unmarried

daughters. The persons who would be entitled to share

in a partition would be the father and the son besides,
56
no doubt, the wife. Strangely, the wife is not given

any share in the partition. Therefore, the argument is

that those sharers whose share would suffer diminution

by the partition alone could possibly question it. This

argument is liable to be rejected. It is one thing to

say that a sharer whose shares may be affected, could

question it in the appropriate forum. It is, however,

a far cry from maintaining that the Competent Authority

under the Act, when it has before it, evidence which

points to the transaction being a sham or collusive

affair, is disabled from finding it to be so. If one

proceeds on the basis that the transaction was sham,

the persons who would benefit from the sham transaction

would be the other sharers. In the facts of this case,

viz., the father, the wife and the son.
67.   This is for the reason that it is implicit in the

finding that in the transaction of sham that there is

no effective transfer. The properties would continue

to be held by the father. The daughters would not get

any effective share. The    other sharers, who would

ordinarily have challenged the transaction, viz., the

wife and the son, would be themselves beneficiaries
57
under the transaction and they cannot be expected to

challenge the transaction. Acceptance of the argument

of the appellants would result in parties defeating the

Act by setting up a pretense and wearing a cloak and

this cannot be permitted.
68.     Thus, it can be concluded as follows:
i. A   transfer   or       a     partition    entered     into   before

  26.09.1970, if it is not genuine and is collusive or

  is a sham transaction, can, in a given case, on

  materials being present, be found to be so by the

  Authority under the Act;
ii. What is contemplated under
Sections 10
and
11
of

  the    Act   read       with
Section    8
,   undoubtedly,       is   a

  transfer as defined in
Section 8
, being a genuine

  transaction.        A    fraudulent       transaction    or    a   sham

  transaction if entered into before 26.09.1970, would

  incur the wrath of Section (3), and a farce of a

  partition likewise, bringing about a mock division

  of property among the sharers, would also incur wrath

  of Section (3) of the Act. No doubt, even if the

  transaction is a sham transaction, be it a transfer
58
or a partition, needless to say, it would incur the

  wrath of
Sections 10
and
11
and it would not be

  necessary      to   justify    the    invalidity    with     any

  materials      if   entered    into    or     effected     after

  26.09.1970.
iii. It   does   not mean   that     a transaction    which     is

  entered into, particularly after the Act came into

  force, be it a transfer or a partition, and if there

  are materials and circumstances brought out, which

  persuades Authorities to hold that it is collusive

  or a sham transaction and the property did not change

  the hands, the property would not be liable to be

  treated as held by the previous owner as on the

  commencement day and included in the account despite

  the purported transfer or partition.
WHETHER THE PARTITION ALLOTTING SHARES TO THE DAUGHTERS
WAS UNNATURAL AND SHAM
69. The     further      question       which     arises       for

consideration is whether in the facts of this case, any

interference is called for proceeding on the basis that

there is power to find that the transaction is a sham.
59
This     question    resolves       itself      into    two    further

questions. Firstly, what is the effect of the Tribunal

entertaining the cross-objection by the State when the

two elder daughters of Vithaldas, to whom properties

were allotted in the partition, were not parties?

Secondly,    whether     the    circumstances          in   which     the

partition    was    entered    into      and    the    material      were

sufficient for the High Court to uphold the findings

by the Tribunal.
Taking the second question first, the very first

aspect    which     stands   out    is   the     finding      that    the

partition is unnatural. It is dubbed unnatural for the

reason that under the extant Hindu Law, daughters were

not entitled to a share. No doubt, in Maharashtra,

Section 29A has been inserted in the
Hindu Succession

Act, 1956
with effect from 1994.               It reads as follows:
“29A   Equal   rights   to   daughter   in
         coparcenary property. — Notwithstanding
         anything contained in
section 6
of this
         Act—
(i) in a joint Hindu family governed by
         Mitakshara Law, the daughter of a
         coparcener shall by birth, become a
         coparcener in her own right in the same
         manner as the son and have the same rights
         in the coparcenary property as she would
         have had if she had been a son, inclusive
60
of the right to claim by survivorship;
and shall be subject to the same
liabilities and disabilities in respect
thereto as the son;
(ii) at a partition in such a joint Hindu
family the coparcenary property shall be
so divided as to allot to a daughter the
same share as is allotable to a son:
Provided that the share which a pre-
deceased son or a pre-deceased daughter
would have got at the partition if he or
she had been alive at the time of the
partition shall be allotted to the
surviving child of such pre-deceased son
or   of   such   pre-deceased   daughter:
Provided further that the share allotable
to the pre-deceased child of a pre-
deceased son or of a pre-deceased
daughter, if such child had been alive at
the time of the partition, shall be
allotted to the child of such pre-
deceased child of the pre-deceased son or
of the pre-deceased daughter as the case
may be;
(iii) any property to which a female
Hindu becomes entitled by virtue of the
provisions of clause (i) shall be held by
her with the incidents of coparcenary
ownership   and   shall    be   regarded,
notwithstanding anything contained in
this Act or any other law for the time
being in force, as property capable of
being disposed of by her by will or other
testamentary disposition;
(iv) Nothing in clause (ii) shall apply
to a daughter married prior to or to a
partition which had been effected before
the commencement of the
Hindu Succession
(Andhra Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1986
.
61
The next aspect considered relevant for holding

the    partition     unnatural   is   that   the    wife    of   Shri

Vithaldas was entitled in law upon a partition to a

share but she is not given any share. The further

finding is that Vithaldas continued to be in effective

cultivation of the land, and in this regard, the record

of rights was relied upon.
70.     The further aspect, which has been enlisted in

support of its finding, is the fact that the minors

were    represented     by   their    grandfather     though      the

natural guardian, viz., Vithaldas, was very much alive.

It is the case of the appellants that giving a share

to the daughter cannot be impugned as done. Under the

Hindu Law, daughters were entitled to maintenance and

if the share is set apart to the daughters in lieu of

same, it could not be questioned.
The appellants further contended that the two elder

daughters were minors at the time of partition. They

attained majority only in the year 1973 and 1975 but

before the commencement day.
71.     There   is    nothing    unnatural     if     the    father
62
cultivates the property on behalf of the daughters. The

finding by the Authorities, approved by the High Court,

that     the   daughters   did    not   have   the   resources   to

cultivate the land, not only pales into insignificance,

but the Authorities/Courts have not appreciated the law

correctly.
A BRIEF SURVEY OF CERTAIN ASPECTS OF HINDU LAW
72.
In
State of Maharashtra v. Narayan Rao Sham Rao

Deshmukh
and others13 the case arose under the very Act

the Court is concerned with, and therein upon the death

of a male leaving behind him his widow, mother and his

son [the respondent therein], the High court held that

after the death of the Karta the joint family continued

but each one of the three were entitled to a separate

unit of ceiling area. This Court took the view that a

female member who inherited the interest under
Section

6
of the Hindu Succession Act did not cease to be a

member of the family.            The Court inter alia held as

follows:
“7. As observed in Mayne on Hindu Law and
          Usage (1953 Edn.) the joint and undivided
13   AIR 1985 SC 716
63
family is the normal condition of a Hindu
society. An undivided Hindu family is
ordinarily joint not only in estate but in
food and worship but it is not necessary
that a joint family should own joint family
property. There can be a joint family
without a joint family property. At para
264 of the above treatise it is observed
thus:
“264. It is evident that there can be
  no limit to the number of persons of
  whom a Hindu joint family consists, or
  to the remoteness of their descent from
  the common ancestor, and consequently
  to the distance of their relationship
  from   each   other.   But   the   Hindu
  coparcenary is a much narrower body...
  For, coparcenary in the Mitakshara law
  is not identical with coparcenary as
  understood in English law: when a member
  of a joint family dies, ‘his right
  accresces to the other members by
  survivorship, but if a coparcener dies,
  his or her right does not accresce to
  the other coparceners, but goes to his
  or her own heirs’. When we speak of a
  Hindu joint family as constituting a
  coparcenary, we refer not to the entire
  number of persons who can trace descent
  from a common ancestor, and amongst whom
  no partition has ever taken place; we
  include only those persons who, by
  virtue of relationship, have the right
  to enjoy and hold the joint property,
  to restrain the acts of each other in
  respect of it, to burden it with their
  debts, and at their pleasure to enforce
64
its partition. Outside this body, there
 is a fringe of persons possessing only
 inferior   rights  such   as  that   of
 maintenance, which however tend to
 diminish as the result of reforms in
 Hindu law by legislation.”
8. A Hindu coparcenary is, however, a
narrower body than the joint family. Only
males who acquire by birth an interest in
the joint or coparcenary property can be
members of the coparcenary or coparceners.
A male member of a joint family and his
sons,   grandsons    and   great   grandsons
constitute a coparcenary, A coparcener
acquires right in the coparcenary property
by birth but his right can be definitely
ascertained only when a partition takes
place. When the family is joint, the extent
of the share of a coparcener cannot be
definitely predicated since it is always
capable of fluctuating. It increases by the
death of a coparcener and decreases on the
birth of a coparcener. A joint family,
however, may consist of female members. It
may consist of a male member, his wife, his
mother and his unmarried daughters. The
property of a joint family does not cease
to belong to the family merely because
there is only a single male member in the
family. (See
Gowli Buddanna v. CIT
[(1966)
3 SCR 224 : AIR 1966 SC 1523 : (
1966) 60
ITR         293]         and Sitabai v. Ram
Chandra
[(1969) 2 SCC 544 : AIR 1970 SC
343 : (1970) 2 SCR 1] .) A joint family may
consist of a single male member and his wife
and daughters. It is not necessary that
65
there should be two male members to
      constitute   a  joint   family.
(See N.V.
      Narendranath v. CWT [(1969) 1 SCC 748 : AIR
      1970 SC 14 : (1969) 3 SCR 882 : (1969) 74
      ITR 190]………………….”
                             (Emphasis supplied)


    Women were not co-parceners under the extant law.

In this regard, the following discussion in Mayne’s

Hindu Law and usage, sheds light.
“Women not coparceners.- It is obvious
      that, on the twin principles of a right
      vested by birth in the male issue only and
      of unobstructed heritage, the conception of
      a Mitakshara coparcenary is a common male
      ancestor with his lineal descendants in the
      male line, and that the female members of
      the family who have no vested right by birth
      and come in only as heirs to obstructed
      heritage (Sapratibandha Daya) cannot be
      copaceners, with the male members though,
      along with the males, or in exceptional
      cases by themselves, they are members of
      the undivided family as a corporate body.”
73. It is to be noticed that partition can be of

property which is previously held jointly.    Mayne’s of

Hindu Law states as follows:
“436.Coparcenary       property         alone
      divisible.- First    the property      to be
66
divided by ex vi termini the property which
         has been previously held as joint property
         in coparcenary”.
COPARCENARY PROPERTY ALONE IS PARTIBLE.
74. In para 442 the learned author has dealt with the

persons entitled to a share under the heading Share for

women.    The following is the discussion in regard to

wives.
“453.Shares for women.-The interest of the
         women of the family, whether wives, widows,
         mothers or daughters, where a partition
         took place at the will of others were
         specially safeguarded by the Sanskrit
         writers.
Wife.-Yajnavalkya says: “If he(father)
         makes the allotments equal, his wives to
         whom stridhana has been given by the
         husband or the father-in-law must be made
         partakers of equal portions”. Explaining
         this text, the Mitakshara says: “When the
         father, by his own choice, makes all his
         sons partakers of equal portions, his wives
         to whom peculiar property had not been
         given by their husband or by their father-
         in-law, must be made participants of shares
         equal to those of sons. But if separate
         property have been given to a woman, the
         author subsequently directs half a share to
         be allotted to her: “Or if any had been
         given, let him assign the half”.”
67
75. A wife however could not demand a partition.     The

share of the wife under the Mitakshra law has been

dealt with as follows in Mayne’s Hindu Law:
“455. Wife – A wife however could never
      demand a partition during the life of her
      husband, since, from the time of marriage,
      she and he are united in religious
      ceremonies. This is in accordance with the
      fundamental rule of Hindu law as stated in
      the text of Harita as quoted by the writers:
“There can be no partition between husband
      and wife”.
Wife’s share under the Mitakshara law.-
      According to the Mitakshara law prevailing
      in States other than Madras, a wife is
      entitled on a partition between her husband
      and his sons to a share equal to that of a
      son; but she cannot enforce a partition.
      She may either be the mother or the step-
      mother of the sons. She can sue for her
      share where there has been a partition and
      she has not been assigned any share,
      provided there was no waiver of her rights
      or acquiescence on her part.”

    Women could not enforce partition.     This was a

right which was conferred upon the males

      “458. Women cannot enforce partition.-
Neither   the    wife,   nor   mother   nor
      grandmother is entitled to enforce a
      partition; the sons have a perfect right to
      remain undivided as long as they choose.
      Any alienation of property made by the
      coparceners without their consent will
      therefore   bind   the  wife,   mother   or
      grandmother as they do not become owners of
68
any shares till an actual division of the
      joint estate.”
76. Regarding the rights of daughters, in Mayne’s Hindu

Law, it is stated as follows:
“461. Rights of daughters. -Where a
      partition takes place during the life of
      the father, the daughter has no right to
      any special apportionment. She continues
      under his protection till her marriage; he
      is bound to maintain her and to pay her
      marriage expenses, and the expenditure he
      is to incur is wholly in his discretion.
      But where the division takes place after
      the death of the father, the same texts
      which direct that the mother should receive
      a share equal to that of a son, direct that
      the mother should receive a share equal to
      that of a son, direct that the mother should
      receive a fourth share.”
77. The   father,   no   doubt    had the   power   under   the

Mitakshra Law to effect a partition even if the sons

did not agree to the same.
“471.Father’s power to effect a partition.-
      A Hindu father under the Mitakshara law
      can, it has been held, effect a partition
      between himself and his sons without their
      consent   and  this   is   rested  on   the
      Mitakshara I,ii,2. This text has been held
      to apply not only to property acquired by
      the father himself but also to ancestral
69
property. The father has power to effect a
          division not only between himself and his
          sons but also between the sons inter se. So
          also it would seem that he has the power to
          make a division when the sons are dead and
          his grandsons along are living.
The power extends not only to effecting a
          division by metes and bounds, but also to
          a division of status. In all these cases,
          the father’s power must be exercised bona
          fide and in accordance with law; the
          division must not be unfair and the
          allotments must be equal.”



THE LAW RELATING TO GIFTS BY A HINDU TO HIS DAUGHTER
78.
In the decision in
Annivillah Sundaramya v. Cherla

Seethamma
and others14, the Court was concerned with

the gift of 8 acres of ancestral land by a Hindu father

to his daughter after her marriage when the family

possessed 200 acres. The gift of 8 acres was not

unreasonable.       In the above scenario it was found that

if the father had enforced a partition, he would have

admittedly got not less than 100 acres.
In
Pugaria

Vettoramal and another v. Vettor Gounder, Minor
, by his



14   1911 (21) MLJ 695
70
next friend and mother Poochammal and another15, a

Division Bench of the Madras High court elaborately

considered the matter relating to gifts in favour of

daughter of a coparcener. In the said case, in fact,

the gift was made by paternal uncle in favour of his

niece (brother’s daughter).          In the course of its

discussion, the court held as follows:
“We have however, no doubt that a gift made by a

      father to his own daughter or a daughter of an

      uncle, provided it be of a reasonable amount is

      valid as against his son and that the question is

      really covered by authority.”

         Thereafter,     the   question   arose   about   the

      quantum of the gift involved in the said case.       It

      be noted that the gift was of land worth Rs.400

      and the family property at the time of gift was

      worth Rs.2400/-. Therefore, it constituted one-
sixth of the property in the hands of the donor.
The Court proceeded to hold as follows:
“The question whether the gift should
            be set aside on the ground of its being
            excessive   presents   more   practical
15   1912 (22) MLJ 321
71
difficulty. The text of Yajnavalkya in
                     Chapter I,
Section 7
, PI. 5, .of the
                     Mitakshara     as     interpreted     by
                     Vignaneswara defines the share of a
                     daughter as one-fourth of what she would
                     be entitled to if she were a son. The
                     Smrithi Chandrika, in Chapter IV, cites
                     a text of Katyayana which says: "For the
                     unmarried   daughters   a   quarter   is
                     allowed and three parts for the sons,
                     but where the property is small, the
                     portion is considered to be equal. The
                     author of the Smriti Chandrika says
                     (Placituin 28): " The meaning of the
                     fourth or last portion of the above
                     text, para 26, is that where the estate
                     is small the share of each sister is
                     considered by Vishnu and others as being
                     equal to that of a son. Reference has
                     already been made to the observation of
                     Vignaneswara in his commentary on
                     slokas 175 and 176 of Yajnavalkya that
                     it is the duty of a father to provide
                     for his daughters as well as for his
                     sons. The text of Yajnavalkya defining
                     the share of the daughter is no longer
                     legally in force though it would afford
                     a guide in determining whether any
                     particular gift which is impeached is
                     reasonable or not. As observed in the
                     Viramitrodaya in the text cited in
Bachoo v. Mankorebai16
the gift should
                     be guided by propriety but not by
                     caprice.
It would be hardly right to lay
                     down the hard and fast rule that nothing
                     more than a fourth share of what the
                     daughter would get if she were a son can
                     be given in any case as apparently
                     attempted to be done in Damodar Misser
                     v. Senabutty Misrain 17. The social
16
(1904) 29 Bo.51
17
(1882) 8. Cal. 537
72
condition existing at the time of the
                   gift would be a proper matter to be
                   taken into account; and where the
                   property is very small and the expenses
                   of marriage heavy in the community of
                   the parties, it may not be improper to
                   allot a share equal to that of the son
                   for the expenses of marriage and for
                   dowry together. At the same time, where
                   the property is very large, worth say
                   several lakhs of rupees, the courts may
                   not be prepared to uphold a gift of the
                   share permissible according to the text
                   of Yajnavalkya. The right of the
                   daughter not being confined, as pointed
                   out in Rantasami Ayyar v. Vengidusami
                   Ayyar18 and Churamon Sahu v. Gopi Sahu
                   I.L.R.19 to have the expenses of her
                   marriage    defrayed,   it    might   be
                   reasonable to allot something more than
                   such expenses even where they are
                   comparatively heavy. At the same time,
                   it would not be fair to the sons that
                   the father, after spending a large
                   amount on the marriage of his daughter,
                   should make a gift of any considerable
                   property to her. It must also be borne
                   in mind that it would be unfair to the
                   daughter that she should be told that
                   her claim has been absorbed by excessive
                   expenditure on marriage contracted by
                   members of the family not for her
                   benefit but to enable the co-parceners
                   to maintain their social prestige. In
                   Churamon Sahu v. Gopi Sahu (supra), the
                   Calcutta High Court upheld the gift of
                   one-third of the family property on the
                   occasion of the dwiragaman ceremony.
The learned Judges observe that the
                   question must be determined with regard
18
(1898) 22 Mad.113
19
(1909) ILR 37 Cal.1
73
to the circumstances of each particular
                  disposition. They refer to a case
                  reported in 2 Morley's Digest, 198, and
                  cite the observation of Lord Gifford in
                  that case that it was absolutely
                  impossible to define the extent and
                  limit of the power of disposition
                  because    it    must    depend   upon    the
                  circumstances       of    the    disposition
                  whenever such disposition shall be made
                  and must be consistent with the law
                  regulating      such     dispositions.
In
Anivillah     Sundararatnayd     v.    Cherla
20
Sitamma        another
principle      is
                  indicated. The learned Judges say : "
Here if the father had enforced a
                  partition, he would have admittedly got
                  not less than one hundred acres and it
                  is impossible to say that a gift of 8
                  acres     is    unreasonable."      We    are
                  unwilling to adopt this test based upon
                  the father's right to dispose of what
                  he gets for his own share on partition
                  for   deciding       the    question     what
                  disposition      he    might    make    while
                  remaining a member of an undivided
                  family. We think it must be left to the
                  court in each case to decide whether the
                  gift   is     reasonable      in   all    the
                  circumstances under which it is made.
                  In this case, the donor, at the time of
                  the gift, had only one son, and he was
                  an infant. The share given to the 1st
                  defendant was one-sixth of the whole.
                  It was apparently considered by the
                  donor that the property still left to
                  the family would have time to increase
                  before his son would have to support a
                  family. He died undivided from his son,
                  and apparently never wished to be
                  divided from him. One eighth share of
20
(1911) 21 MLJ 956
74
the property would be a suitable portion
            for the 1st defendant under such
            circumstances        according        to
            Yajnavalkya's text. What was given was
            one-sixth or one-twenty-fourth more,
            worth Rs. 100. We are not prepared to
            say that, an excessive portion of the
            property was given.”

                                  (Emphasis supplied)
79.
In
Annamalai Ammal v. Sundarathammal and Others21
,

the High Court took note of the fact that there were

concurrent findings that the property gifted was a very

reasonable portion of the property and the gift was

found valid.
The question fell for consideration of this Court

in the decision reported in Guramma Bhratar Chanbasappa

Deshmukh      and   others   v.    Mallappa   Chanbasappa   and

another22. Therein, this Court after an elaborate survey

of decisions including the decisions referred to by me,

held as follows: -
“18.   The   legal  position   may   be
            summarized thus: the Hindu law tests
            conferred a right upon a daughter or a
            sister, as the case may be, to have a share
            in the family property at the time of

21   AIR 1953 Madras 404
22   AIR 1964 SC 510
75
partition. That right was lost by efflux of
time. But, it became, crystallized into a
moral obligation. The father or his
representative can make a valid gift, by
way of reasonable provision for the
maintenance of the daughter regard being
had to the financial and other relevant
circumstances of the family. By custom or
by convenience, such gifts are made at the
time of marriage, but the right of the
father or his representative to make such
a gift is not confined to the marriage
occasion. It is a normal obligation and it
continues to subsist till it is discharged.
Marriage is only a customary occasion for
such a gift. But the obligation can be
discharged at any time, either during the
lifetime of the father or thereafter. It is
not possible to lay down a hard and fast
rule, prescribing the quantitative limits
of such a gift as that would depend on the
facts of each case and it can only be
decided by courts, regard being had to the
overall picture of the extent of the family
estate, the number of daughters to be
provided for and other paramount charges
and other similar circumstances. If the
father is within his rights to make a gift
of a reasonable extent of the family
property for the maintenance of a daughter,
it cannot be said that the said gift must
be made only by one document or only at a
single point of time. The validity or the
reasonableness of a gift does not depend
upon the plurality of documents but on the
power of the father to make a gift and the
reasonableness of the gift so made. If once
the power is granted and the reasonableness
of the gift is not disputed, the fact that
two gift deeds were executed instead of
one, cannot make the gift anytheless a
valid one”.
76
80.   A Joint Hindu Family would consist of a large

number of persons. A Joint Hindu Family could, however,

be understood to be a narrower body of individuals that

constitutes a coparcenary. The coparceners, at the

relevant point of time, consisted of males, viz., son,

grandson and the great grandson. They were persons who

were entitled to demand partition. When a partition

took place, however, certain other persons were also

entitled    to   share   in   the   property.   It   must   be

remembered that a partition involves separate enjoyment

and what was previously jointly held property. A wife

of a Hindu while not a coparcener was one such person

who was entitled to a share in the partition. But even

when a partition took place, the daughter of a person

was not a person who was entitled to any share.
In order to appreciate the contentions, it is

necessary to advert to the relevant portions of the

partition deed dated 31.01.1970:
“Partition deed of immovable property at
           Rs.500/-
Partition deed of the land situated at
           Mangrul and Babhulagaon
77
Executants:   1.   Vitthaldas Jagannath
                   Khathri, age 39 years,
2.   Anilbabu       Vitthaldas
                   Khatri, age 4 years,
3.   Ku.    Shakuntala    d/o.
Vitthaldas Khatri, age 14
                   years,
4.   Ku.    Durgadevi     d/o.
Vitthaldas Khatri, age 11
                   years.
5.   Ku.     Beladevi    d/o.
Vitthaldas Khatri, age 8
                   years.
Party No.2,3,4,5 being minors
              represented    by    Guardian
              grandfather         Jagannath
              Ganeshdas   Khatri,  age   65
              years.
Occu. Of all: Agriculture, all
        r/o.       Mangrul      Navghare,
        Tq.Chikhali, Dist. Buldhana.
We execute & kept the partition
        deed as under:-
We all are the members of the HUF
        and party No.2 to 5 are the issues
        of part No.1 and party No.3,4,5
        are the sisters of the party No.2
        and party No.2 is the brother of
        party No.3,4,5. We have been using
        our property jointly. Party No.2
        to 5 have to take the education
        and to see that each of them take
        it freely and to provide for the
        expenses therefore and to see that
        each of them will meet the
78
expenses out of their own property
                   and that no dispute took place
                   between them in future, therefore,
                   we are executing and keeping with
                   us this deed of partition. The
                   property fall on the share of each
                   party is shown in front of his
                   name….
xxx         xxx      xxx       xxx
                   In this way we have partitioned
                   over estate, the property fallen
                   to the share of party have taken
                   its possession and became the full
                   owner thereof. Now nobody is
                   concerned with the property of
                   others.   Out   of   us   for  the
                   education and marriage purpose of
                   party no.2 to 5 and for the
                   benefits of our family and for the
                   successful future, we of our free
                   will and consideration executed
                   and kept this deed of partition,
                   on this 31st day of January, 1970.
xxx         xxx      xxx       xxx”
81.   To   the   share   of   party   no.1,   namely,   late

Vithaldas, an extent of 23.01 acres in Sy.No.9 of

Bhabulgaon village is set apart. Further, in Sy.No.14

Bhabulgaon village 9 acres out of 35.12 acres is also

allotted to Vithaldas.     Thus, a total of 32.01 acres

is given to him.     In favour of his only son, who is

aged 4 years and who is the third appellant before us,
79
an extent of 30 acres 64 ares is seen set apart. The

appellant no.1 (eldest daughter), who is the eldest

child and who was aged 14 years, was given 17 acres and

23 ares. An extent of 14 acres and 6 ares is set apart

to the second appellant before us from out of Sy.No.14

Babulgaon out of 35.12 acres who is again the other

daughter of Vithaldas and aged 11 years at that time.

The fifth party to the partition deed Kumari Beladevi

aged 8 years is given 14 acres and 06 ares from Sy.

No.14 Babulgaon out of 35.12 acres. Thus, it can be

seen that from the partition deed itself that the

extent of land made subject matter of partition was 106

acres. This is apart from the land which was the subject

matter of the gift in favour of the wife of Vithaldas

who is made a proforma respondent before this Court.
82.    Vithaldas was the karta of a Hindu Undivided

Family (HUF). The Coparceners were Vithaldas and his

son.    Vithaldas, as father, had the unilateral right

to partition the joint family property.        The law,

however, attached a condition to the exercise of such

unilateral power that the      partition must be fair.
80
Fairness cannot be present when it is made in complete

derogation of the extant law relating to share of

parties on a partition.
83. The terms of the partition deed have been set out.

The first thing that is a striking feature in the

partition    deed   is   the   exclusion      of   the   wife   of

Vithaldas.   In fact, under the Act as it stood in 1970,

Section (8) interdicted a partition by a person who on

or after the appointed day (26-01-1962), had excess

land till the matter was determined. The word ‘person’

was defined to include a family. Family included a HUF.

If the property of 60 and odd acres found held by the

wife was reckoned, on 31-1-1970, as the member of

family as defined included the spouse, and as the

family   holding    would   have    crossed    114   acres,     the

maximum limit in Buldana District, the partition may

have been in the teeth of Section (8) as it stood before

substitution by Act XXI of 1975. No doubt, I may notice

that she was gifted 60 and odd acres by her father and

husband from out of the joint property by gift deed

dated 20.1.1955.      However, when the family partition

took place, her right may continue.           If the wife under
81
the   Hindu    Law,   when    a   partition    is   effected,   was

entitled to a share, the fact that she is not given any

share, does raise a suspicion. The father got 32 and

odd acres. The son is given 30 acres. Most importantly

the daughters who had no right are seen given a total

of 45 acres and 35 ares.           The daughters together got

1½ times the share of the son! Any property, which went

to the wife, would have been liable to be included in

the   account    of     the   family    for    the    purpose   of

determining the ceiling limit. It is no doubt true that

there was no concept of family unit at that time but

family as a person was subject to the ceiling limit. I

have noticed the age of both appellants nos. 1 and 2

before   us.     They    were     14   years    and    11   years,

respectively. The son, in fact, was merely 4 years old

and the youngest daughter 8 years. The statement in the

partition deed that the parties have been using their

properties jointly itself, is suspect as none of the

daughters had any legal right in the properties. The

circumstances which stand against the document namely

the partition being a genuine transaction are:
82
1. The age of the children being 4, 8, 11 and 14

  years.
2. The wife of the Vithaldas not being given any

  share.
3. The     children   being    represented   by   their

  grandfather as a guardian when the parents are

  alive.
4. Allotment of shares to the daughters when daughters

  did not have any right to share in the partition

  of a Hindu Undivided Family at that point of time.
Out of a total of 106 acres, 45 acres and 35 ares

  can by no stretch of imagination be treated as

  ‘small’ or ‘reasonable’. While it may be true that

  after 1994, a Hindu daughter in Maharashtra had

  been recognized as a coparcener vide
Section 29A
of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 and entitled to

  a share as such, the question to be posed and

  answered is whether such right existed in 1970 when

  the partition was entered into. The answer can only

  be in the negative.
83
84. No doubt, as held by this Court in the decision

supra, it was open to a Hindu to make a gift of a small

portion or a reasonable portion of his daughter. In

fact, there is a line of thought that though styled as

partition it could be held to be a gift in the absence

of a pre-existing right.
85.     The question in this case is not whether a gift

could have been validly made or not by Vithaldas to

his elder daughters.            It is to be noted that there is

no    such   case    expressly       set    up    that   what    was    the

effected     under       the   partition      was    a   gift    or    that

Vithaldas intended to make a gift of the properties in

question to the elder daughters.                  Though it is stated

in    the    reply       to    the   cross       objection      that   the

nomenclature        is   immaterial        one,   what   was     intended

therefrom is clear from the next sentence. “The factum

of possession and cultivation is material one”.                          No

case of it being a gift is set up before the Tribunal

or the High Court.               It is to be remembered that

definition of ‘member of family’ under the Act included

dependent daughters.            In the Special Leave Petition,

in ground (I), it is stated as follows: -
84
“Because the Hon’ble Division Bench
            has merely confused the whole issue
            where at Para 9 it has observed that
            the Vithaldas could have gifted the
            property to his two daughters i.e.
            Shakuntala and Durga but that too
            would not have mattered till the
            time the said daughters continued to
            be part of his family.
It is submitted that the said
            observation clearly goes beyond the
            intention and nature behind the said
            transfer   which,   was   merely   a
            partition in the lines of a family
            settlement.”


       By no yardstick can the circumstances be treated

as either legal or natural.               I may also notice that in

the context of a family arrangement a Bench of 4

learned     Judges     in   the    decision     reported   in
Potti

Lakshmi     Perumallu       v.    Potti    Krishnavenamma23
,    inter

alia, held as follows:
“7. No doubt, a family arrangement
        which is for the benefit of the family
        generally can be enforced in a Court of
        law. But before the court would do so it
        must be shown that there was an occasion
        for effecting a family arrangement and that
        it was acted upon. It is quite clear that
        there is complete absence of evidence to
        show that there was such an occasion or the

23   AIR 1965 SC 825
85
arrangement indicated in the will was acted
        upon.”
86. I would also think that no acceptable reasons are

forthcoming as occasion warranting such a partition

apart from its illegal and unfair terms.
87.
In
Made Couda and Ors. v. Chenne Gouda and Ors.24
,

the appellant was the uncle of the second defendant

who     was   his   nephew   (his   sister’s   son).     Under   a

partition, a share was purported to be allotted to the

nephew.       The District Munsif found that the nephew got

a share as a gift or in consideration of surrender of

part of the property to the appellant.              The value of

the property being more Rs.100/-, whether it was a

gift     or    an   exchange.       It   offended   against,   the

provisions of
Transfer of Property Act
.                The first

appellate Court took the view that it was not a gift

but a partition and the nephew was made a co-sharer.

The learned Judge set aside the findings and remitted

the matter back to consider whether any valid title

has been acquired independent of the point decided in

the judgment.        The learned Court took the view that a


24   AIR 1925 Madras 1174
86
person could not by mere recognition as a co-sharer by

another co-sharer acquire title without complying with

the provisions of the
Transfer of Property Act
.
88.
In
Ponnu and another v. Taluk Land Board, Chittur
and     others25,     though   rights   were   purported   to   be

conferred upon his son under a partition deed, it was

contended before the authority that it may be treated

as gift.      It is to be noted that to be a valid gift

not only there must be registration but there must be

attestation by two witnesses.           [See
Section 123
of the

Transfer of Property Act].            It is further relevant to

notice that in
the said judgment
the property was the

separate property of the father which undoubtedly, he

could gift.         The gift under the
Kerala Land Reforms

Act
had the effect of reducing the extent of land from

the account of the declarant. In the facts of this

case however, apart from the fact that the question

which arises is whether the partition was a sham?, It

is to be noted that there is no case that the property



25   (1981) KLT 780
87
was the separate property of Vithaldas.                 There can no

dispute that the property was an ancestral property

which he acquired in terms of the earlier partition

between him and his father.             Even before this Court it

is not maintained that the partition is to be construed

as a gift.
89.     The question, however, relevant to this case is

this.    Apart from the partition deed being unnatural,

was it a sham transaction?                The finding that the

transaction is unnatural apart from raising serious

suspicion effortlessly opens the doors to a finding of

it    being   sham.      Ordinarily,      in     the   case   of   sham

transaction      its     terms     deceptively         disguise     the

underlying truth.         The task become uphill when the

transaction appears natural, to prove it to be a sham

transaction.     But     when    the     transaction      itself     is

unnatural, the task of the court is made lighter.
90. It is true that there is no express pleading in

the cross objection that the transaction is sham and

that    Vithaldas      continued    to    hold    the   land   as    on

2.10.1975.
In
Uttar Chand
(supra), this Court, in
88
fact, has pointed out to the lack of pleading to

support the finding that transaction involved in the

said case was a collusive one.            In fact, it may be

noticed that under the Act what is contemplated is

filing a return by the person or family unit having

surplus land followed by an inquiry under
Section 14
read   with
Section   18
and   the    declaration     under
Section 21
. The earlier proceedings which has taken

place in this case has not been produced.             Be that as

it may, the State has filed cross objection in the

appeal.     The contents of the said cross objection in

relation to the partition deed has also been noticed.
91. I would think that in the facts of this case, the

finding that there is no transfer of the interest of

Vithaldas     under   the    partition    deed   is    what   is

essentially involved. In facilitating such a finding,

the unnatural nature of the partition has played a

large part. In the facts, the mere fact that it is not

expressly stated that he continued to hold the land or

that the transaction was a sham transaction by itself

may not be fatal to the case of the State though
89
ideally it should have been mentioned. The parties

have proceeded before the Tribunal and the High Court

understanding the purport of the pleadings in the cross

objection to be that there is no effective transfer

under the partition.
THE MATERIALS RELIED ON IN THE ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL
IN REGARD TO THE FINDING ABOUT THE PARTITION DEED
92. The   Tribunal   notes   that   the   eldest   among   the

daughters Shakuntala Bai was born on 03.11.1955.           The

second of the elder daughters Durga Devi was born on

29.08.1957.   They were 14 and 12½ years of age on the

date of the partition in 1970.      Vithaldas continued to

be the owner as the title has not passed by a legally

valid instrument.    As regards the actual possession in

regard to Survey Nos.14 and 12 of Babul Gaon in which

the elder daughters were allotted the shares, it was

found as follows:
“15. As regards the actual possession of
      S.Nos. 14 and 12 of Babulgaon, the crop-
      statements in respect of S.No.14 for the
      year   1970-71  and   71-72   shows  the
      cultivation of Vithaldas, while during
      1972-73 to 74-75 it is shown as jointly
      cultivated by Vithaldas and his daughter
      Durgadevi. S.No.12 of Babulgaon is shown
90
as cultivated during 1974-75 by Vithaldas
      alongwith his daughter Shakultala. The
      crop statement for the other years have
      not been filed by the appellant. It is
      ludicrous to think that these minor
      daughters would possess the necessary
      where withal to cultivate the land
      independently.   I   have   therefore   no
      hesitation to hold that the appellant
Vithaldas was holding S.No.12 area 17
acres 23 Gs and S.No.14 area 14 As 6 Gs
      of   Babulgaon,   shown   to   have   been
      transferred to his daughters Shakuntala
      and Durgadevi.”


THE ORDER DATED 23.11.2016 PASSED BY THIS COURT AND
ADDITIONAL AFFIDAVIT BY THE SON OF VITHALDAS
93. On 23.11.2016, this Court passed an order which

reads as follows:
“The   legal   representatives    of   the
      deceased appellant¬ Vithaldas Jagannath
      Khatri appear to have
placed reliance
      upon
a document purporting to be a deed
      of partition of certain agricultural land
      in support of their contention that they
      had acquired ownership over the disputed
      land long before the effective date under
      the   provisions   of    the
Maharashtra
      Agricultural Land (Ceilings on Holdings)
      Act, 1961
. While a copy of the said
      document purporting to be a partition
      deed is on record and has been noticed by
      the authorities below it is not clear
      whether the alleged acquisition 2 of
      rights under the said document was ever
      reported to revenue authorities in terms
      of Sections 148 and 149 of the Maharashtra
91
Land Revenue Code, 1966. It is also not
      clear    as   to   whether   the    revenue
      authorities had upon receipt of such a
      report taken any steps to acknowledge the
      creation of the alleged rights in favour
      of the legal representatives of the
      deceased appellant. The orders under
      challenge on the contrary suggest that
      the ownership of the land had continued
      in the name of the deceased in the revenue
      records despite the alleged execution of
      the partition deed. Confronted with this
      position Ms. Indu Malhotra, learned
      senior    counsel    appearing   for    the
      appellants seeks a short adjournment to
      take instruction and place on record
      material to suggest that the execution of
      the so-called partition deed and the
      acquisition of the rights thereunder by
      her clients was duly reported and
      accepted    in   appropriate   proceedings
      envisaged under the land revenue code
      mentioned above. Copies of the record of
      rights in relation to land in question
      with    effect    from   31.09.1970    till
      02.10.1975 shall also be placed on
      record. Needful shall be done within six
      weeks.”
94. Pursuant to the same an additional affidavit by

son of Late Vithaldas has been filed on 09.03.2017.
Thereunder    it    is   inter    alia   stated    that   on    an

application    to    the   concerned     office,    reply      was

received to the effect that with regard to the field

Survey No.12 and 14 of village Babulgaon as well as

field Survey No.64 village Mangrul, that the record
92
from 1970 to 1975 is in a mutilated condition and the

mutation register for the period from 1964 to 1978 is

not traceable.
“For Village Mangrul, the crop statement
      is not available for the period 1970-
      1972, and for Village Babhulgaon crop
      statement    is    not    available         for   the
      period 1970-1973 for Survey No.14, while
      crop   statement     is    not    available       for
      Survey No.12 for the period 1971-1972.”
95. It is stated further that the name of the son is

recorded in the Crop Register for the period 1972 to

1975 as occupant. Certain copies of the Record of

Rights from the register of crop prepared under Rule

29 of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Record of Rights

and Registers (Preparation and Maintenance Rules)1971

have been produced.      They show inter alia as follows:
Therein, in the year 1973-74 under the column

    ‘existing occupant’, as regards Survey No.14 is

    concerned, for a total area of 35 acres and 12

    guntas   it   is    Vithaldas      who   is    shown      as   the

    occupant.     Durga Devi is also shown as occupant
93
as against Sy.No.14 in respect of 14.29 H.                 Bela

Devi,   the   youngest     daughter   is    also    shown    as

occupant.      Both are shown as minor and their

guardian,     the    grandfather.     The    same    is     the

position in regard to the year 1974-1975.                 Still

further it is shown likewise for the year 1975-

1976.   The same position is shown both before and

after the consolidation proceedings in regard to

Survey No.12.       For the year 1972-1973 in regard

to 17 acres and 23 guntas.,Shankuntala Bai (the

eldest daughter) was shown under the head ‘Name

of the existing occupant’ along with Vithaldas

Jagannath S.O..       Even in the Crop Register 1973-

1974,   the   name    of   the   occupant     is    shown   as

Vithaldas     Jagannath    for   minor      Shakuntala      Bai

Vithaldas.     It is to be noted that going by the

date of birth of Shakuntala Bai as noted by the

Tribunal as on 03.11.1955, she became major on

03.11.1973, Still she is shown as a minor and her

father is shown as occupant on her behalf.
In regard to 17 acres and 23 guntas for 1974-
94
1975   under   the   name    of    existing   occupant,    the

     following is noticed-
1)Vithaldas Jagannath,
2)Shakuntala Bai Vithaldas through the guardian
     Jagannath.
Two features may be noted.
96. The first occupant is shown as the father.                 This

is   despite    the   fact       that   on   03.11.1973   itself

Shakuntala Bai had even already become a major.                For

the earlier year it has been noticed that the entry

was Vithaldas for Shakuntala Bai.            For the year 1974-

1975, the next feature to be noticed is Shakuntala Bai

is to shown along with her father as an occupant.

However, she is so shown through her guardian who is

shown as her grandfather.           Taking the matter forward

for the next year namely 1975-1976, the occupant is

shown as Shakuntala Bai Rama Prasad through guardian

Jagannath.     It is to be noted that Shakuntala Bai had

much earlier become major. The name of Vithaldas which

was there in the earlier year is seen removed.
97. In the Record of Rights, produced under the law

relating to consolidation in Survey No.12, Shakuntala
95
Bai is shown as minor through her grandfather both

before and after the proceedings were conducted.                     In

this   connection    as    noticed      by   the     Tribunal    crops

statements for the other years were not filed. They

were not produced in the High Court also.                 No evidence

has been tendered though it was open to adduce evidence

as is permitted under the Act.
98. I would think on a conspectus of the material, I

feel reinforced that the partition was indeed not only

unnatural but it was not intended to have effect.

THE EFFECT OF THE CROSS OBJECTION BEING ALLOWED IN THE
ABSENCE OF THE TWO ELDER DAUGHTERS TO WHOM THE PROPERTY
WAS ALLOTTED IN THE PARTITION.
99. It is undoubtedly true that the appeal before the

Tribunal was filed by Late Vithaldas, his wife, son and

youngest daughter.        It is also true that there was no

occasion for the elder daughters to challenge the order

passed   as   the   properties     allotted        to    them   in   the

partition deed dated 31.1.1970 stood excluded.                   It is

in such an appeal that the Government filed a cross

objection.      Undoubtedly,       the       cross      objection    was

maintainable    both      under   the    express        provisions   of
96
Section 33
of the Act as also under
Order 41 Rule 22

CPC
which was also made applicable under
Section 33
of

the Act.     In law it is true that if a cross objection

is maintained, the person affected by an order in the

cross objection must be on the party array.               If he is

not on the party array, it is incumbent upon the

respondent in the appeal who seeks to maintain a cross

objection against a non-party to implead such person

as a party.      This is a matter on which I need not dwell

further.
100.       The question which would however arise is, as

is sought to be contended by the respondent-State the

effect of the elder daughters not challenging the order

of   the    Tribunal.     The   order      of   the   Tribunal    was

challenged by Vithaldas and his wife only by filing a

writ petition before the High Court.             Appellants 3 and

4    in    the   appeal   before     the    Tribunal    were     made

respondents in such writ petition.               It is true that

elder daughters were also made respondents.
101.       Shri Vithaldas and his wife did not prosecute

the writ petition also as representatives of the elder
97
daughters.   At least the writ petition is not produced

to support such a case.   It is necessary to notice that

the finding regarding the partition deed and gift deed

by the Tribunal impacted both Vithaldas and his wife

on the one hand and also the elders daughters on the

other hand [the latter as regards the partition deed].

The Ceiling Account of the family unit was determined

taking into consideration the 31 and odd acres allotted

to the elder daughters.   Vithaldas would been affected

in two different capacities. One as head of the family

unit and the other as father of the elder daughters.
102.    It is relevant to notice that under the
Hindu

Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956
Section 6
declares

who is to be the natural guardian of a Hindu minor. It

reads as under:
“6. Natural guardians of a Hindu minor.—
       The natural guardian of a Hindu minor, in
       respect of the minor’s person as well as
       in respect of the minor’s property
       (excluding his or her undivided interest
       in joint family property), are—
(a) in the case of a boy or an unmarried
       girl—the father, and after him, the
       mother: provided that the custody of a
       minor who has not completed the age of
98
five years shall ordinarily be with the
       mother;
(b) in case of an illegitimate boy or an
       illegitimate unmarried girl—the mother,
       and after her, the father;
(c) in the case of a married girl—the
       husband: Provided that no person shall be
       entitled to act as the natural guardian
       of a minor under the provisions of this
       section—
(a) if he has ceased to be a Hindu, or
(b) if he has completely and finally
       renounced the world by becoming a hermit
       (vanaprastha) or an ascetic (yati or
       sanyasi). Explanation.—In this section,
       the expression “father” and “mother” do
       not include a step-father and a step-
mother.”
                             (Emphasis supplied)
103.   A perusal of
Section 6
of the Hindu Minority

and Guardianship Act would show that in the case of

unmarried girl, the father and after the father the

mother would be the natural guardian.       This is in

respect of both the person of the minor and the property

of the minor. When the writ petition was filed, the

eldest daughter was clearly major and married. Durga

Devi was also a major.
104.   The State would contend the partition dated

31.1.1970 was a sham and Vithaldas continued to hold
99
the property.       It is not unnatural that he would

challenge the inclusion of such property in the ceiling

account as property of the family unit on the basis

that he continued to be the holder.     Allowing the cross

objection by the Tribunal if viewed in this perspective

did affect Vithaldas. He could indeed question the

inclusion of the lands allotted to his elder daughters

in the account of the family unit. Vithaldas could

support the partition deed but he could not challenge

the order of the Tribunal allowing the cross objection

on the ground that the cross objection was allowed

without   giving    an   opportunity   to   his   daughters.

Undoubtedly, Vithaldas was the first appellant before

the Tribunal.      He along with other appellants therein

were heard by the Tribunal as parties before allowing

the cross objection in relation to the partition.        The

ground that the cross objection was allowed without an

opportunity to his elder daughters was not available

to Vithaldas or his wife.         Again, I would reiterate

that the writ petition has been filed only by Vithaldas

and his wife.   Though the elder daughters were majors,

they have not challenged the order of the Tribunal.
100
Maybe it is true that they were respondents in the writ

petition       filed   by    their    parents.         Even    after   the

learned    Single      Judge    dismissed      the     writ    petition,

upholding the order of the Tribunal, no appeal was

filed by the elder daughters.
105. If    indeed      the     elder       daughters     had    acquired

possession and rights under the partition deed in

respect of an extent of more than 31 and odd acres of

land      in    between       themselves,        it     passes     one’s

comprehension that they would not challenge the order

which purported to deprive them of their rights.                       This

conduct on the part of the parties would appear to lend

assurance to the case of the State that the partition

was not a genuine transaction but a sham and the

property continued with Vithaldas in which case it

would     be   property      held     by   Vithaldas     even    on    the

commencement date namely 2.10.1975 rendering it liable

to be included in the account of the family unit.                       He

accordingly challenged the order of the Tribunal along

with his wife who was separately aggrieved by the

inclusion of the property found gifted to her.
101
106.    It is to be noted that a writ petition is not a

partition suit.      In a partition suit, apart from the

plaintiff, the defendants also stand in the shoes of a

plaintiff.    Vithaldas passed away even when the appeal

was pending in the High Court.     Appeal was filed before

this Court originally as a special leave petition. In

the Special Leave Petition, it is shown Vithaldas(now

deceased) through LRs and the petitioners names are

shown. No doubt their position as respondents in the

High Court is also shown. The elder daughters were

petitioner No.1 and 2 in the special leave petition and

upon leave being granted, they are in the party array

as appellants 1 and 2.     But they are before this Court

only    as   legal   representatives   of   Vithaldas   who

instituted the writ petition and appeal along with his

wife.   Be it noted that one out of the two appellants

in the High Court, namely, Vithaldas passed away. His

wife has not pursued the matter before this Court and

she is a proforma respondent No.4 in this appeal.       The

appeal is prosecuted by the present appellants in their

capacity     as   legal   representatives   of   Vithaldas.

Contentions which were available to Vithaldas alone,
102
would therefore be available to them.
In this Court,

I may refer to the judgment of this Court reported in
Jagdish Chander Chatterjee and Others        v.   Shri Sri

Kishan
and another26, reads as follows:
“10. Under sub-clause (ii) of Rule 4 of
          Order XXII, Civil Procedure Code any
          person so made a party as a legal
          representative     of    the     deceased,
          respondent was entitled to make any
          defence appropriate to his character as
          legal representative of the deceased-
          respondent. In other words, the heirs and
          the legal representatives could urge all
          contentions which the deceased could have
          urged except only those which were
          personal to the deceased. Indeed this
          does     not     prevent     the     legal
          representatives from setting up also
          their own independent title, in which
          case there could be no objection to the
          court impleading them not merely as the
          legal representatives of the deceased but
          also in their personal capacity avoiding
          thereby a separate suit for a decision on
          the independent title”.
(Emphasis supplied)
107.     As has been noted by me, the contention that the

Tribunal should not have allowed the cross objection



26   (1972) 2 SCC 461
103
without the elder daughters on the party array was not

available to Vitahaldas.          If that is so, his legal

representatives      namely,    the   appellants     cannot      take

contentions    which     were     not    available        to     their

predecessor-in-interest.
108.    It is true that this is a case where as regards

the elder daughters, they were not parties in the

appeal in which the cross-objection was filed.
109.    Also, no doubt the elder daughters and others

were respondents in the Writ Petition and Letter Patent

Appeal. It may be true that a respondent and even a

person who is not a party can with leave prefer an

appeal. But when they have not challenged the order of

the Tribunal and even the judgment of the learned

Single Judge and as the Vithaldas had fully contested

the matter and in view of my finding that the properties

allotted to the elder daughters, are liable to be found

held   by   Vithaldas,    I     would    not   be   inclined        to

interfere, particularly, as I have noted above when the

perusal of the Special Leave Petition would reveal that

Vithaldas     (now     deceased)        through     the        LRs-the

petitioners is shown in the cause title. It must be
104
remembered that the petitioners upon the passing away

of Vithaldas during the pendency of the Latter Patent

Appeal were recorded as his legal representatives.
110.      I would also, at any rate, in this regard, in

this     case   invoke   the    principles
laid   down   in
Taherakhatoon (D) By Lrs. v. Salambin Mohammad27 and

refuse to interfere.
111.      I would think, therefore, the appeal must fail

and it stands dismissed.
.................J.
                                        (K.M. JOSEPH)

NEW DELHI,
AUGUST 29, 2019.
27   1999(2) SCC 635
105
Reportable

                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                     CIVIL APPEAL NOS.6006 OF 2009


  VITHALDAS JAGANNATH KHATRI (D) THROUGH
  SHAKUNTALA ALIAS SUSHMA & ORS.                         ...Appellants

                                      Vs.


  THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA REVENUE AND
  FOREST DEPARTMENT & ORS.                               ...Respondents


                                 O R D E R



       In     view     of    difference        of     opinions    and     the

distinguishing     judgments      (Hon’ble     Sanjay   Kishan    Kaul,    J.

allowed the appeal and Hon’ble K.M.Joseph, J. dismissed the

appeal),    the   matter    be    placed     before   Hon’ble    the    Chief

Justice of India for referring the matter to a Larger Bench.
......................J.
                                                 [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]



                                                ......................J.
                                                 [K.M.JOSEPH]

 New Delhi;
August 29, 2019.