[Cites
4
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
The Director Of Horticulture vs Pravat Kumar Dash on 9 August, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2334, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2693
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
L. Nageswara Rao
REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

           CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6227-6228 OF 2019
     (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NOS. 1363-1364 OF 2019


THE DIRECTOR OF HORTICULTURE, ODISHA                             .....APPELLANT(S)


                                         VERSUS


PRAVAT KUMAR DASH & ORS.                                     .....RESPONDENT(S)


                           JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1)   Leave granted.
2)   The challenge in the present appeals is to a judgment passed by

     Orissa High Court on December 22, 2017 maintaining the order

     dated June 27, 2014 passed by Odisha Administrative Tribunal in

     Original Application (OA) No. 1510 of 2012 and other petitions.

     The Tribunal decided nine OAs by a common order whereby the

     orders passed by the Government not to fill up the posts of

     Gardener and to create the equal number of posts of Horticulture

     Extension Workers were set aside.            The State was directed to

     consider the applicants for appointment against the existing

     vacant posts of Gardener. The operative part of the order reads as

     under:
“17.    In   view   of   our analysis   in   the   foregoing
Page 1 of 10
paragraphs, the order dated 15.9.2012, 06.10.2012 and
             17.11.2012 passed by the Government in their
             Agriculture Department not to fill up the posts of
             Gardener and create equal number of posts of
             Horticulture    Extension    Workers     stand     quashed.
Respondents are directed to consider the case of the
             applicants for their appointment against the existing
             vacant posts of Gardener, as has been done in the case
             of similarly placed trained candidates pursuant to the
             order of the Hon’ble High Court, within a period of three
             months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
             Since the applicants have been fighting for their right
             for the last more than 15 years, respondents are
             directed to stick to the dead line fixed by this Tribunal.”
3)   Aggrieved against the said order, the State and the Director of

     Horticulture, Odisha filed writ petitions before the High Court. The

     High Court dismissed the writ petitions holding that the applicants

     had undergone training after being selected and sponsored by the

     Government. It is also held that since the posts of Gardener are

     lying vacant, there is no reason why the State should not consider

     the applicants against such vacancies.
4)   The facts leading to the present appeals are that Agriculture and

     Cooperation Department of Odisha approved ten months course for

     pre-service training of Gardeners.        The Gardeners were to be

     recruited through an open advertisement and to undergo ten

     months training in the School of Horticulture, Odisha.                All the

     candidates who were trained up to the year 1990 were absorbed.

     It was on April 16, 1998, the Director of Horticulture decided to

     impart pre-service Gardener’s Training in the 10 Departmental

     farms during the year 1998-1999.          The candidates were to be

     selected as per the guidelines in terms of the selection procedure
Page 2 of 10
circulated.   The procedure for selecting candidates in all the 30

     districts was to be made by a committee chaired by Deputy

     Director of Horticulture in each range. One of the conditions in the

     procedure circulated was as under:
“VIII. The candidates are required to furnish a bond in
             the prescribed form to the effect that after successful
             completion of training they shall serve under the
             Department for at least 3 years, if required, failing
             which the stipend paid during the training period shall
             become refundable. No guarantee can be given in the
             matter of employment after successful completion of
             the training by the trainees.”
5)   The   High    Court   ordered   an   inquiry   on   May   11,    1999     in

     Miscellaneous Case No. 5135 of 1999 arising out of OJC No. 4665 of

     1999, when it was found as under:
“(i) Out of sixty four candidates selected as gardeners
             trainee, six candidates have been selected by the
             Director of Horticulture without following proper
             procedure.
(ii) 356 (Three hundred and fifty six) candidates have
             been selected as gardeners trainee irregularly and
             imparted training in some identified farms under
             Director of Horticulture outside the School of
             Horticulture at Kurds, meant for such training without
             approval of Government.
(iii)  Besides, 997 (Nine hundred ninety seven)
             applications received directly for selection as gardeners
             trainee are also lying pending with the Director of
             Horticulture Orissa without proper notification.”
6)   It was decided to dispense with the services of six persons who

     have been selected by the Director of Horticulture. The Director of

     Horticulture was directed not to give any employment or any

     financial assistance to 356 candidates who have been selected

     irregularly and imparted training at places other than School of
Page 3 of 10
Horticulture, Khurda. Director of Horticulture was also directed not

     to entertain 997 pending applications for their selection as

     Gardeners trainee. The said decision became the subject matter of

     challenge before the Odisha Administrative Tribunal.
7)   On April 24, 2001, services of six persons as mentioned in the

     letter of Director of Horticulture were terminated.    Such order of

     termination was challenged before the Odisha Administrative

     Tribunal in OA Nos. 1144 of 2001, 1181 of 2001, 1374 of 2001 and

     1435 of 2001. These applications were allowed on September 13,

     2006 whereby the appellant was directed to reinstate the services

     of the applicants along with payment of consequential benefits

     including 50% of their salary and allowances.
8)   The writ petitions filed by the State against order dated September

     13, 2006 were dismissed by the High Court on December 5, 2009.
It was held that all trainees who have taken training outside the

     School of Horticulture, Khurda stand on the same footing and a pick

     and choose method could not have been adopted by the

     Department for the purpose of compliance of the order of the Court

     passed in OJC No. 4665 of 1999 (PIL). The High Court held that all

     such trainees were appointed against the substantive vacancies

     and continued for almost two years, therefore, they are protected

     under
Article 311
of the Constitution of India and their services

     could not be terminated without any notice. The relevant extract

     from the order reads as under:
Page 4 of 10
“7. …As it appears, all the candidates selected, for
               such training had been trained in different farms
               instead of School of Horticulture at Khurda meant for
               such training without approval of the Government.
               Therefore, all such trainees, who had taken training
               outside the School stand on the same footing and a pick
               and choose method could not have been adopted by
               the Department for the purpose of compliance of the
               order of this Court passed, in the aforesaid Public
               Interest Litigation. We are, therefore, of the view that
               there was no illegality in the recommendation of the
               Director selecting these four opposite parties for the
               purpose of training, he being the higher authority than
               the authority competent to do so.
8. Apart from the above, as rightly observed by the
               Tribunal that all these opposite parties were regularly
               appointed by order dated 30th June, 1999 against the
               substantive vacancies and continued as such almost for
               two years. Therefore, they are protected under
Article
               311(2)
of the Constitution of India as well as Rule 15 of
               the O.C.S. (C.C.A) Rules, 1962 and their services could
               not have been terminated without a notice to show
               cause. The Tribunal, while holding such, also relied
               upon a decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court as well
               as a decision of this Court.”
9)   Nine    OAs   were   filed   by   81   applicants   before   the   Odisha

     Administrative Tribunal including OA Nos. 337 of 2001 and 529 of

     2001.    Another OA No. 1534 of 2006 was also filed seeking

     appointment as Gardener in terms of order dated September 13,

     2006. Such applications were allowed by the Tribunal on May 11,

     2011.
10) It may be noticed that certain OAs filed by Subhash Chandra Jena,

     Ajay Kumar Das and Ranjit Sahoo were dismissed by the Tribunal

     on December 21, 2009 but such order was set aside by the High
Page 5 of 10
Court on December 14, 2011 holding that the applicants were on

     the same footing as parties in previous applications which were

     decided on May 11, 2011.
11) On March 7, 2012, the State decided to abolish the post of

     Gardener.    On May 9, 2012, it was decided that no further

     recruitment will be made in the cadre of Gardener and the post

     would stand abolished when the incumbent retires or gets

     promoted. There were certain directions to the State Government

     to consider the appointments in other Original Applications. The

     claim of the applicants for appointment as Gardener was rejected

     on various dates. Such termination orders were challenged in nine

     separate applications before the Odisha Administrative Tribunal

     including OA No. 1510 of 2012 which was allowed on June 27, 2014

     and the writ petitions filed by the State stand dismissed vide order

     dated December 22, 2017. This order is impugned in the present

     appeal.
12) In this factual background and the number of orders passed by
     Odisha Administrative Tribunal, the argument of Mr. Vikas Singh,

     learned senior counsel for the appellant is that 362 persons were

     selected in wholly irregular manner to undergo training in Depart-

     mental farms other than training by the Director of Horticulture.

     Out of 1359 applications, 362 were selected without any criteria.

     The circular of the State Government was categorically to the effect

     that undergoing training will not ensure an appointment. The train-

     ing of Gardener was only an eligibility qualification and not a guar-
Page 6 of 10
antee for the appointment. It is, thus, argued that training was not

     as per the decision of Director of Horticulture communicated on

     April 16, 1998 but in the departmental farms without a transparent

     selection process, 362 candidates out of 1359 candidates were se-

     lected to undergo training. Still, further, six candidates were ap-

     pointed surreptitiously, therefore, it was decided to terminate their

     services.   The appointment was dehors any selection procedure

     known for making employment against the public post, therefore,

     such appointments cannot be said to be protected by
Article 311
or

     by the Orissa Civil Services Rules.
13) It is alternatively contended that even if six candidates have been
     appointed illegally, such illegality cannot be claimed to be perpetu-

     ated by the other candidates by seeking parity with six illegally ap-

     pointed candidates.   It is pointed out that the posts of Gardener

     were never advertised even when six candidates were appointed,

     therefore, the direction of the Tribunal as maintained by the High

     Court to make appointments is contrary to the statutory rules and

     the procedure for appointment against the public post, therefore,

     such directions cannot be sustained in law.
14) It is also argued that the findings recorded by the Tribunal, as af-
firmed by the High Court, that similarly situated Gardeners have

     been appointed are factually incorrect as some vacancies in the

     cadre of Gardener were filled in the rehabilitation scheme from

     amongst the attendants who have completed six years’ service for
Page 7 of 10
promotion to the post or rank of Gardener on the basis of seniority-
cum-merit.
15) On the other hand, the argument of Mr. Guru Krishnakumar as well
     as Mr. R. Basant, learned senior counsels appearing on behalf of

     some of the respondents, is that the action of the State is wholly

     arbitrary as similarly situated candidates have been appointed. It

     is further argued that the stand that post of Gardener stands abol-

     ished and the post of Horticulture Extension Worker has been cre-

     ated is only a ruse as it is nomenclature of the same post. The

     stand of the State that Horticulture Extension Worker is a promo-

     tion post from the post of Gardener is not correct.
16) We have heard learned counsel for the parties and find that the or-
ders passed by the Tribunal, as affirmed by the High Court, are not

     justified in law.
17) The respondents were subjected to training in pursuance of circular
     dated July 4, 1998. The training was proposed in the circular dated

     April 16, 1998. It clearly contemplates that there is no guarantee

     in the matter of employment after successful completion of training

     by the trainees. At that time, training was contemplated only in

     the School of Horticulture, Khurda during the year 1998-1999. Sub-

     sequently, the training was proposed to be held in ten selected de-

     partmental farms but there is no assurance in the said communica-

     tion dated July 4, 1998 that candidates would be appointed. The

     appointment to the post of Gardener is required to be made in
Page 8 of 10
terms of the Recruitment Rules if any, applicable thereto or in

     terms of instructions issued under executive power of the State but

     the appointments cannot be made merely for the reason that a

     candidate has undergone training. Out of 1359 candidates who ap-

     plied in pursuance of circular dated July 4, 1998, 362 candidates

     were selected for training but the manner of their selection has not

     come on record.
18) We find the selection of the candidates for training was not by way
     of transparent procedure nor there was any commitment to appoint

     candidates who have completed training as Gardeners, therefore,

     even if a candidate has completed training, he cannot seek right of

     employment unless such posts are advertised and filled up by giv-

     ing opportunity to all similarly situated candidates. The directions

     of the Tribunal, as affirmed by the High Court, that the candidates

     are intended to be employed are wholly unjustified as there cannot

     be any direction for appointment only for the reason that the candi-

     dates have undergone training. It is not necessary for this Court to

     examine whether the post of Gardener has been upgraded to the

     post of Horticulture Extension Worker or that it is the same post

     having a different nomenclature. The fact remains that all public

     posts are required to be filled up by giving an opportunity to all the

     candidates to apply and to compete for the post.
19) The services of six persons who were appointed were ordered to be
     terminated on December 10, 1999 but even if their termination

     was set aside on April 24, 2001, it will not confer any right on the
Page 9 of 10
basis of equity in favour of the other candidates. There cannot be

      any parity in the illegality. Reference will be made to
Chandigarh

      Administration & Anr. v. Jagjit Singh & Anr.1
and
Kulwinder

      Pal Singh & Anr. v. State of Punjab & Ors.2
20) In view of the above, we find that the order of the Odisha Adminis-
trative Tribunal, as affirmed by the High Court, directing the State

      to appoint the applicants as Gardeners is beyond their jurisdiction

      vested in the High Court as there cannot be any direction for mak-

      ing appointment to the public post in such a manner.                 Conse-

      quently, the appeals are allowed. The orders passed by the High

      Court and the Tribunal are set aside and the OAs filed by the re-

      spondents are dismissed.
.............................................J.
                                                     (L. NAGESWARA RAO)



                                      .............................................J.
                                                           (HEMANT GUPTA)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 09, 2019.
1   (1995) 1 SCC 745
2   (2016) 6 SCC 532
Page 10 of 10