[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Commissioner Of Income Tax Karnal vs M/S Carpet India.Panipat(Haryana) on 27 August, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 5032, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1007, (2019) 12 SCALE 353, (2019) 6 MAD LJ 727, AIR 2020 SC (CIV) 382
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
Surya Kant
,
R. Subhash Reddy
,
Rohinton Fali Nariman
1


                                                                            REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4590 OF 2018

                   COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, KARNAL (HARYANA)         Appellant(s)

                                 VERSUS

                   M/S CARPET INDIA, PANIPAT (HARYANA)                  Respondent(s)

                                                  WITH

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4591 OF 2018

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4592 OF 2018

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4593 OF 2018

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4594 OF 2018

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4595 OF 2018

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4596 OF 2018

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4597 OF 2018

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4598 OF 2018

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4599 OF 2018

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4603 OF 2018


                                           J U D G M E N T
R.F. Nariman, J.
Civil Appeal Nos. 4590, 4591, 4592 and 4603 of 2018:
1)      This batch of appeals arises from a judgment passed

                   by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
Date: 2019.09.04
17:24:13 IST
Reason:
which   the   Appeals   preferred   by   the   Revenue   have   been

                   dismissed     relying   upon
Commissioner     of   Income     Tax,

                   Thiruvananthapuram vs. Baby Marine Exports, Kollam
(2007) 4
2
SCC   555   in    order   to   arrive      at   a   conclusion    that   the

supporting manufacturer is at par with the actual direct

exporter of goods when it comes to deductions that are

available under
Section 80HHC
of the Income Tax Act, 1961

(in short ‘the Act’).
2)     It is unnecessary to go into the facts of each of

these cases as it is undisputed that the assessee in each

of these cases is a supporting manufacturer.                     The scheme

insofar as
Section 80HHC
of the Act is concerned is crystal

clear.      The    marginal     note       to
Section   80HHC
reads   -
Deduction    in    respect     of   profits         retained   for    export

business.
“80HHC. (1) Where an assessee, being an Indian
       company or a person (other than a company)
       resident in India, is engaged in the business
       of export out of India of any goods or
       merchandise to which this section applies,
       there shall, in accordance with and subject to
       the provisions of this section, be allowed, in
       computing the total income of the assessee, a
       deduction to the extent of profits, referred to
       in sub-section (1B), derived by the assessee
       from the export of such goods or merchandise:
Provided that if the assessee, being a holder
       of an Export House Certificate or a Trading
       House Certificate (hereafter in this section
       referred to as an Export House or a Trading
       House,   as  the   case  may   be,)  issues   a
       certificate referred to in clause (b) of
       sub-section (4A), that in respect of the amount
       of the export turnover specified therein, the
       deduction under this sub-section is to be
       allowed to a supporting manufacturer, then the
       amount of deduction in the case of the assessee
       shall be reduced by such amount which bears to
       the total profits derived by the assessee from
       the   export  of   trading   goods,  the   same
       proportion as the amount of export turnover
       specified in the said certificate bears to the
3
total export turnover of the       assessee   in
respect of such trading goods.
(1A) Where the assessee, being a supporting
manufacturer, has during the previous year,
sold goods or merchandise to any Export House
or Trading House in respect of which the Export
House or Trading House has issued a certificate
under the proviso to sub-section (1), there
shall, in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of this section, be allowed in
computing the total income of the assessee, a
deduction to the extent of profits, referred to
in sub-section (1B), derived by the assessee
from the sale of goods or merchandise to the
Export House or Trading House in respect of
which the certificate has been issued by the
Export House or Trading House.
Xxx xxx xxx
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1),—
(a) where the export out of India is of goods
or merchandise manufactured or processed by the
assessee, the profits derived from such export
shall be the amount which bears to the profits
of the business, the same proportion as the
export turnover in respect of such goods bears
to the   total turnover of the business carried
on by the assessee;
(b) where the export out of India is of trading
goods, the profits derived from such export
shall be the export turnover in respect of such
trading goods as reduced by the direct costs
and indirect costs attributable to such export;
(c) where the export out of India is of goods
or merchandise manufactured or processed by the
assessee and of trading goods, the profits
derived from such export shall,—
(i) in respect of the goods or merchandise
manufactured or processed by the assessee, be
the amount which bears to the adjusted profits
of the business, the same proportion as the
adjusted    export turnover in respect of such
goods bears to the adjusted total turnover of
the business    carried on by the assessee; and
(ii) in respect of trading goods, be the export
turnover in respect of such trading goods as
reduced by the direct and indirect costs
attributable to export of such trading goods:
4
Provided that the profits computed under clause
(a) or clause (b) or clause (c) of this
sub-section shall be further increased by the
amount which bears to ninety per cent of any
sum referred to in clause (iiia) (not being
profits on sale of a licence acquired from any
other person), and clauses (iiib) and (iiic) of
section 28
, the same proportion as the export
turnover bears to the total turnover of the
business carried on by the assessee:
Provided further that in the case of an
assessee having export turnover not exceeding
rupees ten crores during the previous year, the
profits    computed under clause (a) or clause
(b) or clause (c) of this sub-section or after
giving effect to the first proviso, as the case
may be, shall be further increased by the
amount which bears to ninety per cent of any
sum referred to in clause (iiid) or clause
(iiie), as the case may be, of
section 28
, the
same proportion as the export turnover bears to
the total turnover of the   business carried on
by the assessee:
Provided also that in the case of an assessee
having export turnover exceeding rupees ten
crores during the previous year, the profits
computed   under clause (a) or clause (b) or
clause (c) of this sub-section or after giving
effect to the first proviso, as the case may
be, shall be    further increased by the amount
which bears to ninety per cent of any sum
referred to in clause (iiid) of
section 28
, the
same proportion as the export turnover bears to
the total turnover of the business carried on
by the assessee, if the assessee has necessary
and sufficient evidence to prove that,—
(a) he had an option to choose either the duty
drawback or the Duty Entitlement Pass Book
Scheme, being the Duty Remission Scheme; and
(b) the rate of drawback credit attributable to
the customs duty was higher than the rate of
credit allowable under the Duty Entitlement
Pass Book Scheme, being the Duty Remission
Scheme :
Provided also that in the case of an assessee
having export turnover exceeding rupees ten
crores during the previous year, the profits
computed   under clause (a) or clause (b) or
clause (c) of this sub-section or after giving
effect to the first proviso, as the case may
5
be, shall be    further increased by the amount
which bears to ninety per cent of any sum
referred to in clause (iiie) of
section 28
, the
same proportion as the export turnover bears to
the total turnover of the business carried on
by the assessee, if the assessee has necessary
and sufficient evidence to prove that,—
(a) he had an option to choose either the duty
drawback   or  the  Duty   Free  Replenishment
Certificate, being the Duty Remission Scheme;
and
(b) the rate of drawback credit attributable to
the customs duty was higher than the rate of
credit   allowable    under   the   Duty   Free
Replenishment   Certificate,  being   the  Duty
Remission Scheme.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,
“rate of credit allowable” means the rate of
credit   allowable    under    the   Duty   Free
Replenishment   Certificate,   being   the  Duty
Remission Scheme     calculated in the manner as
may be notified by the Central Government:
Provided also that in case the computation
under clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) of
this sub-section is a loss, such loss shall be
set off against the amount which bears to
ninety per cent of—
(a) any sum referred to in clause (iiia) or
clause (iiib) or clause (iiic), as the case may
be, or
(b) any sum referred to in clause (iiid) or
clause (iiie), as the case may be, of
section
28
, as    applicable in the case of an assessee
referred to in the second or the third or the
fourth proviso, as the case may be,
the same proportion as the export turnover
bears to the total turnover of the business
carried on by the assessee.
Explanation.—For   the       purposes   of   this
sub-section,—
(a) “adjusted export turnover” means the export
turnover as reduced by the export turnover in
respect of trading goods;
(b) “adjusted profits of the business” means
the profits of the business as reduced by the
profits derived from the business of export out
of India of trading goods as computed in the
6
manner provided in clause (b) of sub-section
     (3);
(c) “adjusted total turnover” means the total
     turnover of the business as reduced by the
     export turnover in respect of trading goods;
(d)   “direct  costs”  means   costs  directly
     attributable to the trading goods exported out
     of India including the purchase price of such
     goods;
(e) “indirect costs” means costs, not being
     direct costs, allocated in the ratio of the
     export turnover in respect of trading goods to
     the total turnover;
(f) “trading goods” means goods which are not
     manufactured or processed by the assessee.
     (3A) For the purposes of sub-section (1A),
     profits derived by a supporting manufacturer
     from the sale of goods or merchandise shall be,
     —
(a) in a case where   the business carried on by
     the     supporting      manufacturer    consists
     exclusively of sale   of goods or merchandise to
     one or more Export    Houses or Trading Houses,
     the profits of the    business;
(b) in a case where the business carried on by
     the supporting manufacturer does not consist
     exclusively of sale of goods or merchandise to
     one or more Export Houses or Trading Houses,
     the amount which bears to the profits of the
     business the same proportion as the turnover in
     respect of sale to the respective Export House
     or Trading House bears to the total turnover of
     the business carried on by the assessee.”
3)   It will be noticed on an analysis of
Section 80HHC(1)
that where the assessee has engaged in the business of

export out of India of any goods or merchandise to which

this section applies, what shall be allowed in computing

the total income of the assessee, is a deduction to the

extent of profits, referred to in sub-section (1B), and

derived by the assessee from the export of such goods or
7
merchandise.        So    far    as   “supporting        manufacturers”         are

concerned, under
Section 80HHC(1A)
, where any Export House

or   Trading      House    has    issued       a     certificate    that        the

supporting manufacturer has, in fact, supplied such goods

or merchandise for export, they shall also be allowed a

deduction to the extent of profits referred to derived by

the assessee from the sale of goods or merchandise to the

Export House or Trading House.                     The manner of deduction,

insofar as the exporter is concerned, is
laid down in
sub-
section (3) which when read together with its provisos make

it clear that profits that are derived from such export

shall be further increased in the manner provided by the

first proviso; and where export turnover does not exceed

rupees ten crores, in the manner provided by the second

proviso; and where the export turnover exceeds rupees ten

crores, in the manner provided by the third proviso.                        What

is conspicuous by their absence is any of the provisos in

sub-section (3) insofar as sub-section (3A) is concerned,

which    makes    it     clear    that       the    profits    derived     by     a

supporting     manufacturer       shall      be     strictly   in   accordance

with the provisions contained in
Section 80HHC (3A)
read

with the explanation to the section, which then defines

“Profits     of   the     business”      under       explanation    (baa)        as

follows:
“profits of business” means the profits of the
        business as computed under the head “Profits
        and gains of business or profession” as reduced
        by-
8
(1)   ninety per cent of any sum referred to in
        clauses (iiia), (iiib), (iiic), (iiid) and
        (iiie) of
section 28
or of any receipts by way
        of   brokerage,  commission,   interest, rent,
        charges or any other receipt of a similar
        nature included in such profits; and

       (2)   the   profits  of   any   branch, office,
        warehouse or any other establishment of the
        assessee situate outside India.”
4)     Given this statutory scheme, it is clear that the

exporter stands on a completely different footing from the

supporting manufacturer as the parameters and scheme for

claiming deduction relatable to exporters under 80HHC(1)

read   with    (3)    is   completely   different   from    that   of

supporting manufacturers under
Section 80HHC (1A)
read with

(3A) thereof.
5)     We may mention in passing that this matter has been

placed before a bench of three judges by the judgment in
Commissioner of Income Tax, Karnal (Haryana) vs. Carpet

India, Panipat (Haryana
) (2018) 6 SCC 620, where this Court

analysed      the    provisions   of
Section   80HHC    (3A)
and

thereafter adverted to the decision in
Baby Marine Exports
(supra) as follows:-
“15) In
Baby Marine Exports
(supra), the
       question of law involved was “whether the
       export house premium received by the assessee
       is includible in the “profits of the business”
       of the assessee while computing the deduction
       under
Section 80HHC
of the Income Tax Act,
       1961?”. The said case mainly dealt with the
       issue related with the    eligibility of export
       house premium for inclusion in the business
       profit for the purpose of deduction under
Section 80HHC
of the IT Act. Whereas in the
9
instant case, the main point of consideration
is   whether   the   assessee-firm,   being   a
supporting manufacturer, is to be treated at
par with the direct exporter for the purpose of
deduction of export incentives under
Section
80HHC
of the IT Act, after having regards to
the peculiar facts of the instant case.
16) While deciding the issue in
Baby Marine
Exports
(supra), a two Judge Bench of this
Court held as under:
“39. On plain construction of
Section 80HHC
(1-A), the respondent is clearly entitled to
claim deduction of the premium amount received
from the export house in computing the total
income. The export house premium can be
included in the business profit because it is
an integral part of business operation of the
respondent which consists of sale of goods by
the respondent to the export house.”
17. The aforesaid decision has been followed
by another Bench of two Judges of this Court in
Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 7615 of
2009, Civil Appeal No. 6437 of 2012 and Others,
Commissioner of Income Tax Karnal vs. Sushil
Kumar Gupta decided on September 12, 2012. The
question considered in the aforesaid case is
reproduced below:
“3. In these civil appeals the common question
which arises for determination is as follows:
“Whether 90% of export benefits disclaimed in
favour of a supporting manufacturer (assessee
herein) have to be reduced in terms of
Explanation (baa) of
Section 80HHC
of the
Income Tax Act, 1961, while computing deduction
admissible to such supporting manufacturer
under
Section 80HHC (3A)
of the Act?”
4. This question has been answered in favour of
the assessee and against the Department in the
case of
CIT vs. Baby Marine Exports
[2007] 290
ITR 323/160 Taxman 160.
5. The civil appeals filed by the Department
are, accordingly, dismissed.”

Broadly speaking, we are of the view that both
these cases are not identical and cannot be
10
related with the deduction of export incentives
     by the supporting manufacturer under
Section
     80HHC
of the IT Act.
18) However, we are not in the agreement with
     these decisions and as Explanation (baa) of
Section 80HHC
specifically reduces deduction of
     90% of the amount referable to
Section 28
     (iiia)
to (iiie) of the
IT Act
, hence, we are
     of the view that these decisions require
     re-consideration by a larger Bench since this
     issue has larger implication in terms of
     monetary benefits for both the parties. After
     giving   our   thoughtful  consideration,   the
     following substantial question of law of
     general importance arises for re-consideration
     by this Court:
“Whether in the light of peculiar facts and
     circumstances of the instant case, supporting
     manufacturer who receives export incentives in
     the form of duty draw back (DDB), Duty
     Entitlement Pass Book (DEPB) etc. is entitled
     for deduction under
Section 80HHC
of the Income
     Tax Act, 1961?”
6)   We     agree   with   the   reasoning    and    analysis   of   the

referring    judgment,     namely,     that
Baby    Marine    Exports
(supra) dealt with an issue related to the eligibility of

export house premium for inclusion in business profit for

the purpose of deduction under
Section 80HHC
of the Act.
Whereas in the present appeals, the point for consideration

is completely different, being as to whether the assessees

being supporting manufacturers, are to be treated on par

with the direct exporter for the purpose of deduction of

export incentives under
Section 80HHC
of the Act.                    We,

therefore, answer the question referred to us by stating

that
Baby Marine Exports
(supra) deals with an entirely

different question and cannot be relied upon to arrive at
11
the conclusion that the supporting manufacturers are to be

treated on par with the direct exporter for the purpose of

deduction     under
Section   80HHC
of     the   Act,    as     has   been

pointed out by us herein above.
Consequently, the decision

in
C.I.T.   vs.     Satish   Kumar     Gupta    (C.A.   No.
6437/2012)

decided on 12.09.2012 is over ruled.
7)     This being the case, we allow these appeals in favour

of the Revenue and set aside the impugned judgment(s).
Civil Appeal Nos. 4593, 4594, 4595, 4596, 4597, 4598 and

4599 of 2018:
8)     In these appeals also the impugned judgments are set

aside.     However, it will be open for the respondent in the

above cases to show, by adducing the necessary facts, that

they are direct exporters as well and can therefore avail

of the deduction available under
Section 80HHC (1)
read

with (3).      For this purpose, these matters stand remanded

to   the   Appellate    Tribunal.        Accordingly,         these    appeals

stand disposed of.
.......................... J.
(ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN)


                                       .......................... J.
(R. SUBHASH REDDY)


                                       .......................... J.
(SURYA KANT)
New Delhi;
August 27, 2019.