[Cites
12
, Cited by
45
]
Supreme Court of India
Thankamony Amma vs Omana Amma N. on 13 August, 2019
Equivalent citations: (2019) 4 ICC 617, AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 3803, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 851, (2019) 12 SCALE 244, (2019) 2 RENCR 312, (2019) 2 RENTLR 303, (2019) 3 KER LJ 869, (2019) 4 KER LT 361, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 2606
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Vineet Saran
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
Civil Appeal No.6147 of 2019
          Thankamony Amma & Ors. vs. Omana Amman N. & Ors.
                                                                                                1

                                                                                       Reportable
                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO.6147 OF 2019


                         THANKAMONY AMMA & ORS.                                     …Appellants

                                                           VERSUS

                         OMANA AMMA N. & ORS.                                     …Respondents


                                                         JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.      This appeal challenges the final judgment and order dated

                         09.08.2018 passed by the High Court of Kerala in RCR No.172 of 2017.
2.      One Sankara Kurup, owner of a piece of land admeasuring 27 cents

                         erected a Theatre named “Manorama Theatre” thereon (“suit Property”, for

                         short). The management of the Theatre was being conducted by his son-in-

                         law named Kumara Kurup (predecessor of the respondents herein). After

                         the death of Sankara Kurup, a claim was raised by his son Viswanatha

                         Kurup that he was entitled to the rights and interests in said Theatre by
Signature Not Verified
virtue of a Will executed by his father.
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2019.08.13
17:03:47 IST
Reason:
Civil Appeal No.6147 of 2019
Thankamony Amma & Ors. vs. Omana Amman N. & Ors
.
2
Soon thereafter, proceedings were initiated by Kumara Kurup

     before the Land Tribunal Alappuzha being OA No.3233 of 1975

     submitting, inter alia that he was a cultivating tenant and as such entitled

     to protection under the
Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963
.               Viswanatha

     Kurup was arrayed as respondent in the proceedings. The application

     preferred by Kumara Kurup was rejected by the Land Tribunal, Alappuzha

     on 17.03.1976. The finding rendered by the Land Tribunal was to the

     following effect:-
“The oral evidence adduced by respondent shows
               that the scheduled property and cinema theatre
               belongs to the respondent’s father and after his death
               the property passed to him.            Ext.B1 accounts
               maintained in the hand-writing of the father of the
               respondent shows that the applicant is only the
               manager of the cinema theatre in the property. I
               therefore find that the application is not bona fide and
               it is not maintainable. In the result this O.A.
               dismissed under Rule 9.1 (a) of the Kerala Land
               Reforms (Vesting and Assignment) Rules, 1970.”
3.      Kumara Kurup died in the year 1982 and the respondents

     succeeded to his interest. In the year 2009, the appellants herein filed Rent

     Control Petition No.5 of 2009 before the Rent Control Court, Alappuzha,

     seeking eviction of the respondents from the suit property.              It was

     submitted that the respondents who were initially paying rent had stopped

     paying rent and the suit property was required for personal requirement of

     the appellants. The respondents denied the title of the appellants. By its
Civil Appeal No.6147 of 2019
Thankamony Amma & Ors. vs. Omana Amman N. & Ors
.
3
order dated 08.04.2014 the Rent Control Court allowed the eviction

     petition. The order passed by the Land Tribunal (Ext A5 in Rent Control

     proceedings) was relied upon and it was observed:-
“Admittedly the scheduled building is situating in 27
               cents of property comprised in Sy. No.147/9 B of
               Mararikkulam South Village and the Land Tribunal
               found that the property and cinema theatre absolutely
               belongs to the predecessor of Narayana Kuruppu
               Viswanadha Kuruppu. It is admitted by the
               respondents 5 to 7 that Narayana Kuruppu
               Viswanadha Kuruppu is the only legal heir of Sankara
               Kuruppu. From Ext. A5, it can be seen that the title of
               Sankara Kuruppu and his son Viswanadha Kuruppu
               over the property and building was admitted by
               Kumara Kuruppu and he filed O.A. No.3233/75 for
               getting assignment of the property in his favour from
               the Land Tribunal. So it can be seen that the
               predecessor of respondents 5 to 7. Sri Kumara
               Kuruppu admitted the title of Viswanadha Kuruppu
               and finding in O.A. No.3233/75 is binding on the
               respondents 5 to 7. Apart from that there is absolutely
               no pleadings with respect to right of respondents 5 to
               7 or their predecessors over the plaint scheduled
               property. Hence I find that the denial of title raised in
               the objection by the respondents 5 to 7 is not bona
               fide.”
4.      The Rent Control Court also accepted the plea that the appellants

     bona fide required the suit property for conducting Cinema Theatre. The

     operative direction issued in the order dated 05.04.2014 was as under:
“An order or eviction is passed under
Section 11(3)
of
               the Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act
               directing the respondents to put the petitioners in
               possession of the petition scheduled building within
               one month from today.”
Civil Appeal No.6147 of 2019
Thankamony Amma & Ors. vs. Omana Amman N. & Ors
.
4
5.      The respondent being aggrieved, filed Rent Control Appeal No.17

     of 2014 before the Rent Control Appellate Authority, Alappuzha, which by

     its order dated 21.02.2017 dismissed said appeal. While dismissing the

     appeal, it was stated:-
“So Exbt.A8 would cut the very root of the case
               advanced by the respondents. Firstly Exbt.A8 would
               show that the said Sankara Kurup has constructed the
               Cinema Theatre and he was keeping books of
               accounts showing it. Secondly the said Kumara
               Kurup was only a manager of the theatre. Thirdly the
               said Kumara Kurup has accepted the said Viswanatha
               Kurup as his landlord. So the respondents who are
               claiming under the said Kumara Kurup can’t claim
               any more right over the scheduled property.”
6.      The respondents carried the matter further by filing Rent Control

     Revision No.172 of 2017 in the High Court under
Section 20
of the Kerala

     Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965 (“the Act” for short) which

     came to be allowed vide judgment and order dated 09.08.2018 presently

     under appeal. The High Court found that there was no material to arrive at

     a finding that there was any landlord-tenant relationship between the

     parties. The conclusion of the High Court was as under:
“Having gone through the respective contentions
               urged by the parties, it is rather clear that there is no
               material to arrive at a conclusion that there was a
               landlord-tenant relationship between the parties. Of
               course, what stands in the way of revision petitioners
               is the finding by the Land Tribunal when a claim for
               tenancy was made. But it could be seen that the claim
               for tenancy was on the allegation that the petitioner
Civil Appeal No.6147 of 2019
Thankamony Amma & Ors. vs. Omana Amman N. & Ors
.
5
was a cultivating tenant. Apparently the claim was
               not genuine and was not maintainable. That apart the
               finding is that the claimant was the Manager of the
               theatre. That is not the situation as far as the property
               is concerned. The property consists of 27 cents of
               land and a theatre building.           The theatre was
               constructed well before the
Kerala Land Reforms Act
coming into force. There is substantial material to
               indicate that the theatre was being run by the revision
               petitioners and their predecessor. But there is no
               material to indicate that it was on a tenancy
               arrangement. In the absence of any material to arrive
               at a conclusion that there was landlord-tenant
               relationship, the Rent Control Court has no
               jurisdiction to entertain the petition for eviction.”
7.      In this appeal, we heard Mr. Kaleeswaram Raj, learned Advocate

     for the appellants and Mr. P.B. Suresh, learned Advocate for the

     respondents.
8.      It is a matter of record that in proceedings initiated before the Land

     Tribunal, Kumara Kurup (predecessor of the respondents) had taken the

     plea that he was a tenant in respect of the suit property. The proceedings

     were filed against Viswanatha Kurup (predecessor of the appellants).

     While rejecting the plea taken by Kumara Kurup, the Land Tribunal relied

     upon the accounts maintained by Sankara Kurup in his own hand writing

     which showed that Kumara Kurup was only a manager. The plea of

     agricultural tenancy was rejected.
Civil Appeal No.6147 of 2019
Thankamony Amma & Ors. vs. Omana Amman N. & Ors
.
6
9          In the present proceedings accounts maintained by Sankara Kurup,

     namely Ext.A8 were produced on record. Considering the entirety of the

     circumstances and the fact that Kumara Kurup had accepted Viswanatha

     Kurup to be his landlord, the matter was decided in favour of the

     appellants by both the courts below.
10.        The scope of revisional powers under
Section 20
of the Act came

     up for consideration in
Rukmini Amma Saradamma v. Kallyani

     Sulochana
and others1. While considering whether the High Court could

     have reappreciated entire evidence, it was laid down:
“20. We are afraid this approach of the High Court is
                  wrong. Even the wider language of
Section 20
of the
                  Act cannot enable the High Court to act as a first or a
                  second court of appeal. Otherwise the distinction
                  between appellate and revisional jurisdiction will get
                  obliterated. Hence, the High Court was not right in re-
                  appreciating the entire evidence both oral or
                  documentary in the light of the Commissioner’s report
                  (Exts. C-1 and C-2 mahazar). In our considered view,
                  the High Court had travelled far beyond the revisional
                  jurisdiction. Even by the presence of the word
                  “propriety” it cannot mean that there could be a re-
                  appreciation of evidence. Of course, the revisional
                  court can come to a different conclusion but not on a
                  re-appreciation of evidence; on the contrary, by
                  confining itself to legality, regularity and propriety of
                  the order impugned before it. Therefore, we are
                  unable to agree with the reasoning of the High Court
                  with reference to the exercise of revisional
                  jurisdiction.”




     1 (
1993)   1 SCC 499
Civil Appeal No.6147 of 2019
Thankamony Amma & Ors. vs. Omana Amman N. & Ors
.
7
11.
In
Ubaiba v. Damodaran2
exercise of revisional power was

     considered in the context of an issue whether the relationship of landlord-

     tenant existed or not. It was urged that whether such relationship existed

     would be a jurisdictional fact. This Court dealt with the matter as under:-
“3. Mr K. Sukumaran, the learned Senior Counsel
                  appearing for the appellant contended that however
                  wide the jurisdiction of the revisional court under the
                  Act in question may be, but it cannot have jurisdiction
                  to reappreciate the evidence and substitute its own
                  finding upsetting the finding arrived at by the
                  appellate authority and therefore the impugned order
                  of the High Court is unsustainable in law.
In support
                  of this contention reliance has been placed on a
                  decision of this Court in the case of
Rukmini Amma
                  Saradamma v. Kallyani Sulochana1
whereunder the
                  selfsame provision of the
Kerala Act
was under
consideration. This Court after noticing the word
                  “propriety” used in
Section 20
came to the conclusion
                  that the approach of the High Court was totally wrong
                  and even the wider language of
Section 20
of the Act
                  cannot enable the High Court to act as a first or a
                  second court of appeal. Otherwise the distinction
                  between appellate and revisional jurisdiction will get
                  obliterated. The Court also further observed “even by
                  the presence of the word ‘propriety’ it cannot mean
                  that there could be any reappreciation of evidence”.
                  The learned counsel for the respondent on the other
                  hand contended that the aforesaid decision will have
                  no application to the case in hand where the dispute
                  involved relates to a jurisdictional fact and according
                  to the learned counsel where the dispute is in relation
                  to a jurisdictional fact there should not be any fetter
                  on the power of the revisional court even to
                  reappreciate the evidence and come to its own
                  conclusion. On being asked to support the aforesaid
                  proposition no authority could be placed though on
                  first principle learned counsel for the respondent
                  argued as aforesaid. Having examined the rival
                  submission and having gone through the decision of
     2 (
1999)   5 SCC 645
Civil Appeal No.6147 of 2019
Thankamony Amma & Ors. vs. Omana Amman N. & Ors
.
8
this Court referred to earlier we are of the considered
                  opinion that though the revisional power under the
Rent Act
may be wider than
Section 115
of the Code
                  of Civil Procedure it cannot be equated even with the
                  second appellate power conferred on the civil court
                  under
the Code of Civil Procedure
. Notwithstanding
                  the use of the expression “propriety” in
Section 20
,
                  the revisional court therefore will not be entitled to
                  reappreciate the evidence and substitute its own
                  conclusion in place of the conclusion of the appellate
                  authority. On examining the impugned judgment of
                  the High Court in the light of the aforesaid ratio of
                  this Court it is crystal clear that the High Court
                  exceeded its jurisdiction by reappreciating the
                  evidence and in coming to the conclusion that the
                  relationship of landlord-tenant did not exist. In the
                  circumstances, the impugned revisional order of the
                  High Court is wholly unsustainable and we set aside
                  the same and the order of the appellate authority is
                  affirmed.
12.        A Constitution Bench of this Court considered the revisional

     powers of the High Court under Rent Acts operating in different States in
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited v. Dilbahar Singh3
.
The

     decision in
Rukmini Amma Saradamma v. Kallyani Sulochana
and

     others1 was again referred to in para 16. In para 38 it was observed:
“38. Rukmini1 holds, and in our view, rightly that even
                  the wider language of Section 20 of the Kerala Rent
                  Control Act does not enable the High Court to act as a
                  first or a second court of appeal. We are in full
                  agreement with the view of the three-Judge Bench in
                  Rukmini1 that the word “propriety” does not confer
                  power upon the High Court to reappreciate evidence
                  to come to a different conclusion but its consideration
                  of evidence is confined to find out legality, regularity


     3 (
2014)   9 SCC 78
Civil Appeal No.6147 of 2019
Thankamony Amma & Ors. vs. Omana Amman N. & Ors
.
9
and propriety of the order impugned4 before it. We
               approve the view of this Court in Rukmini1.”
13.     Considering the instant matter in the backdrop of law
laid down by
this Court it must be stated that the findings rendered by the courts below

     were well supported by evidence on record and could not even be said to

     be perverse in any way. The High Court could not have re-appreciated the

     evidence and the concurrent findings rendered by the courts below ought

     not to have been interfered with by the High Court while exercising

     revisional jurisdiction.
14.     We, therefore, allow this appeal, set aside the judgment and order

     dated 09.08.2018 passed by the High Court and restore the Decree for

     eviction as passed by the Rent Control Court and confirmed by the Rent

     Control Appellate Authority, Alappuzha. No order as to costs.
……………………..J.
                                                              [Uday Umesh Lalit]


                                                             ……………………..J.
                                                                [Vineet Saran]
     New Delhi;
August 13, 2019.
4 Kalyani Sulochana   v. Saradamma, 1991 SCC OnLine Ker 213 : (1991) 2 KLJ 105