[Cites
27
, Cited by
15
]
Supreme Court of India
Prahlad Raut vs All India Institute Of Medical Sciences on 27 August, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1027, (2019) 11 SCALE 566, (2019) 3 SERVLJ 140, (2019) 4 PAT LJR 265, (2019) 4 SCT 370, (2020) 1 SERVLR 431
Author:
Indira Banerjee
Bench:
Indira Banerjee
,
R. Banumathi
1

                                                                  REPORTABLE


                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6640 OF 2019
                                     (@ SLP(C) No. 30046 OF 2017)


                      Prahlad Raut                                  ….Appellant

                                            Versus

                      All India Institute of Medical Sciences     ….Respondent



                                            JUDGMENT
Indira Banerjee, J.
Leave granted.
2.   The appeal is against a judgment and order dated

                      24.07.2017 of the Delhi High Court, allowing Writ Petition

                      (Civil) No. 5977 of 2016 filed by the respondent, and setting

                      aside the order dated 29.02.2016 passed by the Principal
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.08.28
16:30:23 IST
Reason:
Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal at New Delhi,
2
whereby    the     learned      Tribunal   had     allowed        Original

Application (O.A.) No.3381 of 2013 filed by the appellant

challenging an order dated 6.1.2000 removing the appellant

from the service of the respondent.
3.    The appellant was appointed by the respondent as

Bearer on 09.02.1972 and was promoted to the post of

Steward on 15.10.1987. He was elected as an executive

member     of    the    Cooperative    Society    known      as     AIIMS

Cooperative, Thrift and Credit Society, hereinafter referred to

as “Cooperative Society”, run by the respondent, and became

its treasurer.
4.    On or about 5.3.1991, a First Information Report being

FIR    No.91       of     1991     under
Sections     406
/
420
/
468
/
471
/
477A
/
120B
of    the   Indian    Penal     Code     (
IPC
),

hereinafter referred to as the first FIR, was registered against

the appellant at the Defence Colony Police Station at New

Delhi, allegedly for causing loss to the tune of Rs.5 Lakhs to

the Cooperative Society by forging the signatures of its

members.
3
5.   The appellant was arrested on 05.06.1991 and was in

custody till 12.06.1991. By reason of his detention for more

than 48 hours, the appellant was, by an order dated 7.8.1991,

placed under deemed suspension in terms of Rule 10(2) of the

Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal)

Rules, 1965, hereinafter referred to as “CCS (CCA) Rules” and

subsistence allowance was paid to him.
6.   While the appellant was under suspension, another FIR

No.868 of 1991 under
Sections 356
/
379
/
411
of the IPC,

hereinafter referred to as the second FIR, was registered

against the appellant at the Connaught Place Police Station at

New Delhi, allegedly for snatching a bag containing cash of

Rs.290/­ and two lottery tickets from one Jai Ram son of

Chimma     Ram.    Criminal   proceedings    commenced        in

pursuance of the second FIR. By a judgment and order dated

15.9.1993, the appellant was convicted by the Metropolitan

Magistrate Delhi under
Section 379
of the Indian Penal Code.
7.   Admittedly, the second FIR was registered against the

appellant while he was under suspension. On behalf of the

respondent, it has been contended that the respondent had no
4
knowledge of the second FIR or of the judgment and order

dated 15.09.1993, of conviction of the appellant under
Section

379
of the IPC, for about 7 years.
8.   On 16.09.1993, the respondent had been released on

probation of good conduct for a period of one year, on

condition of furnishing a personal bond and one surety of

Rs.5,000/­. These orders were apparently concealed from the

respondent.
9.   It is the case of the respondent, that the respondent

came to know about the second FIR and the conviction of the

appellant pursuant thereto, after about 7 years, after which

the respondent was removed from service by a memorandum

dated 6.1.2000 issued under Rule 19(i) of the CCS (CCA)

Rules. The said Memorandum is extracted hereinbelow:­

           “Whereas Shri Prahlad Raut, Steward (under
      suspension) from 5.6.1991 on charge of embezzling and mis­
      appropriation in view of F.I.R. No.91 dated 3.3.1991 under
Section 406
/
420
/
468
/
471
/
477
­A and 120­B
IPC
And whereas Shri Prahlad Raut was later on charge for
      an offence of theft of a bag in public place, he had been
      convicted by the Court of Shri D.K. Saini, Metropolitan
      Magistrate, New Delhi under
section 356
/
379
/
411
IPC vide
      judgment dated 16.9.1993.
As whereas it is considered that the conduct of the said
      Shri Prahlad Raut which had held to his conviction is such
5
as to render his further retention in the service of the
      Institute undesirable.
And whereas Shri Prahlad Raut was              given    an
      opportunity to offer his written explanation.
And whereas the said Shri Prahlad Raut has given a
      written explanation which has been duly considered by the
      undersigned.
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by
      the Rule 19 (1) of the C.C.S. (C.C.A.) Rule 1965 the
      undersigned removes the said Shri Prahlad Raut from the
      service of the Institute from the date of the conviction i.e.
      16.9.1993.
Shri Prahlad Raut therefore is directed to deposit the
      subsistence allowance as received by him from the A.I.I.M.S.
      beyond 16.9.1993.”
10.   By the said memorandum dated 6.01.2000, issued under

Rule 19(i) of the CCS (CCA) Rules, the respondent removed

the appellant from service with retrospective effect from

16.9.1993, being the date of his conviction, pursuant to the

second FIR, and directed him to refund the subsistence

allowance received by him from 16.9.1993 onwards.
11.   Rule 19 of the CCS(CCA) Rules is set out hereinbelow for

convenience:
“19. Special procedure in certain cases
      Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 14 to Rule 18­
(i)  where any penalty is imposed on a Government
      servant on the ground of conduct which has led to his
      conviction on a criminal charge, or
6
(ii) where the Disciplinary Authority is satisfied for reasons
        to be recorded by it in writing that it is not reasonably
        practicable to hold an inquiry in the manner provided in these
        rules, or
(iii) where the President is satisfied that in the interest of
        the security of the State, it is not expedient to hold any
        inquiry in the manner provided in these rules.
The Disciplinary Authority may consider the circumstances of
      the case and make such orders thereon as it deems fit:
[Provided that the Government servant may be given an
      opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed to
      be Imposed before any order is made in a case under Clause (i):
Provided further that the Commission shall be consulted, where
      such consultation is necessary, [and the Government servant
      has been given an opportunity of representing the advice of the
      Commission,] before any orders are made in any case under
      this rule.]”
12.    The memorandum dated 6.1.2000 indicates compliance

of the requisites for imposition of penalty under Rule 19(i) of

the CCS(CCA) Rules.            It is a matter of record that the

appellant was convicted of offence under
Section 379
of the

Indian Penal Code for committing theft at a public place. The

said memorandum reveals that the conduct of the appellant of

committing theft in a public place, while under suspension on

the serious charge of embezzlement and misappropriation, for

which he was convicted under
Section 379
of the Indian Penal

Code was duly considered. On such consideration the
7
concerned authority found retention of the appellant in the

service of the respondent to be undesirable.
13.   The appellant has apparently been given an opportunity

of hearing.   The memorandum dated 6.1.2000 records that

the appellant had submitted a written explanation which had

duly been considered before removing the appellant from the

service of the respondent, from the date of his conviction.
14.   According to the appellant, aggrieved by the said

decision, the appellant appealed to the President of the

respondent, to which there was no response. The respondent

claims that the appeal was rejected in the same year, that is,

in 2000. However, no order of rejection is traceable.
15.   Over a decade after the appellant was removed from

service, he entered into a settlement with the respondent, in

terms whereof he compensated the respondent for the loss

caused by him to the Cooperative Society. As a consequence

of the compromise, the first FIR, that is, FIR No. 91 of 1991

was quashed by the High Court of Delhi on 2.11.2012.

Thereafter, the appellant made a representation demanding
8
Pension, Gratuity and Provident Fund with interest from the

respondent. This is not in dispute.
16.   The appellant has also alleged that he made a request to

the respondent for withdrawal and/or cancellation of the

Memorandum dated 6.1.2000, to which there was no

response.
17.   On or about 24.7.2013, that is, over thirteen years after

the issuance of the Memorandum dated 6.1.2000, removing

the   appellant     from    service    of   the    respondent,         with

retrospective effect from the date of his conviction, the

appellant filed Original Application No.3381 of 2013 before the

learned     Tribunal,    challenging     the   Memorandum          dated

6.1.2000.
18.
Section 21
of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985,

which prescribes the period of limitation for filing an

application in an Administrative Tribunal provides:
“21. LIMITATION.­
       (1) A Tribunal shall not admit an application,­
(a) in a case where a final order such as is mentioned in
       clause (a) of sub­section (2) of
section 20
has been made in
       connection with the grievance unless the application is made,
       within one year from the date on which such final order has
       been made;
9
(b) in a case where an appeal or representation such as is
       mentioned in clause (b) of sub­section (2) of
section 20
has
       been made and a period of six months had expired thereafter
       without such final order having been made, within one year
       from the date of expiry of the said period of six months.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­section (1),
       where­
(a) the grievance in respect of which an application is made
       had arisen by reason of any order made at any time during
       the period of three years immediately preceding the date on
       which the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal
       becomes exercisable under this Act in respect of the matter to
       which such order relates; and
(b) no proceedings for the redressal of such grievance had
       been commenced before the said date before any High Court,
       the application shall be entertained by the Tribunal if it is
       made within the period referred to in clause (a), or, as the
       case may be, clause (b), of sub­section (1) or within a period
       of six months from the said date, whichever period expires
       later.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­section (1) or
       sub­section (2), an application may be admitted after the
       period of one year specified in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub­
       section (1) or, as the case may be, the period of six months
       specified in sub­section (2), if the applicant satisfies the
       Tribunal that he had sufficient cause for not making the
       application within such period.”
19.   The pleadings of the appellant, in his application before

the Tribunal with regard to limitation, are extracted herein

below :­

      "3 Limitation
       The application is within the period of limitation as
       prescribed in
Section 21
of the A.T. Act, 1985. Moreover, the
       applicant challenges a per se illegal order of removal from
10
service with retrospective effect as well as his pension/GPF
      is withheld and thus are continuing wrongs.”
20.   Along with O.A. No.3381 of 2013 the appellant had filed

an application seeking condonation of delay and an affidavit

stating that the application for condonation of delay had been

filed in exercise of abundant caution and to comply with

procedural requirements.
21.   In the application for condonation of delay, it was

contended that (i) the order of removal with retrospective effect

being void ab initio, the law of limitation would not apply; (ii)

Delhi High Court had quashed the first FIR by an order dated

2.11.2012 and this order gave rise to a fresh cause of action;
(iii) the respondent had filed an appeal dated 21.01.2013 to

the Appellate Authority, seeking review of the order of

removal, to which there had been no response; (iv) the

appellant     had     continuing       cause      of     action       as

pension/provident fund amount had illegally been withheld;
(v) the appellant being 67 years of age, had retired from

service, and was in a state of penury.
11
22.   By an order dated 29.2.2016, the learned Tribunal set

aside the Memorandum dated 6.1.2000 and granted all the

benefits to the appellant. The Learned Tribunal held:­

      “11. Having considered the matter, we are of the firm view
      that the OA was filed within the period of limitation. It is not
      a matter of dispute that the punishing authority has
      retrospectively removed the applicant from service with effect
      from 16.09.1993, that being the date of his conviction in a
      criminal case by means of impugned order dated
      06.01.2000. Such orders are illegal, void ab initio and can
      be challenged at any time. The Hon’ble Apex Court in a
      celebrated judgment in the case of
State of Madhya
      Pradesh Vs. Syed Qamarali
1967(I) SLR 228, which was
      subsequently      followed    in   many      decisions,     has
      authoritatively ruled that the order of dismissal having been
      made in breach of mandatory provision of the rules, such
      order of dismissal had, therefore, no legal existence and it
      was not necessary for the respondents to have the order set
      aside by the court. The defence of limitation which was
      based only on contention that the order has to be set aside
      by a court before it became invalid must, therefore, be
      rejected.
12. Not only that, the applicant claimed that he has filed the
      appeal on 23.02.2000 (Annexure A­5 Colly) to the Appellate
      Authority which was received by the office of the President,
      AIIMS, on 25.02.2000. Subsequently, he moved a
      representation dated 21.01.2013 (Annexure A­6 Colly)
      claiming all the consequential benefits by ignoring the
      impugned removal order.
13. The contesting respondents have neither specifically
      denied nor produced any cogent record even to indicate that
      applicant has not filed any appeal (Annexure A­5
      Colly)/representation (Annexure A­6 Colly) or the same were
      decided by the Appellate Authority. Moreover, the applicant
      has claimed all consequential benefits along with amount of
      pension and other emoluments along with interest, which to
      our mind, is recurring and continuing cause of action.
12
14. Thus, seen from any angle, it cannot possibly be said
      that the OA filed by the applicant is barred by limitation as
      contrary urged on behalf of respondents. Hence, it is held
      that the main OA filed by the applicant is within the
      prescribed period of limitation and the crux of law
laid down
      in
Syed Qamarali
(supra) is fully applicable in the present
      case.
15. Once it is held that the main OA has been filed within
      the period of limitation, learned counsel for applicant then
      contended with some amount of vehemence that there is no
      provision of law/rules that the applicant can retrospectively
      be removed from his service with effect from 16.09.1993, the
      date of his conviction, that too, simply on the ground of his
      conviction in a criminal case by the impugned order dated
      06.01.2000 by the competent authority.”
23.   Aggrieved by the order dated 29.2.2016 passed by the

learned Tribunal, the respondent filed Writ Petition No. 5977

of 2016, which has been allowed by the High Court of Delhi by

the judgment and order dated 24.7.2017 impugned in this

appeal.
24.   We have heard Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned senior

counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant and Mr.

Dushyant Parashar, learned counsel appearing for the

respondent and perused the documents on record.
25.   Ms. Arora submitted that the learned Tribunal had

rightly set aside the order of removal on the ground that the

same could not have been passed with retrospective effect
13
from 16.9.1993. Furthermore, a mere conviction in a criminal

case could not, as held by the learned Tribunal, justify an

order under Rule 19, which postulates satisfaction by the

Disciplinary Authority, for reasons to be recorded in writing,

that the conduct of the employee, which had led to his

conviction in the criminal trial, was such that the punishment

should be imposed.
26.   Ms. Arora argued that the appellant had filed the

Original Application before learned Tribunal within limitation,

which is also supported by the non obstante clause in sub­

Section (3) of
Section 21
of the Administrative Tribunals Act,

1985.
27.   Sub­Section (3) of
Section 21
has no application in the

facts and circumstances of this case, since the appellant

contended and the learned Tribunal accepted that the Original

Application had been filed within limitation. It was not the

case of the appellant that there was sufficient cause for the

delay of about thirteen years beyond the period of limitation in

filing the Original Application. Nor has the Tribunal arrived at
14
any finding that there was good and sufficient cause for the

delay of about thirteen years, in filing the Application.
28.   Sub­Section (3) of
Section 21
is attracted when there is

sufficient cause for the delay in filing an appeal beyond the

period of limitation. The finding of the learned Tribunal that

the Original Application had been filed within limitation, as

argued by the appellant, is patently erroneous and has rightly

not been accepted by the High Court. It is well settled that

successive    representations     do   not    save      limitation   and

certainly does not justify delay of about thirteen years in

approaching the Tribunal.         The judgment of the Division

Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Sardar

Singh v. Union of India1
was rendered in the special facts

and circumstances of the case, where the claim of a soldier for

payment of disability pension was being denied only on the

ground that the disability was not attributable to, or

aggravated by, military service.
29.
In support of her argument that the learned Tribunal

was   right   in   entertaining    and       allowing     the   Original

1 1991 SCC Online P&H 1943
15
Application, Ms. Arora cited
Union of India and Others v.

Tarsem Singh2
where this Court held :­

      “7. To summarise, normally, a belated service related claim
      will be rejected on the ground of delay and laches (where
      remedy is sought by filing a writ petition) or limitation (where
      remedy is sought by an application to the Administrative
      Tribunal). One of the exceptions to the said rule is cases
      relating to a continuing wrong. Where a service related claim
      is based on a continuing wrong, relief can be granted even if
      there is a long delay in seeking remedy, with reference to the
      date on which the continuing wrong commenced, if such
      continuing wrong creates a continuing source of injury. But
      there is an exception to the exception. If the grievance is in
      respect of any order or administrative decision which related
      to or affected several others also, and if the reopening of the
      issue would affect the settled rights of third parties, then the
      claim will not be entertained. For example, if the issue
      relates to payment or refixation of pay or pension, relief may
      be granted in spite of delay as it does not affect the rights of
      third parties. But if the claim involved issues relating to
      seniority or promotion, etc., affecting others, delay would
      render the claim stale and doctrine of laches/limitation will
      be applied. …..”
30.   The proposition of law
laid down by
this Court in
Tarsem Singh
(supra) is unexceptionable. It is well settled

that where there is a continuing wrong in relation to a service

related claim, relief may be granted notwithstanding delay,

provided the granting of the relief does not unsettle matters

settled and affect third parties. The judgment was, however,


2 (2008) 8 SCC 648
16
rendered in the context of discretionary relief in proceedings

under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, for which there

is no limitation prescribed. Where the cause of action is not a

continuing one the High Courts refuse monetary claim on the

ground of delay, specially arrears.
In this context it would be

pertinent to refer to the concluding part of Paragraph (7) and

Paragraph (8) of the judgment of this Court in
Tarsem Singh
(supra) extracted hereinbelow:
“7. ……….Where a service related claim is based on a
      continuing wrong, relief can be granted even if there is a
      long delay in seeking remedy, with reference to the date
      on which the continuing wrong commenced, if such
      continuing wrong creates a continuing source of injury.
      But there is an exception to the exception. If the
      grievance is in respect of any order or administrative
      decision which related to or affected several others also,
      and if the reopening of the issue would affect the settled
      rights of third parties, then the claim will not be
      entertained. For example, if the issue relates to payment
      or refixation of pay or pension, relief may be granted in
      spite of delay as it does not affect the rights of third
      parties. But if the claim involved issues relating to
      seniority or promotion, etc., affecting others, delay would
      render the claim stale and doctrine of laches/limitation
      will be applied. Insofar as the consequential relief of
      recovery of arrears for a past period is concerned, the
      principles relating to recurring/successive wrongs will
      apply. As a consequence, the High Courts will restrict the
      consequential relief relating to arrears normally to a
      period of three years prior to the date of filing of the writ
      petition.
17
8.    In this case, the delay of sixteen years would affect
      the consequential claim for arrears. The High Court was
      not justified in directing payment of arrears relating to
      sixteen years, and that too with interest. It ought to have
      restricted the relief relating to arrears to only three years
      before the date of writ petition, or from the date of
      demand to date of writ petition, whichever was lesser. It
      ought not to have granted interest on arrears in such
      circumstances.”
31.   Ms. Arora argued that the appellant had not been paid

pension, gratuity and general provident fund even though the

appellant had completed service of over 20 years from 1972 to

1993. The appellant had otherwise, actually completed 28

years of service.   Ms. Arora also attacked the direction on the

appellant, in the Memorandum dated 6.1.2000, to return the

subsistence allowance with effect from 16.9.1993.
32.   Removal under Rule 19(i) of the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965

entails the consequence of forfeiture of retiral benefits such as

pension. The order of 6.01.2000 necessarily had to be

challenged before the learned Tribunal within the period of

limitation or alternatively the appellant would have to show

sufficient cause for the delay in filing the Original Application

beyond the period prescribed by limitation.             The question of

entitlement, if at all, of the appellant to gratuity and provident
18
fund, notwithstanding his removal by the Memorandum dated

6.01.2000 was neither raised before nor considered by the

learned Tribunal.     Nor was the question considered by the

High Court. The question cannot be raised at the stage of this

appeal.
33.   The question of retrospective discharge and removal

cannot be raised after lapse of thirteen years. Whether the

judgment of this Court in
Union Bank of India and Others

vs. C.G. Ajay Babu and Another
3 cited by Ms. Arora, at all

has any application, cannot be examined at the stage of this

appeal.
34.   As recorded by the High Court, as early as on 5.03.1991,

FIR No.91 (the first FIR) had been registered against the

appellant who had been elected Executive Member of the

Cooperative Society. That FIR, as observed above, was under
Sections   406
/
420
/
468
/
471
/
477A
/
120B
of   the   IPC    for

causing, as Treasurer, pecuniary loss to the tune of Rs.5

lakhs to the Society, by forging signatures of its members.
3. (2018) 9 SCC 529
19
35.   The appellant was arrested on 5.06.1991 and had

remained in custody till 12.06.1991. By an order dated

7.08.1991 the appellant was placed under deemed suspension

from the date of his arrest i.e., 5.06.1991 and paid

subsistence allowance. The High Court has very rightly taken

note of the fact that the first FIR had been quashed pursuant

to a settlement between the parties in terms whereof the

appellant paid an amount of Rs.2 lakhs and another amount

of Rs.2,46,130/­ by way of bankers’ cheque, by way of

compensation for the loss caused to the Cooperative Society.
36.   The judgment and order under appeal records that the

appeal filed by the appellant to the President, AIIMS was

rejected in 2000. However, a copy of the rejection order is not

available and was not brought on record.
37.   Be that as it may, the order of dismissal dated 6.1.2000

under Rule 19(i)of CCS(CCA) Rules, 1985 was challenged on

2013 after almost 13 years. Even assuming that the appeal

was never decided, the cause of action for filing an application

before the Tribunal would have arisen on expiry of six months
20
from the date of filing the appeal, in view of
Section 20(2)(b)
of

the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 set out hereinbelow:­

      “20. Application not to be admitted unless other
            remedies exhausted:
(2) For the purposes of sub­section (1), a person shall be
      deemed to have availed of all the remedies available to him
      under the relevant service rules as to redressal of
      grievances;­
(a) …..
(b) where no final order has been made by the Government
      or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass
      such order with regard to the appeal preferred or
      representation made by such person, if a period of six
      months from the date on which such appeal was preferred or
      representation was made has expired.”

The application to the Tribunal would have to be filed within

the period of limitation as prescribed in
Section 21(1)(b)
of the

Administrative Tribunals Act, which would start running from

the date of expiry of six months from the date of filing of

appeal. The contention of the appellant that the quashing of

the first FIR gave rise to a fresh cause of action is completely

misconceived.
38.
In
S.S. Rathore vs. State of Madhya Pradesh
4, a

Constitution Bench of this Court held:­

        “21. It is appropriate to notice the provision regarding
        limitation under
Section 21
of the Administrative
        Tribunals Act.
Sub­section (1) has prescribed a period of
        one year for making of the application and power of
4. (1989) 4 SCC 582
21
condonation of delay of a total period of six months has
        been vested under sub­section (3). The civil court's
        jurisdiction has been taken away by the Act and,
        therefore, as far as government servants are concerned,
Article 58
may not be invocable in view of the special
        limitation. Yet, suits outside the purview of the
Administrative Tribunals Act
shall continue to be
        governed by
Article 58.
22. It is proper that the position in such cases should
         be uniform. Therefore, in every such case only when the
         appeal or representation provided by law is disposed of,
         cause of action shall first accrue and where such order
         is not made, on the expiry of six months from the date
         when the appeal was filed or representation was made,
         the right to sue shall first accrue. Submission of just a
         memorial or representation to the head of the
         establishment shall not be taken into consideration in
         the matter of fixing limitation.”
39.   In our considered opinion, the High Court rightly

declined to accept the finding of the Tribunal that the O.A.

was within the period of limitation.
40.   The learned Tribunal opined that the O.A. had been filed

within limitation, relying on a judgment of this Court in
State

of Madhya Pradesh vs. Syed Qamarali5
and held that

orders such as the order of removal of the appellant which

were illegal or void ab initio could be challenged at any time.

As such orders had no legal existence, it was not necessary for

the respondent to have the order set aside by Court.
The

5 (1967) 1 SLR 228
22
learned Tribunal has misconstrued the law
laid down by
this

Court in
Syed Qamarali
(supra).
41.   The High Court rightly found that, in
Syed Qamarali
(supra) the suit challenging the order of termination, which

was held to be invalid, had been filed within the prescribed

period of limitation of six years under
Article 120
of the

Limitation Act, 1908 which was the residuary article. In Syed

Qamarali’s case the appeal had been rejected on 9.04.1947

and the suit filed on 8.12.1952. The period of six years has

been reduced to three years under
Article 113
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
.
42.   On the other hand, in the
State of Punjab and Others

vs. Gurdev Singh6
referred to and relied upon by the High

Court, this Court held:­

      "8. But nonetheless the impugned dismissal order has at
      least a de facto operation unless and until it is declared to be
      void or nullity by a competent body or court.
In Smith v. East
      Elloe Rural District Council [1956 AC 736, 769 : (1956) 1 All
      ER 855, 871] Lord Radcliffe observed: (All ER p. 871)

        “An order, even if not made in good faith, is still an act
        capable of legal consequences. It bears no brand of
        invalidity on its forehead. Unless the necessary
        proceedings are taken at law to establish the cause of

6 (1991) 4 SCC 1
23
invalidity and to get it quashed or otherwise upset, it
        will remain as effective for its ostensible purpose as the
        most impeccable of orders.”
9.    Apropos to this principle, Prof. Wade states [See Wade:
Administrative Law, 6th edn., p. 352] : “the principle must be
      equally true even where the ‘brand’ of invalidity” is plainly
      visible; for there also the order can effectively be resisted in
      law only by obtaining the decision of the court. Prof. Wade
      sums up these principles: [ Ibid.]

        “The truth of the matter is that the court will invalidate
        an order only if the right remedy is sought by the right
        person in the right proceedings and circumstances. The
        order may be hypothetically a nullity, but the court may
        refuse to quash it because of the plaintiff's lack of
        standing, because he does not deserve a discretionary
        remedy, because he has waived his rights, or for some
        other legal reason. In any such case the ‘void’ order
        remains effective and is, in reality, valid. It follows that
        an order may be void for one purpose and valid for
        another; and that it may be void against one person but
        valid against another.
10. It will be clear from these principles, the party
      aggrieved by the invalidity of the order has to
      approach the court for relief of declaration that the
      order against him is inoperative and not binding upon
      him. He must approach the court within the prescribed
      period of limitation. If the statutory time limit expires
      the court cannot give the declaration sought for.”
43.   In this case the order of removal was passed on

6.01.2000. The respondent had filed an appeal on 23.02.2000

Even assuming, as contended by the appellant that the appeal

was not disposed of, the limitation started running upon

expiry of six months from 23.2.2000, that is, around
24
23.8.2000. The Original Application was patently barred by

limitation, there being delay of 13 years in approaching the

learned Tribunal. Such inordinate delay could not have been

condoned.
44.   The High Court rightly held that the law of limitation is

founded on public policy. The object of limitation is to put a

quietus on stale and dead disputes. A person ought not to be

allowed to agitate his claim after a long delay. There can be

no doubt that when retiral benefits are withheld without

cause, there would be a continuing cause of action. However,

when retirement benefits are withheld by way of disciplinary

action, the order would necessarily have to be challenged

within the period of limitation or alternatively there would

have to be sufficient cause for the delay. Once there is

cessation of employer­employee relationship by an order of

termination, the cause of action would necessarily arise when

the   order   of   termination   is    passed.   The   forfeiture    of

pensionary    benefits   by   reason    of   a   punitive   order    of

termination is not a continuing cause of action.
25
45.   We are unable to accept Ms Arora’s submission that this

Court take a sympathetic view of the plight of the appellant

considering that the first FIR was quashed and after the

conviction pursuant to the second FIR the appellant was

released on probation of good conduct after which there was

no further complaint against him.
46.   It is reiterated, at the cost of repetition that the first FIR

was quashed pursuant to a settlement between the appellant

and   the   respondent     in   terms     whereof   the   appellant

compensated the pecuniary loss caused by him to the

Cooperative Society. The FIR was not quashed on the ground

that the same did not disclose any offence or was otherwise

frivolous, vexatious or harassive.      While under suspension in

contemplation of disciplinary proceedings for misconduct

related to the first FIR, the appellant committed theft of a bag

containing money at a public place for which he was convicted

under
Section 379
of the IPC.     It cannot be said that absolute

penury led him to commit the offence as argued by Ms. Arora

since the appellant was receiving subsistence allowance while
26
under suspension. Any sympathy for the appellant would, in

our view, be completely misplaced.
47.   The judgment and order of the High Court under appeal

does not call for any interference. The appeal is, therefore,

dismissed and the judgment and order of the High Court,

under appeal is affirmed.
.................................J.
                                      (R. BANUMATHI)




                                     ..................................J
                                       (INDIRA BANERJEE)

AUGUST 27, 2019
NEW DELHI