[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Krishnamurthy S. Setlur (Dead) By Lrs. vs O.V.Narasimha Setty(Dead) By Lrs. on 8 August, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 814, (2019) 10 SCALE 617, (2019) 2 CLR 705 (SC), (2019) 3 CURCC 169
Author:
Arun Mishra
Bench:
Vineet Saran
,
Arun Mishra
1


                                                                   NON­REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.6111 OF 2009


         KRISHNAMURTHY S. SETLUR (D)
         THROUGH LRS.                                            …APPELLANT(S)
                                 VERSUS

         O.V. NARASIMHA SETTY (D) BY LRS. & ORS                  …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                  WITH

                              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 12267 OF 2018
                 (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.2760 OF 2011)


         NAGAR COUNCIL SIRHIND                                   …APPELLANT(S)

                                                 VERSUS

         BHAGAT RAM & ORS.                                       …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                  WITH

                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10332 OF 2018
               (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.10343 OF 2016)

         M.E. MUNIRAJEGOWDA & ORS.                               …APPELLANT(S)

                                                 VERSUS

         SRI UTHANALLAPPA @ UTHANALLIGA
         SINCE DECEASED BY HIS LRS.                              …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                ORDER
Signature Not Verified
1.
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
The instant appeals involve a preliminary issue as to whether
Date: 2019.08.08
17:05:16 IST
Reason:
plaintiff can take the plea of adverse possession in view of the

         interpretation of
Article 65
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
. A Three­Judge
2
Bench of this Court in
Ravinder Kaur Grewal & Ors. v. Manjit Kaur &

Ors. (Civil Appeal No.7764
of 2014) has decided the similar issue on

7th August, 2019, by holding as under:
“56. Possession is the root of title and is right like the property.
      As ownership is also of different kinds of viz. sole ownership,
      contingent ownership, corporeal ownership, and legal equitable
      ownership. Limited ownership or limited right to property may
      be enjoyed by a holder. What can be prescribable against is
      limited to the rights of the holder. Possession confers enforceable
      right under
Section 6
of the Specific Relief Act. It has to be
      looked into what kind of possession is enjoyed viz. de facto i.e.,
      actual, ‘de jure possession’, constructive possession, concurrent
      possession over a small portion of the property. In case the
      owner is in symbolic possession, there is no dispossession, there
      can be formal, exclusive or joint possession.             The joint
      possessor/co­owner possession is not presumed to be adverse.
      Personal law also plays a role to construe nature of possession.
57. The adverse possession requires all the three classic
      requirements to co­exist at the same time, namely, nec­vi i.e.
      adequate in continuity, nec­clam i.e., adequate in publicity and
      nec­precario i.e. adverse to a competitor, in denial of title and his
      knowledge. Visible, notorious and peaceful so that if the owner
      does not take care to know notorious facts, knowledge is
      attributed to him on the basis that but for due diligence he would
      have known it. Adverse possession cannot be decreed on a title
      which is not pleaded. Animus possidendi under hostile colour of
      title is required. Trespasser’s long possession is not synonym
      with adverse possession. Trespasser’s possession is construed to
      be on behalf of the owner, the casual user does not constitute
      adverse possession. The owner can take possession from a
      trespasser at any point in time. Possessor looks after the
      property, protects it and in case of agricultural property by and
      the large concept is that actual tiller should own the land who
      works by dint of his hard labour and makes the land cultivable.
The legislature in various States confers rights based on
      possession.
58. Adverse possession is heritable and there can be tacking of
      adverse possession by two or more persons as the right is
      transmissible one. In our opinion, it confers a perfected right
      which cannot be defeated on reentry except as provided in
Article
      65
itself.   Tacking is based on the fulfillment of certain
      conditions, tacking maybe by possession by the purchaser,
      legatee or assignee, etc. so as to constitute continuity of
3
possession, that person must be claiming through whom it is
sought to be tacked, and would depend on the identity of the
same property under the same right. Two distinct trespassers
cannot tack their possession to constitute conferral of right by
adverse possession for the prescribed period.
59. We hold that a person in possession cannot be ousted by
another person except by due procedure of law and once 12
years' period of adverse possession is over, even owner's right to
eject him is lost and the possessory owner acquires right, title
and interest possessed by the outgoing person/owner as the case
may be against whom he has prescribed. In our opinion,
consequence is that once the right, title or interest is acquired it
can be used as a sword by the plaintiff as well as a shield by the
defendant within ken of
Article 65
of the Act and any person who
has perfected title by way of adverse possession, can file a suit for
restoration of possession in case of dispossession. In case of
dispossession by another person by taking law in his hand a
possessory suit can be maintained under
Article 64
, even before
the ripening of title by way of adverse possession. By perfection
of title on extinguishment of the owner’s title, a person cannot be
remediless. In case he has been dispossessed by the owner after
having lost the right by adverse possession, he can be evicted by
the plaintiff by taking the plea of adverse possession. Similarly,
any other person who might have dispossessed the plaintiff
having perfected title by way of adverse possession can also be
evicted until and unless such other person has perfected title
against such a plaintiff by adverse possession. Similarly, under
other Articles also in case of infringement of any of his rights, a
plaintiff who has perfected the title by adverse possession, can
sue and maintain a suit.
60. When we consider the law of adverse possession as has
developed vis­à­vis to property dedicated to public use, courts
have been loath to confer the right by adverse possession. There
are instances when such properties are encroached upon and
then a plea of adverse possession is raised. In Such cases, on
the land reserved for public utility, it is desirable that rights
should not accrue. The law of adverse possession may cause
harsh consequences, hence, we are constrained to observe that it
would be advisable that concerning such properties dedicated to
public cause, it is made clear in the statute of limitation that no
rights can accrue by adverse possession.
61. Resultantly, we hold that decisions of
Gurudwara Sahab v.
Gram Panchayat Village Sirthala
(supra) and decision relying on it
in State of Uttarakhand v. Mandir Shri Lakshmi Siddh Maharaj
(supra) and Dharampal (dead) through
LRs v. Punjab Wakf Board
(supra) cannot be said to be laying down the law correctly, thus
4
they are hereby overruled. We hold that plea of acquisition of title
      by adverse possession can be taken by plaintiff under
Article 65
of the
Limitation Act
and there is no bar under the
Limitation
      Act, 1963
to sue on aforesaid basis in case of infringement of any
      rights of a plaintiff.
62. Let the matters be placed for consideration on merits before
      the appropriate Bench.”
2.   The preliminary issue involved in the instant appeals is wholly

covered by
the above decision
. In view of the answer, let the matters be

placed for consideration on merits before the appropriate Bench.
……………………..J.
                                                            (Arun Mishra)




New Delhi;                                                  .…………………….J.
August 08, 2019.                                            (Vineet Saran)