[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Gujarat vs H B Kapadia Education Trust on 21 February, 2023
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
,
Dinesh Maheshwari
REPORTABLE


                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2837 OF 2022


          THE STATE OF GUJARAT & ORS.                                    .... APPELLANTS


                                                      VERSUS


          H. B. KAPADIA EDUCATION TRUST
            & ANR.                                                    .... RESPONDENTS




                                                JUDGMENT
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1.             The Appellants-State of Gujarat and Ors., being aggrieved by the

                         judgment and order dated 02.04.2018 passed by the Division

                         Bench of the Gujarat High Court in Letters Patent Appeal No. 175

                         of 2017, arising out of Special Civil Application No. 3250 of 2001,

                         have preferred the present appeal.
2.             The Respondent No. 1 (original writ petitioner) a Jain Minority
Signature Not Verified
Institution, was running a government aided school in the name of
Digitally signed by
Ashwani Kumar
Date: 2023.02.21
17:12:44 IST
Reason:
“The New High School”, in which Shri H.H. Kapadia was appointed
1
as the Principal of the school. Mr. Kapadia having attained the age

of 58 years on 22.07.1999, the Respondent No. 1-Institute sought

a permission from the Government to continue him as the

Principal. The DEO granted the permission to continue him as the

Principal upto the age of 60 years on the condition that his salary

would be paid by the Institution. The Respondent No. 1 thereafter

addressed a letter dated 16.04.2001 to the DEO seeking extension

of service of Mr. Kapadia beyond the age of 60 years, which came

to be rejected by the DEO vide the letter dated 18.06.2001. The

said two decisions of the DEO came to be challenged by the

Respondent No. 1 by filing the Writ petition being Special Civil

Application No. 3250/2001 before the High Court of Gujarat. The

Single Bench vide the judgment and order dated 24.06.2016

allowed the said writ petition and held that the action on the part of

the Respondents (the appellants herein) in stopping the grant was

violative of
Article 30(1)
of the Constitution of India and that the

Writ Petitioner-Institute had a right to continue Mr. Kapadia as the

Principal of the school beyond the age of 60 years. It was further

held that the respondents (the appellants herein) were obliged to

pay the Grant-in-Aid towards his salary. The Single Bench

therefore directed the appellant authorities to calculate the

amounts towards the arrears of grant for the period between 2001
2
and 2012 (as the school was no longer functional since the year

     2012) and to pay the requisite amount to the management of the

     school within a period of 3 months of the order. The aggrieved

     appellants had preferred an appeal being the LPA No. 175 of 2017

     before the Division Bench, which came to be dismissed vide the

     impugned order dated 02.04.2018.
3.   The short question which falls for consideration before this Court is

     whether the decision of the appellants in not providing the aid to

     the respondents towards the salary of the principal of the

     respondent no. 2 - school on his attaining the age of

     superannuation as per the Grant-in-aid Code, could be said to be

     arbitrary or violative of
Article 30(1)
of the Constitution of India?
4.   A reference to the relevant provisions contained in the Constitution

     of India, the Gujarat Secondary Education Act, the Regulations

     framed thereunder and, in the Grant-in-Aid Code published under

     the Gujarat Notification dated 22.04.1964, would be beneficial for

     the purpose of answering the aforesaid question. The relevant part

     of
Article 30
of the Constitution pertaining to the right of minority to

     establish and administer educational institutions reads as under: -
“30. Right of minorities to establish and administer
                 educational institutions. –
3
(1)       All minorities, whether based on religion or language,
                 shall have the right to establish and administer educational
                 institutions of their choice.
(1A)   -   xxxx -
(2)       The State shall not, in granting aid to educational
                 institutions, discriminate against any educational institution on
                 the ground that it is under the management of a minority,
                 whether based on religion or language.”
5.
The Gujarat Secondary Education Act
1972 (hereinafter referred to

     as ‘the said Act’) was enacted to provide for the Regulation of

     Secondary Education in the State of Gujarat and to establish a

     Board for that purpose. The Board established under the said Act

     has framed the Regulations, namely the Secondary Education

     Regulations 1974, (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Regulations’) in

     exercise of the powers conferred upon it under Section 53 of the

     said Act, for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of the

     said Act. The Regulations relevant for the purpose of deciding the

     present appeal, read as under:-
“36. Superannuation- (1) An employee of a registered
                 secondary school shall be compulsorily retired on the date
                 on which he attains the age of 58 years.
(2) No management shall employ or re-employ any person
                 who has completed the age of 58 years.
Provided however that if the date of superannuation
                 of an employee falls within a term, his service shall
                 automatically be extended up to end of that term,

                        Provided further that re-employment upto the age
                 of 60 years should normally be given to peons and such
                 other menial servants by the management if they are
                 physically fit.
37. Superannuation of non-teaching staff - Deleted by
                 G.R. No. E & L.D. No. SER/1074/36379-G dated 2-12-75.
4
38. to 41.    -   xxxx -
42. Regulations to prevail over Grant-in-Aid Code -The
                provisions of these regulations shall prevail over those
                provisions contained in the Grant-in-aid Code published
                under Government Notification, Education and Labour
                Department No.GAC-1064-C dated the 22nd April, 1974 in
                so far as they relate to any matters provided in these
                regulations.
43. Nothing contained in Regulations 19, 20, 21, 22, 24,
                25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 36, 37, 40 and sub-clauses
                (4), (5) and (6) of Regulation No. 41 shall apply to any
                educational institution established and administered by a
                minority, whether based on religion or language.”
6.   It would be also germane to reproduce the relevant provisions

     contained in the Grant-in-Aid Code for Secondary Schools,

     published vide the notification dated 22.04.1964: -
“81.1 A secondary school teacher shall ordinarily retire from
                service at the age of 58.
81.2 The management may grant to teachers extensions upto
                the age of 60. If the Inspecting Officers report on the basis of
                their inspection that any teacher beyond the age of 58 is unable
                to discharge his duties properly, the teacher will be sent for
                medical examination and if declared unfit will be compelled to
                retire.
81.3 and 81.4 -    xxxx -
81.5 No person who has already attained the age of 58 years
                shall be employed as a teacher or on the non-teaching staff.
Retired persons from Government or non-Government
                Educational Institutions may however, be re-employed by the
                Educational Institution provided they are physically and mentally
                fit. The employment of such retired persons should be subject to
                the provisions made in clauses 81.2 and 81.3 above and such
                other terms and conditions not in contravention of these rules
                and the general service conditions as may be mutually agreed
                upon between the employer and the employee. Such re-
                employed persons will not however, be eligible for the
                departmentally prescribed scales of pay and allowances, etc.
                and to the Government aided provident fund scheme.”
7.       From the above stated provisions, it emerges that as per

     Regulation 42 of the said Regulations, the provisions contained in
5
the said Regulations framed under the said Act prevail over those

provisions contained in the Grant-in-Aid Code published under the

government notification dated 22.04.1964, insofar as they relate to

any matter provided in the said Regulations. It further emerges that

as per Regulation 43 of the said Regulations, Regulation 36

pertaining to the age of superannuation is not applicable to the

educational institution established and administered by a minority,

whether based on religion or language. Therefore, the age of

superannuation of an employee of a registered Secondary School

as mentioned in Regulation 36 would not be applicable to the

employee or teacher of an educational institution established and

administered by a minority. The combined reading of Regulations

42 and 43 of the said Regulations makes it clear that Regulation

36 would not apply to any educational institutions established and

administered by minority, and therefore the matter pertaining to the

age of superannuation of the employees of registered Secondary

School established and administered by minority, availing the

Grant-in-Aid could not be said to have been provided under the

said Regulations. The necessary corollary would be that the said

Regulation 36 being not applicable to the minority educational

institution, the provisions contained in the Grant-in-Aid Code

pertaining to the age of superannuation would be applicable to
6
such minority institutions availing the grant from the State

     Government.
8.     Now, as per para 81.1 of the Grant-in-Aid Code, a secondary

     school teacher receiving grant-in-aid would ordinarily retire from

     service at the age of 58, and the management may grant to the

     teachers extensions upto the age of 60, in view of para 81.2 of the

     said Code. Therefore, the minority educational institutions like the

     respondents could not continue the employees/teachers beyond

     the age of 58 years or 60 years as the case may be. If an

     employee or a teacher is continued in service by the management

     of any registered minority Secondary School receiving Grant-in-Aid

     from the State-Government, then such school would not be entitled

     to receive any grant in respect of the expenditure incurred for

     continuing such employee or teacher beyond the age of 58 or 60

     years, as the case may be. The provisions of Grant-in-Aid Code

     are applicable to all the registered secondary education institutions

     desirous of receiving or which are receiving the grant from the

     Government, and such institutions would be subject to the

     restrictions imposed under the Code, except for the matters

     provided in the said Regulations.
7
9.    The provisions contained in the said Grant-in-Aid Code pertaining

      to the recognition, eligibility criteria, the procedure for making

      application to the government for receiving Grant-in-Aid etc. are

      applicable to all the secondary schools whether established and

      administered by the minority or not and the respondents could not

      have claimed any right to receive the aid from the Government

      dehors the provisions of the Grant-in-Aid Code. If the appellants

      therefore had refused to pay the Grant-in-Aid to the respondents,

      on the Principal having reached to the age of superannuation, it

      could not be said by any stretch of imagination that the appellants

      had interfered with the affairs of the respondents or had violated
Article 30(1)
of the Constitution. As held by the Constitution Bench

      in case of
T.M.A. Pai Foundation and Others vs. State of

      Karnataka and Others1
, the right under
Article 30(1)
is not an

      absolute right above the law, and that the provisions for the grant

      or non-grant in aid to the educational institutions, whether it is

      majority-run institution or a minority-run institution, have to be

      uniformly applied. The relevant observations made in para 143 and

      144 of
the said judgment
, which clinch the issue read, as under: -
“143. This means that the right under
Article 30(1)
implies that
                     any grant that is given by the State to the minority institution
                     cannot have such conditions attached to it, which will in any way
                     dilute or abridge the rights of the minority institution to establish
                     and administer that institution. The conditions that can normally

1 (2002) 8 SCC 481
8
be permitted to be imposed, on the educational institutions
                   receiving the grant, must be related to the proper utilization of
                   the grant and fulfilment of the objectives of the grant. Any such
                   secular conditions so laid, such as a proper audit with regard to
                   the utilization of the funds and the manner in which the funds are
                   to be utilized, will be applicable and would not dilute the minority
                   status of the educational institutions. Such conditions would be
                   valid if they are also imposed on other educational institutions
                   receiving the grant.”
                   “144. It cannot be argued that no conditions can            be imposed
                   while giving aid to a minority institution. Whether it is an
                   institution run by the majority or the minority, all conditions that
                   have relevance to the proper utilization of the grant-in-aid by an
                   educational institution can be imposed. All that
Article 30(2)
states is that on the ground that an institution is under the
                   management of a minority, whether based on religion or
                   language, grant of aid to that educational institution cannot be
                   discriminated against, if other educational institutions are entitled
                   to receive aid. The conditions for grant or non-grant of aid to
                   educational institutions have to be uniformly applied, whether it is
                   a majority-run institution or a minority-run institution..”
10.
In a case involving similar issue as to whether a minority institute

      receiving an aid is bound by the conditions imposed by the

      Government, this Court in a recent decision in case of
State of

      Uttar Pradesh and Others vs. Principal Abhay Nandan Inter

      College and Others2
observed as under: -
“32. When it comes to aided institutions, there cannot be any
                   difference between a minority and non-minority one.
Article 30
of
                   the Constitution of India is subject to its own restrictions being
                   reasonable. A protection cannot be expanded into a better right
                   than one which a non-minority institution enjoys. Law has
                   become quite settled on this issue and therefore does not require
                   any elaboration.
33. Thus, on the aforesaid issue we have no hesitation in
                   reiterating the principle that an institution receiving aid is bound
                   by the conditions imposed and therefore expected to comply.
Once we hold so, the challenge made on various grounds, falls
                   to the ground.”
11. In light of the afore-stated legal position, we are of the opinion that

      the respondent-institution was bound by the provisions contained

2 2021 SCC Online SC 807
9
in the Grant-in-Aid Code. There is also nothing on record to show

      that the appellant-State had discriminated against the respondent-

      institution on the ground that it was under the management of a

      minority, attracting
Article 30(2)
of the Constitution of India. The

      High Court therefore had committed gross error in holding that the

      respondent-institute had a right to continue the Principal of its

      school beyond his age of 60 years, and in directing the appellants

      to calculate and pay the requisite amount towards the arrears of

      grant for the period from 2001 to 2012.
12.   In that view of the matter, the impugned order passed by the

      Division Bench confirming the order passed by the Single Bench

      allowing the writ petition filed by the respondent institution is set

      aside. The present appeal filed by the appellants stands allowed

      accordingly.
………………………. J.
[DINESH MAHESHWARI]


                                                  …..................................J.
                                                          [BELA M. TRIVEDI]
NEW DELHI
21.02.2023.
10