[Cites
45
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Haji Abdul Gani Khan vs Union Of India on 13 February, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.237 OF 2022


     Haji Abdul Gani Khan & Anr.                                      …Petitioners


                                                     v.


     Union of India & Ors.                                         ... Respondents



                                           J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.                  The main challenge in this writ petition under
Article 32
of the

     constitution of India is to the legality and validity of the action of

     constituting a Delimitation Commission for the Union Territory of

     Jammu and Kashmir under provisions of the
Delimitation Act, 2002
and the exercise of delimitation undertaken by the Commission.




     RELEVANT FACTS
2.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
The Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order,
Harshita Uppal
Date: 2023.02.13
16:53:26 IST
Reason:
2019 bearing C.O. No.272 was issued by the Hon’ble President of
1
India on 5th August 2019. The said order was issued in the exercise of

powers conferred by clause (1) of
Article 370
of the Constitution of

India. The said order directed that all the provisions of the

Constitution, as amended from time to time, shall apply in relation to

the State of Jammu and Kashmir, subject to modifications made to
Article 367
as set out in the said order. By the said order, Clause (4)

was added to
Article 367
providing that the expression “Constituent

Assembly of the State referred to in clause (2)” in the proviso to clause

(3) of
Article 370
of the Constitution, shall be read as “Legislative

Assembly of the State”. On 6th August 2019, a declaration under

Clause (3) of
Article 370
of the Constitution bearing C.O.No.273 was

made by the Hon’ble President of India on the recommendation of the

Parliament, by which it was declared that all the clauses of
Article 370
shall cease to be operative.
3.
The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019
(for short,

‘the J&K Reorganisation Act’) was enacted which provided for the

reorganisation of the State of Jammu and Kashmir by dividing it into

two Union Territories. A new Union Territory of Ladakh was created

comprising territories of Kargil and Leh Districts in the erstwhile State

of Jammu and Kashmir. The Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir

(for short, ‘the Union Territory of J & K) was formed comprising the
2
existing State of Jammu and Kashmir other than Kargil and Leh

Districts. The J&K Reorganisation Act came into force with effect from

31st October 2019. By virtue of Section 13 thereof,
Article 239A
of the

Constitution of India which was earlier applicable only to the Union

Territory of Puducherry, became applicable to the Union Territory of J

& K.
Article 239A
confers a power on the Parliament to enact a law for

creating a legislature for the Union Territory.
4.
The Delimitation Act, 2002
which was not applicable to the

erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir, was made applicable by virtue

of Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act to the newly formed Union

Territory of J&K. On 6th March 2020, the Central Government

constituted a Delimitation Commission under
Section 3
of the

Delimitation Act, 2002 for the purpose of delimitation of Assembly and

Parliamentary Constituencies in the Union Territory of J & K as well

as the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur and Nagaland.

The Commission was headed by a retired Judge of this Court. The

Election Commissioner and the State Election Commissioner were

made ex-officio members of the Delimitation Commission. The term of

appointment of the Chairperson was fixed as one year. By a

notification dated 3rd March 2021, the earlier notification dated 6 th

March 2020 appointing the Delimitation Commission was amended by
3
deleting the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur and

Nagaland from the purview of the Delimitation Commission. By the

same notification, the term of the Chairperson was extended to two

years. The notification dated 6th March 2020 was further amended by

a notification dated 21st February 2022 by providing that the term of

the Chairperson shall be for two years and two months.
5.   Sub-Section (1) of Section 60 of the J&K Reorganisation Act

provides that the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of Union

Territory of J & K shall be increased from 107 to 114. Sub-Section (4)

of Section 14 provides that 24 seats in the Legislative Assembly of the

Union territory of J & K shall remain vacant and shall not be taken

into account for reckoning the total membership of the Assembly.


PLEADINGS
6.   Very wide and sweeping prayers have been made in the present

writ petition invoking
Article 32
of the Constitution of India. The first

challenge is to the provision regarding the increase in the number of

seats in the Legislative Assembly of Union territory of J & K. The

second challenge is to the modification made of the notification dated

6th March 2020 by deleting the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,

Manipur and Nagaland from the purview of the
4
Delimitation Commission. The third challenge is to the constitution of

the Delimitation Commission itself under the notification dated 6 th

March 2020. The challenge is on the ground that after the

Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order,

2008 (for short “the Delimitation Order of 2008”) was issued by the

Election Commission of India, the existing Delimitation Commission

was wound up and therefore, it was inappropriate and illegal to

constitute a new Delimitation Commission. The petitioners contended

that the Delimitation Commission has been appointed under the

notification dated 6th March 2020 by usurping the jurisdiction of the

Election Commission of India (for short, ‘the Election Commission) and

therefore, the constitution of the Delimitation Commission was ultra

vires the provisions of sub-Sections (2) and (5) of Section 60 of the

J&K Reorganisation Act. There is also a challenge to the constitution

of the Delimitation Commission on the ground of infringement of

clause (3) of
Article 170
as well as
Articles 14
, 19
and
21
of the

Constitution.
7.   We may note here that on 13th May 2022, this Court recorded a

submission of Shri Ravi Shankar Jandhyala, the learned senior

counsel appearing for the petitioners that the petitioners are not

seeking to assail abrogation of
Article 370
of the Constitution. In view
5
of this statement, this Court observed that certain allegations made on

that behalf in the pleadings are to be ignored. This Court also noted

that the challenge really was to the exercise undertaken in respect of

the delimitation pursuant to the notification dated 6th March 2020 as

amended by further notifications dated 3rd March 2021 and 21st

February 2022.
8.   A counter affidavit has been filed by the Union of India pointing

out that during the pendency of this writ petition, on 5 th May 2022, a

notification has been published by the Delimitation Commission in the

exercise of powers under sub-Section (2) of
Section 4
and sub-Section

(2) of
Section 9
of the Delimitation Act, 2002 containing the order of

the delimitation of Assembly Constituencies of the Union territory of J

& K and Parliamentary Constituencies. It is also pointed out that by a

further order dated 20th May 2022, the Central Government exercised

powers under sub-Sections (2) and (3) of Section 62 of the J&K

Reorganisation Act appointing 20th May 2022 as the date on which

order dated 5th May 2022 issued by the Delimitation Commission shall

come into force. The counter affidavit also notes that earlier, a draft

order was published by the Delimitation Commission on 14 th March

2022 containing proposals for delimitation of the Constituencies, and

objections and suggestions to it were invited. Copies of the
6
notifications/orders dated 5th May 2022 and 20th May 2022 have been

placed on record by the Election Commission – Respondent no.5.

There is a rejoinder filed by the petitioners dealing with the counter

affidavits filed by the Union of India and the Election Commission.


SUBMISSIONS OF THE PETITIONERS
9.   Shri Ravi Shankar Jandhyala, the learned senior counsel

appearing for the petitioners has made detailed submissions. The

summary of his submissions is as under:
(a)     That the 2nd proviso to clause (3) of
Article 170
of the

           Constitution lays down that until the figures for the first

           census taken after the year 2026 have been published, it shall

           not be necessary to readjust the total number of seats in the

           Legislative Assembly readjusted on the basis of the 1971

           census and the division into territorial constituencies as may

           be readjusted on the basis of 2001 census. The exercise

           undertaken of delimitation/readjustment of the Assembly and

           Parliamentary Constituencies of Union Territory of J & K by

           appointing the Delimitation Commission under the impugned

           notification dated 6th March 2020 is completely in violation of

           2nd proviso to clause (3) of
Article 170.
Similarly, the 3 rd
7
proviso to
Article 82
imposes an embargo on the readjustment

  of allocation of seats in the House of the People readjusted on

  the basis of the 1971 census and the division of States into

  territorial constituencies as may be readjusted on the basis of

  the 2001 census till the figures of the first census conducted

  after 2026 are available. A similar embargo has been imposed

  by
Articles 330
and
332
of the Constitution on reserving the

  seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes till figures of

  the first census conducted after 2026 are available;
(b) Earlier, the embargo was applicable till figures of the first

   census taken after the year 2000 were available.           It was

   modified by the Constitution (84 th
Amendment Act, 2001
) by

   substituting   the   year   2026   for   the   year   2000.   The

   Government cannot undermine the objects and reasons for

   the said amendment;
(c) Till the figures of the first census conducted after the year

   2026 become available, the number of members of the

   Legislative Assembly of the States remains the same.
Therefore, the effort to divide the Union territory of J & K into

   territorial constituencies was illegal and uncalled for;
8
(d) Though the petitioners may not have challenged the validity

   of Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act, the same is

   violative of clause (3) of
Article 170
of the Constitution and

   therefore,   the   provisions   of   Section     62   cannot    be

   implemented.       He   submitted    that      the    number    of

   Constituencies in Legislative Assemblies of the State can be

   readjusted only in accordance with
Article 170
and in

   particular, the 2nd proviso to clause (3) thereof, and therefore,

   any attempt to make any readjustment of the constituencies

   of the Union Territory of J & K violates
Article 170.
The

   constitution of the Legislative Assembly of the Union

   Territory of J & K must remain the same till the figures of the

   first census conducted after the year 2026 are made

   available;
(e) In view of
Articles 82
and
83
, constituencies of the House of

   the People for the Union territory of J & K cannot be

   reconstituted without the publication of the results of the

   first census conducted after the year 2026;
(f)The opinion rendered by the learned Attorney General for

   India on 6th July 2016 concerning the implementation of
Section 26
of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014
9
(for short, ‘the 2014 Act’) is very relevant. The learned

        Attorney General for India opined that there was a conflict

        between Section 26 of the 2014 Act and
Article 170
of the

        Constitution and therefore,
Article 170
will prevail. It was

        submitted that the said opinion will govern the relevant

        provisions of the J&K Reorganisation Act as well;
(g) A non-obstante clause in a statute cannot override the

        provisions of the Constitution. Reliance was placed upon a

        decision of this Court in the case of
Engineering Kamgar

        Union v. Electro Steel Casting1
on this behalf;
(h) The delimitation order of 2008 published by the Election

       Commission cannot be deviated from. The guidelines issued

       by the Election Commission are very relevant on this behalf;
(i) As under Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act, the work

       of   delimitation   has    been    entrusted   to   the   Election

       Commission, the notification dated 6th March 2020 which

       permits Delimitation Commission to undertake the said

       exercise, is completely illegal;
(j) It is a settled law that this Court can take judicial notice of

1   2004 (6) SCC 36
10
the proceedings of the Houses of Parliament. A question was

  asked in the Lok Sabha by a Hon’ble Member regarding

  undertaking the delimitation of the constituencies in the State

  of Telangana along with the Union territory of J & K.           The

  answer given by Shri Nityanand Rai, the Hon’ble Minister of

  State in the Ministry of Home Affairs on 3rd August 2021 to

  the question was that the total number of seats in the

  Assembly of each State will be readjusted after the first

  census is published after the year 2026;
(k) In   any    event,   the   appointment   of   the   Delimitation

  Commission under the order dated 6 th March 2020 is

  completely contrary to
Section 3
of the Delimitation Act which

  provides     that   the   Delimitation   Commission     shall    be

  constituted at the earliest. Sub-Section (6) of
Section 10
of the

  Delimitation Act, 2002 requires the Delimitation Commission

  to complete the exercise and to publish orders under sub-

  Section (1) of
Section 10
, not later than 31 st July 2008.

  Hence, the orders passed by the Delimitation Commission

  constituted under the notification dated 6th March 2020 are in

  complete violation of the mandate of sub-Section (6) of
Section

  10
;
11
(l)
The Delimitation Act, 2002
contemplates the constitution of

  a   single   Delimitation   Commission        and   not    multiple

  Commissions.     He   would,     therefore,   submit      that   the

  constitution of the Delimitation Commission is completely

  illegal;
(m) The States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur and

  Nagaland were illegally excluded from the purview of the

  notification dated 6th March 2020. The said action was taken

  on the basis of the letter dated 22 nd February 2021 addressed

  by the Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Home Affairs,

  stating that considering the litigations pending concerning the

  delimitation exercise in North-Eastern States, the delimitation

  exercise should not be undertaken in the said States.            The

  earlier notification cannot be modified on the basis of the

  views of a Deputy Secretary. The Union of India and the

  Election Commission cannot apply different yardsticks to

  different States. There was no reason to exclude the other

  States included in the notification dated 6th March 2020;
(n) Sections 59 to 63 of the J&K Reorganisation Act are not

  only violative of the express provisions of the Constitution but

  also contradictory to each other. These Sections confer the
12
power of delimitation both on the Election Commission and

 the Delimitation Commission which makes these Sections

 completely illegal. Sub-Section (1)(b) of
Section 11
of the

 Delimitation Act, 2002 permits the Election Commission to

 make any changes in the boundary, area, or the extent of any

 constituency as described in the delimitation order already

 issued and published;
(o) The act of omission of the words “but does not include the

 State of Jammu and Kashmir” from
Section 2(f)
of the

 Delimitation Act, 2002 by sub-Section (1) of Section 62 of the

 J&K    Reorganisation    Act   infringes
Article   14
of   the

 Constitution of India;
(p) Consolidation of all the delimitation orders was already

 made by the Election Commission in accordance with
Section

 9
of the Representation of the People Act, 1950;
(q) Articles 2 to 4 of the Constitution are subject to other

 provisions of the Constitution and the provisions of the said

 Articles cannot override the Constitutional scheme; and
(r) Notwithstanding the orders dated 5th May 2020 and 20th

 May 2022 passed in the exercise of powers under sub-Section
13
(1) of
Section 10
of the Delimitation Act, 2002, the present

         writ petition is maintainable. The decision of the Constitution

         Bench of this Court in the case of
Meghraj Kothari v.

         Delimitation Commission & Ors.2
will have no application to

         the facts of the present case.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE UNION OF INDIA
10.   Shri Tushar Mehta, the learned Solicitor General of India

appearing for the Union of India has made the following submissions:
(a)      Writ petition suffers from delay and latches as the

            Delimitation Commission was constituted by the impugned

            notification dated 6th March 2020. The notification was

            amended on 3rd March 2021 by deleting the States of

            Arunachal    Pradesh,    Assam,    Manipur    and      Nagaland.
Thereafter, on 14th March 2022, a draft delimitation order was

            published by the Commission. As late as on 28 th March 2022,

            the present petition has been filed. For challenging the

            notification dated 6th March 2020, the present writ petition

            has been filed after a lapse of more than two years;
(b) During the pendency of this petition, the delimitation order

            under sub-Section (1) of Section 10 of the Delimitation Act,
2     1967 (1) SCR 400
14
2002 has been issued by the Delimitation Commission which

  has been brought into force with effect from 20 th March 2022;
(c) Under sub-Section (2) of
Section 10
of the Delimitation Act,

  2002, there is a complete bar on any Court questioning the

  order passed under sub-Section (1) of
Section 10
. In view of

  the decision of the Constitution Bench in the case of Meghraj

  Kothari2, the bar under sub-Section (2) of
Section 10
is

  applicable also to a remedy under
Article 226
of the

  Constitution.
Article 329
also creates a bar on interference by

  Courts in the matters of validity of any law relating to the

  delimitation of constituencies. An order of delimitation of

  constituencies has been held to be a law and therefore, now

  the orders dated 5th May 2020 and 20th May 2022 cannot be

  questioned;
(d)Sections 60 and 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act operate in

  different fields. Section 60 generally refers to the delimitation

  of constituencies and Section 62 deals with the delimitation of

  constituencies on the basis of census figures of the 2011

  census. He pointed out that sub-Section (1) of Section 60

  which   confers   power   on    the   Election   Commission    of

  delimitation uses the word “may” whereas Section 62 uses the
15
word “shall”;
(e)     The Election Commission by a letter dated 2nd September

          2019 informed the Government of India that since the

          Delimitation Commission is constituted under Section 62 of

          the   J&K    Reorganisation          Act   which   is    carrying   out

          readjustment of Parliamentary and Legislative Assembly

          constituencies,     it   was   not    necessary    for   the   Election

          Commission to undertake the exercise under
Section 60
of the

          Delimitation Act;
(f)
Article 3
specifically empowers Parliament by law to form a

          new State/Union Territory and the said law referred to in
Article 3
must provide for the appropriate amendments to the

          First Schedule and Fourth Schedule for giving effect to the

          provisions of the law. Clause (2) of
Article 4
specifically

          provides that no such law shall be deemed to be an

          amendment of the Constitution for the purpose of
Article 368.
Reliance was placed upon a decision of the Constitution

          Bench in the case of Mangal Singh & Anr. v. Union of

          India3 on this behalf; and
(g) Clauses (3) of
Articles 81
and
Article 170
do not apply to the

3   1967 (2) SCR 109
16
Union territories at all.
REJOINDER
11.   The learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners by way

of rejoinder urged that though there may not be any specific challenge

in the present petition to the validity of the provisions of the J&K

Reorganisation Act, the said challenge can always be inferred. He

submitted that the issues of inconsistency between the Constitutional

provisions and the provisions of the J&K Reorganisation Act have not

been answered by the learned Solicitor General of India.


CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS

Developments concerning the State of Jammu and Kashmir in the
year 2019
12. (a) On 5th August 2019, the Constitution (Application to Jammu &

        Kashmir) Order, 2019 (for short ‘the 2019 Presidential Order’)

        was promulgated by the Hon’ble President of India in the

        exercise of powers under clause (1) of
Article 370
of the

        Constitution of India.        The said order was issued in

        concurrence with the Government of the State of Jammu and

        Kashmir. Clause (2) of the 2019 Presidential Order provided

        that all the provisions of the Constitution of India, as

        amended from time to time, shall apply in relation to the State
17
of    Jammu    and   Kashmir    subject   to   exceptions   and

      modifications set out in the said order. Clause (4) was added

      by the said Order to
Article 367
in relation to the State of

      Jammu and Kashmir which provided that the expression

      “Constituent Assembly of the State referred to in clause (2)” in

      the proviso to clause (3) of
Article 370
of the Constitution

      shall be read as “Legislative Assembly of the State”. The 2019

      Presidential order was brought into force with immediate

      effect;
(b)        The second important development was the declaration

      under Clause (3) of
Article 370
of the Constitution (for short

      ‘the said declaration’) made by the Hon’ble President on the

      recommendation of the Parliament. It was declared that from

      6th August 2019, all clauses of
Article 370
shall cease to be

      operative, subject to the exceptions incorporated in the said

      declaration. It was provided therein that notwithstanding

      anything contained to the contrary in
Articles 152
and
308
as

      well as any other Article of the Constitution or any other

      provision of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir or any

      law, all the provisions of the Constitution of India as amended

      from time to time shall apply to the State of Jammu and
18
Kashmir;
(c)     Thus, in view of the 2019 Presidential Order and the said

      declaration, with effect from 6 th August 2019, all the

      provisions of the Constitution of India became applicable to

      the State of Jammu and Kashmir except the modifications

      provided in the 2019 Presidential Order. As a result of the

      said declaration and the 2019 Presidential Order, the special

      status of the State of Jammu and Kashmir under the

      Constitution by virtue of
Article 370
virtually came to an end;
(d) Another important development that followed was the

      enactment of the J&K Reorganisation Act which received the

      assent of the Hon’ble President on 9 th August 2019. 31st

      October 2019 was fixed as the appointed day under the J&K

      Reorganisation Act by the Central Government. By virtue of
Sections 3
and
4
thereof, with effect from 31st October 2019, a

      new Union Territory came into existence known as the Union

      Territory of Ladakh. The said Union Territory comprises of the

      areas covered by Kargil and Leh districts. From the appointed

      day, the Union Territory of J & K was also created. The said

      Union Territory comprises of the territories of the erstwhile
19
State of Jammu and Kashmir except the area covered by the

Union Territory of Ladakh. Thus, with effect from 31 st October

2019, the State of Jammu and Kashmir ceased to exist and

the Union Territories of Ladakh, as well as Jammu &

Kashmir, were brought into existence;
(e).
The Delimitation Act, 2002
became applicable to the

Union territory of J & K as the definition of “State” in clause (f)

of
Section 2
thereof includes the Union Territories having a

Legislative Assembly.        In addition, many other Central

enactments incorporated in Table-1 of the Fifth Schedule to

the J&K Reorganisation Act became applicable to the Union

territory of J & K;
(f)
The Representation of the People Act, 1951
(for short ‘the

RP Act of 1951’) was not applicable to the elections to fill in

the seats in either House of Parliament in the State of Jammu

and Kashmir and the House of Legislature of the said State.

An amendment was carried out to the RP Act of 1951 by the

J&K Reorganisation Act by which the provisions of the RP Act

of 1951 were made applicable to both the newly created Union

Territories.    Prior   to   that,
The   Jammu   and   Kashmir

Representation of the People Act, 1957
(for short “J&K R.P
20
Act”) was applicable to the State. We may note here that as

        the
Representation of the People Act, 1950
(for short ‘the RP

        Act of 1950’), was applicable to the State of Jammu and

        Kashmir, the same continues to apply to the two newly

        created Union Territories;
(g) By virtue of Section 13 of the J&K Reorganisation Act, the

        provisions contained in
Article 239A
which were earlier

        applicable only to the Union Territory of Puducherry were

        made applicable to the Union Territory of J and K.
Article

        239A
, inter alia, provides that Parliament may by law create a

        body to function as a legislature of the Union Territory of

        Puducherry.
The issue of the validity of provisions of the J&K Reorganisation
Act.
13.   We may note here that during the course of the hearing of

submissions      of the learned senior        counsel appearing       for     the

petitioners, he attempted to assail the validity of certain provisions of

the J&K Reorganisation Act. Therefore, we pointed out to him that

there is no challenge incorporated in the present writ petition to the

constitutional    validity   of   any   of   the   provisions   of   the     J&K

Reorganisation Act.     The initial response of the senior counsel was
21
that he does not wish to challenge the provisions. However,

subsequently, he submitted that the challenge to the relevant

provisions of the J&K Reorganisation Act is implicit in this writ

petition.
14.   There cannot be any doubt that when a party wants to challenge

the constitutional validity of a statute, he must plead in detail the

grounds on which the validity of the statute is sought to be

challenged. In absence of the specific pleadings to that effect, Court

cannot go into the issue of the validity of statutory provisions. The

Constitutional Courts cannot interfere with the law made by the

Legislature unless it is specifically challenged by incorporating specific

grounds of challenge in the pleadings. The reason is that there is

always a presumption of the constitutionality of laws. The burden is

always on the person alleging unconstitutionality to prove it. For that

purpose, the challenge has to be specifically pleaded by setting out the

specific grounds on which the challenge is made.        A Constitutional

Court cannot casually interfere with legislation made by a competent

Legislature only by drawing an inference from the pleadings that the

challenge to the validity is implicit. The State gets a proper

opportunity to defend the legislation only if the State is made aware of

the grounds on which the legislation is sought to be challenged.
22
15.   Though an opportunity was available to the petitioners to

challenge the provisions of the J&K Reorganisation Act, the petitioners

have chosen not to do so. We may also note here that the petitioners

are also not questioning the 2019 Presidential Order and the said

declaration. Therefore, we will have to proceed on the footing that the

2019 Presidential Order, the said declaration and the provisions of the

J&K Reorganisation Act are valid. It is in this context that the

submissions made across the Bar will have to be appreciated.


Findings on the challenges in the Writ Petition
16.   The Constitution makes a clear distinction between the States

and Union Territories as can be seen from
Article 1
and the First

Schedule. Part V of the Constitution deals with the Union. Chapter II

of Part V deals with Parliament. Part VI deals with the States. Chapter

III of Part VI deals with the State Legislature. Part VIII of the

Constitution independently deals with the Union Territories.
17.
Article 3
provides that Parliament may by law form new States

and alter the areas, boundaries or names of the existing States. The

explanation I provides that in clauses (a) to (e) of
Article 3
, a “State”

includes “Union Territory”. Thus, Explanation I makes it amply clear

that the power of Parliament under Clause (a) of
Article 3
, to make a
23
law to form a new State or to alter a boundary of a State includes a

power to make a law to form a new Union Territory. Explanation II

clarifies that the power conferred by clause (a) on Parliament to enact

the law to form a new State includes a power to form a Union Territory

by uniting parts of any State or Union Territory to any other State or

Union Territory. Clause (1) of
Article 4
provides that any law made by

Parliament as provided in
Article 3
shall contain such provisions for

the amendment of the First Schedule (containing the list of States and

Union Territories) and Fourth Schedule (containing allocation of seats

in the Council of States) as may be necessary for the purposes of

giving effect to the provisions of the law. Such a law may also contain

such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions including

provisions as to representation in Parliament and in the Legislature or

Legislatures of the State or States affected by such law as Parliament

may deem necessary. Clause (2) of
Article 4
clarifies that no such law

made by
Article 3
shall be deemed to be an amendment of the

Constitution for the purposes of
Article 368.
By the same law, a

provision can be made as to the representation in Parliament and in

the legislature of the Union Territory created by such law. The

Constitution Bench in the case of Mangal Singh3 has held that the

power under
Article 4
is wide enough even to reduce the total
24
members of the Legislative Assembly below the minimum prescribed

by clause (1) of
Article 170.
18.   Firstly, we will deal with the issue of applicability of
Article 170
having the title “Composition of the Legislative Assemblies” to the

Union Territory of J & K.
Article 170
forms part of Chapter III under

the title “The State Legislature”. Chapter III has been incorporated in

Part VI of the Constitution which deals with the States. Much

emphasis was laid on the violation of the provisions contained in the

second Proviso to Clause (3) of
Article 170
by the learned counsel

appearing for the petitioners.    But we may note here that the said

Article does not deal with the legislatures of Union Territory at all.
Articles 239A
and
239AA
which are included in Part VIII of the

Constitution are the Articles that deal with the creation of a body to

function as legislature and Council of Ministers for certain Union

Territories. For the sake of convenience, we are reproducing
Article

239A
which reads thus:
“239A. Creation of local Legislatures or Council of
      Ministers or both for certain Union territories -- (1)
      Parliament may by law create [for the Union territory
      of [Puducherry] --
(a) a body, whether elected or partly
             nominated and partly elected, to function as a
             Legislature for the Union territory, or
(b) a Council of Ministers, or both with such
             constitution, powers and functions, in each case,
25
as may be specified in the law.
(2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) shall
           not be deemed to be an amendment of this
           Constitution for the purposes of
article 368
notwithstanding that it contains any provision
           which amends or has the effect of amending this
           Constitution.”
                                      (emphasis added)
Article 239A
as it originally stood provided that Parliament may by law

create for the Union Territory of Puducherry a body to function as a

Legislature for the Union Territory or a Council of Ministers or both.
Such a body to act as a Legislature of the Union Territory covered by
Article 239A
may be elected or partly nominated and partly elected.

By virtue of Section 13 of the J&K Reorganisation Act, with effect from

31st October 2019,
Article 239A
became applicable to the Union

Territory of J and K. As noted by clause (2) of
Article 239A
, the law

contemplated by clause (1) of
Article 239A
shall not be deemed to be

an amendment to the Constitution for the purposes of
Article 368
notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or has

the effect of amending the Constitution.
19.    On a conjoint reading of Articles 3,4 and 239A, we find that:-
a) Parliament by making a law can convert an existing State into

        one or more Union territories;
b) Parliament is empowered by law to create a body of legislature
26
for the Union territories of Puducherry and J&K. Accordingly,

        sub-Section (2) of Section 14 of the J & K Reorganisation Act

        provides that there shall be a Legislative Assembly for the

        Union Territory of J & K.; and
c) Even if the law made by Parliament creating a body of

        legislature for Union territories of Puducherry and J&K has

        the effect of amending certain parts of the Constitution, it

        shall not be deemed to be an amendment of the Constitution

        for the purposes of
Article 368.
20.   Now coming to the J&K Reorganisation Act, it is apparent that

the said law has been made by Parliament in the exercise of powers

under Articles 3,4 and 239A. The said law created two Union

territories in place of the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The said law

provides for the amendment of the First and Fourth schedule for

giving effect to its provisions. Section 13 provides for amendment of
Article 239A
for applying the same to the Union territory of J & K.

Section 13 is a supplemental and consequential provision made by

Parliament as provided in clause (1) of
Article 4
for the purposes of

giving effect to the creation of the new Union territory of J and K. In

view of clause (2) of
Article 4
, though Section 13 has the effect of

amending
Article 239A
, it will not be affected by
Article 368
of the
27
Constitution.
21.   Under sub-section (2) of Section 14 of the J&K Reorganisation

Act, a Legislative Assembly for the Union territory of J and K has been

created. Sub-section (3) provides that the total number of seats in the

Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of J & K to be filled by the

persons chosen by direct election shall be 107. Clause (a) of sub-

section (4) of Section 14 provides that 24 seats in the Legislative

Assembly of the said Union territory shall remain vacant until the area

of the Union Territory under the occupation of Pakistan ceases to be

so occupied. We may note here that under the Constitution of Jammu

and Kashmir, the seats in the State Legislative Assembly excluding 24

seats earmarked for Pakistan occupied territory were 87 out of which

7 seats were reserved for Scheduled Castes and Schedule Tribes.
22.   As far as the number of constituencies is concerned, we must

also refer to Part V of the J&K Reorganisation Act having the title

“Delimitation of Constituencies”.       Sub-section (1) of Section 60

provides that the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the

Union territory of J & K shall be increased from 107 to 114. However,

the excluded 24 seats covered by Pakistan occupied territory remain

the same. Thus, the total number of seats available now for holding
28
elections to the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of J & K is
90.
23.   Hence, as far as the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory

of J & K is concerned,
Article 170
will have no application as it forms a

part of Chapter III of Part VI which deals with only the State

Legislature. It has no application to the Legislatures of Union

Territories. The reason is that the Legislative Assemblies of the

concerned Union Territories will be governed by the law made by the

Parliament in accordance with
Article 239A
and not by the provisions

of Chapter III of Part VI.    As
Article 170
is not applicable to the

Legislature of the Union Territory of J & K, the main thrust of the

argument that certain provisions of the J&K Reorganisation Act and

actions taken thereunder are in conflict with
Article 170
and in

particular Clause (3) thereof is clearly misconceived and deserves to be

rejected.
The exercise of Delimitation
24.   Now, we come to the issue of delimitation of constituencies of the

Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of J and K. There were two

earlier enactments dealing with the establishment of the Delimitation

Commission. The first one was the
Delimitation Commission Act, 1962
29
and the second one was the
Delimitation Act, 1972
. Both the Acts

were not applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir as the

definition of the State incorporated in both Acts specifically excluded

the State of Jammu and Kashmir.            The same is the case with the
Delimitation Act, 2002
. We may note here that
Section 3
of the J&K

RP Act laid down the requirement of the establishment of the

Delimitation Commission which provided that the Delimitation

Commission shall distribute the seats in the Legislative Assembly to

single member territorial constituencies and delimit them having

regard to various factors mentioned in sub-section (2) of
Section 3
.

Section 4-B of the J&K RP Act provided for the Delimitation

Commission     to   pass   an    order    regarding    the   delimitation    of

constituencies and publish the same. In fact, the Delimitation of

Assembly   Constituencies       Order,    1995   was   issued    which      was

applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. Section 4-C of the J&K

RP Act conferred power on the Election Commission to correct any

printing mistakes in the final order of the Delimitation Commission or

any error or omission. The Election Commission was also empowered

to make amendments when the boundaries or names of any district or

any territorial division mentioned in the final order of the Delimitation

Commission were altered.
30
25.    By virtue of sub-section (5) of Section 14 of the J&K

Reorganisation Act, the said Delimitation Order of 1995 was amended

as provided in the Third Schedule thereof. The Third Schedule

contains the details of the amendments to the delimitation of the

assembly constituencies made by the said Delimitation Order of 1995

in relation to the existing 83 assembly constituencies out of a total

107 as provided in sub-section (3) of Section 14. 24 constituencies

covered by the Pakistan occupied area were obviously not covered by

the Delimitation Order. Thus, by virtue of sub-section (5) of Section

14, the delimitation of 83 constituencies of the Legislative Assembly of

the Union Territory of J & K was incorporated in the form of the Third

Schedule which sets out the boundaries of and the areas incorporated

in the new individual 83 constituencies.
26.   Now we come to Part V of the of J&K Reorganisation Act which

deals with the Delimitation of Constituencies. By virtue of clause (a) of

sub-section (1) of Section 62, the provisions of the
Delimitation Act,

2002
were made applicable to the Union Territory of J & K with effect

from 31st October 2019.       For the sake of convenience, we are

reproducing Sections 60 to 63 of the J&K Reorganisation Act which

read thus:
31
60. (1) Without prejudice to sub-sections (3) of
section 14 of this Act, the number of seats in the
Legislative Assembly of Union territory of Jammu &
Kashmir shall be increased from 107 to 114, and
delimitation of the constituencies may be
determined by the Election Commission in the
manner hereinafter provided—
(a) the number of seats to be reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the
Legislative Assembly, having regard to the relevant
provisions of the Constitution;
(b) the assembly constituencies into which the
Union territory shall be divided, the extent of each
of such constituencies and in which of them seats
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes or for the
Scheduled Tribes; and
(c) the adjustments in the boundaries and
description of the extent of the parliamentary
constituencies in each Union territory that may be
necessary or expedient.
(2) In determining the matters referred to in clauses (b)
and (c) of sub-section (1), the Election Commission
shall have regard to the following provisions, namely:—
(a) all the constituencies shall be single-member
constituencies;
(b) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be
geographically compact areas, and in delimiting them,
regard shall be had to physical features, existing
boundaries of administrative units, facilities of
communication and conveniences to the public; and
(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall, as
far as practicable, be located in areas where the
proportion of their population to the total population is
the largest.
(3) The Election Commission shall, for the purpose of
assisting it in the performance of its functions under
sub-section (1), associate with itself as associate
members, four persons as the Central Government may
by order specify, being persons who are the members of
the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of
Jammu & Kashmir or four members of the House of the
32
People representing the Union territory of Jammu and
Kashmir:
Provided that none of the associate members shall have
a right to vote or to sign any decision of the Election
Commission.
(4) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an
associate member falls vacant, it shall be filled as far as
practicable, in accordance with the provisions of sub-
section (3).
(5) The Election Commission shall—
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of
constituencies together with the dissenting proposals, if
any, of any associate member who desires publication
thereof in the Official Gazette and in such other
manner as the Commission may consider fit, together
with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in
relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or
after which the proposals will be further considered by
it;
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may
have been received by it before the date so specified;
and
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions
which may have been received by it before the date so
specified, determine by one or more orders the
delimitation of constituencies and cause such order or
orders to be published in the Official Gazette, and there
upon such publication, the order or orders shall have
the full force of law and shall not be called in question
in any court.
(6) As soon as may be after such publication, every
such order relating to assembly constituencies shall be
laid before the Legislative Assembly of the Union
territory of Jammu and Kashmir.
61. (1) The Election Commission may by notification in
the Official Gazette,—
(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made
under section 60 or any error arising therein from
inadvertent slip or omission; and
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial
division mentioned in any such order or orders is or are
altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be
33
necessary or expedient for bringing such order up-to-
date.
(2) Every notification under this section relating to an
assembly constituency shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is issued, before the Legislative Assembly.
62.     (1) On       and    from    the appointed      day,
notwithstanding the publication of orders under sub-
section (1) of
section 10
of the Delimitation Act, 2002 or
anything contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (4)
of the said section, the
Delimitation Act, 2002
shall
be deemed to have been amended as provided
below:
(a) in section 2(f), the words “but does not include
the State of Jammu and Kashmir” shall be omitted;
and
(b) for the purpose of delimitation of Assembly and
Parliamentary Constituencies, the words and figure
“census held in the year 2001”, wherever occurring,
shall be construed as words and figure “census held
in the year 2011”.
(2) Readjustment of the constituencies as provided
under section 60 in the successor Union territory of
Jammu & Kashmir into Assembly Constituencies,
shall be carried by the Delimitation Commission, to
be constituted under the
Delimitation Act, 2002
as
amended by this Act, and shall take effect from
such date as the Central Government may, by order,
published in the Official Gazette, specify.
(3) Readjustment of the constituencies as provided
under
section 11
in the successor Union territory of
Jammu          &     Kashmir       into      Parliamentary
Constituencies, shall be carried by the Delimitation
Commission,        to    be    constituted     under    the
Delimitation Act, 2002
as amended by this Act, and
shall take effect from such date as the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official
Gazette, specify.
63. Special provisions as to readjustment of
Assembly and Parliamentary Constituencies.—
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 59 to
61, until the relevant figures for the first census taken
after the year 2026 have been published, it shall not
34
be necessary to readjust the division of successor
        Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir into Assembly
        and Parliamentary Constituencies and any reference
        to the “latest census figures” in this Part shall be
        construed as a reference to the 2011 census figures.”

                                       (emphasis added)
27.   As noted earlier, the delimitation of 83 constituencies of the

Union Territory was made under the J&K Reorganisation Act and was

incorporated in the Third Schedule as provided in sub-section (5) of

Section 14. By virtue of the mandate of sub-section (1) of Section 60,

the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the Union

Territory was required to be increased from 107 to 114. Thus, by

excluding 24 seats from Pakistan occupied areas, the mandate was to

increase the seats from 83 to 90. For giving effect to the increase in

the number of seats as aforesaid, the exercise of delimitation for

dividing the Union Territory into 90 constituencies and determining

the number of seats to be reserved for Scheduled Castes and Schedule

Tribes was required to be undertaken. Sub-section (1) of Section 60

provides that the said delimitation exercise may be undertaken by the

Election Commission. However, sub-section (2) of Section 62 provides

that the readjustment of the constituencies as provided under Section

60 in the successor Union Territory of J & K into assembly

constituencies shall be carried out by the Delimitation Commission to
35
be constituted under the
Delimitation Act, 2002
as amended by the

J&K Reorganisation Act. Sub-section (1) of Section 60, as noted

earlier, provides that the exercise of the division of the newly

constituted Union Territory into 90 assembly constituencies and

providing for reservation may be undertaken by the Election

Commission. However, the purport of Section 62 is that if a

Delimitation Commission is constituted under the
Delimitation Act
2002, the exercise provided by clauses (a) to (c) of sub-section (1) of

Section 60 shall be carried out by the Delimitation Commission.

However, sub-section (2) of Section 62 refers to the readjustment of

the constituencies. But, the purport of sub-section (2) of Section 62 is

that the readjustment means the creation of 90 constituencies in the

newly set up Union territory. Thus, the process of readjustment

contemplated by sub-section (2) of Section 62 is nothing but the

exercise of delimitation under sub-section (1) of Section 60.
28.   If we see the provisions of the
Delimitation Act
2002, it indicates

what is readjustment.
Section 4
reads thus:-
“4. Duties of the Commission.—(1) The readjustment
         made, on the basis of the census figures as ascertained
         at the census held in the year 1971 by the Delimitation
         Commission constituted under
section 3
of the
         Delimitation Act, 1972 (76 of 1972), of the allocation of
         seats in the House of the People to the several States
         and the total number of seats in the Legislative
36
Assembly of each State shall be deemed to be the
        readjustment made by the Commission for the
        purposes of this Act.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) and
        any other law for the time being in force, the
        Commission shall readjust the division of each
        State into territorial constituencies for the purpose
        of elections to the House of the People and to the
        State Legislative Assembly on the basis of the
        census figures as ascertained at the census held in
        the year [2001]:
Provided that where on such readjustment only one
        seat is allocated in the House of the People to a State,
        the whole of that State shall form one territorial
        constituency for the purpose of elections to the House
        of the People from that State.”
                                        (emphasis added)

What is important to note is that by virtue of Clause (b) of sub-section

(1) of Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act, the year 2001 stands

substituted by the year 2011 in relation to the Legislative Assembly of

the Union Territory of J & K.
29.   Under
Section 9
of the Delimitation Act, 2002, a specific power

has been conferred on the Delimitation Commission of conducting the

Delimitation exercise.
Section 9
reads thus:
“9. Delimitation of constituencies.— (1) The
        Commission shall, in the manner herein provided,
        then, distribute the seats in the House of the People
        allocated to each State and the seats assigned to
        the Legislative Assembly of each State as readjusted
        on the basis of 1971 census to single-member
        territorial constituencies and delimit them on the
        basis of the census figures as ascertained, at the
        census held in the year [2001], having regard to the
        provisions of the Constitution, the provisions of the Act
37
specified in
section 8
and the following provisions,
       namely:—
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be
       geographically compact areas, and in delimiting them
       regard shall be had to physical features, existing
       boundaries of administrative units, facilities of
       communication and public convenience;
(b) every assembly constituency shall be so delimited as
       to fall wholly within one parliamentary constituency;
(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the
       Scheduled Castes shall be distributed in different parts
       of the State and located, as far as practicable, in those
       areas where the proportion of their population to the
       total is comparatively large; and
(d) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the
       Scheduled Tribes shall, as far as practicable, be located
       in areas where the proportion of their population to the
       total is the largest.
(2) The Commission shall—
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of
       constituencies, together with the dissenting proposals,
       if any, of any associate member who desires publication
       thereof, in the Gazette of India and in the Official
       Gazettes of all the States concerned and also in such
       other manner as it thinks fit;
(b) specify a date on or after which the proposals shall
       be further considered by it;
(c) consider all objections and suggestions which may
       have been received by it before the date so specified,
       and for the purpose of such consideration, hold one or
       more public sittings at such place or places in each
       State as it thinks fit; and
(d) thereafter by one or more orders determine—
(i) the delimitation of parliamentary constituencies; and
(ii) the delimitation of assembly constituencies, of each
       State.”
                                        (emphasis added)

     As noted earlier, by virtue of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of

Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act, the year 2001 appearing in
38
sub-section (1) of
Section 9
of the Delimitation Act, 2002 will have to

be read as 2011. Therefore, the Delimitation Commission established

under the Order dated 6th March 2020 had to undertake the exercise of

delimitation or readjustment on the basis of the census figures of 2011

as the earlier exercise of delimitation of the constituencies of the

erstwhile State was not made on the basis of the census figures of

2011. For the reasons stated above, there is nothing illegal about the

exercise of delimitation/readjustment of the constituencies undertaken

by the Delimitation Commission for the purposes of dividing the Union

Territory into 90 constituencies on the basis of the 2011 census

figures.
30.   Before we deal with the issue of the legality of the appointment of

the Delimitation Commission, we must deal with parliamentary

constituencies in the newly created Union Territories of J&K and

Ladakh. In the First Schedule to the RP Act of 1950, a total of 6 seats

were allocated to the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir with no

reservation for Scheduled Castes and Schedule Tribes.
Section 10
of

the J&K Reorganisation Act provides that out of the 6 seats allocated

to the erstwhile State, 5 will be allocated to the Union Territory of J &

K and one will be to the Union Territory of Ladakh. That is how
Section 11
provides thereof that the Delimitation of Parliamentary
39
Constituencies Order, 1976 stands amended as provided in the

Second Schedule of the said Act. Thus, the delimitation of the five

parliamentary constituencies of the Union Territory of J & K and one

constituency of the Union Territory of Ladakh was made by virtue of
Section 11
as provided in the Second Schedule.
31.   We have already quoted Section 60 of the J&K Reorganisation

Act. Clause (c) of sub-section (1) thereof provides that considering the

increase in the number of seats of the Legislative Assembly, the

adjustments in the boundaries and description of the extent of the

Parliamentary Constituencies in each Union Territory may be made by

the Election Commission. Sub-section (3) of Section 62 provides that

readjustment of the constituencies as provided in
Section 11
in the

successor Union Territories into Parliamentary Constituencies shall be

carried out by the Delimitation Commission. The readjustment

referred to in sub-section (3) of Section 62 is the adjustment of

boundaries and description of the extent of the Parliamentary

Constituencies as provided in sub-section (1) of Section 60.        This

became    necessary     as   a   result    of   the   requirement     of

readjustment/delimitation of 90 constituencies of the Legislative

Assembly. Therefore, there is no illegality associated with the

delimitation/readjustment of Parliamentary constituencies of the
40
Union Territory of J & K undertaken by the Delimitation Commission.


The legality of the appointment of the Delimitation Commission
by the Notification of 6th March 2020
32.   The impugned notification dated 6th March 2020 constituting the

Delimitation Commission reads thus:
“MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
                           Legislative Department
                               NOTIFICATION
                        New Delhi, the 6th March, 2020
              S.O. 1015 (E). – In exercise of the powers conferred by
Section 3
of the Delimitation Act, 2002 (33 of 2002), the Central
        Government hereby constitutes the Delimitation Commission for
        the purpose of delimitation of Assembly and Parliamentary
        constituencies in the Union territory of Jammu & Kashmir and
        the States of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Nagaland,
        consisting of the following member, namely:-
(i) Justice (Retd.) Ranjana Prakash Desai - Chairperson
(ii)      Shri Sushil Chandra,
            Election Commissioner              - Member, (ex officio)
(iii)The State Election Commissioner of
        the concerned State of Union Territory
        appointed under clause (1) of article
        243K or under clause (1) of article 243L
        of the Constitution, as the case may be.
2. The appointment of Justice (Retd.) Ranjana Prakash Desai
        shall be for a period of one year from the date of the publication
        of this notification in the Official Gazette or till further orders,
        whichever is earlier.
3. The said Delimitation Commission shall delimit the
        constituencies, -
(i)  of the Union territory of Jammu & Kashmir in
            accordance with the provisions of
Part V of the Jammu &
            Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019
(34 of 2019) and the
            provisions of the
Delimitation Act, 2002
(33 of 2002).
(ii) of the States of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur
            and Nagaland in accordance with the provisions of the
            Delimitation act, 2002 (33 of 2002).”
                                                   (emphasis added)


      Hence, it is obvious that when the said notification requires the
41
Delimitation Commission to undertake the exercise of the delimitation

of Assembly and Parliamentary Constituencies in the Union Territory

of J & K, it refers to the exercise of readjustment as provided in sub-

section (2) and (3) of Section 62 which is nothing but delimitation

exercise contemplated by sub-section (1) of Section 60 due to the

reason of the increase in the membership of the Legislative Assembly

from 83 to 90. Moreover, the readjustment was necessary to be made

on the basis of the census figures of the 2011 census as contemplated

by
Section 4
and sub-section (1) of
Section 9
of the Delimitation Act,

2002 as amended by clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 62 of the

J&K Reorganisation Act.
33.   One of the contentions raised by the petitioners is that the
Delimitation Act, 2002
contemplates the constitution of only one

Delimitation Commission and not more than one. As noted earlier, the
Delimitation Act, 2002
was made applicable for the first time to the

State of Jammu and Kashmir with effect from 31 st October 2019. Even

the Delimitation Acts of 1962 and 1972 were not applicable to the

State of Jammu and Kashmir. By virtue of the J&K Reorganisation

Act, not only provisions of the
Delimitation Act, 2002
were made

applicable to the Union Territory of J & K, but a mandatory duty of

readjustment of the constituencies in the Union Territory both of the
42
Legislative Assembly and Parliament was entrusted to the Delimitation

Commission by sub-Sections (2) and (3) of Section 62. Till 31 st October

2019, the Delimitation Commission for the State/Union Territory of J

& K under the
Delimitation Act, 2002
could not have been established

as the said enactment was not made applicable to the State of Jammu

and Kashmir till then.
34.   Sub-section (6) of
Section 10
of the Delimitation Act, 2002 reads

thus:
“10. Publication of orders and their date of
         operation.—
                       xxx          xxx        xxx
         (6) The Commission shall endeavour to complete and
         publish each of its orders referred to in sub-section (1)
         in the manner provided in that sub-
section, 2
[within a
         period not later than 31st day of July, 2008] under
section 3
.”

Sub-section (6) uses the word “endeavour”.
Section 10A
of the

Delimitation Act, 2002 itself indicates that the time limit of 31 st July

2008 fixed under sub-Section (6) of
Section 10
is not sacrosanct as it

confers a power on the Hon’ble President to defer the delimitation

exercise in a State under certain circumstances. Thus, the time limit

provided in sub-section (6) of
Section 10
was never intended to be

mandatory. While amending
Section 2(f)
of the Delimitation Act by the

J&K Reorganisation Act, sub-section (6) of
Section 10
has not been

amended for enlarging the period provided thereunder. However, the
43
intention of the legislature as reflected in sub-sections (2) and (3) of

Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act is crystal clear. The very fact

that the duty of making the readjustment as per sub-sections (2) and

(3) of Section 62 on the basis of the 2011 census figures has been

entrusted to the Delimitation Commission suggests that the legislature

intended that the Delimitation Commission for the Union Territory of

Jammu & Kashmir will remain unaffected by the requirement of

completing the exercise by the end of July 2008. The provisions of

sub-Sections (2) and (3) of Section 62 will have to be interpreted in a

manner that gives effect to the intention of the legislature. If it is held

that due to the failure of the legislature to modify the time limit

provided in sub-Section (6) of
Section 10
of the Delimitation Act, 2002,

the Central Government is powerless to appoint a Delimitation

Commission for the newly created Union territory, the provisions of

Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act will be rendered nugatory. A

statute cannot be interpreted in a manner that will render some of its

provisions otiose. A statute must be construed and interpreted in such

a manner as to make it workable. Therefore, the argument based on

sub-Section (6) of
Section 10
of the Delimitation Act 2002 will have to

be rejected.
35.
Articles 2
and
3
of the Constitution enable the Parliament to
44
create new States and Union territories. Accordingly, the two new

Union territories have been created. The J&K Reorganisation Act

which created the two new Union territories assigns the role of

readjustment of constituencies to the Delimitation Commission under

the
Delimitation Act, 2002
.
Article 4
of the Constitution permits the

Parliament to incorporate such provisions in the law made in

accordance with
Article 3
for the formation of new States and Union

territories, which may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of

the law. Such a law may also contain provisions as to representations

in Parliament and in the Legislature of the State or States affected by

such law. Therefore, such law which is made under
Article 3
can

always provide for readjustment of the Constituencies in the newly

constituted States or Union territories through the Delimitation

Commission. Hence, we hold that there is no illegality associated with

the   establishment   of   the   Delimitation   Commission   under   the

impugned Order dated 6th March 2020.
36.   Under the notification dated 6th March 2020, the appointment of

the Chairperson of the Delimitation Commission who was a retired

Judge of this Court was for a period of one year. By the notification

dated 3rd March 2021, the said period was extended up to two years.

By the third impugned notification dated 21 st February 2022, the said
45
period of two years was extended to two years and two months. Once

the Delimitation Commission was established, there is nothing wrong

if the Central Government extended the period of appointment of the

Chairperson till the task of delimitation/readjustment was completed.
The Delimitation Act, 2002
is silent about the term of the appointment

of the Chairperson.
Exclusion of the North-Eastern States from the purview of the
notification dated 6th March 2020
37.   Another challenge which is seriously pressed is to that part of the

second impugned notification dated 31st March 2021 by which the

States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur and Nagaland were

excluded from the purview of the Delimitation Commission constituted

under the notification dated 6th March 2020. In the counter affidavit

filed by the Union of India, reliance has been placed on the letter

dated 22nd February 2021 issued by the Deputy Secretary (NE-III),

Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India. In paragraphs 5 and 6

of the counter affidavit, it is stated that the Delimitation Commission

set up on 12th July 2002 under the Chairmanship of a retired Judge of

this Court had completed the delimitation exercise in respect of the

entire country except for four North-Eastern States of Assam,

Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Nagaland. It is stated that

delimitation of these four States was deferred due to security reasons.
46
Section 10A
of the Delimitation Act, 2002 permitted such a course to

be adopted. Though these four States were a part of the notification

dated 6th March 2020, it is stated in the letter dated 22 nd February

2021 that there were number of petitions pending in this Court as well

as in the Manipur High Court concerning delimitation exercise in

North-Eastern States and that in the Court cases, discrepancies in

census figures of 2001 in relation to these States were pointed out. In

fact, it is stated that a number of notices have been issued regarding

the said discrepancies. Therefore, the said letter was issued with the

approval of the competent authority in which it was stated that it may

not be conducive to grant an extension for the process of delimitation

in the four North-Eastern States. The term of the Chairman of the

Delimitation Commission constituted under the first impugned

notification dated 6th march 2020 was to expire on 5 th March 2021. In

view of the aforesaid letter, while extending the term of the Chairman

by one more year by the second impugned notification dated 3 rd March

2021, the said four States were excluded. Thus, in effect, the term of

the Delimitation Commission constituted under the notification dated

6th March 2020 was extended by a period of one year only in relation

to the Union territory of J & K. By the third impugned notification, the

period was further extended by a period of two months.
Section 10A
of
47
the
Delimitation Act, 2002
itself permits the postponement of the

exercise of delimitation in certain contingencies.         Moreover, the

position and the status of the newly created Union Territory of J&K

under the Constitution is completely different from the four North-

Eastern States. In its applicability to the Union Territory of J & K,
Sections 4
and
9
of the Delimitation Act, 2002 stand amended by

requiring readjustment to be carried out on the basis of the census

figures of 2011. In case of the North Eastern States, there is no such

amendment. Therefore, two unequal cannot be treated as equals.

Hence, the argument based on the violation of Constitutional

provisions including
Article 14
deserves to be rejected.
38.   The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners did not dispute

that the draft order of delimitation was issued on 14 th March 2022.

The final order was issued on 5th May 2022 which was brought into

force with effect from 20th May 2022. While accepting that he has not

challenged these subsequent orders, the learned counsel submitted

that the petitioners cannot challenge the said order in view of sub-

Section (2) of
Section 10
which lays down that every such order shall

have the force of law and shall not be called in question in any Court.

In fact, the learned Solicitor General by relying upon a decision of the

Constitution Bench in the case of Megharaj Kothari2 urged that the
48
intention of the legislature is that once an order passed by the

Delimitation Commission is published in accordance with sub-Section

(1) of
Section 10
, the same are treated as law, which cannot be

questioned in any Court. In paragraph 21 of
the said decision
, the

Constitution Bench held that though orders passed under
Sections 8
and
9
of the Delimitation Act, 2002 in accordance with sub-Section (1)

of
Section 10
are not part of an act of the Parliament but its effect

would be the same. In any event, the order of the Delimitation

Commission has not been questioned in this petition.
39.   We may note here that there is a great deal of substance in the

argument of the learned Solicitor General that the challenge to the

notification dated 6th March 2020 was belatedly made by filing the

present petition on 28th March 2022 and for the said delay, there is no

valid explanation.      Moreover, the notification dated 6th March 2020

was     substantially   acted   upon    by   completing   the   exercise   of

delimitation as the draft Order was also published on 14 th March

2022.
40.   In the writ petition, the first prayer is for challenging the increase

in number of seats from 107 to 114. The said provision is made by

sub-Section (1) of Section 60. Without challenging the legality of any of

the provisions of the J&K Reorganisation Act, it is contended that the
49
Act of increasing the number of seats is violative of
Articles 81
, 82
,

170
, 330
and
332
of the Constitution of India.
Article 81
deals with

the composition of the House of the People;
Article 82
deals with the

readjustment and allocation of seats of the House of Parliament after

the census and
Article 170
deals with legislatures of the States. None

of these provisions deal with the Legislature of any Union territory.
Article 330
deals with the reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes

and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People.
Article 332
deals

with the reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled

Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States.         Both these

provisions do not deal with reservation of seats for the House of

legislature of Union Territories. In any case, even assuming that
Article 332
can be applied to the reservation of seats for Scheduled

Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislatures of Union territories, it

is not shown how the act of increasing the total number of seats in the

legislature will offend
Article 332
, so long as the reservation is

maintained as per the formula provided under
Article 332.
41.   Another argument sought to be made is that the provision made

for 114 seats in the legislature of the newly constituted Union

Territory of J & K is illegal. This submission calls for no consideration

as there is no challenge to the validity of sub-section (1) of Section 60
50
of the J&K Reorganisation Act.
42.   Another argument was canvassed that the Delimitation Order of

2008 published by the Election Commission cannot be deviated from.

The perusal of the said Order shows that it reproduces the

delimitation   of   the   Parliamentary   and    Legislative   Assembly

Constituencies made by the Delimitation of Parliamentary and

Assembly Constituencies Orders of 1976 and 1995 for the State of

Jammu and Kashmir. Both the orders of 1976 and 1995 have been

expressly modified by the J&K Reorganisation Act by virtue of
Sections

11(4)
and 14(5) as provided in the second and third Schedules thereto.

Hence, the argument deserves to be rejected.
43.   The petitioners have overlooked the fact that clause (b) of sub-

Section (1) of Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act has further

amended the
Delimitation Act, 2002
by providing that words and

figures ‘census held in the year 2001’ appearing in the
Delimitation

Act
shall be construed as ‘census held in the year 2011’. To its

application to the Union territory of J & K, the year 2001 in sub-

section (1) of
Section 9
of the Delimitation Act, 2002 has been

substituted by the year 2011 and therefore, distribution of seats in the

House of the People and seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly

will have to be readjusted on the basis of 2011 census and the
51
delimitation will have to be carried out on the basis of the figures of

the census held in the year 2011. The effect of Section 63 is that once

the exercise of readjustment/delimitation is made on the basis of 2011

census figures, the same will be frozen till the relevant figures of the

first census taken after 2026 are available. Therefore, the exercise of

delimitation/readjustment of the seats in the Union Territory of J & K

was required to be made by the Delimitation Commission on the basis

of the figures of the 2011 census. In view of Section 63, further

readjustment can be carried out only after the publication of figures

from the census held after the year 2026.
44.   Reliance placed on the opinion of the learned Attorney General of

India is misplaced as it deals only with the provisions of the
A.P.

Reorganisation Act, 2014
.     The petitioners cannot rely upon the

answer given by Hon’ble Minister in the Lok Sabha as it deals with

delimitation of Constituencies in Telangana in the context of Article
170. In any event, the said opinion as well as the answer given by the

Hon’ble Minister have no bearing on the interpretation of the J&K

Reorganisation Act.
45.   A vague attempt was made by the learned senior counsel

appearing for the petitioners to submit that the exercise which is

undertaken for the newly created Union territory of J & K was not
52
undertaken on the basis of the
Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act,

2000
and
Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014
. In both the Acts,

there is no provision which is pari materia with clause (b) of sub-

Section (1) of Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act which

amended the      provisions   of   the
Delimitation   Act
2002 in   its

applicability to the newly formed Union Territories by substituting the

year 2001 with 2011.
46.   Thus, there is absolutely no merit in any of the contentions

raised by the petitioners. We may, however, clarify that the findings

rendered in the judgment are on the footing that the exercise of power

made in the year 2019 under clauses (1) and (3) of
Article 370
of the

Constitution is valid. We are aware that the issue of the validity of the

exercise of the said powers is the subject matter of petitions pending

before this Court. Therefore, we have not dealt with the issue of

validity. Nothing stated in this judgment shall be construed as giving

our imprimatur to the exercise of powers under clauses (1) and (3) of
Article 370
of the Constitution.
47.   Hence, writ petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.
53
…....…………………J.
                          (Sanjay Kishan Kaul)



                          …….…………………J.
                          (Abhay S. Oka)
New Delhi;
February 13, 2023.
54