[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
S.M. Pasha vs State Of Maharashtra . on 17 February, 2023
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
C.T. Ravikumar
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       SLP(C) NO. 4428 OF 2016


         S.M. Pasha & Ors.                                                 ...Petitioner(S)

                                                Versus

         State of Maharashtra & Ors.                                     ...Respondent(S)

                                                 With

                                   SLP(C) NO... CC No. 4922 OF 2016


                                                ORDER
M. R. Shah, J.
1.              Feeling    aggrieved   and       dissatisfied   with   impugned

                         judgment(s) and order(s) passed by the High Court of

                         Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition No. 6142/2014 and

                         Writ Petition No. 5490/2014, the present Special Leave

                         Petitions (SLP) have been preferred by some of the tenants

                         in occupation of the premises in question.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2023.02.17
17:06:46 IST
Reason:
1
2.   Dr. A.M. Singhvi, learned Senior Advocate has appeared on

     behalf of the petitioners in Special Leave Petition (C) No.

     4428/2016 except petitioner No. 4. Shri Rana Mukherjee,

     learned Senior Advocate has appeared on behalf of the

     petitioners in Special Leave Petition (C) No…CC No.

     4922/2016. Shri Dhruv Mehta, learned Senior Advocate

     has appeared on behalf of the present office bearers. Shri

     Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned Senior Advocate has appeared

     on behalf of respondent No. 5 in SLP (C) No. 4428/2016 –

     main contesting respondent. Shri Venugopal, learned

     Senior Advocate has appeared on behalf of respondent No.

     17, Shri Gurukrishna Kumar, learned Senior Advocate has

     appeared on behalf of respondent No. 16 and Shri Sanjay

     Jain, learned ASG has appeared on behalf of the State of

     Maharashtra/MHADA.
3.   Two IAs are filed for perjury on behalf of respondent No. 5.
One IA is filed on behalf of respondent No. 5 challenging

     the termination of the development agreement which was

     in its favour.
2
3.1   Dr. A.M. Singhvi, learned Senior Advocate, appearing on

      behalf of the petitioners in SLP (C) No. 4428/2016 has

      prayed to permit the petitioners (except petitioner No. 4) to

      withdraw the SLP in view of the subsequent development.

      It is submitted that the subsequent developments are

      mentioned in IA No. 128881/2019. It is pointed out that

      during the pendency of the present proceedings, the

      development agreement in favour of respondent No. 5 has

      been terminated on 08.10.2018. It is pointed out that the

      new development agreement in favour of another developer

      has also been entered into as the new developer has been

      appointed. It is further pointed out that even subsequently

      Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority

      (MHADA) has also terminated the development agreement

      which was in favour of respondent No. 5. It is submitted

      that in view of the change circumstances, as such, the

      cause does not survive which as such was against

      respondent No. 5 and therefore, it is prayed to permit the

      petitioners to withdraw Special Leave Petition (C) No.

      4428/2016.
3
3.2   Shri Rana Mukherjee, learned Senior Advocate appearing

      on behalf of the petitioners in SLP (C) No…CC No.

      4922/2016 is not disputing the above. However, he has

      submitted that so far as the tenants and/or the petitioners

      in this SLP are concerned, they are not aware of the

      contents   and/or    terms       and    conditions   of   the   new

      development agreement. It is submitted that therefore, the

      present management may be directed to furnish the copy

      of the fresh development agreement which has been

      entered into in favour of new developer so that they can

      know on what terms and conditions the fresh development

      agreement has been entered into and whether the tenants

      are agreeable on the same or not. He has prayed to reserve

      the liberty in favour of the petitioners to challenge the

      fresh    development      agreement         before    appropriate

      court/forum, if the petitioners are not agreeable on the

      terms and conditions on which the fresh development

      agreement has been entered into.
3.3   Shri    Neeraj   Kishan   Kaul,        learned   Senior   Advocate

      appearing on behalf of respondent No. 5, though has
4
opposed the withdrawal of the present SLPs, but has

     submitted that even respondent No. 5 has challenged the

     termination of the development agreement in its favour by

     way of IA and has also initiated the perjury proceedings. It

     is prayed that if this Court is not inclined to permit

     respondent       No.   5    to   challenge        the   termination     of

     respondent No. 5 in the present proceedings and is not

     entertaining the perjury application(s), the liberty may be

     reserved in favour of respondent No. 5 to challenge the

     termination and subsequent development agreement in

     favour    of      another        developer        before     appropriate

     court/forum and the grounds stated in the perjury

     application(s)    may      be directed       to    be      considered in

     accordance with law and on its own merits.
4.   Having heard learned senior counsel/counsel appearing on

     behalf   of    the     respective     parties       and     taking    into

     consideration the subsequent development so stated and

     pointed out in IA No. 128881/2019, without prejudice to

     the rights and contentions of the respective parties in the

     proceedings to be initiated as observed hereinbelow,
5
considering the prayer made by Dr. A.M. Singhvi, learned

     Senior Advocate, we permit the petitioners in SLP (C) No.

     4428/2016 to withdraw the SLP unconditionally. So far as

     petitioner No. 4 is concerned none has appeared. In view of

     the subsequent development and even otherwise none has

     remained present, the present SLP stands dismissed qua

     petitioner No. 4 in SLP (C) No. 4428/2016.
SLP (C)…..CC No. 4922/2016
Delay condoned. Substitution application(s) are allowed

     and the name(s) of legal heirs of concerned petitioners are

     taken on record and the memo of parties be amended

     accordingly.
5.   SLP (C) No…. CC No. 4922/2016 is disposed of as under: ­
(i)   This Court has taken note of the termination of the

           development agreement which was in favour of

           respondent No. 5 and executing/entering into the

           fresh development agreement. The copy of the fresh

           development agreement needs be furnished to the
6
respective tenants by the present management. If any

            of the tenants is aggrieved by the terms and

            conditions of the fresh development agreement, it will

            be open for them to challenge the same before

            appropriate court/forum, which may be considered in

            accordance with law and on its own merits;
(ii)   It will also be open for respondent No. 5 whose

            development agreement has been terminated by the

            present   management/MHADA         to    challenge   the

            termination   of   the   development    agreement    and

            executing the fresh development agreement before

            appropriate court/forum and the grounds set out in

            the perjury application(s) may be considered in

            accordance with law and on its own merits.
6.   Present Special Leave Petition (C) No. 4428 of 2016 stands

     dismissed as withdrawn in terms of the above and with the

     above observations and Special Leave Petition (C) No… CC

     No. 4922/2016 also stands disposed of in terms of the

     above and with the above observations.
7.
7
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
…………………………………J.
                                     (M. R. SHAH)



                                     …………………………………J.
                                     (C.T. RAVIKUMAR)



                                     …………………………………J.
                                     (SANJAY KAROL)

NEW DELHI,
FEBRUARY 17, 2023.
8