[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Lisie Medical Institutions vs The State Of Kerala on 9 February, 2023
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 720
                                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                    Civil Appeal No 6799 of 2017


            M/s Lisie Medical Institutions                                                    … Apellant

                                                               Versuys

            The State of Kerala & Ors                                                         … Respondents



                                                           JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud , CJI


            1               The present reference to a three Judge Bench has been occasioned in a referring

                            judgment of a two Judge bench in
Lisie Medical Institutions Vs State of

                            Kerala1
.
The two judge Bench has doubted the correctness of certain

                            observations contained in an earlier decision of two Judges in
SH Medical Centre

                            Hospital vs State of Kerala2
.
2               We have heard Mr R Basant, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant

                            and Mr V Giri, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents.


            3               The issue turns on the interpretation of the provision for exemptions contained in
Section 3(1)
of the Kerala Building Tax Act, 1975, which is extracted below:
“3. Exemptions – (1) Nothing in this Act shall apply to
(a)  buildings owned by the Government of Kerala or the
Signature Not Verified
Government of India or any local authority; and
Digitally signed by
GULSHAN KUMAR
ARORA
Date: 2023.02.16
16:19:45 IST
Reason:
1                  (2017) 14 SCC 533
            2                  (2014) 11 SCC 381
(b)  buildings used principally for religious charitable            or
            educational purposes or as factories or workshops.
Explanation.– For the purpose of this sub-section, “Charitable
            purpose” includes relief of the poor and free medical relief.”


4   Clause (b) of sub-Section (1) of
Section 3
of the Kerala Building Tax Act 1975

    stipulates that nothing in the enactment shall apply to buildings used “principally

    for ... Charitable ... purposes”.   The Explanation [now Explanation (1)] indicates

    that for the purpose of the sub-section ‘charitable purpose’ includes “relief of the

    poor and free medical relief”.      Clearly, therefore, the Explanation indicates that

    the meaning of the expression ‘charitable purpose’ is not confined to relief of the

    poor and free medical relief as is evidenced by the use of the expression

    ‘includes’.   When a statute uses the expression ‘includes’, it is a well settled

    principle of interpretation that the elucidation is not intended to be exhaustive.


5   However, while construing the provisions of
Section 3(1)(b)
of the Kerala Building

    Tax Act 1975, the two Judge Bench in
SH Medical Centre Hospital
(supra), has

    incorporated the following observations in Paragraph 17 of the Judgment:
“The High Court has correctly interpreted the “Explanation”
            clause to
Section 3(1)
of the Act to hold that “charitable
            purpose” means “relief of the poor and free medical relief”.
(Emphasis Supplied)
6   The observation which is extracted above suggests that the two-Judge Bench

    construed the Explanation to
Section 3(1)
to mean that a ‘charitable purpose’ is

    confined only to relief of the poor and free medical relief. This observation of the

    two-Judge Bench in
SH Medical Centre Hospital
(supra) does not accord with

    the plain meaning of the Explanation to
Section 3(1)
. It was this aspect which was

    noted in the referring judgment by A K Sikri, J in the following observations:
“16. … With due respect to the Bench which rendered the
         judgment in
S.H. Medical Centre Hospital Vs State of Kerala
,
         (2014) 11 SCC 381, it appears that an error in interpreting
         Explanation I to Clause 1 of
Section 3
of the Act has occurred in
         not noticing that it contains the word “includes” and not “means”.
This error led to holding that “charitable purpose” meant only
         “relief of the poor and free medical relief”. Relief to the poor and
         free medical relief is only one of the facets to charitable purpose
         and Explanation simply clarifies that too to be a charitable
         purpose. However, the inclusive definition points out that relief to
         poor and free medical relief is not exhaustive as to what
         charitable purpose would mean. Thus, in order to find out the true
         scope of charitable purpose, one will have to look into the
         judgments of this Court, even if this very expression is examined
         in the context of the
Income Tax Act
.”


7   The two judge bench in
SH Medical Centre Hospital
(supra) conflated the use

    of the word ‘include’ with ‘means’. The Explanation to
Section 3(1)(a)
uses the

    expression ‘includes’.   The plain intendment is that relief of the poor and free

    medical relief are not exhaustive of the content of charitable purpose.
8   At this stage, it would be material to note the submission of the respondents,

    urged by Mr V Giri, senior counsel, to the effect that apart from the

    interpretational issue which is addressed in the decision of the two-Judge Bench in
SH Medical Centre Hospital
(supra), the Court has dwelt on other aspects of
Section 3(1)
. Mr. Giri adverted to the expression “buildings used principally for …

    charitable … purposes” in
Section 3(1)(b)
and urges that the interpretation of that

    phrase in the decision in SH Medical Centre Hospital is correct.


9   Undoubtedly,
Section 3(1)(b)
provides that nothing in the Act shall apply to

    buildings which are used ‘principally’ for specific purposes, including among them,

    ‘charitable purposes’. The expression “principally” conveys the meaning of that

    which is the dominant purpose. The interpretation placed by the two-Judge Bench

    on the expression “principally used for charitable purposes” does not call for

    interference in view of the statutory language used in
Section 3(1)
. Principal use

    refers to the dominant substantive use as distinguished from an ancillary use.
10   The Explanation goes to indicate that ‘charitable purposes’ includes and is,

     therefore, not confined to the relief of the poor and free medical relief.
Consequently, the decision in
SH Medical Centre Hospital
(supra) to the extent

     of the interpretation which is placed on the Explanation to
Section 3(1)(b)
of the

     Kerala Building Tax Act 1975 does not correctly reflect the position in law which is

     clarified above.   The decision in    SH Medical Centre Hospital is, therefore,

     overruled to the above extent.
11   In the present case, the Division Bench of the Kerala High Court, while disposing

     of the Writ Appeal, has relied only on the decision of the two Judge Bench of this

     Court in
SH Medical Centre Hospital
(supra). The impugned judgment of the

     Division Bench is extracted below :
“The issue raised in this writ appeal concerning the claim of
            the appellant for exemption from Building Tax levied under
            the
Kerala Building Tax Act, 1975
is fully covered against it
            by the judgment of the Apex Court in
S.H.Medical Centre
            Hospital v. State of Kerala
[2014 (1) KHC 222]. This being
            the factual position, we do not see any merit in this appeal.
Appeal fails and it is dismissed accordingly.”
12   Since the position in regard to the interpretation of the provisions of the

     Explanation to
Section 3(1)
of the Kerala Building Tax Act 1975 has been clarified

     above, we are of the considered view that the impugned judgment of the High

     Court dated 18 July 2016 should be set aside and the Writ Appeal be restored to

     the file of the High Court for a decision after keeping open the factual analysis

     based on the interpretation of
Section 3(1)
.
13   Writ Appeal No 1386 of 2016 in Writ Petition (Civil) No 20448 of 2016 is

     accordingly restored to the file of the Kerala High Court for disposal in view of the

     above interpretation.
14   The reference is answered in the above terms.        The appeal is accordingly

     disposed of.
15   Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
…..…..…....…........……………….…......CJI
                                              [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                              …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                              [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha]




                                              …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                              [J B Pardiwala]
New Delhi;
February 9, 2023.
-GKA-
ITEM NO.102                     COURT NO.1                     SECTION XI-A

                  S U P R E M E C O U R T O F           I N D I A
                          RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

                      Civil Appeal       No(s).    6799/2017

M/S LISIE MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS                                 Appellant(s)

                                        VERSUS

THE STATE OF KERALA . & ORS.                                   Respondent(s)
([TO GO BEFORE THREE HONBLE JUDGES][ RETAIN ITS POSITION ]
( IA No. 198197/2022 - INTERVENTION APPLICATION IA No. 98067/2019 -
PERMISSION TO APPEAR AND ARGUE IN PERSON)

Date : 09-02-2023 These matters were called on for hearing today.
CORAM :    HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
           HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA
           HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.B. PARDIWALA

For Appellant(s)       Mr. R. Basant, Sr. Adv.
Mr. K.V. Mohan, Adv.
Mr. Jijo Paul Kallookkaran, Adv.
Mr. K.v. Balakrishnan, Adv.
Mr. Rahul Kumar Sharma, Adv.
Mr. Vishnu. P, Adv.
Mr. K. V. Mohan, AOR

For Respondent(s)      Mr. V Giri, Sr. Adv.
                       Mr. C. K. Sasi, AOR
                       Mr. Abdulla Naseeh V T, Adv.
                       Ms. Meena K Poulose, Adv.

                       Mr. Ramesh Babu M. R., AOR
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                                 O R D E R

1    The reference is answered in terms of the signed reportable judgment.     The
     appeal is disposed of.
2    Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
(GULSHAN KUMAR ARORA)                          (SAROJ KUMARI GAUR)
     AR-CUM-PS                                 ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
(Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)