[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ashwini Kumar Upadhyay vs Union Of India on 2 February, 2023
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
WPC 967/2017
                                                           1



                                                                                          Reportable


                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                              CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION



                                            Writ Petition (Civil) No 967 of 2017




                      Ashwini Kumar Upadhyay                                         Petitioner


                                                      Versus


                      Union of India and Another                                     Respondents




                                                 JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI



                      1   The petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 32
of

                          the Constitution to challenge the constitutional validity of
Section 33(7)
of

                          the Representation of the People Act 19511.
Signature Not Verified
1     “Act of 1951”
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2023.02.04
13:39:30 IST
Reason:
WPC 967/2017
2
2    Apart from the above challenge, the petitioner seeks a direction to the

          Central government and the Election Commission of India to take appropriate

          steps to restrict any person from contesting an election for the “same office”

          from more than one constituency simultaneously.
3    At this stage, it would also be material to note that the third prayer, prayer
(c), which sought a direction to the Union government and the Election

          Commission    “to   take   appropriate   steps   to   discourage   independent

          candidates from contesting the Parliamentary and Assembly elections” was

          rejected by an order of this Court dated 11 December 2017.


     4    The basis of the petition is that on 5 July 2004, the Chief Election

          Commissioner urged the then Prime Minister to amend
Section 33(7)
of the

          Act of 1951 insofar as it permits a person to contest from more than one

          constituency for the same office simultaneously. The petitioner urges that

          the Law Commission in its 255th Report had opined that the
Representation

          of the People Act
1951 should be amended to provide that a person should

          not be permitted to contest from more than one seat at a time.


     5    We have heard Mr Gopal Sankaranarayanan, senior counsel appearing on

          behalf of the petitioner and Mr R Venkataramani, Attorney General for India.

          The Election Commission of India has also appeared in these proceedings

          through its counsel, Mr Amit Sharma.
WPC 967/2017
3
6    Counter affidavits have been filed by the Union of India and the Election

          Commission.
7    During the course of the hearing, Mr Gopal Sankaranarayanan, senior

          counsel urged that the petition implicates an issue under
Article 19
of the

          Constitution. It has been submitted that citizens exercise their right to vote

          after knowing about a candidate’s character, qualifications and criminal

          antecedents among other details. When a candidate who contests from two

          seats, is elected from both, one of the two seats has to be vacated. Apart

          from the financial burden which is imposed on the public exchequer for

          holding a bye-election, it has been urged that the electorate which has cast

          its vote in favour of a candidate on the basis of the representations which

          were held out during the course of campaigning would be deprived of being

          represented by that candidate for the Parliamentary or, as the case may be,

          the State Legislative Assembly constituency. Consequently, it has been

          urged that the electorate which has opted for a candidate in pursuance of its

          right to know under
Article 19(1)(a)
would be deprived of its right when the

          candidate vacates the seat.
8
Section 33(7)
of the Act of 1951 provides as follows:
“Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (6) or in
                 any other provisions of this Act, a person shall not be
                 nominated as a candidate for election,—
WPC 967/2017
4
(a) in the case of a general election to the House of the People
               (whether or not held simultaneously from all Parliamentary
               constituencies),    from   more     than    two   Parliamentary
               constituencies;
(b) in the case of a general election to the Legislative Assembly
               of a State (whether or not held simultaneously from all
               Assembly constituencies), from more than two Assembly
               constituencies in that State;
(c) in the case of a biennial election to the Legislative Council
               of a State having such Council, from more than two Council
               constituencies in the State;
(d) in the case of a biennial election to the Council of States for
               filling two or more seats allotted to a State, for filling more than
               two such seats;
(e) in the case of bye-elections to the House of the People from
               two or more Parliamentary constituencies which are held
               simultaneously, from more than two such Parliamentary
               constituencies;
(f) in the case of bye-elections to the Legislative Assembly of a
               State from two or more Assembly constituencies which are held
               simultaneously, from more than two such Assembly
               constituencies;
(g) in the case of bye-elections to the Council of States for
               filling two or more seats allotted to a State, which are held
               simultaneously, for filling more than two such seats;
(h) in the case of bye-elections to the Legislative Council of a
               State having such Council from two or more Council
               constituencies which are held simultaneously, from more than
               two such Council constituencies.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, two or more
               bye-elections shall be deemed to be held simultaneously where
               the notification calling such bye-elections are issued by the
               Election Commission under Sections 147, 149, 150 or, as the
               case may be, 151 on the same date.”
WPC 967/2017
5
9    The above provision was inserted by Act 21 of 1996 with effect from 1

          August 1996. It is common ground between senior counsel and the Attorney

          General for India that prior to 1 August 1996, there was no bar on the

          number of seats which a candidate could contest in the course of one

          election, be it for Parliamentary or State Legislative Assembly constituencies.

          Parliament has stepped in to provide that a candidate cannot contest more

          than two seats simultaneously in one and the same election.


     10   The issue which has been raised by the petitioner pertains to the legislative

          domain. Undoubtedly, where a candidate contests more than one seat

          simultaneously in the course of the same general election, one seat has to

          be vacated if the candidate succeeds in both the electoral contests. That

          necessitates a bye-election. The petitioner has highlighted the fact that this

          involves a drain on the public exchequer. The issue, however, is whether this

          by itself would result in the invalidation of a statutory provision.


     11   A statutory provision can be challenged before the Court either on the

          ground that it has been made by a legislature which lacks legislative

          competence to enact a law or on the ground that there is a violation of a

          Fundamental Right in Part III of the Constitution. The former is not in issue.


     12   Permitting a candidate to contest from more than one seat in a

          Parliamentary election or at an election to the State Legislative Assembly is a

          matter of legislative policy. It is a matter pertaining to legislative policy
WPC 967/2017
6
since, ultimately, Parliament determines whether political democracy in the

          country is furthered by granting a choice such as is made available by
Section 33(7)
of the Act of 1951. A candidate who contests from more than

          one seat may do so for a variety of reasons not just bearing on the

          uncertainty which the candidate perceives of an election result. There are

          other considerations which weigh in the balance in determining whether this

          would restrict the course of electoral democracy in the country. This is a

          matter where Parliament is legitimately entitled to make legislative choices

          and enact or amend legislation. The Law Commission and the Election

          Commission may at the material time have expressed certain viewpoints.

          Whether they should be converted into a mandate of the law depends on the

          exercise of Parliamentary sovereignty in enacting legislation. Absent any

          manifest arbitrariness of the provision so as to implicate the provisions of
Article 14
or a violation of
Article 19
, it would not be possible for this Court to

          strike down the provision as unconstitutional.
13   This will not restrain Parliament from taking an appropriate view if it decides

          to do so at any point of time in pursuance of its legislative authority.

          Parliament has intervened in the past in the form of Act 21 of 1996 which

          restricts the choice of a candidate for electoral contest to two seats in one

          and the same election.
WPC 967/2017
7
14    For the above reasons, we are of the view that no relief can be granted in

           these proceedings.
15    The Petition shall accordingly stand dismissed.


     16    Pending applications, if any, stands disposed of.
….....…...….......…………………..CJI.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                    ..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                    [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha]




                                                    ..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                    [J B Pardiwala]

     New Delhi;
February 2, 2023
     CKB
WPC 967/2017
8
ITEM NO.17                 COURT NO.1               SECTION PIL-W

               S U P R E M E C O U R T O F      I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

                    Writ Petition (Civil) No.967/2017


ASHWINI KUMAR UPADHYAY                                  Petitioner(s)

                                  VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                                   Respondent(s)

(With IA No.21671/2018-INTERVENTION/IMPLEADMENT         ATTORNEY   GENERAL
FOR INDIA)
Date : 02-02-2023 This petition was called on for hearing today.


CORAM :
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
               HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA
               HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.B. PARDIWALA


For Petitioner(s)     Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayanan, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Ashwani Kumar Dubey, AOR

For Respondent(s)     Mr. R. Venkataramani, AG
                      Mr. Tushar Mehta, SG
                      Ms. Saudamini Sharma, Adv.
Mrs. Rukhmini Bobde, Adv.
Mr. Ankur Talwar, Adv.
Mr. Chinmayee Chandra, Adv.
Mr. Kanu Agrawal, Adv.
Mr. Digvijay Dam, Adv.
Mr. Vinayak Mehrotra, Adv.
Mrs. Mansi Sood, Adv.
Mr. Chitvan Singhal, Adv.
Ms. Sonali Jain, Adv.
WPC 967/2017
9
Mr. Abhishek Kumar Pandey, Adv.
Mr. Raman Yadav, Adv.
Mr. Anand Venkatramani, Adv.
Ms. Vijay Lakshami Venkataramani, Adv.
                         Mr. Arvind Kumar Sharma, AOR

                         Mr. Amit Sharma, AOR
                         Mr. Dipesh Sinha, Adv.
Mr. Pallavi Barua, Adv.
Ms. Sakshi Upadhayya, Adv.
Ms. Aparna Singh, Adv.
Mr. Balaji Srinivasan, AOR


               UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                                   O R D E R

     1    The Petition is dismissed in terms of the signed reportable judgment.
2    Pending applications, if any, stands disposed of.
(CHETAN KUMAR)                     (SAROJ KUMARI GAUR)
                A.R.-cum-P.S.                     Assistant Registrar
(Signed Reportable Judgment is placed on the file)