[Cites
2
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Seema Kaushal vs Dheeraj Kumar on 10 February, 2023
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
V. Ramasubramanian
1

                                                                           Non-Reportable

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                            TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL)No.1621 OF 2022



                SEEMA KAUSHAL                                              Petitioner


                                                 VERSUS


                DHEERAJ KUMAR                                              Respondent


                                                 O R D E R
Pankaj Mithal, J.
1.       Heard   counsel   for   the      parties    and   perused   the

                pleadings.
2.       The petitioner – wife has filed this petition for

                the transfer of Divorce Petition bearing Application

                No.646      of   2022   titled   as
“Dheeraj   Kumar   Vs.   Seema

                Kaushal”
pending before the Family Court No.1, Jaipur

                Metropolis Jaipur, Rajasthan to the Court of Principal
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
POOJA SHARMA
Date: 2023.02.10
16:53:00 IST
Reason:
Judge, Family Court, Kurukshetra, Haryana.
2
3.     The petitioner and the respondent – husband were

married on 13.11.2014 and their marriage was registered

before     the     Marriage     Registrar,                Ghaziabad,           Uttar

Pradesh. They have a son, who is alleged to be living

with     his     maternal     parents               at    Kurukshetra.           The

petitioner and the respondent both are in Government

service and are posted at Jaipur. The petitioner is

currently posted as Deputy Director in National Health

Mission, Jaipur and a Class-I, Officer, in Rajasthan

Civil Services. She had remained posted in Rajasthan

since 2011.
4.     The Transfer Petition has been preferred basically

on the ground that her father-in-law, who was Assistant

Superintendent       of     Police        in        Rajasthan,        is   a    very

influential person in Jaipur and that at his behest,

threats have been extended to the petitioner, in respect

whereof, some complaints have been made by her to the

authorities. The son of the petitioner is living and

studying in Kurukshetra, Haryana, where he has initiated

proceedings for maintenance under
Section 125
of the

Code     of      Criminal     Procedure,                 1973     against        the

respondents.       Therefore,        it        is     just      and    proper     to

transfer the case to Haryana.
3
5.   The    father-in-law    of       the   petitioner   was    the

Assistant Superintendent of Police but has now retired.

There is no allegation whatsoever in the petition that

he is so influential even today so as to influence the

decision of the Family Court at Jaipur. The extension of

some threats as alleged may be a danger to her personal

security but that may not be sufficient or a good ground

for the transfer of the petition. The complaints, if

any, alleging such threats are all subsequent to the

filing of the divorce petition and may be for creating a

ground for seeking       transfer of the divorce petition.

Even the initiation of the proceedings by the son at

Kurukshetra in Haryana are subsequent to the filing of

the divorce petition and appears to be an afterthought.
6.   The petitioner has nowhere alleged that she is not

going to stay        in Jaipur   any further or     that she is

likely     to   be    transferred      or   going   to   live    in

Kurukshetra, Haryana. Therefore, when both the parties

to the marriage/divorce petition are residing in Jaipur,

it is not just and proper to transfer the case outside

Rajasthan to a remote place like Kurukshetra in Haryana.

It will not be inconvenient to both of them as, while on
4
duty they will have to go to attend the proceedings to

such a long distance and return.
7.   In the overall facts and circumstances, we do not

deem it necessary to transfer this divorce application,

the petition is dismissed. No order as to costs.
Pending   application(s),     if     any,   shall   stand

disposed of accordingly.
…………………………………………………J.
                                        [V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN]




                                        .…………………………………………….J.
                                         [PANKAJ MITHAL]


 New Delhi;
10th February, 2023.