[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Gtc Industries Ltd. (Now Known As Golden ... vs Collector Of Central Excise New Delhi on 9 February, 2023
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
1


                                                               NON-REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                            CIVIL APPEAL NOS.8583-8584 OF 2010


          G.T.C. INDUSTRIES LTD (NOW KNOWN
          AS GOLDEN TOBACCO LIMITED)
          THR. MANAGER LEGAL AND ANR.      ……APPELLANTS

                                                  VS.

          COLLECTOR OF CENTRAL EXCISE
          AND ORS                                              ….RESPONDENTS

          WITH

          CIVIL APPEAL NOS.8581-8582/2010
          CIVIL APPEAL No.8585/2010


                                             JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
These    appeals,   by   special   leave,   challenge   the

          judgment and order dated 28th August, 2009 rendered by the

          Delhi High Court (hereafter ‘the High Court’, for short) while

          disposing of 5 (five) writ petitions, viz. WP(C) Nos. 1854 and

          1895 to 1898 of 1992.
2.             The High Court, for the reasons assigned in the

          impugned judgment, declared section 9-D of the Central
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Harshita Uppal
Date: 2023.02.09
15:49:53 IST
Reason:
Excise and Salt Act, 1944 (hereafter ‘
Excise Act
’, for short) as

          intra vires while dismissing the writ petitions.
2
3.   In course of hearing before us, Mr. S.K. Bagaria, learned

senior counsel appearing for the appellants, did not even

attempt to assail the reasons assigned by the High Court for

up-holding the constitutional validity of
section 9-D
of the

Excise Act. However, Mr. Bagaria argued that by a judgment

and order dated 25th April, 2008, this Court had remitted the

matters back to the High Court for consideration thereof

afresh. In view of the judicial mandate, while deciding the writ

petitions afresh on remand, the High Court could not have

limited its decision only to the issue relating to vires of section

9-D. The writ petitions, as amended, also raised the issue as

to how the essential pre-requisites of section 9-D were

breached by the department in the adjudication orders. The

effect of the principles and pre-requisites laid down by the

High Court for invocation of section 9-D vis-à-vis the

appellants’ case could not have been left undecided.
4.   According to Mr. Bagaria, the principles laid down by the

High Court in the impugned judgment ought to have been

applied to test the legality and correctness of the impugned

action of the department and there being apparent breach of

such principles at the end of the department, the High Court

committed an error of law in not deciding the other issues

raised in the writ petitions. In other words, according to Mr.
3
Bagaria, the High Court could not have stopped at deciding

the issue of vires of section 9-D by reading it down and

summarizing the conditions precedent in-built into it and it

was obligatory for the High Court to decide the writ petitions

in its totality; and while so deciding, to declare whether on the

parameters of the conditions precedent in section 9-D, as laid

down in the impugned judgment, the petitioners were entitled

to any relief or not.
5. Mr. Bagaria continued by submitting that the details of the

earlier proceedings as well as all earlier orders including the

orders passed by the Customs, Excise and Gold Control

Appellate Tribunal (hereafter ‘Tribunal’, for short) and this

Court were placed on record before this Court by way of a

‘status chart’. Such status chart was reproduced in the

judgment and order dated 25th April, 2008; and after noting all

these facts, the matters were remitted to the High Court for

deciding the writ petitions afresh. It is not as if the remand

was only for deciding the issue of section 9-D alone without

deciding the remaining issues raised in the writ petitions.
6.    The argument of Mr. Bagaria was that if the effect of the

principles and pre-requisites laid down by the High Court vis-

à-vis the appellants’ case were to be left undecided, the entire

proceedings continuing since the last several years would
4
simply be rendered academic. He has, therefore, endeavoured

to persuade us hold that the High Court committed an error of

law requiring correction by us.
7.    Mr. Bagaria referred to the decisions of this Court in
State of UP vs. Mohammad Nooh
1,
Calcutta Discount

Company vs. ITO2
,
Institute of Chartered Accountants

of India vs. L.K. Ratna3
and
Andaman Timber Industries

vs. CCE4
in support of his arguments.
8.    To appreciate the contentions of Mr. Bagaria, we need to

take a quick look at the events preceding the impugned

judgment and order.
9.    The facts giving rise to the writ petitions reveal that

huge demands of about Rs. 94,00,00,000/- were raised by the

department on the ground that the appellants and its job

workers had manufactured deceptively similar versions of

certain regular brands of cigarettes showing sale price

whereas the same were sold through marketing chain at the

higher price of normal brands and that the difference

between the two prices was received by the appellants as

flow-back through various super wholesale buyers. On 23 rd

March, 1988 and 29th March, 1988, two show-cause notices

1 AIR 1958 SC 86
2 AIR 1961 SC 372
3 (1986) 4 SCC 537
4 (2016) 15 SCC 785
5
were issued by the department to the petitioners raising

demands for alleged short payment of excise duty. Such

notices primarily relied on the statements of 75 (seventy-five)

witnesses to establish the recovery of prices higher than the

declared prices and flow back of additional amounts to the

appellants. Pursuant to directions of the Bombay High Court,

facility of cross-examination was extended in respect of only

29 (twenty-nine) witnesses and most of them, during cross-

examination, denied any flow back to the appellants. The

remaining statements remained untested but were relied

upon by invoking
section 9-D
of the Excise Act. Grievance of

the appellants in the writ petitions was that the parameters

of    section   9-D   had   been   completely   ignored   by   the

authorities.
10.    Since the show-cause notices were spread over a

thousand pages and 600 (six hundred) of which were related

to 63 (sixty-three) statements on which the department had

placed reliance, the appellants on 6th March, 1991 made a

request for cross-examination of 31 (thirty-one) witnesses.

However, without attempting to follow the principles of

natural justice, adjudication orders in respect of the show-

cause notices had been passed by the adjudicating authority

confirming the demands.
6
11.   Despite    persistent        requests,   the   facility   of    cross-

examination was denied. Even before the Collector of Central

Excise had passed any order confirming the demand of duty

against them, the appellants had rushed to the High Court to

complain about the fairness of the procedure followed by the

Collector, more particularly, the denial of the opportunity to

cross-examine. During the pendency of the proceedings, the

Collector had passed the final orders. By applying for

amendment in each one of the writ petitions, permission was

sought to assail the validity of the orders passed by the

Collector. Such applications were disposed of by an order

dated 28th October, 1992 with the observation that the order

of the Collector being appealable, the petitioners could

pursue   their   remedy       in    appeal     before   the     prescribed

appellate   authority.   However,         since   there    was       also   a

challenge to the constitutional validity of
section 9-D
of the

Excise Act, the High Court did not dispose of the writ petitions

finally but intended to examine that limited question later.

The petitioners had preferred appeals before the Tribunal for

the period relevant to WP(C) 1854/1992 and 1895/1992. The

Tribunal had disposed of the appeals in favour of the

department, whereafter appeals were carried to this Court.

The appeals arising out of orders passed by the Tribunal
7
relevant to WP(C) Nos. 1896/1992 and 1898/1992 were

dismissed by an order dated 12 th September, 1997 of this

Court for failure to make the requisite pre-deposit.
12.   The Tribunal on 21st March, 2001 had allowed appeals

filed by M/s J&K Cigarettes and M/s. Kanpur Cigarettes Pvt.

Ltd. These orders were carried in appeal by the department

by filing appeals before this Court under
section 35L
of the

Excise Act, being Civil Appeal Nos. 6398-6403 of 2002.
13.   During the pendency of these 2 (two) appeals, the 5

(five) writ petitions came up for hearing before the High Court

on December 6, 2006. The common grievance of the

petitioners was noted by the High Court in paragraph 3, that

they had invoked the writ jurisdiction feeling aggrieved by

denial of adequate opportunity to cross-examine certain

witnesses whose statements were recorded by the excise

authorities in the course of investigation. The appellants had

argued that the statements of such witnesses, obtained by

the excise authorities in the course of their investigation,

could only be used if they were given an opportunity to cross-

examine the witnesses.
14.   The High Court in its order dated 6 th December, 2006

recorded that 2 (two) issues emerged for decision, viz.,

      “1. Whether this Court would be justified in reading
      down or interpreting
Section 9-D
of the Act as
8
suggested by counsel for the petitioner company
      when three appeals involving the validity of the
      orders passed by the Collector and the CEGAT placing
      reliance upon
Section 9-D
of the Act are pending
      before the Supreme Court?
2. If answer to question No. 1 is in the affirmative,
      whether Section 9-D suffers from any vice of
      unconstitutionality?”
15.   Insofar as the first question is concerned, the High

Court, inter alia, held as follows:
“Two of the orders when challenged before the
      Supreme Court, were upheld by Their Lordships also
      while the remaining three appeals are pending
      adjudication. It is obvious that stand (sic) disposed of
      or those pending before the Apex Court, the question
      of fairness of the procedure and in particular, the
      denial of any opportunity to cross-examine the
      witnesses was and continues be available to the
      petitioner. If the discretion vested in the authority in
      terms of Section 9D(1)(a) has been improperly
      exercised, Their Lordships could have granted relief in
      the disposed of appeals and can even now grant relief
      to the petitioner in the appeals that are pending for
      disposal. It is also evident that while examining the
      question of fairness of the procedure adopted by the
      adjudicating authority, the interpretation of provisions
      of Section 9D(1)(a) would fall for consideration of
      Their Lordships. What is the true scope of Section
      9D(1)(a) and what is the true interpretation to be
      placed upon the same having regard to the possible
      'constitutional infirmity suggested by the petitioner's
      is a matter which would legitimately arise for
      consideration of the Supreme Court. Even assuming
      that the dismissal of two appeals filed by the
      petitioner involving the same question is not
      indicative of the Court finding infirmity either (sic, in)
      the procedure adopted by the adjudicating authority
      or in the interpretation placed upon Section 9D(1)(a)
      by the saidauthority or the Tribunal, the contrary
      interpretation which petitioner wishes this Court to
      place upon Section 9D is a matter still open to the
      petitioners before the Supreme Court. That being so,
      there is no compelling reason why this court should
      take upon itself the exercise of interpreting
Section
9
9D and in the process reading the same down as
      suggested by the petitioner. If the interpretation
      suggested does eventually appeal to the Supreme
      Court during the course the hearing pending before
      Their Lordships, the opinion of this court on that
      aspect would be wholly inconsequential and
      academic. Such an academic exercise need not be
      undertaken by this court nor is any duplication of the
      process of interpretation (sic) Question number 1 is,
      therefore, answered in the negative.”

In the light of the answer to question no. 1, the Court felt that

the answer to the second question becomes unnecessary.
Consequently, the writ petitions were dismissed with costs.
16.   The judgment and order dated 6th December, 2006

was carried in appeal before this Court in Civil Appeal

Nos.3187-3189/2008. By an order dated 25 th April, 2008, this

Court disposed of the appeals by the following order:-
“7. The High Court, as noticed hereinbefore, did not
      decide the question of constitutionality of the said
      provision, nor did it determine the objection of the
      respondents that no cause of action had arisen
      therefor.
8. We are, therefore, of the opinion that interest of
      justice would be subserved if the impugned
      judgments are set aside and the matters are remitted
      back to the High Court for consideration thereof
      afresh. We direct accordingly.
9. The appeals are disposed of with                 the
      aforementioned observations and directions.
10. However, as these matters are pending for a long
      time, we would request the High Court to consider the
      desirability of disposing of thewrit petitions, filed by
      the appellants, as expeditiously as possible,
      preferably without a period of three months from the
      date of communication of this order. All contentions of
      the parties shall remain open.”
10
17.   It was in terms of the order dated 25 th April, 2008 that

the High Court once again considered the challenge of the

appellants to the vires of
section 9-D
of the Excise Act. Upon

hearing learned counsel appearing for the parties, the High

Court in the impugned judgment and order dated 28 th August,

2009 recorded the following conclusions:-
“32. Thus, we summarize our conclusions as under:-
(i) We are of the opinion that the provisions of
Section
         9-D(2)
of the Act are not unconstitutional or ultra
         vires;
(ii) While invoking
Section 9-D
of the Act, the
         concernedauthority is to form an opinion on the basis
         of material on record that a particular ground, as
         stipulated in the said Section, exists and is
         established;
(iii) Such an opinion has to be supported with
         reasons;
(iv) Before arriving at this opinion, the authority
         would give opportunity to the affected party to make
         submissions on the available material on the basis of
         which the authority intends to arrive at the said
         opinion; and
(v)   it is always open to the affected party to
         challenge the invocation of provisions of
Section 9-D
of the Act in a particular case by filing statutory
         appeal, which provides for judicial review”.
and dismissed the writ petitions holding that the same had no

merit.
18.   Bearing      in    mind     these     preceding     facts     and

circumstances, we need to consider the contentions raised by
11
Mr. Bagaria. For the reasons that follow, the contentions do

not commend acceptance.
19. This Court while remitting the writ petitions to the High

Court for hearing the same afresh had taken note of the fact

that, inter alia, the appellants’ appeals bearing Civil Appeal

Nos. 5134-34/1997 questioning the order of the Tribunal

confirming      the    demands   against     the     appellants      stood

dismissed by an order of this Court dated 12th September,

1997.
20.   As noted above, the orders of the Tribunal dated 21 st

March, 2001 deciding the appeals in favour of the appellants,

were the subject matter of challenge in this Court at the

instance   of    the    department    in   Civil    Appeal       Nos.6398-

6403/2002. Such appeals were ultimately allowed by order

dated 31st July, 2008; while directing a remand, it was

observed by this Court that the Tribunal had not recorded any

findings regarding the flow back.
21.   At this juncture, from paragraph 1(xxiv) of the Statement

of Case filed on 10th December, 2012, we also note that

pursuant to the remand ordered by this Court as above, the

Tribunal disposed of the statutory appeals confirming the

demands      against    Kanpur   Cigarettes        Pvt.   Ltd.   and   J&K
12
Cigarettes. Civil Appeal Nos. 1533-1534 of 2011, carried

before this Court from the orders of the Tribunal, were

thereafter dismissed in view of inability to comply with the

conditional order passed by this Court directing issue of notice

subject to deposit of the entire demand amount as confirmed.
22.   There was one other appeal filed before this Court but

the same too had not been not pursued by the appellants and

the job workers.
23.   Therefore, as on date of hearing of these civil appeals,

there is no lis pending in respect of the concerned demands

between the parties.
24.   It would be appropriate to note the issues involved in the

writ petitions. First, the vires of
section 9-D
of the Excise Act

was under challenge. Secondly, even if section 9-D were intra

vires, whether the parameters thereof were completely

ignored by the excise authorities.
25.   The writ petitions were instituted before the High Court

way back in 1992 before any adjudication order was passed

praying, inter-alia, for cross-examination of the remaining

witnesses   whose      cross-examination   had   already   been

permitted but who were not produced. Pursuant to the liberty

given by the High Court, the appellants filed an application for
13
amendment mentioning in detail as to how and for what

reasons invocation of section 9-D by the Commissioner was

illegal and also challenging the vires of
section 9-D
of the

Excise Act.
26.   Though vehemently argued by Mr. Bagaria, there is no

pending proceeding where the principles and prerequisites
laid down by
the High Court for invocation of
section 9-D
of

the Excise Act vis-à-vis the appellants’ case could be

attracted for a decision. When this Court by its order dated

25th April, 2008 remitted the matter to the High Court for

deciding the question of vires of section 9-D, only the civil

appeals carried from the orders of the Tribunal by the

department were pending. These appeals were ultimately

allowed by this Court vide its order dated 31 st July, 2008 and

the matters remitted to the Tribunal. These two appeals, on

remand to the Tribunal, have since been decided in favour of

the department and against the appellants. As noticed above,

the appeals carried to this Court by the appellants from the

orders of the Tribunal confirming the demands against the

appellants also stand dismissed. We are, therefore, left to

wonder in which proceedings would the principles and

prerequisites   and/or   the   parameters   of   the   conditions
14
precedent in section 9-D
,
laid down by
the High Court, could

at all be applied.
27.   The   contentions   raised   by   Mr.   Bagaria   that   the

parameters of section 9-D were completely ignored while the

adjudication orders were made could have been regarded to

be of some worth and engaged our attention if only any

remedy by way of an appeal before the departmental

authority or by a petition before any court were open to be

pursued by the appellants as on date these civil appeals came

up for consideration before us. What we find from the factual

narrative is that although two proceedings were pending

before the Tribunal in view of the order of remand dated 31 st

July, 2008 when the judgment and order dated 28 th August,

2009 under challenge came to be made, even those

proceedings stand closed today after the appellants had

approached this Court and their civil appeals stood dismissed

for non-deposit of the amount demanded. With the final

decision on all the appeals arising from the orders of the

Tribunal being rendered against the appellants, there is no

pending lis where the principles and conditions precedent

could be applied. The endeavour of the appellants to have

these appeals argued before us is, therefore, of purely

academic interest and would not serve any real purpose.
15
28.   While dismissing the civil appeals, we endorse the views

of the High Court insofar as it spurned the challenge of the

appellants to the constitutional validity of
section 9-D
of the

Excise Act.
29.   For unnecessarily protracting the proceedings before this

Court, although no lis survived for resolution, we impose costs

of Rs.5,00,000/- on the appellants. This amount is to be paid

to any charitable organization involved in providing help,

assistance and relief to children suffering from cancer. Such

costs shall be paid within a month from date.             Within two

weeks thereof, proof of payment shall be produced before the

Registrar     who   shall   satisfy    himself   that   the   recipient

organization is, in fact, providing care to children suffering

from cancer. In default thereof, the amount of costs shall be

recovered as arrears of land revenue.
………………………………J
                                             (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)



                                            ………………………………J
                                              (DIPANKAR DATTA)

NEW DELHI;
9TH FEBRUARY, 2023.