[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Anna Mathew vs Supreme Court Of India on 10 February, 2023
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                  WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 148 OF 2023

         ANNA MATHEWS AND OTHERS                                                          .....        PETITIONERS

                                              VERSUS

         SUPREME COURT OF INDIA AND OTHERS                                                .....     RESPONDENTS
WITH

                                  WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 147 OF 2023


                                                     REASONS
                              The legal issue raised in the aforementioned writ petitions

                     relates to the scope and ambit of judicial review in the matter of

                     appointment of judges to the High Courts under
Article 217
of the

                     Constitution of India1.
1 217. Appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of a High Court.— (1) Every Judge of

            a High Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal on the
            recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments Commission referred to in
article 124A
, and
            shall hold office, in the case of an additional or acting Judge, as provided in
article 224
, and in any
            other case, until he attains the age of sixty-two years:
Provided that—
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office;
Signature Not Verified
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office by the President in the manner provided in clause (4) of
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2023.02.10
article 124
for the removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court;
17:26:00 IST
Reason:                (c) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being appointed by the President to be a Judge of the
                       Supreme Court or by his being transferred by the President to any other High Court within the territory
                       of India.
W.P. (C) Nos. 148 & 147 of 2023                                                                     Page 1 of 9
2.      In our opinion, this legal issue is settled and is not res integra.
3.      This Court, in
Mahesh Chandra Gupta v. Union of India and

        Others2
, has held that appointment of a judge is an executive

        function of the President of India.
Article 217(1)
prescribes the

        constitutional requirement of consultation. Fitness of a person to be

        appointed as a judge of the High Court is evaluated in the

        consultation process. Evaluation of the worth and merit of a person

        is a matter entirely different from eligibility of a candidate for

        elevation. While
Article 217(2)
prescribes the threshold limit or the

        entry point for a person to be qualified to be a judge of a High Court,
Article 217(1)
prescribes the procedure to be followed, which


(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High Court unless he is a citizen of
India and—
(a) has for at least ten years held a judicial office in the territory of India; or
(b) has for at least ten years been an advocate of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in
succession;
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause—
(a) in computing the period during which a person has held judicial office in the territory of India, there
shall be included any period, after he has held any judicial office, during which the person has been an
advocate of a High Court or has held the office of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union
or a State, requiring special knowledge of law;
(aa) in computing the period during which a person has been an advocate of a High Court, there shall
be included any period during which the person has held judicial office or the office of a member of a
tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law after he became
an advocate;
(b) in computing the period during which a person has held judicial office in the territory of India or been
an advocate of a High Court, there shall be included any period before the commencement of this
Constitution during which he has held judicial office in any area which was comprised before the
fifteenth day of August, 1947, within India as defined by the
Government of India Act, 1935
, or has
been an advocate of any High Court in any such area, as the case may be.
(3) If any question arises as to the age of a Judge of a High Court, the question shall be decided by
the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India and the decision of the President shall
be final.
2 (2009) 8 SCC 273.
W.P. (C) Nos. 148 & 147 of 2023                                                                Page 2 of 9
procedure is designed to test the fitness of a person so to be

       appointed; her character, her integrity, her competence, her

       knowledge and the like. Thus, this judgment draws on the basic

       difference between eligibility and suitability. Eligibility is an objective

       factor which is determined by applying the parameters or

       qualifications specified in
Article 217(2).
Therefore, when eligibility

       is put in question, the question would fall within the scope of judicial

       review. However, the question whether a person is fit to be

       appointed as a judge essentially involves the aspect of suitability

       and stands excluded from the purview of judicial review.
4.     The ratio in this judgment has been followed in
M. Manohar Reddy

       and Another v. Union of India and Others3
, inter alia, observing

       that the consultative process envisaged under
Article 217(1)
is to

       limit the judicial review, restricting it to the specified area, that is,

       eligibility, and not suitability.
After referring to two decisions of the

       9 Judges’ Bench in Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record

       Association and Others v. Union of India4, and Special

       Reference No. 1 of 1998, Re:5 , it is opined that judicial review lies




3 (2013) 3 SCC 99.
4 (1993) 4 SCC 441.
5 (1998) 7 SCC 739.
W.P. (C) Nos. 148 & 147 of 2023                                         Page 3 of 9
when there is lack of eligibility or ‘lack of effective consultation’.
Judicial review does not lie on ‘content’ of consultation.
5.     Elaborating on what is meant by the term ‘lack of effective

       consultation’, we would like to refer to the observations made by

       this Court in Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association

       and Others (supra):
“JUSTICIABILITY

                 Appointments and Transfers
480. The primacy of the judiciary in the matter of
                 appointments and its determinative nature in transfers
                 introduces the judicial element in the process, and is
                 itself a sufficient justification for the absence of the need
                 for further judicial review of those decisions, which is
                 ordinarily needed as a check against possible executive
                 excess or arbitrariness. Plurality of judges in the
                 formation of the opinion of the Chief Justice of India, as
                 indicated, is another inbuilt check against the likelihood
                 of arbitrariness or bias, even subconsciously, of any
                 individual. The judicial element being predominant in the
                 case of appointments, and decisive in transfers, as
                 indicated, the need for further judicial review, as in other
                 executive actions, is eliminated. The reduction of the
                 area of discretion to the minimum, the element of plurality
                 of judges in formation of the opinion of the Chief Justice
                 of India, effective consultation in writing, and prevailing
                 norms to regulate the area of discretion are sufficient
                 checks against arbitrariness.
481. These guidelines in the form of norms are not to be
                 construed as conferring any justiciable right in the
                 transferred Judge. Apart from the constitutional
                 requirement of a transfer being made only on the
                 recommendation of the Chief Justice of India, the issue
                 of transfer is not justiciable on any other ground,
                 including the reasons for the transfer or their sufficiency.
The opinion of the Chief Justice of India formed in the
                 manner indicated is sufficient safeguard and protection
W.P. (C) Nos. 148 & 147 of 2023                                            Page 4 of 9
against any arbitrariness or bias, as well as any erosion
                 of the independence of the judiciary.
482. This is also in accord with the public interest of
                 excluding these appointments and transfers from
                 litigative debate, to avoid any erosion in the credibility of
                 the decisions, and to ensure a free and frank expression
                 of honest opinion by all the constitutional functionaries,
                 which is essential for effective consultation and for taking
                 the right decision. The growing tendency of needless
                 intrusion by strangers and busybodies in the functioning
                 of the judiciary under the garb of public interest litigation,
                 in spite of the caution in S.P. Gupta while expanding the
                 concept of locus standi, was adverted to recently by a
                 Constitution Bench in
Krishna Swami v. Union of India
. It
                 is, therefore, necessary to spell out clearly the limited
                 scope of judicial review in such matters, to avoid similar
                 situations in future. Except on the ground of want of
                 consultation with the named constitutional functionaries
                 or lack of any condition of eligibility in the case of an
                 appointment, or of a transfer being made without the
                 recommendation of the Chief Justice of India, these
                 matters are not justiciable on any other ground, including
                 that of bias, which in any case is excluded by the element
                 of plurality in the process of decision-making.”
6.     Following the ratio, in
Mahesh Chandra Gupta
(supra), it has been

       held that:
“77. As stated above, in the present case, the matter has
                 arisen from the writ of quo warranto and not from the writ
                 of certiorari. The biodata of Respondent 3 was placed
                 before the Collegiums. Whether Respondent 3 was
                 “suitable” to be appointed a High Court Judge or whether
                 he satisfied the fitness test as enumerated hereinabove
                 is beyond justiciability as far as the present proceedings
                 are concerned. We have decided this matter strictly on
                 the basis of the constitutional scheme in the matter of
                 appointments of High Court Judges as
laid down in
Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Assn. and in
                 Special Reference No. 1 of 1998, Re. Essentially, having
                 worked as a member of the Tribunal for 11 years,
                 Respondent 3 satisfies the “eligibility qualification” in
Article 217(2)(b)
read with Explanation (aa).”
W.P. (C) Nos. 148 & 147 of 2023                                             Page 5 of 9
7.     To further elucidate, we need to state that after the Collegium of the

       High Court makes a recommendation for elevation, inputs are

       received from the intelligence agencies, which conduct a

       background check, and comments from the government are

       considered by the Collegium of the Supreme Court consisting of the

       Chief Justice of India and two senior most Judges. Opinion and

       comments of the Judges in this Court conversant with the affairs of

       the High Court concerned are called for in writing and placed before

       the Collegium. Invariably a number of shoot down and dismissive

       letters and communications from all quarters are received. Only

       thereafter, and on consideration, the Collegium of the Supreme

       Court takes a final call, which is then communicated to the

       government.
8.     During the course of hearing before us, it was accepted that a

       number of persons, who have had political backgrounds, have been

       elevated as judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court, and

       this by itself, though a relevant consideration, has not been an

       absolute bar to appointment of otherwise a suitable person.

       Similarly, there have been cases where the persons recommended

       for elevation have expressed reservations or even criticised policies

       or actions, but this has not been held to be a ground to treat them
W.P. (C) Nos. 148 & 147 of 2023                                     Page 6 of 9
as unsuitable. It goes without saying that the conduct of the judge

       and her/his decisions must reflect and show independence,

       adherence to the democratic and constitutional values. This is

       necessary as the judiciary holds the centre stage in protecting and

       strengthening democracy and upholding human rights and Rule of

       Law.6
9.     We have made the said observations as these are aspects which

       are established and are taken into consideration by the Collegiums,

       both of the High Courts and the Supreme Court. It is in this context

       that we reject the argument that the facts were not known and

       considered by the Collegium. The petitioners have themselves

       stated and enclosed copy of their representation dated 1st February

       2023, albeit the Collegium of the High Court and the Supreme Court

       have not, on this basis, deemed it appropriate to withdraw the

       recommendation or recall their decision.
10.    We are clearly of the opinion that this Court, while exercising power

       of judicial review cannot issue a writ of certiorari quashing the

       recommendation, or mandamus calling upon the Collegium of the

       Supreme Court to reconsider its decision, as this would be contrary

       to the ratio and dictum of the earlier decisions of this Court referred


6 See
N. Kannadasan v. Ajoy Khose and Others
, (2009) 7 SCC 1.
W.P. (C) Nos. 148 & 147 of 2023                                     Page 7 of 9
to above, which are binding on us. To do so would violate the law

       as declared, as it would amount to evaluating and substituting the

       decision of the Collegium, with individual or personal opinion on the

       suitability and merits of the person.
11.    The decision of this Court in
Shri Kumar Padma Prasad v. Union

       of India and Others7
, was a case relating to eligibility of a person,

       in whose favour the warrant for appointment as a judge of the High

       Court had been issued, but who was not qualified to be appointed

       as a judge of the High Court. The ratio of this judgment cannot be

       extended to apply the power of judicial review to examine the

       suitability or merit of a candidate.
12.    We may also state that the person in question has been elevated

       as an Additional Judge of the High Court of Judicature at Madras.

       On taking oath the person pledges to work as a judge to uphold the

       Constitution and the laws. Article 51A8 of the Constitution casts an

       obligation on every citizen, and more so on every judge, to promote

       harmony, spirit of common brotherhood among all transcending

       religious, linguistic, regional or sectional diversities. Principle of

       secularism and dignity of every individual – regardless of the



7 (1992) 2 SCC 428
8 Part IV-A- Fundamental Duties.
W.P. (C) Nos. 148 & 147 of 2023                                     Page 8 of 9
religion, caste or creed, is the foundation of Rule of Law and equal

       protection of laws. Not only is the conduct and judgments delivered

       considered at the time of confirmation, a judge is judged everyday

       by the lawyers, litigants and the public, as the courts are open and

       the judges speak by giving reasons in writing for their decisions.
13.    For the aforesaid reasons, we do not find any merit in the present

       writ petitions and, thus, we are not inclined to entertain and issue

       notice.
14.    The writ petitions are dismissed at the admission stage.
......................................J.
                                                          (SANJIV KHANNA)




                                                 ......................................J.
                                                                    (B.R. GAVAI)
NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 10, 2023.
W.P. (C) Nos. 148 & 147 of 2023                                            Page 9 of 9