[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ram Gopal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 17 February, 2023
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
,
Ajay Rastogi
REPORTABLE


                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                              SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (Crl.) No. 9221 OF 2018



                      RAM GOPAL S/O MANSHARAM                             .....PETITIONER

                                                      VERSUS


                         STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                         .....RESPONDENT



                                                JUDGMENT
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1.              The impugned judgment and order dated 13.07.2018 passed by

                          the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Bench at Gwalior in Criminal

                          Appeal No. 70/2000 has been sought to be challenged by the

                          petitioner-accused by way of present petition. The said appeal was

                          dismissed by the High Court confirming the judgment and order

                          dated 17.01.2000 passed by the First Additional Sessions Judge,

                          Morena (hereinafter referred to as the “Sessions Court”) in ST No.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Ashwani Kumar
205/1996, whereby the petitioner was convicted for the offence
Date: 2023.02.17
17:06:16 IST
Reason:
under
Section 302
IPC and was sentenced to undergo life
1
imprisonment with fine of Rs. 5,000/-, in default thereof to suffer

     further rigorous imprisonment for a period of two years.
2.   The petitioner-accused Ramgopal alias Gopal was the Ex-
Sarpanch of the village Har Gangoli. On 20.12.1995 at about

     09:30 AM, the complainant Upendra Singh (PW-1) reported at the

     Police Station Baghchini that on 19.12.1995 at about 5 PM his

     uncle (Tau) Pratap Singh Sikarwar was taken by the Sarpanch

     Ram Gopal from Arhela, and the dead body of his uncle Pratap

     Singh was lying on the road near the house of Bharosibaba at

     village Chachiha. He further alleged in the complaint that there

     were injuries found on the head and ear of his uncle and blood

     was oozing out from the said parts. The said complaint was

     registered at the Police Station Baghchini as FIR No. 132/95 on

     20.12.1995. The Investigating Officer after carrying out the

     investigation submitted the chargesheet against the petitioner-

     Ramgopal along with other three accused i.e., Suresh Singh,

     Chhotalli @ Chhotey Singh and Mintoo @ Karan Singh. The

     Sessions Court framed charge against the accused for the offence

     under
Section 302
and in the alternative
Section 302
read with 34
IPC
. The Sessions Court after appreciating the evidence on record

     convicted the petitioner-Ramgopal for the charged offence under
Section 302
IPC, however acquitted the other three accused giving
2
them benefit of doubt. Being aggrieved by the same, the petitioner

     had preferred the appeal before the High Court, which came to be

     dismissed by the impugned order.
3.   The learned Senior Counsel Mr. Salman Khurshid appearing for

     the petitioner submitted that the case of the prosecution rested

     solely on the circumstantial evidence, however the prosecution

     had miserably failed to prove the entire chain of circumstances

     leading unerringly to the guilt of the petitioner-accused. According

     to him, the courts below have committed an error in convicting the

     petitioner merely on the theory of “last seen together”, however

     there was a big time gap between the time when the petitioner was

     lastly seen with the deceased and the time when the dead body of

     the deceased was recovered. The alleged recovery of weapon axe

     from the petitioner also could not be a ground for conviction, more

     particularly when the doctor who had carried out the post-mortem

     of the dead body of the deceased, had not opined that the injuries

     found on the dead body of the deceased were possible with the

     said weapon. According to Mr. Khurshid, there was no animosity

     between the deceased and the petitioner, and on the contrary as

     per the evidence of PW-1 Upendra Singh and PW-8 Ramshree,

     their relations were quite cordial. In absence of examination of any

     independent witness, runs the submission of Mr. Khurshid, the
3
benefit of doubt deserves to be given to the petitioner, when the

       other three co-accused were given such benefit. Mr. Khurshid has

       placed heavy reliance on the decision of this Court in the case of
Padala Veera Reddy vs. State of Andhra Pradesh and others
1,

       in case of Shahaja alias
Shahajan Ismail Mohd. Shaikh vs.

       State of Maharashtra2
, and in case of
Nizam and another vs.

       State of Rajasthan3
in support of his submissions.
4.     However, the learned Advocate Mr. D.S. Parmar appearing for the

       respondent-State submitted that there being concurrent findings of

       the guilt recorded by the courts below against the petitioner, this

       Court should not interfere with the same. He further submitted that

       the petitioner in his further statement under
Section 313
had failed

       to explain as to when and how he departed from the company of

       the deceased, when undisputedly he was with the deceased

       during the previous evening of his death, and therefore both the

       courts below had rightly held the said circumstance as a

       circumstance adverse to the petitioner.
5.     It cannot be gainsaid that when the entire case of the prosecution

       hinges on the circumstantial evidence, the entire chain of

       circumstances has to be completely proved, which unerringly


1 1989 Supp (2) SCC 706
2 (2022) SCC OnLine SC 883
3 (2016) 1 SCC 550
4
would lead to the guilt of the accused and none else. So far as the

     evidence on record in the present case is concerned, it emerges

     that it was not disputed that on 19.12.1995 at about 5 PM, the

     petitioner-accused had taken the deceased Pratap Singh from his

     house. Thereafter, the deceased and the petitioner were also seen

     together at the shop of one Shripal at village Arhela by the witness

     Vijay Singh (PW-4). It was also not disputed that on the next day

     morning the dead body of the deceased was found lying near one

     field at village Chachiha.   Hence, the death of the deceased

     Pratap Singh had taken place during the night hours of 19 th and

     20th December,1995, and that the petitioner was lastly seen with

     the deceased on the previous evening. Thus, it was the petitioner

     alone, who knew as to what happened after the evening of 19 th

     December, 1995.
6.   It may be noted that once the theory of “last seen together” was

     established by the prosecution, the accused was expected to offer

     some explanation as to when and under what circumstances he

     had parted the company of the deceased. It is true that the burden

     to prove the guilt of the accused is always on the prosecution,

     however in view of
Section 106
of the Evidence Act, when any fact

     is within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that

     fact is upon him. Of course,
Section 106
is certainly not intended
5
to relieve the prosecution of its duty to prove the guilt of the

       accused, nonetheless it is also equally settled legal position that if

       the accused does not throw any light upon the facts which are

       proved to be within his special knowledge, in view of
Section 106
of the Evidence Act, such failure on the part of the accused may

       be used against the accused as it may provide an additional link in

       the chain of circumstances required to be proved against him. In

       the case based on circumstantial evidence, furnishing or non-

       furnishing of the explanation by the accused would be a very

       crucial fact, when the theory of “last seen together” as propounded

       by the prosecution was proved against him.
7.
In case of
Rajender vs. State (NCT of Delhi
) 4, it was observed as

       under:
“12.2.4. Having observed so, it is crucial to
                      note that the reasonableness of the
                      explanation offered by the accused as to how
                      and when he/she parted company with the
                      deceased has a bearing on the effect of the
                      last seen in a case.
Section 106
of the
                      Evidence Act, 1872 provides that the burden
                      of proof for any fact that is especially within
                      the knowledge of a person lies upon such
                      person. Thus, if a person is last seen with the
                      deceased, he must offer an explanation as to
                      how and when he parted company with the
                      deceased. In other words, he must furnish an
                      explanation that appears to the court to be
                      probable and satisfactory, and if he fails to
                      offer such an explanation on the basis of facts
4 (2019) 10 SCC 623
6
within his special knowledge, the burden cast
                     upon him under
Section 106
is not
                     discharged. Particularly in cases resting on
                     circumstantial evidence, if the accused fails to
                     offer a reasonable explanation in discharge of
                     the burden placed on him, such failure by
                     itself can provide an additional link in the
                     chain of circumstances proved against him.
                     This, however, does not mean that
Section
                     106
shifts the burden of proof of a criminal trial
                     on the accused. Such burden always rests on
                     the prosecution.
Section 106
only lays down
                     the rule that when the accused does not throw
                     any light upon facts which are specially within
                     his/her knowledge and which cannot support
                     any theory or hypothesis compatible with his
                     innocence, the court can consider his failure
                     to adduce an explanation as an additional link
                     which completes the chain of incriminating
                     circumstances.”
8.
In
Satpal Vs. State of Haryana5
, this Court observed as under: -
“6. We have considered the respective
                     submissions and the evidence on record.
                     There is no eyewitness to the occurrence but
                     only circumstances coupled with the fact of
                     the deceased having been last seen with the
                     appellant. Criminal jurisprudence and the
                     plethora of judicial precedents leave little room
                     for reconsideration of the basic principles for
                     invocation of the last seen theory as a facet of
                     circumstantial evidence. Succinctly stated, it
                     may be a weak kind of evidence by itself to
                     found conviction upon the same singularly.
                     But when it is coupled with other
                     circumstances such as the time when the
                     deceased was last seen with the accused,
                     and the recovery of the corpse being in very
                     close proximity of time, the accused owes an
                     explanation under
Section 106
of the
                     Evidence Act with regard to the circumstances
5 (2018) 6 SCC 610
7
under which death may have taken place. If
                the accused offers no explanation, or
                furnishes a wrong explanation, absconds,
                motive is established, and there is
                corroborative evidence available inter alia in
                the form of recovery or otherwise forming a
                chain of circumstances leading to the only
                inference for guilt of the accused,
                incompatible with any possible hypothesis of
                innocence, conviction can be based on the
                same. If there be any doubt or break in the
                link of chain of circumstances, the benefit of
                doubt must go to the accused. Each case will
                therefore have to be examined on its own
                facts for invocation of the doctrine.”
9.   In view of the afore-stated legal position, it is discernible that

     though the last seen theory as propounded by the prosecution in a

     case based on circumstantial evidence may be a weak kind of

     evidence by itself to base conviction solely on such theory, when

     the said theory is proved coupled with other circumstances such

     as the time when the deceased was last seen with the accused,

     and the recovery of the corpse being in very close proximity of

     time, the accused does owe an explanation under
Section 106
of

     the Evidence Act with regard to the circumstances under which

     death might have taken place. If the accused offers no explanation

     or furnishes a wrong explanation, absconds, motive is established

     and some other corroborative evidence in the form of recovery of
8
weapon etc. forming a chain of circumstances is established, the

      conviction could be based on such evidence.
10.   So far as the facts in the instant case are concerned, it was duly

      proved that the death of the deceased was homicidal. It was not

      disputed that the petitioner had taken the deceased with him on

      the previous day evening and thereafter he was also seen with the

      deceased by the witness Vijay Singh (PW-4) and the very next day

      early morning, the dead body of the deceased was found lying in

      the field at village Chachiha. The time gap between the period

      when the deceased was last seen with the accused and the

      recovery of the corpse of the deceased being quite proximate, the

      non-explanation of the petitioner with regard to the circumstance

      under which and when the petitioner had departed the company of

      the deceased was a very crucial circumstance proved against him.

      Having regard to the oral evidence of the witnesses, the enmity

      between the deceased and the petitioner had also surfaced. The

      corroborative evidence with regard to recovery of the weapon –

      axe alleged to have been used in the commission of crime from

      the petitioner, also substantiated the case of prosecution.
11.   The entire oral as well as documentary evidence having been

      threadbare considered by the Sessions Court as also High Court
9
while holding the petitioner guilty of the charged offence, this Court

      need not again reappreciate the same in the petition under
Article

      136
of the Constitution of India. Suffice it to say that the learned

      Senior Advocate Mr. Khurshid has failed to point out during the

      course of his arguments any perversity or illegality in the impugned

      orders passed by the courts below, which would shake the

      conscience of this Court warranting interference in the impugned

      judgments.
12.   In that view of the matter, we are not inclined to interfere with the

      impugned judgments and orders passed by the courts below. The

      Special Leave Petition stands dismissed accordingly.
..………………………. J.
[AJAY RASTOGI]


                                                   …..................................J.
                                                          [BELA M. TRIVEDI]
NEW DELHI
17.02.2023
10