[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Punjab vs Principal Secretary To The Governor Of ... on 28 February, 2023
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
WP(C) 302/2023
                                                                1

                                                                                                       Reportable



                                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                                                 Writ Petition (Civil) No 302 of 2023



                      State of Punjab                                                    Petitioner


                                                            Versus


                      Principal Secretary to the Governor                                Respondents
                      of Punjab and Another




                                                      JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI



                      1    On 22 February 2023, the Council of Ministers of the Government of Punjab

                           recommended the summoning of the Budget Session of the Sixteenth Punjab

                           Vidhan Sabha on 3 March 2023 under
Article 174(1)
of the Constitution.


                      2    On 23 February 2023, the Governor of Punjab addressed a communication to the

                           Chief Minister of the State. The subject of the letter was:
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2023.03.13
11:26:50 IST
Reason:
WP(C) 302/2023
2
“Cabinet decision on summoning of the house of the legislature of
                    the State on 3rd March 2023.”
3     The letter of the Governor refers to a prior exchange of correspondence between

           the Governor and the Chief Minister; the Governor having addressed an earlier

           communication of 13 February 2023 to which the Chief Minister had responded

           through a letter dated 14 February 2023 and a ’tweet’ of the same date.


     4     In his communication of 13 February 2023 to the Chief Minister, the Governor

           highlighted his concern on certain specific issues, namely:
(i)    The basis on which Principals were selected for being sent to Singapore for

                  training; and
(ii)   The appointment of the Chairman of the Punjab Information and

                  Communication Technology Corporation Limited.
5     The Governor noted that while the Chief Minister had in his previous

           correspondence underscored the mandate with which he has assumed the

           office of Chief Minister, in terms of
Article 167
of the Constitution, the Chief Minister

           is bound to furnish full details and information sought by the Governor.


     6     Besides the above two issues, the Governor sought a clarification on the following

           matters:
“(a) About two lacs Scheduled Castes students were compelled
WP(C) 302/2023
3
to discontinue their studies due to non disbursal of scholarship
                         by the Government. (letter No.Spl.Secy.Gov/2022/95 dated
                         21-07-2022).
(b)   To remove the illegally appointed Vice Chancellor of PAU
                         vide letter No.5/1/2021-PRB-PAU-2G/6904 dated 23-11-22.
(c)   Inspite of my detailed letter dated 14-12-2022 you chose to
                         ignore all misdeeds of Sh. Kuldeep Singh Chahal, IPS. You
                         have not only promoted him but also posted him as
                         Commissioner of Jalandhar and that too the orders being
                         issued just before 26th January, knowing very well that
                         Governor is to unfurl the national flag at Jalandhar. I had to
                         instruct the DGP that concerned officer should maintain
                         distance during ceremony. On this issue it seems that this
                         officer was your blue eyed boy and you chose to ignore facts
                         that were brought to your notice by this office.
(d)   Vide letter dated 4-1-2023 I wrote about the presence of Sh.
Naval Aggarwal in meetings of senior officers, where sensitive
                         and confidential matters of security of the country are
                         discussed. I have not received any reply till date.
(e)   My letters asking for details of advertisements where you were
                         asked for complete details, is also perhaps lying in cold
                         storage.”


     7     Responding to the above communication, the Chief Minister (@ Bhagwant Mann)

           issued a tweet in the following terms:
“Hon’ble Governor Sir, your letter was received through the
                   media..all the subjects mentioned in the letter are all state
                   subjects...I and my government are accountable to 3 crore
                   Punjabis according to the Constitution and not to any Governor
                   appointed by the Central Government. Consider this as my reply.”
8     This was followed by another communication of the Chief Minister dated 14

           February 2023, in which he stated thus:
WP(C) 302/2023
4
“DO No.CMO/CONFI-2023/132
                   Dated:14.02.2023

                   Honorable Governor Sahib,

                   I have received your letter No.Spl.Secy.Gov/2023/34 dated 13th
                   February, 2023.
All the subjects mentioned in your letter are the subjects of the state
                   government. In this regard, I would like to clarify that according to
                   the Indian Constitution, I and my government are answerable to 3
                   crore Punjabis.
You have asked me, on what basis the principals are selected for
                   training in Singapore. The people of Punjab want to ask, on what
                   basis are the Governors in different states elected by the Central
                   Government in the absence of any specific qualification in the
                   Indian Constitution?
Please increase the knowledge of Punjabis by telling this.”
9     In the backdrop of the aforesaid communication by the Chief Minister and his

           tweet, the Governor while responding to the request of the Cabinet for

           summoning the Budget Session of the Vidhan Sabha from 3 March 2023 stated

           that:
“ Since your tweet and letter, both are not only patently
                   unconstitutional but extremely derogatory also, therefore, I am
                   compelled to take legal advice on this issue. Only after getting
                   legal advice, I will take decision on your request”.
10    The inaction of the Governor in summoning the Assembly for the Budget Session

           has led to the invocation of the jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 32
of the

           Constitution by the State of Punjab.
WP(C) 302/2023
5
11    The Government of Punjab seeks (a) a declaration that the Governor of Punjab is

           duty bound to act on the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers in matters of

           summoning or proroguing of the Vidhan Sabha of the State of Punjab; (b) a writ

           of certiorari quashing the communication of the Governor dated 23 February

           2023 stating that a decision on the recommendation of the Council of Ministers

           for summoning the Vidhan Sabha for its Budget Session would be taken only after

           obtaining legal advice; and (c) a direction to the Principal Secretary to the

           Governor of Punjab to facilitate the issuance of appropriate orders for summoning

           the Legislative Assembly for its Budget Session at 10 am on 3 March 2023.


     12    Since the date for the convening of the Budget Session is barely three days away,

           the petition was mentioned for urgent orders, on which it was directed to be listed

           at 3.50 pm today.
13    Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi, senior counsel has appeared on behalf of the

           petitioner. Mr Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General of India appears on behalf of the

           first respondent. Mr Ajay Pal, counsel has appeared for the second respondent.


     14    At the outset, the Solicitor General has placed on the record an order dated 28

           February 2023 of the Governor of Punjab. For convenience of reference, the order

           is extracted below:
“In exercise of the powers conferred upon me by virtue of
WP(C) 302/2023
6
Clause(1) of
Article 174
of the Constitution of India, I, Banwarilal
                   Purohit, Governor of Punjab, hereby summon the Sixteenth Vidhan
                   Sabha of the State of Punjab to meet for its Fourth (Budget) Session
                   at 10.00 am on Friday, the 3rd March 2023 in the Punjab Vidhan
                   Sabha Hall, Vidhan Bhavan, Chandigarh.”
15    In terms of the above order, the Governor of Punjab has summoned the Sixteenth

           Vidhan Sabha of the State of Punjab to meet for its Fourth (Budget) Session at 10

           am on 3 March 2023.
16    With the issuance of the above order by the Governor, the reliefs which have

           been sought in the petition have been substantially fulfilled. However, before

           disposing of the petition, there are certain facets which must be highlighted by

           this Court in the exercise of its constitutional duty.


     17    The institution of these proceedings has its genesis in the communications issued

           by the Governor for the disclosure of information by the State government.
Article

           167
of the Constitution enunciates the duty of the Chief Minister to furnish

           information to the Governor. The provision is in the following terms:
“167. Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of
                   information to Governor, etc– It shall be the duty of the Chief
                   Minister of each State–
(a)   to communicate to the Governor of the State all decisions of
                         the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the
                         affairs of the State and proposals for legislation;
(b)   to furnish such information relating to the administration of the
WP(C) 302/2023
7
affairs of the State and proposals for legislation as the
                         Governor may call for; and
(c)   if the Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of
                         the Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has
                         been taken by a Minister but which has not been considered
                         by the Council.”


     18    The Chief Minister has the duty to communicate to the Governor all decisions of

           the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the State and

           proposals for legislation. Going beyond the duty to communicate, the Chief

           Minister has a duty to furnish such information relating to the administration of the

           affairs of the State and proposals for legislation as the Governor may require.
Moreover, if the Governor so requires, the Chief Minister is duty bound to submit

           for consideration to the Council of Ministers any matter on which the decision is

           taken by a Minister which has not been considered by the Council of Ministers.


     19    The power of the Governor to seek information under
Article 167
must be read

           holistically with reference to their duties as constitutional head under the

           Constitution. The information that the Governor seeks under
Article 167
would

           enable them to effectively discharge their duties. To illustrate, the Governor has

           the power to direct reconsideration of bills that are passed in the assembly. For

           the Governor to make this decision, it is necessary that all the relevant information

           that would aid them in making the said decision must be made available.

           Similarly, the governor requires all relevant information to identify if a decision has

           been taken by a Minister individually without the consideration of the council. The
WP(C) 302/2023
8
Governor might be unable to discharge their duty under
Article 167(c)
if the Chief

            Minister does not discharge their duty under
Article 167(a)
and
Article 167 (b)
by

            providing the Governor with relevant information as requested. Thus, the Chief

            Minister is required to discharge their duties under
Article 167
to enable the

            Governor to effectively discharge their duties stipulated in the Constitution. The

            framers of the Constitution were prescient in incorporating the above provisions.

            They ensure that while on the one hand the administration of the State is entrusted

            to a democratically elected Chief Minister who heads the Council of Ministers,

            which in turn, owes collective responsibility to the state legislature, the Governor

            as a constitutional authority appointed by the President is entrusted with the duty

            to ensure a just, fair, and honest administration. In this context, it is important to

            refer to the speech of Dr. BR Ambedkar on
Article 167 (draft
Article 147
) in the

            Constitution Assembly: 1

                     “A distinction has been made between the functions of the
                     Governor and the duties which the Governor has to perform. My
                     submission is that although the Governor has no functions still, even
                     the constitutional Governor, that he is, has certain duties to
                     perform. His duties, according to me, may be classified in two parts.
                     One is, that he has to retain the Ministry in office. Because the
                     Ministry is to hold office during his pleasure, he has to see whether
                     and when he should exercise his pleasure against the Ministry. The
                     second duty which the Governor has, and must have, is to advise
                     the Ministry, to warn the Ministry, to suggest to the Ministry an
                     alternative and to ask for a reconsideration. I do not think that
                     anybody in this House will question the fact that the Governor
                     should have this duty cast upon him; otherwise, he would be an
                     absolutely unnecessary functionary: no good at all: He is the
                     representative not of a party, he is representative of the people as

1 Dr BR Ambedkar in response to Biswanath Das, Constituent Assembly of India Debates (Proceedings)- Volume

VIII (2 June 1949)
WP(C) 302/2023
9
a whole of the State. It is in the name of the people that he carries
                       on the administration. He must see that the administration is carried
                       on a level which may be regarded as good, efficient, honest
                       administration. Therefore, having regard to these two duties which
                       the Governor has namely, to see that the administration is kept
                       pure, without corruption, impartial, and that the proposals
                       enunciated by the Ministry are not contrary to the wishes of the
                       people, and therefore to advise them, warn them and ask them to
                       reconsider-I ask the House, how is the Governor in a position to
                       carry out his duties unless he has before him certain information? I
                       submit that he cannot discharge the constitutional functions of a
                       Governor which I have just referred to unless he is in a position to
                       obtain the information.”


        20    The power to summon, prorogue and dissolve the legislative assembly is enshrined

              in
Article 174
of the Constitution which is extracted below:
“174. Sessions of the State Legislature, prorogation and dissolution.–
                       (1) The Governor shall form time to time summon the House or each
                       House of the Legislature of the State to meet at such time and
                       place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its
                       last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in
                       the next session.
(2)The Governor may from time to time–
(a) prorogue the House or either House;
(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.”
21    The decision of a seven-Judge Constitution Bench in
Shamsher Singh vs State of

              Punjab
2 has laid down that the Governor is a constitutional or formal Head of the

              State and exercises powers and functions on the aid and advice of the Council
2
(1974) 2 SCC 831
WP(C) 302/2023
10
of Ministers. The relevant extracts from the decision make the position of law clear:
“28. Under the Cabinet system of Government as embodied in our
                   Constitution the Governor is the constitutional or formal head of the
                   State and he exercises all his powers and functions conferred on
                   him by or under the Constitution on the aid and advice of his
                   Council of Ministers save in spheres where the Governor is required
                   by or under the Constitution to exercise his functions in his
                   discretion.
32. It is a fundamental principle of English Constitutional law that
                   Ministers must accept responsibility for every executive act. In
                   England the Sovereign never acts on his own responsibility. The
                   power of the Sovereign is conditioned by the practical rule that the
                   Crown must find advisers to bear responsibility for his action. Those
                   advisers must have the confidence of the House of Commons. This
                   rule of English Constitutional law is incorporated in our Constitution.
The Indian Constitution envisages a Parliamentary and responsible
                   form of Government at the Centre and in the States and not a
                   Presidential form of Government. The powers of the Governor as the
                   constitutional head are not different.
142. The extraordinary powers of legislation by ordinances,
                   dispensing with enquiries against public servants before dismissal,
                   declaration of emergency and imposition of President's rule by
                   proclamation upon States, are vast powers of profound
                   significance. Indeed, even the power of summoning and
                   proroguing and dissolving the House of the People and returning
                   Bills passed by the Parliament belongs to him. If only we expand
                   the ratio of Sardari Lal and Jayantilal to every function which the
                   various articles of the Constitution confer on the President or the
                   Governor, Parliamentary democracy will become a dope and
                   national elections a numerical exercise in expensive futility. We will
                   be compelled to hold that there are two parallel authorities
                   exercising powers of governance of the country, as in the dyarchy
                   days, except that Whitehall is substituted by Rashtrapati Bhavan
                   and Raj Bhavan. The Cabinet will shrink at Union and State levels in
                   political and administrative authority and, having solemn regard to
                   the gamut of his powers and responsibilities, the Head of State will
                   be reincarnation of Her Majesty's Secretary of State for India,
                   untroubled by even the British Parliament — a little taller in power
                   than the American President. Such a distortion, by interpretation, it
WP(C) 302/2023
11
appears to us, would virtually amount to a subversion of the
                     structure, substance and vitality of our Republic, particularly when
                     we remember that Governors are but appointed functionaries and
                     the President himself is elected on a limited indirect basis. As we
                     have already indicated, the overwhelming catena of authorities of
                     this Court have established over the decades that the cabinet form
                     of Government and the Parliamentary system have been adopted
                     in India and the contrary concept must be rejected as incredibly
                     allergic to our political genius, constitutional creed and culture.”
                                                                       (emphasis supplied)


      22     This position was reiterated by a Constitution Bench in Nabam Rebia v. Dy.
Speaker, Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly3. In view of the constitutional

             provision and the judgments of this Court, there can be no manner of doubt that

             the authority which is entrusted to the Governor to summon the House or each

             House of the Legislature of the State is to be exercised on the aid and advice of

             the Council of Minsters. This is not a constitutional arena in which the Governor is

             entitled to exercise his own discretion. In the present case, the Governor was not

             summoning the House for the first time following a general election, but was

             advised by the Council of Ministers to convene the Budget Session, at the behest

             of a government which has been duly elected in the general election. Plainly, the

             Governor was duty bound to do so.
23     While responding to the request by the Council of Ministers for summoning the

             House, the communication of the Governor dated 23 February 2023 referred to

             the Cabinet decision. However, the Governor also referred to the tweet of the


3 (2016) 8 SCC 1
WP(C) 302/2023
12
Chief Minister and to his letter dated 14 February 2023 and then proceeded to

           state that since both the tweet and the letter were “patently unconstitutional”

           and “extremely derogatory”, he was compelled to take legal advice “on this

           issue” and that he would decide on the request thereafter. There was no occasion

           to seek legal advice on whether or not the Budget Session of the Legislative

           Assembly should be convened. The Governor was plainly bound by the advice

           tendered to him by the Council of Ministers.
24    Having said this, it would also be necessary to underscore that both the Chief

           Minister and the Governor are constitutional functionaries who have specified

           roles and obligations earmarked by the Constitution. The Governor has a right to

           seek information from the Chief Minister in terms of
Article 167(b)
on matters

           relating to the administration of the affairs of the State and proposals for

           legislation. Once such information is sought, the Chief Minister is duty bound to

           furnish it. The tone and tenor of the tweet and the letter by the Chief Minister leave

           much to be desired. Not furnishing the information which was sought by the

           Governor would be plainly in dereliction of the constitutional duty which is

           imposed on the Chief Minister in terms of
Article 167(b).
Yet on the other hand,
WP(C) 302/2023
13
the dereliction of the Chief Minister to do so would not furnish a justification for the

           Governor not to comply with the constitutional obligation to summon the House

           for its Budget Session in terms of the advice which was tendered by the Council

           of Ministers. It was after the institution of the petition under
Article 32
that the

           Assembly was summoned.
25    The genesis of the controversy has required the intervention of this Court at two

           distinct levels: first, to ensure that the constitutional duty of the Governor to act on

           the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers to summon the Legislative Assembly

           is fulfilled without delay or demur; and second, to ensure that the obligation of

           the Chief Minister to furnish information to the Governor in terms of
Article 167(b)
of the Constitution is fulfilled. There are two equally important aspects for the

           functioning of a parliamentary democracy. First, the failure of a constitutional

           authority to fulfill its obligation under a distinct provision of the Constitution does

           not furnish a justification to another to decline to fulfill its own constitutional

           obligation. Second, while this Court is cognizant of the importance of free speech

           and expression and the fundamental value embodied in
Article 19(1)(a)
, it

           becomes necessary to emphasize that constitutional discourse has to be

           conducted with a sense of decorum and mature statesmanship.

     26    Political differences in a democratic polity have to be worked upon and sorted

           out with a sense of sobriety and maturity. The dialogue between constitutional

           functionaries cannot degenerate into a race to the bottom. Unless these

           principles were to be borne in mind, the realization of constitutional values may
WP(C) 302/2023
14
be placed in jeopardy. Such a situation emerged before this Court, leading to the

           institution of a petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution for a direction to the

           Governor to summon the Legislative Assembly. It is inconceivable that the Budget

           Session of the Legislative Assembly would not be convened. We can only hope

           that mature constitutional statesmanship will ensure that such instances do not

           occur in the future as much as we reiterate our expectation that constitutional

           functionaries must be cognizant of the public trust in the offices which they

           occupy. The public trust which is entrusted to them is intended to sub-serve the

           cause of our citizens and to ensure that the affairs of the nation are conducted

           with a sense of equanimity so as to accomplish the objects of the Preamble to the

           Constitution.
27    With these observations, the Petition shall stand disposed of.


     28    Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
………..............…...….......…………………..CJI.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                     …………..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                      [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha]
     New Delhi;
February 28, 2023
     CKB