[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
National Institute Of Rural ... vs Shyam Sunder Prasad Sharma on 28 February, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
NON-REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 542 OF 2023



               National Institute of Rural Development                  …Appellant


                                                   v.


               Shyam Sunder Prasad Sharma & Ors.                    ... Respondents



                                         J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.        The issue involved in this Civil Appeal is of entitlement of

               respondent no.1 to pensionary benefits. The appellant is an

               autonomous organisation working under the Ministry of Rural

               Development, Government of India. The appellant has more than
Signature Not Verified
100 faculty members drawn from about 20 disciplines. It trains
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2023.03.01
17:34:47 IST
Reason:
about 4,000 officials as well as non-officials engaged in the field of
1
rural development. It is also conducting international programmes

for the benefit of third world countries.
2.   With effect from 14th August 2002, the appellant appointed

respondent no. 1 as an Associate Professor. Though the post was

admittedly a regular post, he was appointed on a contract basis

for a period of three years which was extendable to five years. Offer

of contract appointment was issued on 22nd July 2002 and the

agreement was executed by the appellant on 14th August 2002.

Respondent    no.1,   after   his       appointment,   opted   for   the

Contributory Provident Fund Scheme of the appellant and

submitted the necessary documents.
3.   On the basis of an application made by respondent no.1, he

was offered a contract appointment to the post of Professor by the

appellant for a period of three years which was extendable to five

years. The offer dated 1st May 2007 records that respondent no.1

will be entitled to benefits of the Contributory Provident Fund

Scheme (CPF) as per the rules of the appellant.
4.   On 18th February 2009, the Executive Council of the

appellant decided to regularise services of such faculty members
2
who were employed on a contract basis on regular posts as a one-

time measure. Accordingly, NIRD Rules, 2011 for Regular

Appointment of the Academic Staff (Appointed on Contract Basis)

(for short “the Regularisation Rules”) were framed. By order dated

4th May 2012, the appointment of respondent no.1 was regularised

on the post of Professor. The order itself records that the

appointment of respondent no.1 was made to a sanctioned post.

The order records that respondent no.1 will be entitled to

pensionary benefits under the new pension scheme.
5.   On 10th September 2012, a representation was made by

respondent no.1 to the Director of the appellant for the grant of

benefits under the old pension scheme to him. It was recorded that

the new pension scheme was applicable to those who were

appointed on or after 1st January 2004. Even subsequently,

representations were made by respondent no.1 in the years 2013

and 2014.
6.   Original application was filed by respondent no.1 before the

Central Administrative Tribunal challenging the action of applying

the new pension scheme to him. The Tribunal held that
3
respondent no.1 was initially appointed as an Associate Professor

through direct recruitment against a permanent post on a contract

basis. Even his appointment as a professor on a contract basis

was on a permanent post. The Tribunal noted that respondent

no.1’s appointment was regularised from 14th August 2012.

However, his service under the contract employment was required

to be considered for the purposes of determining pensionary

benefits. Therefore, the Tribunal proceeded to hold that the action

of the appellant of applying the new pension scheme was illegal. A

direction was issued to the appellant to consider the case of

respondent no.1 under the old pension scheme. It is this order

which has been confirmed by a Division Bench of Telangana High

Court by the impugned judgment and order.
SUBMISSIONS
7.   The learned counsel appearing for the appellant urged that

respondent no.1’s first appointment as an Associate Professor on

14th August 2002 was on a contract basis which came to an end

after he was appointed as a Professor on a contract basis in the

year 2007. Her submission is that as the order of regularisation
4
was passed in the year 2012, he is not entitled to claim a pension

under the old scheme with effect from the year 2002. The learned

counsel further submitted that the Regularisation Rules under

which the service of respondent no.1 was regularised clearly

provided that all the academic staff members who were regularised

under the Regularisation Rules will be entitled to benefit of

pension only under the new pension scheme. She submitted that

without challenging the Regularisation Rules, respondent no.1

cannot claim that the old pension scheme will apply to him. The

learned counsel urged that respondent no.1 accepted the

Regularisation Order dated 4th May 2012 which clearly provides

that he can claim the benefit of only the new pension scheme. She

pointed out that respondent no.1 continued to contribute to CPF

throughout his employment. She submitted that it was not open

for respondent no.1 to opt for the old pension scheme as it was

not open for him to exercise the option of joining the old pension

scheme. The learned counsel urged that Rule 6 of the

Regularisation Rules has not been correctly interpreted both by

the Tribunal and by the High Court. She submitted that there are

similarly placed 20 academic staff members of the appellant and
5
therefore, if the impugned judgment is upheld, the financial

burden on the appellant will be of more than Rs. 8 crores.
8.   The learned counsel appearing for respondent no.1 in reply

submitted   that   after   respondent   no.1’s   employment   was

regularised, in view of clause 4 of Bye-law 52 of the National

Institute of Rural Development (Service) Bye-laws (for short “the

said Bye-laws”), respondent no.1 on regularisation of his service

was entitled to opt for old pension scheme though earlier he had

joined CPF scheme.     He submitted that as interpreted by the

Tribunal and the High Court, Rule 6 of the Regularisation Rules

carves out an exception in the case of an employee who was

initially appointed on a regular post and was holding a high

academic post on a contract basis who had subscribed either to

CPF or GPF-cum-Pension Scheme of the appellant. The learned

counsel appearing for respondent no.1 submitted that only 6 staff

members were beneficiaries of the Regularisation Scheme and not

20 as contended by the appellant. He pointed out that two

Associate Professors employed on a contract basis who are at

serial nos.1 and 2 in Annexure-I to the Regularisation Rules have
6
been given the benefit of the old pension scheme. He pointed out

that as soon as the order of regularisation was served to

respondent no.1, he immediately made a representation disputing

the correctness of the clause which provided that he will get the

benefit only of the new pension scheme. He submitted that he

continued to submit the representations till the year 2014. He

submitted that therefore, it cannot be said that respondent no.1

had voluntarily accepted conditions imposed in the order of

regularisation. The learned counsel would submit that the

Tribunal and High Court have made a reasonable interpretation of

the rules and in particular, the Regularisation Rules which calls

for no interference. Even the learned senior counsel appearing for

the third respondent - Union of India has made submissions in

support of the appeal.
OUR VIEW
9.   It is an admitted position that on 14th August 2002,

respondent no.1 was appointed as an Associate Professor by the

appellant on a contractual basis as per the order dated 22nd July

2002 and in terms of the agreement dated 14th August 2002. The
7
said contractual appointment was extended till 13th August 2007.

After joining the employment, respondent no.1 opted for CPF.
10. Contract appointment to the post of Professor was offered to

respondent no.1 on 1st May 2007 on the terms and conditions set

out in the written offer. Respondent no.1 joined on 3rd May 2007.

Clause 5 of the Offer of Contract Appointment dated 1st May 2007

clearly recorded that respondent no.1 will be entitled to benefit of

CPF. It is not the case of respondent no.1 that any grievance was

made by him before accepting the appointment about Clause no.5

which limits his entitlement only to the CPF. The appointment of

respondent no.1 was regularised on the basis of the Regularisation

Rules. Rule 4 of the Regularisation Rules provides for the

regularisation of the appointment of the academic staff appointed

on a contract basis. It provided that academic staff appointed on

a contract basis in terms of Bye-law 2(2)(a) of the said Bye-laws

shall be deemed to have been appointed on regular basis against

their respective sanctioned posts subject to being found fit by the

selection Committee after evaluating their performance. Rule 6 of
8
the Regularisation Rules has been interpreted by the High Court

and the Tribunal. Rule 6 reads thus:
“In the event of deemed appointment of the
         services of the academic staff appointed on
         contract basis, no pensionary benefits
         would be given other than as available under
         the New Pension Scheme of the Government
         of India is made applicable with effect from
         01.01.2004. This will not affect employee
         who was initially appointed on a regular
         post and presently holding his/her high
         academic post on contract basis and already
         subscribing to either “CPF or GPF cum
         Pension scheme” of the institute from the
         date of their initial regular appointment.
Their      existing    status    will     remain
         unchanged. No arrears of pensionary and
         related allowances for the past service will
         be paid in case of deemed appointment.
However, past service rendered by these
         academic staff appointed on contract basis
         may be taken into consideration for their
         future promotions, if any, as per norms/
         eligibility prescribed by the Institute for other
         academic staff appointed on regular basis, for
         this purpose, as made applicable from time to
         time, with the approval of competent authority.
         The deemed appointment will have no impact
         on existing basic pay and allowance presently
         being drawn by these academic staff appointed
         on contract basis and they will continue to
         draw their existing pay and allowances as per
         norms."
(emphasis added)
9
11. We may note here that the employment of respondent no.1

was regularised by the office order dated 4th May 2012 which

specifically records that the order will take effect from the date of

issue of the order. The said condition has not been challenged by

respondent no.1. Therefore, he cannot claim that his employment

has been regularised with retrospective effect from the year 2002

when he was appointed on a contract basis as an Associate

Professor. The exception carved out in Rule 6 provides that the

main part of Rule 6 will not affect an employee initially appointed

on a regular post who was presently holding a high academic post

on a contract basis and who was subscribing to either CPF or GPF-

cum-pension scheme of the appellant from the date of his initial

regular appointment. This exception is applicable to a member of

the academic staff who was regularly employed (not on a contract

basis) earlier but was holding a high academic post on a contract

basis when the Regularisation Rules came into force.             The

exception will not apply to an employee like respondent no.1,

whose first appointment was also on a contract basis and the

appointment to a higher academic post was also on a contract

basis. Even assuming that the exception carved out is applicable
10
to the case of respondent no.1, the exception does not permit a

change of option from CPF to GPF-cum-Pension Scheme (old

pension scheme).       The exception protects the option earlier

exercised by the employee so that the employee continues to be

governed by the scheme for which he has already opted.

Respondent no.1 had admittedly exercised the option of the CPF

scheme.
12. Reliance was placed on clause (a) of Bye-law 52 of the Bye-

laws which reads thus:
“52. Application and eligibility of the schemes:
a) Persons appointed after the date of
          commencement of the schemes under bye-
laws 48 and 49.
1) A person appointed on contract under Service
          bye-law 2(2) shall be eligible to be governed only
          by the Contributory Provident Fund Scheme
          under Bye-law 50.
2) A person initially appointed on contract under
          Bye-law 12 to a post referred to in Bye-law 3(a)
          shall be eligible to be governed by the
          Contributory Provident Fund Scheme under bye-
          law 50, for the period he holds the appointment
          on contract (vide sub-clause 4).
11
3) A person appointed to a post otherwise than on
contract shall be eligible to be governed only by
the Pension-cum-Gratuity-cum-Family Pension
Scheme referred to in bye-law 48 and the General
Provident Fund Scheme referred to in bye-law 49.
4) An employee of the category referred to in sub-
clause (2) shall, on his appointment on a regular
basis in the post held by him or any other post
under bye-law 12, have the option to elect either.
i) the Pension-cum-Gratuity-cum-Family
     Pension Scheme referred to in bye-law 48
     and the General Provident Fund Scheme
     referred to in bye-law 49 or
ii) to continue to be governed by the
     Contributory Provident Fund Scheme
     referred to in bye-law 50.
Provided that he shall exercise and communicate
his option in writing to the Registrar and
Accounts Officer within three months of the date
of the order appointing him on a regular basis,
and if he is on leave on that date within three
months from the date of his return from leave,
and the option so exercised shall be final.
Provided further that if a person does not
communicate his option in the manner aforesaid,
he shall be deemed to have elected the Pension-
cum-Gratuity-cum-Family Pension Scheme and
the General Provident Fund Scheme.
Where a person elects or is deemed to have
elected the Pension-cum-Gratuity-cum-Family
Pension Scheme and the General provident Fund
12
Scheme, he shall forego the Institute’s
        contribution to his contributory Provident Fund
        account together with interest thereon, which
        shall be paid back to the Institute, and shall
        thereupon be entitled to count towards pension
        the service rendered by him prior to his
        appointment on a regular basis to the extent
        permissible under the Pension-cum-Gratuity-
        cum-Family Pension Rules of the Institute, and
        the accumulated balance of his subscriptions in
        the Fund together with interest thereon standing
        to his credit shall be transferred to his General
        Provident Fund Account.”

                                       (emphasis added)
13. Bye-laws 48 and 49 provide for Pension-cum-Gratuity-cum-

Family Pension Scheme (old scheme) and General Provident Fund

Scheme respectively. Sub-clause (a)(1) of clause 52 clearly

provides that a person appointed on a contract in accordance with

Bye-law 2(2)(a) shall be eligible only to CPF which is provided in

Bye-law 50. Clause (a)(2) of Bye-law 52 provides that a person

who was initially appointed on a contract basis as provided in the

Bye-laws to a post (of academic staff) referred to in Bye-law 3(a)

shall be eligible to be governed by CPF scheme for the period he

holds office. Clause (a)(4) of Bye-law 52 deals with a situation

where a person appointed on a contract basis is appointed on a
13
regular basis. Only in such a case, an option is available to opt for

the either old pension scheme and GPF scheme or CPF scheme.

There is a difference between appointing a contract employee on a

regular basis and regularising the services of the contract

employees. Moreover, when the Bye-laws were framed, the

Regularisation Rules were not in existence. In this case, we are

dealing with the regularisation of the service of the contract

employee in terms of the Regularisation Rules and not an

appointment on a regular basis. Respondent no.1 has been

regularised under Regularisation Rules. Therefore, Clause (a)(4) of

Bye-law 52 will not apply to respondent no.1 whose employment

has been regularised under the Regularisation Rules.
14. As noted earlier, Rule 6 clearly lays down that those who are

regularised under the said Rules will not be entitled to benefit of

any scheme other than the new pension scheme. Even when the

exception carved out to Rule 6 is applicable, it enables the

regularised employee to continue with either CPF or the old

pension scheme as per the option already exercised by him. The

Regularisation Rules under which the employment of respondent
14
no.1 was regularised do not permit the regularised employee to

change his or her option from CPF to the old pension scheme.

Clause 52 of the Bye-laws cannot override subsequent statutory

Rules in the form of the Recruitment Rules.        The Recruitment

Rules are made for giving effect to the Resolution of the General

Executive Council    made on 18th       February 2009      for   the

regularisation of the academic staff appointed on a contract basis.

After having taken benefits of the Regularisation Rules, the

entitlement of respondent no.1 will be governed by Rule 6 and not

by Clause (a) (4) of Bye-law 52 of the Bye-laws.
15. The Tribunal, as well as the High Court, have proceeded on

an erroneous basis that after regularisation, respondent no.1 was

entitled to change his option from CPF to the old pension scheme

in terms of Bye-law 52. The High Court erroneously observed that

regularization would relate back to the date of initial appointment

made in the year 2002 when the order of regularisation dated 4th

May 2012 expressly states that the regularisation will operate from

the date of the said order. The High Court came to the conclusion

that in view of the second proviso to sub-clause (a) (4) of Bye-law
15
52 of the Bye-laws, on the failure to communicate the option in

the prescribed manner it shall be deemed that the employee has

opted for the old pension scheme and GPF. Sub-clause (a)(4) of

Bye-law 52, as observed earlier, will not apply to an employee

whose service has been regularised under the Regularisation

Rules. In the present case, in view of the provisions of the

Regularisation Rules, there was no question of making available

such an option.
16. In the circumstances, we find it difficult to sustain the

impugned judgments. It appears that respondent no.1 has

returned the benefits received by him under the CPF scheme. As

a consequence of setting aside the impugned order, we direct the

appellant to pay the amount to which respondent no.1 was entitled

to under CPF. The amount shall be paid within a period of two

months from today failing which the same will carry interest at the

rate of 8% p.a. from the date on which the amount was returned

to the appellant by respondent no.1.
17. Subject to the above direction, the appeal is allowed. The

impugned orders of the Central Administrative Tribunal and the
16
Division Bench of the High Court are hereby set aside and the

original application filed by the appellant before the Tribunal

stands dismissed.
……....…………………J.
                                        (Sanjay Kishan Kaul)



                                         …….……..……………J.
                                         (Abhay S. Oka)
New Delhi;
February 28, 2023.
17