[Cites
18
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ashwini Kumar Upadhyay vs Union Of India on 27 February, 2023
Author:
K.M. Joseph
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
K.M. Joseph
REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                               WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.190 OF 2023


     ASHWINI KUMAR UPADHYAY                                   … PETITIONER(S)


                                              VERSUS


     UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                    … RESPONDENT(S)


                                         JUDGMENT
K.M. JOSEPH, J.
1.                  The reliefs sought for by the petitioner are as

     follows:
“a) direct the Home Ministry to constitute a
                         “Renaming Commission” to find out original
                         names   of    ‘ancient   historical  cultural
                         religious   places’,   named   after barbaric
                         foreign   invaders   in   order   to maintain
                         Sovereignty and to secure ‘Right to Dignity,
                         Right to Religion and Right to Culture’
                         guaranteed under
Articles 21
, 25
and
29
of
                         the Constitution;
b) alternatively, direct the Archaeological
                         Survey of India to research and publish the
                         initial names of ancient historical cultural
                         religious places, which were renamed by
                         barbaric foreign invaders, in order to secure
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
‘Right to Know’ guaranteed under
Article 19
Nidhi Ahuja
Date: 2023.03.02
17:06:55 IST
of the Constitution;
Reason:
c) direct the Centre and State Governments to
1
update their websites and records and mention
      the original names of ancient historical
      cultural religious places, named after the
      barbaric foreign invaders.”
2.    We   have      heard        Shri     Ashwini        Kumar        Upadhyay,

petitioner appearing in-person.
3.    In brief, the case of the petitioner appears to be

as follows:
The country is celebrating the 75th Anniversary of

Independence but there are many ancient, historical,

cultural,      religious         places    in     the   name      of     ‘brutal

foreign invaders’, their servants and family members.
He has given various examples. He invokes the right to

dignity as flowing from
Article 21
of the Constitution

of    India.    He    further       submits        that        there    is   his

fundamental       right     to    culture       which     is    protected     in
Articles 19
and
29.
Again, he refers to
Article 25
as

the source of his right to religion and in regard to

his   fundamental      right       to    know,    he    leans     on
Article

19(1)(a).
He    also    has        brought    up     the     concept    of

‘sovereignty’ being compromised by the continuous use

of the names of the ‘brutal invaders’.
4.    The petitioner, in fact, draws our attention to the
2
following questions of law:
“1. Whether continuing the names of ancient
     historical cultural religious places, in the
     names of barbaric invaders is against the
     Sovereignty?
2. Whether Centre and States are obligated to
     restore the names of ancient historical
     cultural religious places in their original
     names to secure Right to Dignity guaranteed
     under
Article 21
of the Constitution?
3. Whether the relief claimed for restoration
     of names of ancient historical cultural
     religious places, which were changed during
     foreign rule, relates to Unity and Integrity
     of the Nation, the laudable objective sought
     to be achieved in the Preamble of the
     Constitution of India?
4. Whether Right to profess, practice and
     propagate religion, is intimately connected
     with the names of religious places and
     therefore the changes made during foreign
     rule must be restored to enable the citizens
     to freely Profess, Practice and Propagate
     Religion guaranteed
Article 25?
5. Whether the names of places prevalent
     during Ramayana and Mahabharata Period were
     arbitrarily and illegally changed during
     foreign rule, ought to be restored so as to
     protect the Right to Conserve the Ancient
     Culture, guaranteed under
Article 29
of the
     Constitution of India?
6. Whether restoration of the names of the
     ancient historical cultural religious places,
     is   connected   with   Right    to   Identity
     guaranteed under
Article 21?
7. Whether Right to Know guaranteed under
Article 19
includes the right to know
     Original Names of the ancient historical
     cultural religious places?”
5.   We may notice that we have to bear in mind being
3
the Court dealing with the matter under
Article 32
of

the Constitution, that the Court is tasked with the

enforcement          of    fundamental         rights.     India,        that    is

‘Bharat’        in    terms      of     the    preamble,       is    a     secular

country.
In
His      Holiness       Kesavananda              Bharati

Sripadagalvaru            v.    State    of    Kerala    and    Another1
,        we

notice that it was opined “India is a secular State in

which there is no State religion” (See para 487).                               The

secular and federal character of the Constitution has

found      to    be       among       the     “basic     elements          of   the

constitutional structure” (See para 582).
Secularism

has been accepted by a Bench of nine learned Judges in

the decision reported in                    S.R. Bommai and Others v.
Union of India and Others2, as a facet of the basic

structure       of    the      Constitution.      Therein,          this    Court,

inter alia, declared:
“144....In such circumstances, the Ministries
        formed by the said party could not be trusted
        to follow the objective of secularism which
        was part of the basic structure of the
        Constitution and also the soul of the
        Constitution.
1 (1973) 4 SCC 225
2 (1994)   3 SCC 1
4
145. These contentions inevitably invite us
to discuss the concept of secularism as
accepted     by    our   Constitution.     Our
Constitution does not prohibit the practice
of any religion either privately or publicly.
Through the Preamble of the Constitution, the
people of this country have solemnly resolved
to constitute this country, among others,
into a secular republic and to secure to all
its citizens (i) JUSTICE, social, economic
and political; (ii) LIBERTY of thought,
expression, belief, faith and worship; (iii)
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and
(iv) to promote among them all FRATERNITY
assuring the dignity of the individual and
the unity and integrity of the Nation.
Article 25
of the Constitution guarantees to
all persons equally the freedom of conscience
and the right to freely profess, practise and
propagate religion subject to public order,
morality and health and subject to the other
Fundamental Rights and the State's power to
make any law regulating or restricting any
economic,   financial,  political   or   other
secular activity which may be associated with
religious practice.
Article 26
guarantees
every religious denomination or any section
thereof the right (a) to establish and
maintain   institutions  for   religious   and
charitable purposes, (b) to manage its own
affairs in matters of religion, (c) to own
and acquire movable and immovable property
and (d) to administer such property in
accordance with law.
Article 29
guarantees
every section of the citizens its distinct
culture, among others.
Article 30
provides
that all minorities based on religion shall
have the right to establish and administer
5
educational institutions of their choice. It
prohibits   the    State    from     making    any
discrimination    in   granting    aid     to   an
educational    institution    managed       by   a
religious minority. Under
Articles 14
, 15
and
16
, the Constitution prohibits discrimination
against any citizen on the ground of his
religion and guarantees equal protection of
law   and   equal    opportunity      of    public
employment.
Article 44
enjoins upon the State
to endeavour to secure to its citizens a
uniform civil code.
Article 51-A
casts a duty
on every citizen of India, among others, (a)
to abide by the Constitution and respect its
ideals and institutions, (b) to promote
harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood,
among all the people of India, transcending,
among   others,    religious     and     sectional
diversities, (c) to value and preserve the
rich heritage of our composite culture, (d)
to develop scientific temper, humanism and
the spirit of inquiry and reform; and (e) to
safeguard public property and to abjure
violence.
148. One thing which prominently emerges from
the above discussion on secularism under our
Constitution is that whatever the attitude of
the State towards the religions, religious
sects and denominations, religion cannot be
mixed with any secular activity of the State.
In fact, the encroachment of religion into
secular activities is strictly prohibited.
This is evident from the provisions of the
Constitution to which we have made reference
above. The State's tolerance of religion or
religions does not make it either a religious
or a theocratic State. When the State allows
6
citizens   to   practise   and   profess   their
religions, it does not either explicitly or
implicitly allow them to introduce religion
into non-religious and secular activities of
the State. The freedom and tolerance of
religion is only to the extent of permitting
pursuit of spiritual life which is different
from the secular life. The latter falls in
the exclusive domain of the affairs of the
State. This is also clear from sub-section
(3) of
Section 123
of the Representation of
the People Act, 1951 which prohibits an
appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any
other   person   with   the   consent   of   the
candidate or his election agent to vote or
refrain from voting for any person on the
ground   of    his   religion,    race,   caste,
community or language or the use of or appeal
to religious symbols. Sub-section (3-A) of
the same section prohibits the promotion or
attempt to promote feelings of enmity and
hatred between different classes of the
citizens of India on the grounds of religion,
race, caste, community or language by a
candidate or his agent or any other person
with the consent of the candidate or his
election agent for the furtherance of the
prospects of the election of that candidate
or for prejudicially affecting the election
of any candidate. A breach of the provisions
of the said sub-sections (3) and (3-A) are
deemed to be corrupt practices within the
meaning of the said section.
197. Rise      of    fundamentalism     and
communalisation   of  politics   are  anti-
secularism. They encourage separatist and
divisive forces and become breeding grounds
7
for national disintegration and fail the
parliamentary  democratic   system   and  the
Constitution. Judicial process must promote
citizens' active participation in electoral
process uninfluenced by any corrupt practice
to exercise their free and fair franchise.
Correct interpretation in proper perspective
would be in the defence of the democracy and
to maintain the democratic process on an even
keel even in the face of possible friction,
it is but the duty of the court to interpret
the Constitution to bring the political
parties within the purview of constitutional
parameters for accountability and to abide by
the Constitution, the laws for their strict
adherence.
304....How are the constitutional promises of
social justice, liberty of belief, faith or
worship and equality of status and of
opportunity to be attained unless the State
eschews the religion, faith or belief of a
person from its consideration altogether
while dealing with him, his rights, his
duties and his entitlements? Secularism is
thus   more  than   a  passive   attitude  of
religious tolerance. It is a positive concept
of equal treatment of all religions. This
attitude is described by some as one of
neutrality towards religion or as one of
benevolent neutrality. This may be a concept
evolved by western liberal thought or it may
be, as some say, an abiding faith with the
Indian people at all points of time. That is
not material. What is material is that it is
a constitutional goal and a basic feature of
the Constitution as affirmed in
Kesavananda
Bharati [Kesavananda    Bharati v. State   of
8
Kerala
, (1973) 4 SCC 225 : 1973 Supp SCR 1]
     and Indira N. Gandhi v. Raj Narain [1975 Supp
     SCC 1 : (1976) 2 SCR 347] . Any step
     inconsistent with this constitutional policy
     is, in plain words, unconstitutional....”
                               (Emphasis supplied)
6.
In
State of Karnataka v. Praveen Bhai Thogadia

(Dr.
),3, this Court proclaimed:
“9.   Our    country   is   the    world's   most
     heterogeneous society with a rich heritage
     and our Constitution is committed to high
     ideas   of    socialism,   secularism   and   the
     integrity of the nation. As is well known,
     several    races    have   converged    in   this
     subcontinent and they have carried with them
     their own cultures, languages, religions and
     customs affording positive recognition to the
     noble and ideal way of life — “unity in
     diversity”. Though these diversities created
     problems in early days, they were mostly
     solved on the basis of human approaches and
     harmonious    reconciliation    of   differences,
     usefully    and    peacefully.    That   is   how
     secularism has come to be treated as a part
     of   fundamental    law,   and   an   unalienable
     segment of the basic structure of the
     country's political system. As noted in
S.R.
     Bommai v. Union of India
[(1994) 3 SCC 1]
     freedom of religion is granted to all persons
     of India. Therefore, from the point of view
     of the State, religion, faith or belief of a
     particular person has no place and given no
     scope for imposition on individual citizen.
     Unfortunately, of late, vested interests
     fanning religious fundamentalism of all kinds
     vying with each other, are attempting to
     subject the constitutional machineries of the
     State to great stress and strain with certain

3 (2004)   4 SCC 684
9
quaint ideas of religious priorities, to
promote their own selfish ends, undeterred
and unmindful of the disharmony it may
ultimately bring about and even undermine
national    integration    achieved   with    much
difficulties and laudable determination of
those strong-spirited savants of yesteryear.
Religion    cannot   be    mixed   with    secular
activities of the State and fundamentalism of
any kind cannot be permitted to masquerade as
political philosophies to the detriment of
the larger interest of society and basic
requirement of a welfare State. Religion sans
spiritual values may even be perilous and
bring about chaos and anarchy all around. It
is,   therefore,    imperative    that    if   any
individual or group of persons, by their
action or caustic and inflammatory speech are
bent upon sowing seeds of mutual hatred, and
their proposed activities are likely to
create     disharmony      and     disturb     the
equilibrium, sacrificing public peace and
tranquillity, strong action, and more so
preventive    actions    are    essentially    and
vitally needed to be taken. Any speech or
action which would result in ostracization of
communal harmony would destroy all those high
values   which   the    Constitution    aims   at.
Welfare of the people is the ultimate goal of
all laws, and State action and above all the
Constitution. They have one common object,
that is to promote the well-being and larger
interest of the society as a whole and not of
any individual or particular groups carrying
any brand names. It is inconceivable that
there   can   be   social    well-being    without
communal harmony, love for each other and
hatred for none. The core of religion based
upon spiritual values, which the Vedas,
Upanishads and Puranas were said to reveal to
mankind   seem   to   be:“Love    others,    serve
others, help ever, hurt never” and “sarvae
jana sukhino bhavantoo”. One-upmanship in the
10
name of religion, whichever it be or at
     whomsoever's instance it be, would render
     constitutional   designs   countermanded   and
     chaos, claiming its heavy toll on society and
     humanity as a whole, may be the inevitable
     evil consequences, whereof.”
                               (Emphasis Supplied)
7.
In
M.P. Gopalakrishnan Nair v. State of Kerala4
,

this Court declared:
” 20. It is now well settled:
(i)    The    Constitution    prohibits    the
     establishment of a theocratic State.
(ii) The State is not only prohibited to
     establish any religion of its own but is also
     prohibited   to  identify   itself  with   or
     favouring any particular religion.
(iii)   The  secularism   under  the    Indian
     Constitution does not mean constitution of an
     atheist society but it merely means equal
     status   of   all   religions   without    any
     preference in favour of or discrimination
     against any one of them.”
8.   We are of the view that the questions of law raised

by petitioner do not arise.
9.   The present and future of a country cannot remain a

prisoner of the past. The governance of Bharat must

conform to Rule of law, secularism, constitutionalism

of which
Article 14
stands out as the guarantee of both

4 (2005)   11 SCC 45
11
equality and fairness in the State’s action.
10.    The founding fathers contemplated India to be a

republic which is not merely to be conflated to a body

polity    having    an    elected   President     which   is    the

conventional       understanding.    But    it    also    involves

ensuring rights to all sections of people based on it

being a democracy. It is important that the country

must    move   forward.   For   achieving   the   sublime      goals

which are enshrined in Part IV – that is the Directive

Principles, but bearing in mind the fundamental rights

also guaranteed in Part III of the Constitution, which

have been described as the two wheels of the chariot of

the State, both of which are indispensable, for the

smooth progress of the nation, actions must be taken

which bond all sections of the society together.
11.    The history of any nation cannot haunt the future

generations of a nation to the point that succeeding

generations become prisoners of the past. The golden

principle of fraternity which again is enshrined in the

preamble is of the greatest importance and rightfully

finds its place in the preamble as a constant reminder

to all stakeholders that maintenance of harmony between
12
different sections alone will lead to the imbibing of a

true notion of nationhood bonding sections together for

the greater good of the nation and finally, establish a

sovereign democratic republic. We must constantly remind

ourselves that courts of law, as indeed every part of

the ‘State’, must be guided by the sublime realisation,

that Bharat is a secular nation committed to securing

fundamental rights to all sections as contemplated in

the Constitution.
12.   We are, therefore, of the view that the reliefs

which have been sought for should not be granted by

this Court acting as the guardian of fundamental rights

of all under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India

and bearing in mind the values which a Court must keep

uppermost in its mind - the preamble gives us clear

light in this direction.
13.   The writ petition is dismissed.
…………………………………………J.
                                        [K.M. JOSEPH]


                                        …………………………………………J.
                                        [B.V. NAGARATHNA]
NEW DELHI;
DATED: FEBRUARY 27, 2023
13