[Cites
10
, Cited by
5
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
The Andhra Pradesh Rice Bran Solvent ... vs Union Of India (Uoi) And Ors. on 21 April, 1988
Equivalent citations: AIR1989AP284, 1992(39)ECC149, 1988(19)ECR452(AP), 1988(37)ELT198(AP), AIR 1989 ANDHRA PRADESH 284, (1988) 19 ECR 452, (1988) 37 ELT 198, (1988) 2 LS 57
JUDGMENT


 

  P.A. Choudary, J.
1. The petitioner in this writ petition is the Andhra Pradesh Rice Bran Solvent Extractors Association. It challenges the validity of imposition of cess by the Union of India under Section   3 of the Vegetable Oils Cess Act (Act 30 of 1983) on the bran oil produced by its members out of the rice bran by the method of solvent extraction. The members of the petitioner-association own rice bran solvent extraction mills. They manufacture rice bran oil out of the rice bran through the process of solvent extraction. Rice bran is itself extracted from
rice which is produced from paddy by removing the husk. Of course paddy is produced from a plant.
2. The Union Parliament in exercise of
its powers under entry 52, List I of the VII
Schedule enacted the
National Oilseeds and
Vegetable Oils Development Board Act
(Act
29 of 1983). The object of the enactment is to
provide for the development of the oilseeds
industry and the oils industry. In order to
reach those goals the Act, authorised the
Constitution of a Board with necessary
statutory powers and functions to be exercised
by the Board.
Section   9
of the Act enumerates the
functions of the Board, Under that section
the duty of the Board is to promote
development of the oilseeds industry and the
vegetable oils industry. It is clear that the
-running of the Board requires monies to be
spent. The question who should pay for the
running of the Board is answered by the
companion legislation Act No. 30 of 1983
called the Vegetable Oils Cess Act passed by
the Parliament. The latter Act seeks to raise
these monies at least in part from the
manufacturers of vegetable oils who will be
the beneficiaries in some direct way of the
activities of the Board.
Section   3
of the Act 30 of
1983, therefore, authorises the Government
to levy and collect by way of cess for the
purposes of the
National Oilseeds and
Vegetable Oils Development Board Act, 1983
,
a duty of excise on vegetable oils produced in
any mill in India at such rate not exceeding
five rupees per quintal of vegetable oil, as the
Central Government may, from time to time,
specify by notification in the Official Gazette.
It appears from the affidavit that the Central
Government in exercise of its statutory powers
has issued a notification and imposed a cess
of Re. 1/- per quintal on rice bran oil. When
the Government is attempting to collect the
cess from the manufacturers of bran oil, the
petitioner-Association has filed this writ
petition on behalf of its members, who are
producing rice bran oil and who are asked to
pay the aforementioned cess imposed by the
Central Government under
Section   3
of Act 30 of
1983.
3.   The scope of this writ petition is limited

to finding out whether bran oil is produced from oil yielding material of plant origin.
4. The only argument advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the imposition of cess under
Section   3
on the bran oil is not authorised by the provisions of Act 30 of 83 read with Act 29 of 1983. There is no doubt that
Section   3
of Act 30 of 1983 authorised the imposition of cess only on vegetable oils produced in a mill. The argument of the petitioner is that the bran oil is not a vegetable oil within the meaning of these Acts. Act 30 of 1983 does not define the word 'vegetable oil' but refers to Act 29 of 1983 for the meaning of that word. In
Section   3(h)
of Act 29, 1983 the word 'vegetable oil' is defined to mean any oil produced from oil seeds or any other oil bearing material of plant origin. The question is whether rice bran out of which rice bran oil is produced is an oil-bearing material of plant origin. It is nobody's case that the rice bran oil is produced from any seeds. Nor can any one contend to the contrary that rice bran is an oil yielding material. The only question that is raised and argued is whether rice bran is of plant origin. The argument of the petitioner is that the rice bran oil is produced from the rice bran and that rice bran is in turn produced from the rice and not from paddy and that therefore the rice bran oil cannot be said to be produced from oil bearing material of plant origin. Thus the short question is whether the production of rice bran oil falls within the definition of
Section   3
( h) of Act 29 of 1983.
5. The definition section speaks of material of plant origin. In terms of that definition what we have to find out is the genealogical origin of rice bran. The word origin means ancestry rise of sourse. Clearly rice bran has its origin in paddy. Without paddy there can be neither rice nor rice bran. But according to the petitioner's argument the search for the origin of rice bran should stop with rice and should not go to paddy: We are of the opinion that neither in the text nor in the context there is any justification for this reasoning of the petitioner. On the other hand it does violence to the language used by the statute in its definition. Plant
origins of which the definition speaks of can
be found only in the beginning and not at
intermediary stage. The words plant; origin
require us to trace the genealogical origins of
rice bran to paddy. They would not permit us
to stop the investigation into the origins of
rice bran at the stage of rice which
undoubtedly is the immediate and
intermediate source fpr the production of
the rice bran. But rice bran is an integral part
of paddy which is undoubtedly of plant origin.
Removing husk by which rice is produced
and out of which rice bran is produced is not
a chemical process. It is merely a physical act
of separating some parts Of rice which conies
out of paddy. The words in the definition
requires us to find out the plant origin of the
oil bearing rice bran. What
Section   3(h)
of Act 30
of 1983 says is that imposition of cess should
be confined only to vegetable oils produced
out of material of plant origin and should not
extend to oils produced from materials of
mineral origin or animal origin.
6. Judge Bork says to specify something is simultaneously to give it not only content but by the same process to give it limits. In that view we held rice bran oil which is the product of rice bran is produced out of material of plant origin. We, therefore, reject the contention of Mr. K. Subrahmanya Reddy, learned counsel for the petitioner that rice bran should not be considered as a material of plant origin.
7. The learned counsel cited several cases
arising under the Sales Tax Acts of the States.
He referred to the decisions in
Commr. of
Sales-tax v. Naveen Traders
, (1975) 36 STC
440 (All);
Ganesh Trading Company v. State
of Haryana
, ;
Chordia Kavelu Udyog v. State of
M.P.
, (1988(69) STC 49) (Madh Pra) and Babu
Ram Jagdish Kumar and Co. v. State of
Punjab. . In
our opinion none of these cases are of any
help to us to decide the question which has
been raised in this writ petition. In the cited
cases, which arose under the respective Sales
tax Laws, the various laws have made several
distinctions between the rice bran, husk;
paddy, rice and other materials for the purpose

of imposition of sales tax. In that connection courts have held that the rice bran is not the same as husk and that paddy and rice are not one arid the same. They are of the slightest relevance to find out whether the oil yielding rice bran is of plant origin. Such a question, in our opinion, cari be decided not by the decisions interpreting
Sales Tax Act
but only by attending to the language and context of the present Act. The rule that the nomenclature used by the Sales Tax Acts should be understood in popular sense and not in technical sense can have no application here. The cases in
State of West Bengal v. Wasi Ahmed
,  and
Mukesh Kumar Agarwal v. State of M.P.
,  cannot be of any use to us. This is entirely a different question from the one with which we are concerned. Here the question is, as stated above, whether the rice bran is an oil yielding material of plant origin. The answer in our opinion can only be in the affirmative. For these reasons, we do not find any merit in this writ petition. The writ petition fails.
8. Subject to the condition that the petitioners renew their bank guarantees before they expire, the Government is restrained from encashing the bank guarantees from period of three months.
9. The writ petition is dismissed with costs. Advocate's fee Rs. 250/-.
Mr. Subrahmanya Reddy, learned counsel for the petitioner, has made an oral application for grant of a certificate to enable the petitioners to prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court. We are unable to certify that this caw involves a substantial question of law which needs to be, decided by the Supreme Court, The oral application is rejected.