[Cites
23
, Cited by
5
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
M.B. Chander S/O M. Bhadraiah Aged About ... vs M/S Balakrishna Rao Charitable Trust ... on 8 September, 2016
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2016 HYD 14
Author:
M. Satyanarayana Murthy
Bench:
M. Satyanarayana Murthy
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M. SATYANARAYANA MURTHY             

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.2870 OF 2016     

08-09-2016 

M.B. Chander S/o M. Bhadraiah   Aged about 65 years, Occ Business R/o Plot          
No.54-C, Jubilee Hills, Film Nagar Road No.1, Hyderabad & two others      
Petitioners

M/s Balakrishna Rao Charitable Trust Its office at D.No.3-6-293/2/D, Hyderguda
Hyderabad-29 Rep. by its Managing Trustee Sri M. Jayanth Tagore, Aged about 52  
years   Occ: Business, R/o Jubilee Hills Hyderabad. Respondent  

Counsel for the petitioner:Sri O. Manohar Reddy

Counsel for the respondent:Sri B. Vijaysen Reddy

<GIST:  

>HEAD NOTE:    

?Cases referred

1.2012 (4) ALD 140 
2.2015 (1) ALD 38 
3.(2014) 9 Supreme Court Cases 657  
4.(2005) 2 Supreme Court Cases 400  
5.2014 (5) ALD 744 
6.AIR 1979 All.336
7.(1994) 1 GLR 98 
8.(1964) 1 SCR 371 : AIR 1963 SC 1241  
9.2005 (2) ALD 50 
10.AIR 1996 SC 140  
11.AIR 1954 SC 215  

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M. SATYANARAYANA MURTHY             

CIVIL REVISION PETITION NO.2870 OF 2016     

ORDER:
This civil revision petition under
Article 227
of Constitution
of India is filed challenging the order passed by the II Additional
Chief Judge, City Civil Courts, Hyderabad in I.A.No. 2590 of 2014
in O.S.No.1005 of 2014, whereby, the Trial Court directed to
deposit Rs.20,98,825/- as arrears of rent by the end of April, 2015
within one month and continue to pay monthly rent of Rs.99,225/-
on or before 1st day of every succeeding month commencing from 
01.06.2015, until further orders, failing which the defence in the
suit of the defendants shall be struck off.
For convenience sake, the ranks given to the parties before
the Trial Court will be adopted throughout the judgment.
The petitioner/plaintiff filed petition under Order XV-A
of
Code of Civil Procedure
(for short
C.P.C
) to direct the
respondents/defendants to deposit arrears of rent of
Rs.26,18,200/- payable for the scheduled premises to the credit of
the suit and continue to deposit monthly rent from December,
2014 onwards @ Rs.1,50,000/- per month till disposal of the suit.
It is alleged that the petitioner and 1st respondent entered
into a lease agreement, i.e. unregistered lease deed dated
27.03.2003 for the house property bearing No.3-6-325 situated at
Hyderguda, Hyderabad. The house consists of ground, first, second
floors and terrace admeasuring 11,484 Sft and the monthly rent
agreed for each ground, first and second floors was Rs.15,500/-
and Rs.7,750/- for the terrace respectively and the total rent
agreed to be paid was Rs.54,250/- per month. It was agreed by
both the parties under the unregistered lease deed that the rent
has to be enhanced @ 5% per annum and the term of lease was for  
a period of three years initially with an option of the first
respondent to renew the lease for another period of two years. It is
stated that, while the ground and second floors of the building was
handed over on 27.03.2003, the first floor was handed over in the
month of December, 2003 after evicting the then tenant (Telephone
Department) as stipulated in Clause 2 (b) of the lease agreement.
On 02.04.2003, the terrace was handed over to the first
respondent who made a non interest bearing refundable security
deposit of Rs.1,93,750/- i.e a deposit sum of Rs.1,55,000/- for the
ground and second floor portions and a sum of Rs.38,750/- for the
terrace, but, the first respondent failed to deposit Rs.75,500/- for
the first floor.
Though the lease was expired on 27.03.2006, the first
respondent continued in occupation of the property and running
educational society on month to month basis and the rent agreed
to be paid was on the first day of each month. The rent was
enhanced to Rs.90,000/- with effect from 01.04.2008 for the said
property and it continued till 31.03.2011.  Thereafter, the rent was
enhanced @ 5%, it comes to Rs.94,500/- during financial year
2011-2012 and Rs.99,225/- during financial year 2012-2013 and
thereafter, the rent was enhanced to Rs.1,50,000/- per month for
the financial year 2013-2014.  The first respondent failed to pay
rent for several months and the rent arrears due as on July, 2014
was Rs.20,18,200/-, after adjusting Rs.81,800/- towards part
payment made in the month of June, 2013.  Despite issuing a legal
notice dated 21.07.2014, demanding to vacate the schedule
premises, the first respondent failed to vacate the premises and got
issued a reply dated 14.10.2010 making false and untenable
allegations. The arrears of rent as on the date of filing the petition
was Rs.26,18,200/- after adjusting the amount paid  whatever
from the months of July, 2013 to November, 2014. Thus, the first
respondent continued in possession and enjoyment of the property
without depositing or paying the admitted arrears of rent, which is
mandatory requirement under Order XV-A
of C.P.C
and prayed for 
issuing aforesaid direction against the first respondent.
The first respondent filed counter denying material
allegations while admitting execution of lease deed dated
27.03.2003 and contended that on the date of lease agreement, the
petitioner handed over total plinth area of 7000 sft in ground and
second floor. The first floor and terrace of the building was not
handed over to the first respondent and the petitioner was
collecting rent of Rs.31,000/- per month since the first floor and
terrace of the building were not handed over. The first floor of the
building was handed over in the month of December, 2014.  The
terrace of the building was constructed and roofed with iron sheets
and handed over to the respondents on 02.04.2003. The deposit of
Rs.1,93,750/- was for the entire building. An understanding was
made in the agreement that the lease was to be continued as long
as the respondents run the educational institution in the schedule
premises. It is further stated in the counter that, as the building is
an old one, the petitioner did not care to attend repairs of the
building. The respondents have been paying rent @ Rs.66,276/-
per month and the same was being accepted by the petitioner 
without any protest. Further, it is stated in the counter affidavit
that the respondents were never in arrears of payment of rent to a
tune of Rs.26,18,200/- and denied the last enhancement of rent
from time to time and therefore, no order can be passed against
the respondents and prayed for dismissal of the petition.
Upon hearing argument of both the counsel, the Trial Court
issued a direction referred in paragraph 9 of the order,
undertaking an exercise to fix rent and directed the respondents to
pay a sum of Rs.20,98,825/- as arrears of rent by the end of April,
2015 within one month and continue to pay monthly rent of
Rs.99,225/- on or before 1st of every succeeding month
commencing from 01.06.2015.
Aggrieved by the order and decreetal order passed by the
Trial Court, the present civil revision petition is filed raising several
contentions, mainly contending that the issuance of such direction
fixing monthly rent is beyond the scope of Order XV-A and in the
absence of satisfying the requirements envisaged under
Order XV-A
of CPC
and passing such an order under challenge is 
erroneous. Further, it is contended that the Trial Court ought not
to have conducted a summary enquiry to decide the undisputed 
arrears of rent, ignoring the word undisputed used in Order XV-A
of CPC
. Therefore, it is contended that the order under challenge is
erroneous on the face of record.
During hearing, Sri O. Manoher Reddy, learned counsel for
the revision petitioners herein/respondents before the Trial Court
would contend that the Court can direct payment or deposit of
admitted arrears and the Court is not supposed to undertake such
an exercise to decide the actual arrears of rent. But the Trial Court
had undertaken the exercise beyond its scope and jurisdiction to
decide the actual admitted rent arrears, transgressing the power
conferred on it by Order XV-A
of CPC
as amended by High Court of
Andhra Pradesh. Conducting such a summary enquiry is not  
contemplated under Order XV-A
of CPC
.  Thus, the arrear of rent
fixed or calculated by the Trial Court is based on summary enquiry
and such enquiry is beyond the scope of Order XV-A
of CPC
.  At
the stage of passing such an order under Order XV-A, the Court
has to direct the tenant who is in occupation to pay admitted
arrears. The word admitted does not mean alleged agreed rent but
it represents the rent admitted by the first defendant and not the
rent as contended by the petitioner before the Trial Court. In such
a case, no such summary enquiry has to be undertaken and  
passing an order after fixing arrears of rent is an error apparent on
the face of record. Therefore, the Trial Court exceeded its
jurisdiction that conferred upon it. In those circumstances, this
Court can exercise power under
Article 227
of the Constitution of
India, which is supervisory in nature and set-aside the same.
Learned counsel for the revision petitioners, in support of his
contention, placed reliance two judgments of this Court reported in
Sri Vasavi Boys Hostel and Mess, Hyderabad v. K. Satya 
Prasad  and M. Vijaya Lakshmi and othrs v. Kalanikethan
Textiles and Jewells Pvt. Ltd, Hyderabad and others .
Per contra, Sri B. Vijayasen Reddy, learned counsel for the
respondent herein/petitioner before the Trial Court would mainly
contend that when there is a dispute regarding quantum of rent,
the Court has to undertake such an exercise i.e., summary
enquiry, in view of Order XV-A Rule 2, after affording a reasonable
opportunity to the respondent/defendant, issue such direction for
payment of admitted arrears and continue to pay or deposit
monthly rent during pendency of the suit. Therefore, the exercise
undertaken by the Trial Court is totally in accordance with law and
the same cannot be disturbed by this Court while exercising power
under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India.  Learned counsel
further contended that while interpreting such penal provision to
strike-off defence in a suit, the Court has to interpret such
provision by applying its mind to achieve the wider objective of
incorporating Order XV-A and in the absence of any procedure
prescribed under Order XV-A, by applying the principle of ejusdem
generic, this Court can interpret such provision to achieve the
object of incorporation of Order XV-A
of C.P.C
i.e. A.P. Amendment
Act and the learned counsel placed reliance on the judgment
reported in by the Supreme Court in
Bangalore Turf Club Limited
v. Regional Director, Employees State Insurance Corporation
and Manik lal
Majumdar v. Gouranga Chandra Dey
.  
Sri B. Vijayasen Reddy, learned counsel further contended that a
similar issue came up before this Court in CRP No.5779 of 2015
where the single judge of this Court held that a summary enquiry
need be conducted to fix arrears of rent and by following the same
principle the Trial Court passed the order under challenge.
He also
drawn attention of this Court to the judgments reported in
Chaitanya Lanka v. Suresh Kumar Gupta
to contend that the 
Court has to undertake and exercise to decide the arrears of rent
by conducting summary enquiry and cannot pass routine order to 
direct the respondent/defendant to pay the rent as admitted by
him while requesting to dismiss the civil revision petition.
Considering rival contentions and perusing the order under
challenge, the point that arises for consideration is
        whether the Court can conduct summary enquiry to 
arrive at the admitted arrears to pass an order under Order
XV-A
of C.P.C
as amended by the A.P. Amendment Act. If not,  
whether the order passed by the Trial Court is liable to be set-
aside.
In Re Point:
There is no dispute regarding relationship of tenant and
landlord between the parties to the suit and filing of a suit for
eviction on various grounds, including default in payment of rent
by the first revision petitioner/first respondent. When suit is filed
for ejectment or eviction with or without recovery of arrears of rent,
the tenant, if found the rent admitted to be due, can be directed to
deposit admitted arrears of rent and continue to deposit monthly
rent, as per Order XV-A
of C.P.C
i.e., A.P. Amendment Act.
To invoke Order XV-A
of C.P.C
the following conditions have
to be fulfilled:
1)      a suit must be for recovery of possession of property i.e. for
eviction;
2)      There must be a prayer for recovery of rent or compensation
for use and occupation;
3)      The defendant/petitioner must plead no arrears or low
arrears to be paid to landlord/plaintiff, which needs
examination by Court to decide what is admitted arrears of
rent.
Therefore, the above the requirements have to be satisfied to
claim relief under Order XV-A
of C.P.C
, as amended by the
Andhra Pradesh High Court.
The real test to be applied before exercising power under
Order XV-A for striking off defence is to find out whether the
default or deposit of amount was bonafide or not. If, it was
bonafide, the Court cannot exercise power to strike off the defence.
The power under Order XV-A is purely discretionary.
While interpreting the provision like Order XV-A, the Court
should interpret those provisions to achieve the real object of the
legislature in incorporating Order XV-A
of C.P.C
. Order XV-A
consists of two parts. The first part casts an obligation upon a
tenant to make payment of entire amount of arrears of rent
admitted by him to be due and should be deposited along with a
written statement. If, failed to comply such obligation, the Court
may strike off, direct after affording reasonable opportunity to
tenant and on setting aside that the tenant failed to deposit,
admitted arrear of rent, and shall pass an order. The second part
i.e. Rule 2 deals with the cases where the defendant does not
admit any amount to be due, nonetheless, it casts an obligation
upon him to pay throughout continuation of the suit, such
monthly rent which is due as directed by the Court. The word may
in Order XV-A (2) is significant. It may vest power on the Court to
strike off without application or compelling the Court to do so in
other case of possession. The provision is an interregnum, as held
in
Ishwari Prasad vs. Smt. Rajni Devi & Ors
.
In the present case, the main endeavor of the learned
counsel for the first respondent/plaintiff before the Trial Court is
that while interpreting such provision by applying the principle of
ejusdem generis, the rental loss has to be taken into consideration
and drawn the attention of this Court to the judgment of the
Supreme Court in
Bangalore Turf Club Limited
case (referred
supra). While dealing with provisions of
E.S.I Act
, the Supreme
Court laid down certain guidelines regarding interpretation of
statues and held that two statutes are said to be in pari materia
with each other when they deal with the same subject matter and
the rationale behind this rule is based on the interpretative
assumption that words employed in legislations are used in an
identical sense. However, this assumption is rebuttable by context
of statutes. Therefore, words used in a different statute especially
in light of the fact that the two statutes are not in pari material
with each other and have a wholly different scheme from one
another.
Based on the principle
laid down in
the above judgment,
the learned counsel for the appellant drawn attention of this Court
to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Manik lal
Majumdars
case (referred supra) and held that, where it is a decision rendered
in a matter to which the
Tripura Buildings (Lease and Rent
Control) Act, 1975
(hereinafter referred to as
Tripura Act
) is
applicable, where there is a specific provision which obligated the
tenant to deposit all admitted arrears of rent which is a condition
precedent to prefer an appeal under Section 21(b) &
Section 13(1)
of the Tripura Act.
Deciding a similar question in Binapani Roy & ors v. State
of Tripura & ors , the Gauhati Court held that giving a literal
meaning to the expression all arrears of rent admitted by the
tenant to be due occurring in
Section 13(1)
may defeat the very
object of enacting
Section 13
of the Act and an unscrupulous
tenant may continue to enjoy the premises without payment of any
rent to the landlord by protracting the litigation and the landlord
may have to wait till the final decision of the case to recover his
dues by taking execution proceedings. Therefore, if interpreted
literally, the said expression would mean that unless the tenant
specifically admits any arrears of rent to be due to the landlord,
the condition to make payment of arrears of rent in order to
contest the original proceedings before the Rent Control Court or to
prefer an appeal as provided under
Section 13
of the Act would
arise. The reasonable meaning of the words admitted by the
tenant to be due is the inference of admission from the material
on record. If material on record prima facie discloses the admission
of relationship of landlord and tenant and the rate of monthly rent
payable, the tenant would be required to pay or deposit arrears of
rent and continue payment of current rent during the pendency of
litigation, as enjoyed under in
Section 13
of Tripura Act.
A provision similar to
Section 13
of the Tripura Act is
available in
A.P. Buildings (Lease, Rent & Eviction) Control Act,
1960
.
Applying the principle of Ejusdem Generis in interpreting
Order XV-A, it is necessary to extract Order XV-A
of C.P.C
Andhra
Pradesh Amendment,
Section 11
of A.P. Buildings (Lease, Rent &  
Eviction) Control Act, 1960, and
Section 13
of the Tripura Act and
they are extracted hereunder:
Order XV-A of C.P.C.
Section 13
of the Tripura Act
Section 11
of A.P. Buildings
(Lease, Rent & Eviction)
Control Act, 1960
Striking Off Defence in a
suit by a Lessor

(1) In a suit for recovery of
possession, on termination
of lease, or licence, with or
without a prayer for
recovery of arrears of rent,
or licence fee, known with
whatever description, the
defendant, while filing his
written statement, shall
deposit the amount,
representing the
undisputed arrears,
calculated upto that due
into the Court and shall
continue to deposit such
amount, which becomes   
payable thereafter within
one week from the date on 
which it becomes due, till
the judgment is rendered
in the suit.
In the event of any default
in making the deposit, as
aforesaid the Court may
subject to the provisions of
sub-rule (2) strike off the
defence.
(2) Before passing an order
for striking off the defence,
the Court shall serve
notice on the defendant or
his advocate to show-
cause as to why the 
defence should not be
struck off, and the Court
shall consider any such
cause, if shown in order to
decide as to whether the
defendant should be
relieved an order striking
off the defence.
(3) The amount deposited 
under this rule shall be
paid to the plaintiff lessor
or licensor or his advocate
and the receipt of such
amount shall not have the
effect of prejudicing the
claim of the plaintiff and it
would not also be treated
as a waiver of notice of
termination.
Section 13 - Payment or 
deposit of rent during the
pendency of proceedings for
eviction
(1) No tenant against whom 
an application for eviction
has been made by a landlord 
under section 12 shall be
entitled to contest the
application before the Rent
Control Court under that
section, or to prefer an
appeal under section 20
against any order made by 
the Rent Control Court on
the application, unless he
has paid or pays to the
landlord, or deposit with the
Rent Control Court or the
appellate authority, as the
case may be, all arrears of
rent admitted by the tenant
to be due in respect of the
building upto the date of
payment or deposit, and
continues to pay or to
deposit any rent which may 
subsequently become due in  
respect of the building, until
the termination of the
proceedings before the Rent
Control Court or the
appellate authority, as the
case may be.
(2) The deposit under sub-
section (1) shall be made
within such time as the Rent
Control Court may fix and in
such manner as may be  
prescribed and shall be
accompanied by the fee 
prescribed for the service of
notice referred to in sub-
section (4) :
Provided that the
time fixed by the Rent
Control Court for the
deposit of the arrears
of rent shall not be
less than fortyfive
days from the date of
the order and the
time fixed for the
deposit of rent which
subsequently accrues 
due shall not be less
than two weeks from 
the date on which the
rent becomes due.
(3) If any tenant fails to pay
or to deposit the rent as
aforesaid, the Rent Control
Court or the appellate
authority, as the case may
be, shall, unless the tenant
shows sufficient cause to the
contrary, stop all further
proceedings and make an  
order directing the tenant to
put the landlord in
possession of the building.
(4) When any deposit is made 
under sub-section (1), the
Rent Control Court or the
appellate authority, as the
case may be, shall cause 
notice of the deposit to be
served on the landlord in the
prescribed manner, and the
amount deposited may,  
subject to such conditions as
may be prescribed, be 
withdrawn by the landlord
on application made by him 
to the Rent Control Court or
the appellate authority in
that behalf.
Section 11
Payment or 
deposit of rent during the
pendency of proceedings 
for eviction:-
(1) No tenant against
whom an application for
eviction has been made by 
a landlord under Section
10, shall be entitled to
contest the application
before the Controller
under that section, or to
prefer any appeal under
Section 20 against any
order made by the 
Controller on the
application, unless he has
paid to the landlord or
deposits with the
Controller or the appellate
authority, as the case may
be, all arrears of rent due
in respect of the building
up to the date of payment
or deposit and continues
to pay or deposit any rent
which may subsequently  
become due in respect of
the building, until the
termination of the
proceedings before the
Controller or the appellate
authority, as the case may
be.
(2) The deposit of rent
under sub-section (1)
shall be made within the
time and in the manner
prescribed.
(3) Where there is any
dispute as to the amount
of rent to be paid or
deposited under sub-
section (1) the Controller
or the appellate authority,
as the case may be, shall
on application made to
him either by the tenant
or by the landlord, and
after making such inquiry
as he deems necessary,  
determine summarily the 
rent to be so paid or
deposited.
If, the provisions of
A.P. Rent Control Act and High Court of
Andhra Pradesh Amendment to Order XV-A and Tripura Act
are   
read together and plying the principle of interpretation of ejusdem
generis, the Court has to make summary enquiry as to rent due to
landlord by tenant.
In the judgment of
Manik Lal Majumdars
Case, the
Supreme Court specifically referred two judgments i.e.
State of
West Bengal v. Union of India
and
R.S. Raghunath v. State of
Karnataka
held that it is a well settled principle that the intention
of the legislature must be found by reading the statue as a whole
and in order to ascertain the meaning of a clause in a statute, the
court must look at the whole statute, at what precedes and what
succeeds and not merely the clause itself. The court must
ascertain the intention of the legislature by directing its attention
not merely to the clauses to be construed, but to the entire statute;
it must compare the interpretation occurs. Therefore, it is
necessary to give full meaning and effect to the provisions of
subsections (2) and (3) of
Section 3
of the Act.
When particular words pertaining to a class, category or
genus are followed by general words, the general words are
construed as limited to things of the same kind as those specified.
This rule which is known as the rule of ejusdem generic reflects an
attempt to reconcile incompatibility between the specific and
general words in view of the other rules of interpretation that all
words in a statute are given effect if possible, that a statute is to be
construed as a whole and that no words in a statute are presumed
to be superfluous. The rule applies when
(1)     the statute contains an enumeration of specific words;
(2)     the subjects of enumeration constitute a class or category;
(3)     that class or category is not exhausted by the enumeration;
(4)     the general terms follow  the enumeration; and
(5)     there is no indication of a different legislative intent.
Thus, when the words are clear, intention of the legislature
in incorporating a particular word or provision in the Act, the
Court may fall back on the words used in the similar or identical
procedure contemplated in the other statute, akin to the same
clause. The present revision petition arising out of a direction
under Order XV-A
of C.P.C
by the II Additional Chief Judge, City
Civil Court, Hyderabad, fixing the arrears of rent payable by the
tenant/petitioner herein. But a bare look at the Order XV-A (1) of
Andhra Pradesh Amendment to
C.P.C
indicates that the defendant,  
while filing his written statement, is under an obligation to deposit
undisputed arrears calculated upto that due into the Court and
shall continue to deposit such amount, till termination of the
proceedings.
Taking advantage of the word undisputed arrears, the
learned counsel for the revision petitioners contended that when
the quantum of rent is not disputed, the Trial Court is incompetent
to decide arrear of admitted rent by undertaking summary enquiry
to arrive at the rent due or payable on the date of filing the written
statement or continue to deposit and issue direction to deposit
arrear of amount due to deposit the rent.
If, Rule (1) is read in isolation, there is no ambiguity that the
Court can direct the undisputed arrears to be paid, but a co-joint
reading of Rules 1 & 2 of Order XV-A indicates that when the
defendant pleads in the written statement that no arrear of rent is
payable, the Court is competent to pass an order in this regard
after affording an opportunity of hearing to both the parties and in
case any amount is found due, the defendant shall be under an
obligation to deposit the same within the time stipulated by the
Court and continue to deposit the amount which becomes payable  
thereafter, as provided under Rule 1. Thus, it means that Rule 2 of
Order XV-A of A.P. Amendment Act, enabled the Court to decide 
the amount due when the defendant pleaded no arrears, after
affording opportunity.
If both Rule 1 & 2 are read in isolation, Rule 1 is applicable
only to a situation where rent arrear is admitted, Rule 2 is
applicable when defendant pleads no arrears or disputes quantum
of rent, and mandates summary enquiry. In any view, summary  
enquiry is required to be made to determine the rent arrears to
issue direction to deposit arrears of rent and continue to deposit
rent.
If no summary enquiry is undertaken to decide arrears of
rent payable by tenant, it would frustrate the intention of
legislation, and it is boon to unscrupulous tenants to avoid
payment of rent, continuing in possession of demised premises for
decades together. It is not the intention of any legislation to confer
such benefit on any unscrupulous tenants.
The suit is admittedly filed for eviction or ejectment of the
tenant in occupation by following necessary procedure under
Transfer of Property Act
. The rent payable for the premises is
exceeding the limit prescribed under A.P. Rent Control Act.  The
A.P. Rent Control Act is intended to regulate the procedure for
evicting the tenants by the landlords, subject to the limitations
regarding rent and other conditions prescribed under
Section 32
of
the Act. The intention of the legislature in enacting the A.P. Rent
Control Act or the provisions relating to lease under
Transfer of
Property Act
are only to regulate the unlawful eviction of tenants
by the landlords and avoidance to pay rent by the unscrupulous
tenants in occupation of any premises.
But the Transfer of
Property Act
which is the substantive law did not contain any
provision akin to Section 11 of the A.P. Rent Control Act.
Therefore, as a procedural safeguard, the State of Uttar Pradesh
suitably amended Order XV by incorporating Rule 5, but the High
Court of Andhra Pradesh incorporated Order XV-A to strike off the
defences set up by unscrupulous tenants to avoid payment of rent
to the landlord. Therefore, the intention of the legislature in
incorporating Order XV-A in
C.P.C
, as amended by the High Court
of Andhra Pradesh and Section 11 of the A.P. Rent Control Act is
one and the same.
On close reading of Section 11 of A.P. Rent Control Act and
Order XV-A as amended by High Court of Andhra Pradesh, they  
are identical in all respects. Section 11 of A.P. Rent Control Act
obligates the tenant in occupation to deposit the rent payable for
the premises in his occupation during pendency of the petition
filed under
Section 10
or an appeal filed under Section 20 of the
A.P. Building Lease Eviction Control Act. In case, the landlord
refuses to receive the same, the tenant has to deposit the same
with the rent controller or the appellate authority and continue to
deposit the same after following necessary procedure and in the
event of failure to pay or deposit the rent payable to the premises
and arrears up to the date of entering into appearance in a petition
filed under
Section 10
by the landlord or to prosecute the appeal
filed by the tenant or landlord filed under
Section 20
of the Act, the
rent controller or appellate authority may direct to stop all further
proceedings and make an order directing the tenant to put the
landlord in possession of the building. (vide Subsection (4) of
Section 11
).
Sub-section (3) of
Section 11
permits the Rent Controller or
Appellate Authority to decide the arrears of rent and rents payable
for the premises where there is any dispute as to the amount of
rent to be paid or deposited under Subsection (1), as the case may
be and shall on application made by the tenant or by the landlord
and after making such enquiry, summarily determine the rent
payable for the premises and direct to pay or deposit such amount
decided on summary enquiry. Thus, Sub-
section 3
mandates a   
summary enquiry to be conducted by rent controller or the
appellate authority, as the case may be when there is a dispute
regarding quantum of rent or arrears, on the application of any of
the parties to the eviction petition. The Rent Controller or Appellate
Authority cannot relegate decision on any such dispute to final
decision or determination. The tenant having denied the quantum
of rent or even relationship of landlord and tenant without
adjudicating such issues both rent controller and appellate
authority cannot proceed to enquire into the main petition without
complying the statutory requirement under Sub-
section 3
of
Section 11
of A.P. Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act
and any order passed without making such summary enquiry is  
illegal and direction if any issued to deposit admitted rent to put
the landlord in possession of leasehold premises in the event of
failure to pay admitted rent is liable to be set aside, as held by this
Court in
A. Yeshoda v. Digamber Rao Surve
.  Rule 2 of Order
XV-A
C.P.C
is almost identical to Sub-
section 3
of Section 11 of
A.P. Building (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, but the
language used in the provision, though not identical, a close
reading of Order XV-A, more particularly, due to usage of words
affording opportunity to both the parties indicates an enquiry to
decide the rent due by the tenant to the landlord is to be
undertaken. Therefore, the same analogy as under Section 11(3) of
the A.P. Rent Control Act can be applied to Rule 2 of Order XV-A
of
C.P.C
, by applying the principle of ejusdem generis, since the
purpose of both the provisions are one and the same and intention
of legislature in incorporating the provisions in both Acts is one
and the same.
Learned counsel for the respondent Sri Vijaysen Reddy while
contending that a summary enquiry is required to determine the
arrear of rent when there is a dispute regarding quantum of rent
payable, for the premises by the tenant and placed reliance on
unreported judgment of this Court in C.R.P.No.5779 of 2015,
where a single judge of this Court relying on the earlier judgments
of this Court reported in Sri Vasavi Boys Hostels case (referred
supra) and R.V. Bhupal Prasad v. State of Andhra Pradesh and 
others , concluded that a summary enquiry is to be made to
decide the arrears of rent or rent payable for the premises by the
tenant to issue a direction under Sub-rule 2, when there is a
dispute regarding quantum of rent and arrear, to issue a direction
under Rule 1.
Even if the principle laid down in the above judgment is
applied to the present facts of the case, read with Section 11(3) of
the A.P. Rent Control Act, and Order XV-A Rule 2, it can safely be
concluded that the Court is under an obligation to make summary
enquiry as to the rent payable for the premises and arrears due by
the tenant/petitioner herein.
As discussed in earlier paragraphs, while interpreting Order
XV-A Rule 2, basing on the principle of ejusdem generis, a
summary enquiry under Rule 2 of Order XV-A is mandatory and  
without making such an enquiry, if any order is passed, it is illegal
and liable to be set-aside in view of the judgment in
Yeshodas
case (referred supra). For instance, the unscrupulous tenants in
occupation of the building may set up a frivolous or vexatious
pleas, sometimes totally denying the rent payable for the premises
and sometimes low rent for a palacious building, admitting liability
to pay megre amount of rent which leads to depriving the genuine
landlord to enjoy the fruits of tenancy and due to continuation of
litigation for decades together to avoid such undue hardship to the
landlord, Order XV-A is incorporated by A.P. Amendment to
C.P.C
, 
which is similar to Section 11 of A.P. Rent Control Act.
The Trial Court, by exercising power conferred on it and by
Rule 2 of Order XV-A by holding a summary enquiry, directed to
deposit Rs.20,98,825/- as arrears of rent by the end of April, 2015
within one month and continue to pay monthly rent of Rs.99,225/-
on or before 1st day of every succeeding month commencing from 
01.06.2015, until further orders, failing which the defence in the
suit of the defendants shall be struck off
        Thus, the order under challenge before this Court does not
suffer from any illegality warranting interference of this Court
while exercising power under
Article 227
of the Constitution of
India. Since the powers of this Court under
Article 227
are limited,
this Court cannot exercise such power and the duty of this Court
is to see that the Courts shall not exceed its power that is
conferred on it or exercise power based on extraneous material to
pass any order and to keep the subordinate courts within its
bounds of jurisdiction.
This Court while exercising power under
Article 227
can
exercise its discretion to interfere in the following circumstances:
a) When the inferior court assumes jurisdiction erroneously in
excess of power.
b) When refused to exercise jurisdiction.
c) When found an error of law apparent on the face of record.
d) Violated principles of natural justice.
e) Arbitrary or capricious exercise of authority or discretion.
f) Arriving at a finding which is perverse or based on no material.
g) A patent or flagrant error in procedure.
h) Order resulting in manifest injustice.
i) Error both on facts and law or even otherwise.
But, in the present facts of the case, there is absolutely no
error warranting interference of the Court to interfere with the
order by exercising power of supervision over the Subordinate
Courts in the following situations:
Similarly, the Court cannot exercise its discretion under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India:
a)      Where the only question involved is one of interpretation
of deed;
b)      On question of admission or rejection of particular piece
of evidence, even though the question may be of everyday
recurrence;
c)      To correct erroneous exercise of jurisdiction, as a Court of
revision;
d)      To set aside an intra vires finding of the fact, except
where it is founded on no material or is perverse;
e)      to correct an error of law, not being an error apparent on
the face of the record;
f)      to interfere with the intravires exercise of discretionary
power, unless it is violative of principles of natural
justice;
g)      The Court shall not interfere on a merely technical
ground which would not advance substantial justice.
In
Waryam Singh & another v. Amarnath & another
, the 
Apex Court held in para-9 as follows:
Even if it be possible to take a view different from
the one which has appealed to the labour appellate
Tribunal on the interpretation of sale deed, we do
not think in exercising jurisdiction under
Article
227
of the Constitution we have any power to
interfere with the conclusions of that Tribunal
        Thus, in view of the limited powers of this Court under
Article 227
and all the more when the Trial Court rightly exercised
its power, under Order XV-A Rule 2, this Court cannot interfere
with the findings recorded by the Trial Court in the order under
challenge. Hence, I find no error in the order passed by the
II Additional Chief Judge, City Civil Courts, Hyderabad in
I.A.No. 2590 of 2014 in O.S.No.1005 of 2014.
In view of my foregoing discussions, I hold that the Court is
competent to make summary enquiry under Order XV-A Rule 2   
when the tenant pleaded no errors or disputed quantum of rent,
decided the error of rent payable and rent payable, issue
directions, postponing the same to final decision by the Court and
direct to decide the arrears, as required under Rule 2 and continue
to deposit at the same rate during pendency of the suit or
proceedings before competent Court. Otherwise, it amounts to
encouraging unscrupulous tenants who intent to avoid payment of
rent for the premises in their occupation for decades together
which would certainly result in substantial loss to the landlord
during pendency of the eviction suit or proceedings based on
account of abortive pleas raised by the unscrupulous tenants.
In the result, the civil revision petition is dismissed. No
costs.
Consequently, miscellaneous applications pending if any,
shall also stand dismissed.
__________________________________      
M. SATYANARAYANA MURTHY, J        
Date:08.09.2016