[Cites
34
, Cited by
6
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Sirangai Shoba @ Shoba Munnuri Rep.By ... vs Sirangi Muralidhar Rao, Rep. By His ... on 19 October, 2016
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 HYDERABAD 88, (2018) 2 ANDHLD 557
Author:
B.Siva Sankara Rao
Bench:
B.Siva Sankara Rao
HONOURABLE Dr. JUSTICE B.SIVA SANKARA RAO           

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.337 of 2016   

19-10-2016 

Sirangai Shoba @ Shoba Munnuri rep.by her General Power of Attorney, M.Narayana   
Rao  Petitioner 

Sirangi Muralidhar Rao, rep. by his Power of Attorney Smt. Sirangi
Vijayalakshmi. Respondent   

                                                                                        
        
Counsel for the petitioner: Sri Vedula Venkata Ramana,
                             and Sri Mukheed

Counsel for respondent : Sri Gopinath Lakkineni

<GIST                                                    :       ---

>HEAD NOTE                                           :       ---

? Cases referred:                                     :

   (1974 CrLJ 784)
2  (1999) 4 SCC 567 
3  (1996 2 SCC 428) 
4  113(2004) DLT 125 
5  AIR 2004 SC 3566= 2004(2)ALD (Cri) 504  
6  2003-CrLJ-2033=2003(4)SCC-601=2003(2)ALT(Crl.)118(SC)    
7 (Civil appeal No.3173 of 2011 (arising out of SLP (c) No.27071 of
   2010),dt.24.10.2013
8  2002 (6) ALD34(SC) 
9  2005 (6) SCC-344 
10  AIR 2003 Karnataka 148=2003(3)ILD-505(Karnataka)  
11  2015(2) MHLJ 801 
12  2005 CrLJ 2033 
13  AIR 2005 Calcutta 11
14 (2013) 9 SCC 611 
15 2007(2)ALD 72=2007(1)ALT 237   
16  2015(5) ALT 150 
17  [Crl. Appeal No.1620 of 2015 arising from SLP (Criminal) No.8157/2015],
    dated.02.12.2015
18  FAO(OS) 416/2015, dt.07.01.2016-Delhi HC-DB   


HONBLE Dr. JUSTICE B. SIVA SANKARA RAO        
CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.337 of 2016   
ORDER :
The revision petitioner, who is the unsuccessful
respondent-wife in I.A. No.826 of 2015, impugning legality and
correctness of the order dated 18.12.2015, allowing
examination on Skype technology for recording evidence in
the divorce petition of the petitioner-husband in O.P. No.59 of
2015 on the file of Principal Senior Civil Judge, Kothagudem,
filed the revision.
2. Coming to the relevant facts, in the divorce petition,
after filing chief affidavit and when the matter was coming
for cross-examination, the petitioner-husband at USA filed the
petition before the trial Court to permit his examination
including marking of documents on Skype technology at his
expense, in open Court or through Advocate-commissioner, on 
the ground that he is unable to get leave to attend the Court
due to most urgent works of his project at USA.
3. The respondent-revision petitioner in opposing the
same contended before the lower court on one among other 
that only in-order to-avoid facing the criminal case filed
against him, the petitioner adopted said procedure for
recording his evidence and there is every possibility to prompt
or alert him to give a different answer and prayed to dismiss
the petition.
4. As the trial Court after hearing both sides allowed the
petition, present revision is filed against it as referred supra.
5. In the revision it is the contention, in support of the
grounds by the learned senior counsel for revision petitioner,
that the Court below committed error in allowing the
petition, instead of dismissing by accepting the contentions of
the cross-examination of a witness cannot be allowed to be
done by using Skype Technology since the demeanor of the 
witness cannot be properly observed, identity of the party
giving answers is difficult to fix, there is every possibility to
prompt or alert him to give a different answer if the
technology is used by screening the prompter from visibility,
that a party cannot have the luxury of avoiding Court by
keeping himself busy and conduct the trial of the case by
taking advantage of Skype technology by appointing a G.P.A;
besides same is a device to avoid facing the criminal case
allegedly filed against him and it defeats the very object of
efforts for conciliation without presence and prayed to allow
the revision by setting aside the impugned order.
6. Whereas, it is the contention of the learned counsel
for revision respondent-husband, while supporting the order of
the lower court that placed reliance on a similar expression of
this court, that same is a reasoned one and no way requires
interference, any reconciliation if at all can be done by same
technology, that demeanor of the witness can be properly
observed including identity of the person giving answers and
there is no possibility to prompt or alert to give a different
answer from use of the technology by observing closely the
demeanor of witness with no possibility of any others
prompting, there is no any basis even to say same is a device
to avoid facing the criminal case allegedly filed against him,
that none of the provisions of law, muchless Sections 65A and
B of the Indian Evidence Act prohibit such an e-recoding of
evidence, that law is fairly settled for availing of the
technological advancements and thereby sought for dismissal
of the revision.
7. Heard both sides with reference to the provisions and
propositions and perused the material on record.
8. The facts no way require repetition, in answering the
rival contentions, to decide correctness of the order of the
lower court and further as to recording of evidence through
Skype or Dash or other technological device can be
permitted and if so with what precautions and whether the
case facts otherwise are impermissible even technology
permits with taking care of precautions.
9. Before dealing with the issue as a necessary
background, it is to mention the need to avail technological
innovations with necessary safeguards and precautions in
the justice delivery system for speedy and effective
disposal of cases that; after India attained independence, not
only there is an explosion of population but the pendency of
cases has grown in a multi-dimensional way and the present
day statistics is more alarming. It is apt to quote from the
erudite words of His Excellency, Hon`ble the President of
India Dr.Pranab Mukherjee, on March 14, 2016, that- though
the Indian judiciary has many strengths, for we have a long
way to go, despite burdened with the pendency of more than
three crore cases in various courts, there is every need to
fully meet the aspirations of our people for speedy and
affordable justice, by use of technology.
10. There is a thin line between access to justice and
effective access to justice. No one can dispute on the fact
that ICT has virtually paved a new line of thinking in
modernizing Indian judicial system for effective access to
justice. The task is early disposal without sacrificing the
quality of decision making and for that the Courts are bound
to use the technological innovations.  Our objective should
not only be accessible but affordable justice to all.
11. It is also apt in this regard to quote the erudite
words of one of the great technocrats, no other than the
former President of India-Bharat Ratna, Dr.A.P.J.Abdulkalam
that:
Technology is defined an essential element of change in all
spheres of life. The element involved also is an important
factor. If technology is properly used, it can bring about
tremendous changes for the betterment of life. Any change
we contemplate is for speedy justice mechanism keeping in 
focus the quality, transparency and public accountability.
12. Thus the only thing to be kept in mind is what
precautions can be taken to prevent any possibility of abuse
of the process and in furtherance of and to sub serve the ends
of justice.
13. From the above, it can be well said that Science and
Law, the two distinct professions have increasingly become
commingled, for ensuring a fair process and to see that justice
is done. On one hand, scientific evidence holds out the
tempting possibility of extremely accurate fact-finding and a
reduction in the uncertainty that often accompanies legal
decision making.  At the same time, scientific methodologies
often include risks of uncertainty that the legal system is
unwilling to tolerate.
14.
In
Som Prakash V. State of Delhi
the Apex Court
has observed four decades back that:
in our technological age nothing more primitive can be
conceived of than denying discoveries and nothing cruder can
retard forensic efficiency than swearing by traditional oral
evidence only thereby discouraging the liberal use of scientific
aids to prove guilt.
15. Thus statutory changes are generally needed to
develop more fully a problem solving approach to trials and to
deal with heavy workload on the investigators and judges in so
enabling them. However, when existing provisions enables to
do so from the purposive interpretation to meet the
situations, there is nothing to sit in flaccidly.
16.
In another expression in M/s.
SIL IMPORT, USA Vs.
Exim Aides Exporters, Bangalore
the Apex Court held that:
Technological advancements like facsimile, Internet, e-mail,
etc, were in swift progress even before the Bill for the
Amendment Act was discussed by Parliament. So when    
Parliament contemplated notice in writing to be given we
cannot overlook the fact that Parliament was aware of modern
devices and equipment already in vogue.
17. It was also quoted with approval in M/s.
SIL IMPORT
supra of what Francis Bennion on Statutory Interpretation
has stressed the need to interpret a statute by giving
allowances for any relevant changes that have occurred, since
the Acts passing, in law, social conditions, technology, the
meaning of words, and other matters. For the need to update
legislations, the Courts have the duty to use interpretative
process to the fullest extent permissible by the enactment.
18. The following passage at page 167 of the above book
has been quoted with approval by a three Judge-Bench of this
Court in
State Vs. S.J. Chaudhary
:
It is presumed that Parliament intends the court to apply to
an ongoing Act, a construction that continuously updates its
wording to allow for changes since the Act was initially framed
(an updating construction). While it remains law, it is to be
treated as always speaking. This means that in its application
on any date, the language of the Act, though necessarily
embedded in its own time, is nevertheless to be construed in
accordance with the need to treat it as current law.
19. The requirement of law from
Sections 273
&
317(2)
of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, for short
CrPC
is that the
evidence must be recorded in presence of the accused and 
unless he waives the same and consenting in the presence of
his Advocate or special vakalath holder permitted if any.
Leave such difficulty does not arise for Court to record
Section
164
CrPC Statements or the like during crime investigation or
examination of witness during pre-cognizance stage of private
complaint or for the like.  The term presence in this Section
does not mean the actual physical presence of the accused or
witness in the Court or before officer of the court like in case
Advocate is appointed to record evidence. It is to say, the
idea of fair trial is implicit therein.  As such, same is the law
with all vigor and dynamism for presence of accused in
Judicial custody placed in a jail or even on bail or bond could
not physically present either from ill health or elsewhere-
(including for
Section 313
CrPC examination or pre-trial
questioning /examination under
Sections 209
or 251 or 238 or
244 & 245 or 228
CrPC
or the like, as is in vogue of remand
extension under
Sections 167
or 309
CrPC
or the like or even
without need of physical production for compliance of
Sections 265
to
267
CrPC or the like or even under any special
law from any special provision of similar in nature), from the
term presence in this context does not mean the actual
physical presence of the witness or accused in the Court.
20. In Sheeba Abidi Vs. State  it was held by the Delhi
High Court that it can also be used where the Court on facts
and circumstances do not want the witness to personally
attend the Court and answer.  It can happen in cases where
the witness (victim) is a child who has been sexually exploited
or in case if the child has suffered from unnatural offence
against.
21. The Supreme Court in
Sakshi vs. Union of India
accepted for adopting video conferencing recording of
statements /evidence of witness, without physical presence in
Court.
22. From the above, there is no manner of doubt to hold
that presence of parties and witnesses in civil matters from
Orders 26,18 &16
of the Code of Civil Procedure
, for short
CPC
does not mean actual physical presence either in the
Court or before officer of the court like in case Advocate is
appointed to record evidence, particularly in matrimonial
matters where one party elsewhere to say abroad and other
somewhere within India.
23. It is often quoted across the globe from many walks
of life that, the notion that ordinary people want black-robed
judges, well dressed lawyers, and fine paneled courtrooms as
the setting to resolve their disputes is not correct. Though
such a contention is raised in any case, it is to consider as for
sake of contention. People with legal problems like people
with pain, want relief and they want it as quickly and
inexpensively, as possible. This observation is applicable even
in the Indian context where people come to Courts with legal
problems and want relief in a speedy manner and application
of technologies with e-Courts (video/audio conferencing or
internet conferencing) when helps in achieving said objective
of speedy and efficient justice to the common man.
24. Recording of evidence by video/audio/tele-
conferencing or internet conferencing is thus legally
permissible in both civil and criminal matters and even in
matrimonial matters.
25. In fact to overcome any difficulty of understanding
the existing provisions supra of
CrPC
, a proviso was inserted to
sub-section (1) to
Section 275
of CrPC by Act 5 of 2009 (the
Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008) which  
reads as follows:
Provided that evidence of a witness under this sub-
section may also be recorded by audio-video electronic
means in the presence of the advocate of the person
accused of the offence.
It is leave about recording of evidence on commission as
per
Section 285
CrPC with same analogy, for Commissioner is 
Officer of Court on being appointed for purpose of recording
evidence of such witness.
26. From the aforesaid provision, it is to gather including
for civil matters that the evidence of a witness may be
recorded by audio-video electronic means to say even by
internet technology as once same is statutorily permissible in
criminal proceedings, equally and undoubtedly permissible in
all civil matters.
27. The core function of digital video recording systems is
to convert the audio and video signals from various
microphones and cameras into a digital format and store it as
a computer file (the video file). On the same lines, the system
for video recording of Court proceedings will create a
computer file, usually on the computers hard drive.
However, the permanent (archieve) file would be created by
copying the file from the hard drive to some other, often
external, medium, usually optical media such as DVDs. Any 
auto decoding and conversion is from binary language to local
language under command.
28. The landmark expression of the Apex Court in 2003 in
State of Maharashtra Vs. Dr. Praful B. Desai
, on the scope
of its permissibility and person need not physically present, by
considering the scope of
Section 273
CrPC, speaks that in
cases where the attendance of a witness cannot be procured 
without an amount of delay, expense or inconvenience, the
Court could consider issuing a commission to record evidence
by way of video conferencing.
Normally a commission   
would involve recording of evidence at the place where the
witness is. However, advancement in science and technology 
has now made it possible to record such evidence by way of
video conferencing in the town/city where the Court is.
29. Referring to the chances of witness abusing the trial
Judge during video conferencing, the apex Court in
Dr. Praful
B. Desai
supra observed in erudition that, as a matter of
prudence, evidence by video-conferencing in open Court
should be accepted only if the witness is in a Country
which has an extradition treaty and under whose laws
contempt of Court and perjury are punishable.
30. The Apex Court in
Dr. Praful B. Desai
supra then
directed the Mumbai Court to set up a commission and take 
help of VSNL in recording Dr.Greenbergs (Medical witness)
statement through video conferencing in the presence of the
two accused doctors. It also allowed the two accused to cross-
examine the US-based doctor, through video conferencing.
31. The Apex Court in
Dr. Praful B. Desai
supra by
rejecting all arguments and objections about inferior video
quality, disruption of link and other technical problems and of
rights of the accused under
Article 21
could not be subjected
to a procedure involving virtual reality, holding in answer to
all the queries that- by now science and technology has
progressed enough to not worry about video image/audio
interruptions or disruptions and video conferencing has
nothing to do with virtual reality and gave the example of the
telecast of the cricket World Cup of it could not be said those
who watched the World Cup on television were witnessing 
virtual reality as they were not in the stadium where the
match was taking place. This is not virtual reality, it is actual
reality.  Video conferencing is an advancement of science and
technology which permits one to see, hear and talk with
someone far away with the same facility as if he is present
before you, that is, in your presence. Recording of evidence
by video conferencing also satisfies the object of providing, in
Section 273
CrPC, that evidence be recorded in the presence
of the accused.
32.
In fact, in the recent past in the year,2013, the Apex
Court in
Dr.Kumar Saha Vs. Dr.Sukumar Mukherjee
in a  
medical negligence case, considered the evidence of the
foreign expert witnesses by internet/video conferencing in
recording of testimonies and cross-examination.
33. It is however depends upon the accuracy of the
proceedings, the appreciation depends.  Precautions must be
taken, both as to the identity of the witnesses and accuracy of
the equipment, used for the purpose. Further, if it is not
under control of Court or Commissioner appointed as Officer
of Court in recording evidence by internet/video coverage,
the other end from where witness speaks, the result will not
be accurate from any lack of accuracy in evidence. For
example, if the witness by internet/video conference from
other end while giving evidence is tutoring by some other
person outside of coverage spot, it is difficult to find out and
such evidence got no value or lesser value in appreciation,
subject to detection, so also from any audio pre-recorded
tutoring to him with low voice, not traceable from the place
of recording, which are the drawbacks. Such draw backs can 
be curbed and avoided if for the Court internet/video
conference and recording evidence, a separate cloud with
security is developed and adopted through NIC, like the
devices of Dash, Skype etc., instead depending upon such 
social network technological devices.
34. The Apex Court so far as recording of evidence in civil
matters particularly through Advocate-Commissioners
concerned, suggested way back in the year,2002 by 
interpreting the word mechanical process to include even
audio/video recording. At Para 12 of its expression in Salem
Advocates Bar Association case-I - it was held that recording
evidence in civil cases on commission not only at hand or
typed to dictation, but also and simultaneously by tape
recording/ audio/video recording, so as to obviate any
controversies later between parties while recording
evidence and Or.18 R.4(3)
CPC
was interpreted for said
conclusion.
35. Further, in its later expression in Salem Advocates
Bar Association case-II - for recording evidence in civil cases
on commission, it was held at para 6, referring to Or.18 R.4(7)
CPC
of fees is payable by respective parties for examination of
their respective witnesses.
36. Even while recording evidence in civil cases on
commission, Commissioner can and has to observe and   
record the demeanor of witnesses or such other remarks or
objections in the deposition as per order 18 Rule 4(4) &
Rule 12 CPC
. Further, from the video or internet recording
of evidence and presenting the same in an electronic disk,
the Court also can during arguments by going through the
recorded deposition, note down the demeanor of witness
to the extent required as part of appreciation of evidence.
37. Video recording of proceedings will ensure accuracy
of the record.  Further, by preserving (and making available)
matters which are not apparent from the written record, such
as demeanor, voice inflections, body language and the like,
the judges can form a better view of the witness and that
would lead to better appreciation in evidence for a rationale
conclusion. The Judge can also re-examine later the
demeanor of the witness from such video recording while they
give evidence, by replay and can come to a more accurate
conclusion.  The Judge can even focus on a close-up of the
witnesses face in order to better observe facial expressions.
These can be re-run and replay with ease. The Judge thus can
replay for himself if necessary the recorded proceedings of
any hearing from day one right up to the final arguments,
while appreciating the evidence in deciding the lis.
38. It is needless to say, the marking of any documents
by Commissioner are only for reference sake, since it is the
Court/Tribunal that has to later decide for ultimate marking,
subject to objection if any as per order 18, Rule 4(1) Proviso
CPC
and Rule 113(7)(g) of Civil Rules of Practice and circular
orders, for short, CRP. The venue for recording evidence is
at the court premises or at the venue fixed by Court as per
the facts of the case or by the Commissioner with consent of
parties, as per Rule 113(6)(b) of CRP. The Commissioner can
take any records from the Court/Tribunal by filing a memo
only on or before the respective dates of recording evidence
and return immediately after the purpose as it is in original
condition as per Rule 113(8) of CRP.
39. Further in a civil case in
Twentieth Century Fox
Film Corp. Vs. NRI Film Production Associates (P) Ltd.
- it was
held by the High Court of Karnataka in a matrimonial matter
that, hearing suit and examination of witnesses and recording
of evidence by commissioner are once contemplated by Order  
18 Rule-4
CPC
, the words Witness in attendance are to be
understood as person being present and it need not by
physical presence. Thus, recording of evidence through Audio,
Video link is permissible complying with the words, in
attendance.  It would be a live communication between the
two ends. Everything, including the visual would be recorded
at both ends. This would then be available for viewing by the
Court. Also the recording would be at both ends. This also
minimizes and or almost eliminates the possibility of loss of
material recorded. Also if an officer of the Court is present at
the other end i.e. in USA in the same room of witness, the
possibility if his being promoted would be eliminated. The
officer of the Court can also administer oath.
39(a). There are Safeguards provided therein for the
precautions to be taken in recording such evidence, viz.,
1. Before a witness is examined in terms of the Audio-Video
Link, witness is to file an affidavit or an undertaking duly
verified before a notary or a Judge that the person who is
shown as the witness is the same person as who is going to
depose on the screen. A copy is to be made available to the
other side. (Identification affidavit).
2. The person who examines the witness on the screen is also
to file an affidavit/undertaking before examining the witness
with a copy to the other side with regard to identification.
3. The witness has to be examined during working hours of
Indian Courts. Oath is to be administered through the media.
4. The witness should not plead any inconvenience on account
of time different between India and USA.
5. Before examination of the witness, a set of plaint, written
statement and other documents must be sent to the witness 
so that the witness has acquaintance with the documents and 
an acknowledgement is to be filed before the Court in this
regard.
6. Learned Judge is to record such remarks as is material
regarding the demur of the witness while on the screen.
7. Learned Judge must note the objections raised during
recording of witness and to decide the same at the time of
arguments.
8. After recording the evidence, the same is to be sent to the
witness and his signature is to be obtained in the presence of
a Notary Public and thereafter it forms part of the record of
the suit proceedings.
9. The visual is to be recorded and the record would be at
both ends. The witness also is to be alone at the time of visual
conference and notary is to certificate to this effect.
10. The learned Judge may also impose such other conditions 
as are necessary in a given set of facts.
11. The expenses and the arrangements are to be borne by the 
applicant who wants this facility
40.
In the matter of
Suvarna Rahul Musale Vs. Rahul
Prabhakar Musale  the Bombay High
Court allowed the plea  
of the plaintiff to depose using video conference as the
witness was staying in U.K. with her minor children and was
unable to come to India.
41.
In kalian
Chandra Sarkar V. Rajesh Ranjan @
Pappu Yadav
it was held that as a general rule in case
where the attendance of accused or witness cannot be 
procured without any amount of delay, expense or
inconvenience the Court could consider by way of video
conferencing. The Apex Court directed the trial of the case in
Patna shall continue without the presence of the appellant-
accused by the court dispensing such presence and to the 
extent possible shall be conducted with the aid of video
conferencing.
41(a). In fact it was way back in March, 2003 the
Government of Andhra Pradesh was the first Indian State to
introduce electronic pre-trials (E-pre trials) whereby criminals
alleged is tried in prison using video conferencing, rather than
physically appearing in a Court of law.  By now in the entire
country almost all Courts have the video linkage facility with
prisons for video conferencing of remand extension, enquiry
/trial to the extent necessary and the live.  It is easy to use
and manage system allows Judges, legal professionals, Court 
officials, inmates and witnesses to seamlessly communicate 
face to face in real time as effectively as if in same room.
42.
In
Amitabh Bagchi Vs. Ena Bagchi  the Culcutta
High
Court held including with reference to Sections 65A&B of
the Evidence Act as follows:
It is to be remembered that by virtue of an amendment and
insertion of
Sections 65A
and
65B
of the Evidence Act a special
provision as to evidence relating to electronic record and
admissibility of electronic records has been introduced with
effect from 17th October, 2000. Consequential amendments 
are also made therein. Therefore there is no bar of
examination of witness by way of Video Conferencing being
essential part of electronic method. Hence, such prayer
cannot be ignored as unnecessary. It is to be evaluated with
the amount of delay, expenses or inconvenience. If it appears
that electronic video conferencing is not only much cheaper
but also facilitates the Court and avoids delay of justice, a
practical outlook is to be taken by the Court. In such
circumstances, Court may dispense with such attendance  
and issue a Commission for examination of the witness.
However, in allowing such prayer Court will first of all
consider whether linkage of such facility will be available
between two places or not.
43. In CBI v. Tuncay Alankus  the Apex Court held
that, trial court can direct examination of witnesses by video-
conferencing as per Sections 242 & 243CrPC, however, 
necessary directions should also be given by the court as to
who would bear requisite expenses.
44. Thus recording of evidence by way of video
conferencing can be ordered to be done in cases where the
attendance of the witness cannot be ensured without delay,
expense and inconvenience. It was also held by the Apex
Court that recording of evidence by video conferencing was a
procedure established by law.
45. As technology improved and the size of the equipment
shrunk, experimentation in some American Courts led to a
steady growth in the provision of cameras to make video
recordings of Court proceedings.  Today, in America, Video
Recording is common in most Courts.
46. The influence of information technology in human
lives and the storage of information in digital form brought
amendment to the law to include the provisions regarding the
appreciation of digital evidence.  In 2000, the
Information
Technology Act
was enacted, which brought in corresponding 
amendments to the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
,
Indian Penal 
Code
, 1860 and the Bankers Book Evidence Act, Reserve Bank   
of India Act etc., to make digital evidence admissible.
47.
Section 4
of Information Technology Act says, where
any law provides that information or any other matter shall be
in writing or typewritten or in the printed form, then
notwithstanding anything contained in such law, such
requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such
information or matter is- (a) rendered or made available in an
electronic form; and (b) accessible so as to be usable for a
subsequent reference.
48.
In
Bodala Murali Krishna vs Smt. Bodala
Prathima
in the matrimonial matter, it was held that:
5. The only question that arises for consideration in this
C.R.P. is as to whether the petitioner can be extended the
facility of deposing as a witness before the trial Court,
through the process of video conferencing?
6. The amendments carried to the
Evidence Act
by 
introduction of Sections 65-A and 65-B are in relation to the
electronic record.  Sections 67-A and 73-A were introduced as
regards proof and verification of digital signatures.  As regards
presumption to be drawn about such records, Sections 85-A, 
85-B, 85-C, 88-A and 90-A were added. These provisions are
referred only to demonstrate that the emphasis, at present, is
to recognize the electronic records and digital signatures, as
admissible pieces of evidence. It is no doubt true that the
recording of evidence through the process of video
conferencing is not specifically referred to in these provisions.
7. Examination of witnesses in criminal cases, through video
conferencing was approved by the Supreme Court in a 
judgment reported in
State of Maharashtra v. Dr. Praful B.
Desai
. When such is the facility accorded in criminal cases,
there should not be any plausible objection for adopting the
same procedure, in civil cases as long as the necessary
facilities, with assured accuracy exist.
In Twentieth Century
Fox Film Corporation and Amitabh Bagchi v. Ena Bagchi, the 
High Courts of Karnataka and Calcutta held that recording of
evidence through video conferencing is permissible in law,
provided that necessary precautions must be taken, both as to
the identity of the witnesses and accuracy of the equipment,
used for the purpose. Certain guidelines were indicated
therein. The party, who intends to avail such facility, shall be
under obligation to meet the entire expenditure.
In
Praful
B.Desai
supra the Apex Court observed that video
conferencing is an advancement of science and technology 
which permits seeing, hearing and talking with someone who
is not physically present with the same facility and ease as if
they were physically present.  The legal requirement for the
presence of the witness does not mean actual physical
presence.  The Court allowed the examination of the witness
through video conferencing and concluded that there is no
reason why the examination of a witness by video
conferencing should not be an essential part of electronic
evidence.
8. For the foregoing reasons, C.R.P. is allowed and the order
under revision is set aside. The I.A. shall stand allowed,
subject to the conditions that:
(a) it shall be the obligation of the petitioner to arrange the
necessary equipment for recording the evidence through video
conferencing, duly satisfying the trial Court as to the accuracy
of the equipment and identity of the witness;
(b) the petitioner shall be under obligation to display the
passport and its individual pages as may be demanded, on 
behalf of respondent, and he shall abide by the directions of
the Court, issued during the course of recording;
(c) the petitioner shall make necessary arrangements for
undertaking this exercise within one month from to-day, in
default, the trial Court shall proceed with the other steps.
49. The expression of this Court in
Dasam Vijay Rama
Rao V. M.Sai Sri
is a step forward which holds that:
Increasingly Family Courts have been noticing that one of the
parties is stationed abroad. It may not be always possible for
such parties to undertake trip to India, for variety of good
reasons. On the intended day of examination of a particular
party, the proceedings may not go on, or even get completed
possibly, sometimes due to pre-occupation with any other
more pressing work in the Court. But, however, technology,
particularly, in the Information sector has improved by leaps
and bounds. Courts in India are also making efforts to put to
use the technologies available. Skype is one such facility,
which is easily available. Therefore, the Family Courts are
justified in seeking the assistance of any practicing lawyer to
provide the necessary skype facility in any particular case. For
that purpose, the parties can be permitted to be represented
by a legal practitioner, who can bring a mobile device. By
using the Skype technology, parties who are staying abroad
can not only be identified by the Family Court, but also
enquired about the free will and consent of such party. This
will enable the litigation costs to be reduced greatly and will
also save precious time of the Court. Further, the other party
available in the Court can also help the Court in not only
identifying the other party, but would be able to ascertain the
required information. Accordingly, I direct the Family Court to
entertain the I.A. as it is maintainable and permit the GPA of
the 2nd petitioner in O.P. to represent and depose on behalf of
the 2nd petitioner in the O.P. and the Family Court shall also
direct such GPA or any legal practitioner chosen by him to
make available the Skype facility for the Court to interact
with the 2nd petitioner, who is staying at Melbourne, Australia
and record the consent of 2nd petitioner and proceed with the
matter thereafter as expeditiously as is possible.
50. A Division Bench of this Court in K.Ramesh V. Joint
Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice, New Delhi, in WRIT
APPEAL No.1135 OF 2015; on 15-02-2016 held that- If the 3rd 
respondent incumbent is truly facing any prosecution before
the criminal Court, as alleged, it is the duty of Respondents 1
and 2 to ensure that the petitioner-appellant is sanctioned
necessary permission to leave Gangtok and travel to
Hyderabad/Secunderabad and then, depose before the  
competent criminal Court. It would also be equally open to
them to allow the Petitioner appellant to depose on the
Internet by participating in video-conferencing facility,
provided such facility is available at the criminal Court.
Otherwise, using Skype technology also, any such deposition
of the petitioner appellant may be urged to be recorded by
the criminal Court, but however, the necessary permission for
the appellant to leave the Resource Centre, Gangtok for the
said purpose, should be sanctioned.
51. Further, video recording of proceedings will ensure
accuracy of the record.  Further, by preserving (and making
available) matters which are not apparent from the written
record, such as demeanors, voice inflections, body language
and the like, the Judges can form a better view of the witness
and that would lead to better conclusion.  The Judge can also
re-examine the demeanor of the witness while they give
evidence, and can come to a more accurate conclusion.  The 
Judge can even focus on a close-up of the witnesses face in
order to better observe facial expressions. These can be re-
run and replayed with ease.  The Judge thus can replay for
himself if necessary the recorded proceedings of any hearing
from day one right up to the final arguments, while
appreciating the evidence in deciding the lis.
52.
In the recent expression of the Apex Court in
Sujoy
Mitra Vs. State of West Bengal
, while upholding the order of
the trial Court in the sessions case for the offence under
Section 376
IPC, after examination of four witnesses in
permitting recording of evidence of the Prosecutrix, a citizen of
Ireland and resident of Dubbiln, as PW5-through video
conference, provided the following safeguards:
I) The State of West Bengal shall make provision for recording
the testimony of PW5 in the trial Court by seeking the services
of the National Informatics Centre (NIC) for installing the
appropriate equipment for video conferencing, by using "VC
Solution" software, to facilitate video conferencing in the
case. This provision shall be made by the State of West Bengal
in a room to be identified by the concerned Sessions Judge,
within four weeks from today. The NIC will ensure, that the
equipment installed in the premises of the trial Court, is
compatible with the video conferencing facilities at the Indian
Embassy in Ireland at Dublin.
II) Before recording the statement of the prosecutrix-PW5, the
Embassy shall nominate a responsible officer, in whose
presence the statement is to be recorded. The said officer
shall remain present at all times from the beginning to the
end of each session, of recording of the said testimony.
III) The officer deputed to have the statement recorded shall
also ensure, that there is no other person besides the
concerned witness, in the room, in which the testimony of
PW5 is to be recorded. In case, the witness is in possession of
any material or documents, the same shall be taken over by
the officer concerned in his personal custody.
IV) The statement of witness will then be recorded. The
witness shall be permitted to rely upon the material and
documents in the custody of the officer concerned, or to
tender the same in evidence, only with the express permission
of the trial Court.
V) The officer concerned will affirm to the trial Court, before
the commencement of the recording of the statement, the
fact, that no other person is present in the room where
evidence is recorded, and further, that all material and
documents in possession of the prosecutrix-PW5 (if any) were
taken by him in his custody before the statement was
recorded. He shall further affirm to the trial Court, at the
culmination of the testimony, that no other person had
entered the room, during the course of recording of the
statement of the witness, till the conclusion thereof. The
learned counsel for the accused shall assist the trial Court, to
ensure, that the above procedure is adopted, by placing
reliance on the instant order.
VI) The statement of the witness shall be recorded by the trial
Court, in consonance with the provisions of
Section 278
of the
Code of Criminal Procedure. At the culmination of the
recording of the statement, the same shall be read out to the
witness in the presence of the accused (if in attendance or to
his pleader). If the witness denies the correctness of any part
of the evidence, when the same is read over to her, the trial
Court may make the necessary correction, or alternatively,
may record a memorandum thereon, to the objection made to  
the recorded statement by the witness, and in addition
thereto, record his own remarks, if necessary.
VII) The transcript of the statement of the witness recorded
through video conferencing(as corrected, if necessary), in
consonance with the provisions of
Section 278
of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, shall be scanned and dispatched through
email to the embassy. At the embassy, the witness will
authenticate the same in consonance with law. The aforesaid
authenticated statement shall be endorsed by the officer
deputed by the embassy. It shall be scanned and returned to
the trial Court through email. The statement signed by the
witness at the embassy, shall be retained in its custody in a
sealed cover.
VIII) The statement received by the trial Court through email
shall be re-endorsed by the trial Judge. The instant statement
endorsed by the trial Judge, shall constitute the testimony of
the prosecutrix-PW5, for all intents and purposes.
53. A Division bench of the Delhi High Court, in the very
recent expression, in
International Planned Parenthood
Federation (IPPF) vs. Madhu Bala Nath
, has observed that
Courts must be liberal and pragmatic in allowing the witnesses
to depose through Video conferencing. Court should make use 
of modern technology so as to further the process of
dispensation of justice.
Relying upon the expression of the
Apex Court in
Dr. Praful B. Desai
supra noting the difference
between the concepts of virtual reality vis--vis video-
conferencing that:
Virtual reality is a state where one is made to feel, hear or
imagine what does not really exist. In virtual reality, one can
be made to feel cold when one is sitting in a hot room, one
can be made to hear the sound of the ocean when one is 
sitting in the mountains, one can be made to imagine that he
is taking part in a Grand Prix race whilst one is relaxing on
one's sofa etc. Video-conferencing has nothing to do with
virtual reality. Advances in science and technology have now,
so to say, shrunk the world. They now enable one to see and
hear events, taking place far away, as they are actually taking
place. The question whether commission can be issued  
for recording evidence in a country where there is no
arrangement, is academic so far as this case is concerned. In
this case we are considering whether evidence can
be recorded by video-conferencing. Normally, when a
commission is issued, the recording would have to be at the
place where the witness is. Thus Section 285 provides to
whom the commission is to be directed. If the witness is
outside India, arrangements are required between India and
that country because the services of an official of the country
(mostly a judicial officer) would be required to record the
evidence and to ensure/compel attendance. However, 
advancement of science and technology permit officials of the
court, in the city where video-conferencing is to take place,
to record the evidence. Thus where a witness is willing to
give evidence an official of the court can be deputed
to record evidence on commission by way of video-
conferencing. The evidence will be recorded in the studio/hall
where the video-conferencing takes place. The court in
Mumbai would be issuing commission to record evidence by  
video-conferencing in Mumbai. Therefore the commission 
would be addressed to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate,
Mumbai who would depute a responsible officer (preferably a
judicial officer) to proceed to the office of VSNL and
record the evidence of Dr Greenberg in the presence of the
respondent. The officer shall ensure that the respondent and
his counsel are present when the evidence is recorded and
that they are able to observe the demeanor and hear the
deposition of Dr Greenberg. The officers shall also ensure that
the respondent has full opportunity to cross-examine Dr
Greenberg. It must be clarified that adopting such a procedure
may not be possible if the witness is out of India and not
willing to give evidence.
54. The Division Bench further observed in ordering the
recording of evidence through video conferencing as follows:
14. Procedures have been laid down to facilitate dispensation
of justice. Dispensation of justice entails speedy justice and
justice rendered with least inconvenience to the parties as
well as to the witnesses. If a facility is available for recording
evidence through video conferencing, which avoids any delay
or inconvenience to the parties as well as to the witnesses,
such facilities should be resorted to. Merely because a witness
is travelling and is in a position to travel does not necessary
imply that the witness must be required to come to Court and
depose in the physical presence of the court.
15. We are not for a moment laying down that a witness can
never be called to Court. There may be circumstances or
situations where physical presence of a witness may be
necessary and required by the Court, in such situations it
would be obligatory on the witness to be present in Court.
Where a witness or a party requests that the evidence of a
witness may be recorded through video conferencing, the
Court should be liberal in granting such a prayer. There may
be situations where a witness even though within the city may
still want the evidence to be recorded through video
conferencing in order to save time or avoid inconvenience, the
Court should take a pragmatic view.
16. In the present case, the application was premised on the
ground that the witness holds an important position in her
organization and has to travel world over. We do not feel that
such a request was unreasonable. Furthermore, the 
appellant/defendant has contended that the expenditure
entailed for travel of the witness, who is a lady of over 54
years of age and her stay in Delhi would be a financial
burden on the appellant. This, in our view is a factor that the
learned single judge should have taken into account. We are
of the view that the learned Single Judge erred in dismissing
the application.
17. In view of the above, the impugned order is set aside. The
application IA No.7927/2015 is allowed. The Appellant is
permitted to record the testimony and cross-examination of
its witness Ms Rosalind Miller through audio video conferencing
subject to the following conditions:-
(i) Evidence of the witness Ms Rosalind Miller shall be recorded
through video conferencing between Delhi, India and London,
U.K.
(ii) In Delhi, the video conferencing shall be conducted in the
facilities available in the Annexed Block of the Delhi High
Court.
(iii) Mr. Girish Sharma, Registrar (Computers) of this court is
appointed as the coordinator with regard to the technical
aspects of video conferencing in India.
(iv) The Indian High Commissioner at London shall nominate a
senior officer not below the rank of Deputy Secretary of India
to facilitate video conferencing. The officer nominated by the
Indian High Commission shall co-ordinate the video
conferencing arrangements in London and shall remain present
at the time of recording of the evidence of the witness Ms
Rosalind Miller.
(v) The officer nominated by the Indian High Commissioner in
terms of the direction at serial no.(iv) above shall ensure that
apart from his own presence, only counsel for the
Appellant/Defendant is present at the time of video
conferencing. He shall ensure that no manner of prompting by
word or signs or by any other mode is permitted.
(vi) The officer nominated by the Indian High Commission shall
verify the identity of the witness before commencement of
her examination.
(vii) As soon as the identification part is complete, oath will
be administered by the Joint Registrar (J.R.) through the
media as per
Oaths Act, 1969
.
(viii) The witness shall be examined during working hours of
Indian Courts. The plea of any inconvenience on account of
time difference between India and London shall not be
allowed. However, the convenience of the Indian High
Commission in London shall be taken into consideration in
fixing the time and schedule.
(ix) The cross-examination, as far as practicable, be
proceeded without any interruption and without granting
unnecessary adjournments. However, discretion of the Court
(J.R.) shall be respected.
(x) The Court (J.R.) may record any material remarks
regarding the demeanor of the witness while on the screen
and shall note the objections raised during recording of
evidence.
(xi) The deposition of the witness shall be signed immediately
in the presence of the nominated officer of the Indian High
Commission. The said officer shall certify/attest the
signatures of the witness.
(xii) The audio and visual shall be recorded at both the ends
and copies thereof shall be provided to the parties at the
expense of the Appellant.
(xiii) The appellant shall bear the cost/expenses of the video
conferencing. The expenses for the video conferencing to be
undertaken in London shall be informed to the appellant
through counsel by the Indian High Commissioner. However, in
case of any difficulty, the same may be communicated to the
Registrar (Computers) of this Court by e-mail, who shall
communicate the same to the appellant's lawyer in India.
(xiv) The officer of the Indian High Commission to be
nominated by the Indian High Commissioner shall be paid a
lump sum amount of Rs. 50,000/- as honorarium.
(xv) The appellant shall deposit an amount of Rs. 10,000/- as
cost of preparation of the certified copies with the Registry of
this Court in the present case within two weeks from today.
The Registry shall thereafter prepare certified copies of the
entire record of the case, which shall be sent in separate
folders clearly marked as order sheets; pleadings;
applications; plaintiff's documents and defendant's documents.
The same shall be forwarded to the office of Indian High
Commissioner with the assistance of Ministry of External
Affairs.
(xvi) This record shall be made available to the officer
nominated by the Indian High Commissioner for the purpose of
undertaking the video conferencing as it would be necessary
for recording the statement and cross examination of the
witness.
(xvii) In case, the respondent is desirous of being physically
present in London at the time of recording of the evidence, it
shall be open for her to make arrangements on her own cost
for appearance and her representation. The respondent shall
ensure that prior intimation in this regard is filed in the
Registry of this Court giving full particulars of the names of
the persons as well as enclosing documents of authority in
respect of the persons, who shall be representing them in the
proceedings. The intimation in this regard as well as
documents shall also be furnished to Indian High Commission
in London.
55. Having regard to the above, examination of witnesses
and recording of evidence by commissioner contemplated by
Order XVIII Rule 4 C.P.C
from the words Witness in
attendance are to be understood as person being present and
it need not be physical presence thus, recording of evidence
through Audio, Video link or through internet by Skype or
similar technological device is permissible complying the
words in attendance.
56) From the above, coming back to facts, for there is
no foundation to say the request to record evidence through
Skype technology is a device to avoid facing the criminal case
allegedly filed against him and so far as the apprehensions as
to demeanor and possibility of prompting or tutoring can be
taken care of with necessary precautions, the reconciliation
also can be done if need be by use of Skype technology, there
are no grounds to interfere with the impugned order of the
lower Court permitting the recording of evidence of the party-
witness abroad through Advocate Commissioner and by use of  
Skype technology, but for to give necessary directions of the
precautions required to be taken to ease out the
apprehensions of the other side in giving disposal of the
revision petition.
57. In the result, the revision petition is disposed of with
the following directions for the precautions to be taken for
recording and in the course of recording evidence through
Skype technology.
1. The audio and visual shall be recorded at both the ends
through the Skype technology/audio and video conferencing that
is from Khammam Town of the Telangana State, India at the 
premises of NIC in the Collectorate, Khammam Town and from  
the New Jersey of USA in the venue to be fixed by the officer to
be nominated for the same Indian High Commissioner.
2. The officer of the Indian High Commission to be nominated by
the Indian High Commissioner from USA in the venue to be fixed
for said recording shall be paid a lumpsum amount of Rs.
20,000/- as honorarium by the petitioner.
3. The petitioner by virtue of this order approach the Indian High
Commissioner from USA for said purposes supra and fix the venue 
and date for recording the evidence.
4. The parties are to be permitted in the course of recording
evidence to be represented by legal practitioners at the premises
of NIC in the Collectorate, Khammam Town, who can bring 
mobile device or other gadgets and make available the Skype
facility for the Court/its officer-the Advocate Commissioner to
interact with the Petitioner/witness staying abroad supra and
record the consent to proceed with the matter of recording
evidence thereafter as expeditiously as possible and only after
taking of oath through media as per the provisions of the
Oaths
Act,1969
.
5. Before the witness is being examined in terms of the Skype
technology, the witness has to file an affidavit with an
undertaking of not using any pre-recorded versions to prompt
him therefrom or taking any assistance of another for prompting
while giving evidence, got the pleadings and documents of the
case with him to refer if other side require or Court/Advocate
Commissioner permit during evidence and wont allow any other
person during course of deposition but for the one to operate the
phone or other electronic device/gadgets with internet facility
of Skype technology duly verified before a notary or the  officer
of the Indian High Commission to be nominated by the Indian
High Commissioner from USA that the person who is shown as the  
witness is the same person who is going to depose on the screen
without any prompting. The officer of the Indian High
Commission to be nominated by the Indian High Commissioner   
from USA at the venue of recording evidence shall also ensure
the above during course of recording evidence and not to allow
any device or person to prompt the witness.
6. By using the Skype technology, the Petitioner/witness staying
abroad can not only be easily identified by the Court/its officer-
the Advocate Commissioner from the above, but also be 
ascertained by enquiring about the identity with proof with
reference to the affidavit of identity that to be filed supra and
can verify the same from assistance of opposite party or the
Counsel or representative of opposite party present.
7. The witness has to be examined preferably during working
hours of Indian Courts. Oath is to be administered through the
media.
8. The Court/its officer-the Advocate Commissioner is to record
such remarks as is material regarding the demur of the witness
while on the screen and during course of evidence of the
witness, including to note any objections raised during
recording evidence of witness and to decide the same later.
9. After recording the evidence, the witness has to state that
the contents are true and he authorises his representative or
Advocate on his behalf to sign on the deposition and he is not
going to dispute its correctness or authenticity at any time later
to make it forms part of the record of the proceedings. Besides
that he shall retrieve copy of deposition from other end
recording device and sign and submit to the trial Court later
through his counsel.
10. The Court/its officer-the Advocate Commissioner may also
impose such other conditions as are necessary in a given set of
facts and circumstances.
11. For any further difficulty, the Advocate Commissioner and
the parties may approach the trial Court.
12. The trial Court shall fix the final fees of the Advocate
Commissioner after filing of report on completion of recording
of evidence and for that purpose, the petitioner shall deposit
tentatively before the trial Court Rs.10,000/- to refund
whatever remained or to pay further as the case may be
There shall be no order as to costs. Pending miscellaneous
petitions, if any, shall stand closed.
__________________________    
Dr. B. SIVA SANKARA RAO, J    
Dt.19.10.2016