[Cites
12
, Cited by
81
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Dr.P.Kishore Kumar And Others vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh, Rep. By Its ... on 31 October, 2016
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 (NOC) 579 (HYD.)
Author:
S.V.Bhatt
Bench:
S.V.Bhatt
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE S.V.BHATT       

W.P.Nos.26929 OF 2016 and batch    

31-10-2016 

DR.P.Kishore Kumar and others... PETITIONERS    

The State of Andhra Pradesh, Rep. by its Secretary, Medical, Health & Family
Welfare (E1) Department, A.P. Secretariat Buildings, Hyderabad and
othersRESPONDENTS       

<GIST 

>HEAD NOTE    

!COUNSEL FOR PETITIONERS IN W.P.Nos.26929, 31318, 32264, 32591         
                           of 2016: MR.P.VENUGOPAL FOR MR.KIRAN TIRUMALASETTI   
COUNSEL FOR PETITIONERS IN W.P.No.31164 & 32760 of 2016: MR.MANGENA SREE RAMA                 
RAO  

COUNSEL FOR RESPONDENTS: MR.TADDI NAGESWARA RAO,                 
                          STANDING COUNSEL FOR DR.NTR UNIVERSITY OF HEALTH     
SCIENCES CASES REFERRED:        

1.(2009)1 SCC 599 
2.(2004) 13 SCC 383 
3. (2010) 6 SCC 759 
4. (2014)14 SCC 523 
5. (2011) 8 SCC 497 
6  (2007)1 SCC 603 

HON BLE SRI JUSTCE S.V.BHATT      

W.P.Nos.26929, 31164, 31318, 32264, 32591 & 32760 OF 2016     

COMMON ORDER:
Heard Mr.P.Venugopal, learned senior counsel, Mr.M.Sree 
Rama Rao for petitioners and Mr.Taddi Nageshwara Rao for 
respondents.
The petitioners pray for Mandamus declaring the action of
respondents in digitally (online) evaluating the answer sheets  of
petitioners, as bad in law and direct the respondents to produce
answer scripts of petitioners together with supplementary answer
sheets so as to examine whether verifying/totaling of answer sheets
has been properly done or not; verify whether all the answer sheets
have been properly uploaded or downloaded at the time of
evaluation done by the evaluators and consequently direct
respondents to manually evaluate the answer sheets of petitioners.
The prayer and the circumstances for filing the writ petitions
are substantially same in the batch of writ petitions and for
convenience, I refer to the allegations and counter in W.P.No.26929
of 2016.
Allegations in affidavit:
The petitioners are pursuing P.G. Medical Degree/Diploma
Course in respondents 3 to 10/Colleges.  The petitioners appeared
in the final examinations conducted by 2nd respondent/University in
May/June, 2016.  The stand of petitioners is that hitherto the answer
sheets of examinees are corrected by the Examiners. The students 
had a right to verify the total number of marks assigned by the
Examiners. The petitioners concede that revaluation was not
permitted by the Rules of 2nd respondent.  However, without prior
intimation or knowledge, the answer scripts of May/June, 2016 have
been subjected to online correction.  The 2nd respondent did not
inform the examinees about the change in the method of
evaluation, namely from physical evaluation to digitised evaluation
of answer scripts.  The petitioners have come to know about the
change in mode of evaluation only when the results were declared
by the 2nd respondent.  Therefore, the uninformed and inchoate
method of digitized evaluation, it is contended, is arbitrary, illegal
and unconstitutional. The petitioners from the available knowledge
and information from sources make a few allegations against the
service provider engaged by 2nd respondent for online evaluation.
In this context, the petitioners state probable commissions and
omissions which would have resulted in improper valuation of their
answer sheets; the service provider is authorised to decode, scan
and upload answer sheets on the computer to transfer the answer
sheets to the respective examiners for correction. In the process,
if the server is down during and in the process of uploading, all the
answer sheets are not received in its entirety, thereby a few of the
answer sheets of a student in the booklet go missing.  The service
provider does not take care whether all the papers have been
uploaded or not.  The petitioners suspect imperfection in uploading
and downloading the answer sheets written by the petitioners.
Finally, the 2nd respondent, after receiving the data from service
provider, uploaded on the website the result along with the
following notice.
In view of the introduction of digital valuation and
computerised totalling, there will not be any re-totalling of
answer sheets.  The decision to deny re-totalling after the
examinations are written is impermissible.
The petitioners submit that re-evaluation is different from
re-totalling. The definite case of petitioners is that they are
interested in knowing as to whether by virtue of online valuation of
answer sheets of petitioners are factually and actually received by
the respective Examiners and evaluated.  The petitioners
apprehend fault in uploading and downloading the answer scripts
and, therefore, depriving the right of re-totalling is not correct in
law.  Since the re-totalling is not permitted the petitioners had no
opportunity to see their answer scripts.  The petitioners seek the
indulgence of the Court to direct official respondents to produce
the answer sheets of petitioners before the Court to verify whether
genuine valuation was undertaken by 2nd respondent or not.
Hence, the writ petition.
Reply of 2nd respondent:
The 2nd respondent University, through its Register, filed
counter affidavit. The introductory averments are that
the 2nd respondent University in September, 2015 has taken up a
pilot project of online valuation of about 75 answer scripts and by
seeing the report, introduced digital valuation (online valuation) of
answer sheets of PG Degree/Diploma examinations held in  
May/June, 2016.  The pilot project and the online valuation of
May/June answer scripts have been entrusted to M/s Globarena 
Technologies Private Limited, Hyderabad.  It is stated that the
Examiner who valued the scripts online expressed satisfaction.
The advantages of online valuation vis--vis OMR filling (manual
valuation) are stated.   On the petitioners complaint about the
inadequacy in uploading etc., it is stated that as per the direction
of the 2nd respondent University digital valuation centres were
established at the practical centres of respective colleges and the
service provider was directed by the University to send their staff to
the colleges to assess/verify the infrastructure established at the
digital valuation centres.   The University, after the exams are
concluded, received the answer scripts from PG centres.
Thereafter, the University completed the tearing work of scripts and
handed over the answer scripts to service provider for scanning.
The answer scripts scanned by the service provider were transferred
to medical colleges for online valuation.  The scanning of answer
scripts was done by book scan and not sheet scanning. 
All precautions necessary for accurate scanning are put in place.
The diagrams drawn in colour were scanned and sent to examiners 
in colour depiction.  The possibility of missing a few sheets either in
scanning or uploading is unsustainable. Such eventuality is
completely denied.  The Principals of respective colleges have
been properly guided to oversee online valuation.  By way of reply,
the method of first valuation and second valuation is referred to
and it is further stated that in the event of 20% or more difference
between the first and the second valuations, the scripts are sent to
third Examiner for valuation.  The 2nd respondent admits that the
online valuation is introduced for the first time for the examinations
held between May/June, 2016 and justifies denial of re-totalling, as
online valuation is accurate and no exception can be taken.
The steps taken by 2nd respondent University for ensuring fair and
error free online evaluation are referred to.
It is further stated that on 24.08.2016, the Vice Chancellor of
2nd respondent University on payment of Rs.2,000/- permitted
personal verification of answer scripts. On 12.09.2016, the letter
was communicated to all the colleges.  In response to the  said
letter, 72 Degree candidates and 7 Diploma candidates applied for
personal verification of answer scripts and verification of answer
sheets was permitted.  A few of the petitioners in the instant batch
had advantage of verifying the answer sheets.  Further, the
University constituted a Committee consisting of three Professors
and one Associate Professor and were assigned to verify a) whether
the totals are correct, b) whether all the answers written by the
candidates are valued by the Examiners in first, second and third
valuations and c) whether the candidates written the question
numbers to all answers or not or written wrongly.
It is further replied that the University appointed subject
experts to evaluate the discrepancies of unvalued answers for
evaluation and after receiving the marks awarded by the subject
experts, the University will re-examine the result of such candidates.
If there is change in result, it will be communicated to concerned
college and students as per the existing procedure. It is further
stated that online valuation is more appropriate and the
allegations of petitioners are completely unfounded and
untenable.  The 2nd respondent prays for dismissal of the writ
petitions.
On 27.09.2016, after taking note of the stand in counter-
affidavit and hearing the parties, the following order directing
production of record was made:
Learned counsel for petitioners in all the writ
petitions insisted for production of the answer sheets and
the petitioners before this Court.  Learned standing
counsel fairly agreed to produce the same.  Learned
counsel for petitioners also admitted that for all the
answers written by the students (petitioners), marks were
awarded, they will not insist for evaluation of the answer
sheets manually.  Already the students were permitted to
verify their answer sheets.
The 2nd respondent University has produced original answer
scripts, xerox copies of scanned and allegedly evaluated answer
sheets of the petitioners.  For clarity, answer scripts are referred as
original scripts and also one set consisting of xerox copies of
scanned original scripts of all the petitioners.  For brevity, the
scanned xerox copies are referred as Evaluation-I and
Evaluation-II.  The 2nd respondent-University to stay clear from the
allegations of imperfect handling of online valuation has presented
representatives of M/s Globarena Technologies Private Limited/
service provider, at the time of hearing.  As per the directions of
this Court, the original scripts, Evaluation-I and Evaluation-II
were also permitted to be personally verified by the petitioners.
The representatives who have handled the online valuation have
given a trailer of the services rendered to 2nd respondent.
Mr.P.Venugopal, leading the arguments, contends that the
evaluation of manuscripts has been hitherto done manually and
that the 2nd respondent did not inform the change from manual
to online valuation of answer scripts.  After perusing the
Date/Documents, on which the 2nd respondent University relies, he
contends that the 2nd respondent University in September/October,
2015 has tested the feasibility of online evaluation with miniscule
answer scripts of about 100 and thereafter the pilot project is taken
up with the answer scripts of examination held in May/June, 2016.
Therefore, the answer scripts have become objects of study at
ill-equipped diagnostic centres (evaluation centres) or at the hands
of inexperienced analysts (examiners) and therefore, the reports
(marks) cannot be held to be reflective of physical content of
the answer scripts.  On the instructions given by the petitioners, he
further contends that there is nothing to inspire confidence that the
Examiners have valued Evaluation-I and Evaluation-II answer scripts,
the first page of the answer scripts where marks are written is also
left blank, but a separate sheet called Script Marks Report is
appended to the answer scripts to show the marks awarded to 
petitioners allegedly entered by the Examiner.  In other words, his
contention is online valuation of answer scripts, now undertaken by
the 2nd respondent, could not be taken as infallible or foolproof to
refuse to value the answer scripts for recording a realistic opinion.
He further contends that the 2nd respondent University having
received applications and a sum of Rs.2,000/- from candidates got
the answer scripts verified, found the mistakes and altered the
results of a few students.  Therefore, he contends that the
2nd respondent by learning from the experience of online
valuation experimented on petitioners (students), the undeveloped
technology, cannot put in place as a foolproof substitute to manual
valuation. Though the time schedules are reduced, utilization of
technology is improving the transparency and the petitioners are
not against positive changes.  Therefore, the subject examinations
cannot and could not be treated as a tested experiment enabling
the 2nd respondent to value all future exams online.  He prays for
appropriate direction to 2nd respondent having regard to the
various commissions and omissions pointed out by the petitioners
during and in the course of hearing for valuation of the answer
sheets of petitioners.
Per contra, Mr.Taddi Nageswari Rao contends that the
foremost premise in the case of petitioners is that all the answer
sheets in the original scripts would not have been scanned by the
service provider and/or that the Examiners could not have
corrected all the answers, or given marks to petitioners, or that
answers written are ignored so on and so forth.  To bring home the
stand of University that the entire exercise undertaken by service
provider in this behalf is infallible, with the assistance of University
staff and the service provider, he tried to demonstrate that
the contentions of petitioners are mere apprehensions.  On the
jurisdiction and authority of Vice Chancellor, he places reliance
upon Section 12 of the N.T.R University of Health Sciences Act, 1986
which reads thus:
12) 1)  Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the
Chancellor from out of a panel of names of distinguished
educationists in the field of medicine in the alphabetical
order which shall not be less than three, but not more than
five, suggested by a Committee consisting of-
i)        a nominee of the Chancellor;
       ii)      a nominee of the Government who shall   
                also be the Convenor of the Committee; and
       iii)     a nominee of the Executive Council:
Provided that no employee of the University or
member of any authority of the University shall be a
member of the Committee.
2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal
executive and academic officer of the University and shall
exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of
the University and give effect to the decisions of all the
authorities of the University.
3) The Vice-Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that
immediate action is necessary on any matter, exercise any
power conferred on any authority of the University by or
under this Act and shall report to such authority the action
taken by him on such matter:
xxxxx
       xxxxx
4) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other
powers and perform such other functions as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or Ordinances.
He contends that the Vice Chancellor of University is entitled
to take decision for change of mode of valuation from manual to
online and the decisions of Vice Chancellor is ratified by Vice
Chancellor of 2nd respondent University.  He places reliance upon
SAHITI AND OTHERS V. CHANCELLOR DR.N.T.R.UNIVERSITY OF HEALTH              
SCIENCES AND OTHERS
.  The relevant portions in the judgment read    
thus:
Sub-section (3) of Section 12 provides that the
Vice- Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate
action is necessary on any matter, exercise any power
conferred on any authority of the University by or under
the Act and shall report to such authority the action taken
by him on such matter. The proviso to sub-Section (3)
stipulates that if the authority concerned is of opinion that
such action ought not to have been taken, it may refer the
matter to the Chancellor whose decision thereon shall be
final.
A conjoint and meaningful reading of the provisions of
Section 12(2) of the Act with Section 12(3) of the Act
makes it evident that the Vice-Chancellor has power to
take appropriate action relating to the affairs of the
University, which includes conduct of examination also.
The Vice-Chancellor is the conscious keeper of the
University. He is the principal executive and academic
officer of the University. He is entrusted with the
responsibility of overall administration of academic as
well as non-academic affairs. For these purposes, the Act
confers both express and implied powers on the Vice-
Chancellor. (emphsis added) 
xxxxxx 
        The Vice-Chancellor has right to regulate the work and
conduct of officers and other employees of the University.
He has also emergency powers to deal with any 
untoward situation. The power conferred under Section
12(2) and 12(3) is indeed significant. If the Vice-
Chancellor believes that a situation calls for immediate
action, he can take such action as he thinks necessary
though in the normal course he is not competent to take
that action. However, he must report to the concerned
authority or body, who would, in the ordinary course,
have dealt with the matter. That is not all. His pivotal
position as the principal executive officer also carries with
him certain implied powers. It is the magisterial power
which is plainly to be inferred. This power is essential for
him to maintain domestic discipline in the academic and
non-academic affairs. In a wide variety of situations in the
relationship of tutor and pupil he has to act firmly and
promptly to put down indiscipline and malpractice.
As per the Statutes of university, the Vice-
Chancellor is whole-time Officer of the university and by
virtue of his office, is a Member and Chairman of the
Executive Council and of the Academic Council. He has 
power to convene meetings of the Executive Council and
the Academic Council.
The plea that there is absence of specific
provision enabling the Vice-Chancellor to order re-
evaluation of the answer scripts and, therefore, the
Judgment impugned should not be interfered with, cannot
be accepted. Re- evaluation of answer scripts in the
absence of specific provision is perfectly legal and
permissible. In such cases, what the Court should
consider is whether the decision of the educational
authority is arbitrary, unreasonable, mala fide and
whether the decision contravenes any statutory or
binding rule or ordinance and in doing so, the Court
should show due regard to the opinion expressed by the
authority.
He further contends that the power of this Court to order for
revaluation is no more res integra and relies upon the following
decisions:
1.      BOARD OF SECONDARY EDUCATION v. PRAVAS RANJAN               
PANDA AND ANOTHER
2.
HIMACHAL PRADESH PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION V.             
MUKESH THAKUR AND ANOTHER
3.
CENTRAL BOARD OF SECONDARY EDUCATION THROUGH                
SECRETARY, ALL INDIA PRE-MEDICAL/PRE-DENTAL ENTRANCE              
EXAMINATION AND OTHERS v. KHUSHBOO SHRIVASTAVA AND               
OTHERS
In PRAVAS RANJAN PANDAs (2 supra) case, the Apex Court held   
thus:
The High Court though observed that the writ
petitioners who has taken the examination is hardly a
competent person to assess his own merit and on that 
basis claim for re-evaluation of papers, but issued the
aforesaid direction in order to eliminate the possibility of
injustice on account of marginal variation of marks.  It is an
admitted position that the regulations of the Board of
Secondary Education, Orissa do not make any provision 
for re-evaluation of answer books has been examined by
us in
Pramod Kumar Srivastava v. Chairman, Bihar Public
Service Commission
(2004)6 SCC 714 decided on   
6.8.2004.  It has been held therein that in absence of rules
providing for re-evaluation of answer books, no such
direction can be issued.
It has been further held that in
absence of clear rules on the subject, a direction for re-
evaluation of the answer books may throw many problems  
and in the larger public interest such a direction must be
avoided.  We are, therefore, of the opinion that the
impugned order of the High Court direction for re-
evaluation of the answer books of all the examinees
securing 90% or above marks is clearly unsustainable in
law and must be set aside.
In
HIMACHAL PRADESH PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONs
case           
(3 supra), it was held as follows:
The issue of re-evaluation of answer book is no
more res integra. This issue was considered at length by
this Court in
Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and
Higher Secondary Education & Anr. Vs. Paritosh Bhupesh  
Kurmarsheth
etc.etc. AIR 1984 SC 1543, wherein this 
Court rejected the contention that in absence of provision
for re-evaluation, a direction to this effect can be issued by
the Court. The
Court further held
that even the policy
decision incorporated in the Rules/Regulations not
providing for rechecking/verification/re-evaluation cannot
be challenged unless there are grounds to show that the
policy itself is in violation of some statutory provision. The
Court held as under:
"..........It is exclusively within the province of the
legislature and its delegate to determine, as a
matter of policy, how the provisions of the Statute
can best be implemented and what measures,   
substantive as well as procedural would have to be
incorporated in the rules or regulations for the
efficacious achievement of the objects and
purposes of the Act...
.......The Court cannot sit in judgment over the
wisdom of the policy evolved by the legislature and
the subordinate regulation-making body. It may be
a wise policy which will fully effectuate the purpose
of the enactment or it may be lacking in
effectiveness and hence calling for revision and
improvement. But any draw-backs in the policy
incorporated in a rule or regulation will not render it
ultra vires and the Court cannot strike it down on
the ground that in its opinion, it is not a wise or
prudent policy, but is even a foolish one, and that it
will not really serve to effectuate the purposes of
the Act........."
This view has been approved and relied upon and
re-iterated by this Court in
Pramod Kumar Srivastava Vs.
Chairman, Bihar Public Service Commission, Patna & Ors
,  
AIR 2004 SC 4116 observing as under:
"Under the relevant rules of the Commission, there
is no provision wherein a candidate may be entitled
to ask for re- evaluation of his answer-book. There
is a provision for scrutiny only wherein the answer-
books are seen for the purpose of checking
whether all the answers given by a candidate have
been examined and whether there has been any  
mistake in the totalling of marks of each question
and noting them correctly on the first cover page of
the answer-book. There is no dispute that after
scrutiny no mistake was found in the marks
awarded to the appellant in the General Science
paper. In the absence of any provision for re-
evaluation of answer-books in the relevant rules, no
candidate in an examination has got any right
whatsoever to claim or ask for re-evaluation of his
marks." (emphasis added)
26. A similar view has been reiterated in
Dr. Muneeb Ul
Rehman Haroon & Ors. Vs. Government of Jammu &     
Kashmir State & Ors.
AIR 1984 SC 1585; Board of  
Secondary Education Vs. Pravas Ranjan Panda & Anr.   
(2004) 13 SCC 383;
President, Board of Secondary 
Education, Orissa & Anr. Vs. D. Suvankar & Anr.
(2007) 1
SCC 603;
The Secretary, West Bengal Council of Higher 
Secondary Education Vs. Ayan Das & Ors.
AIR 2007 SC    
3098; and
Sahiti & Ors. Vs. Chancellor, Dr. N.T.R.
University of Health Sciences & Ors.
(2009) 1 SCC 599.
In
KHUSHBOO SHRIVASTAVAs
case (4 supra), the Apex Court     
held thus:
In the present case, the bye-laws of the All India
Pre-Medical/Pre-Dental Entrance Examination, 2007 
conducted by the CBSE did not provide for re-examination
or re-evaluation of answers sheets. Hence, the appellants
could not have allowed such re-examination or re-
evaluation on the representation of the respondent no.1
and accordingly rejected the representation of the
respondent no.1 for re-examination/re-evaluation of her
answers sheets. The respondent no.1, however, 
approached the High Court and the learned Single Judge
of the High Court directed production of answer sheets on
the respondent no.1 depositing a sum of Rs.25,000/- and
when the answer sheets were produced, the learned 
Single Judge himself compared the answers of the
respondent no.1 with the model answers produced by the 
CBSE and awarded two marks for answers given by the  
respondent no.1 in the Chemistry and Botany, but declined
to grant any relief to the respondent no.1. When
respondent no.1 filed the LPA before the Division Bench of
the High Court, the Division Bench also examined the two
answers of the respondent no.1 in Chemistry and Botany 
and agreed with the findings of the learned Single Judge
that the respondent no.1 deserved two additional marks for
the two answers.
The learned standing counsel, therefore, prays for dismissing
the writ petitions.
The Honble Supreme Court in
CENTRAL BOARD OF SECONDARY           
EDUCATION v. ADITYA BANDOPADYAYA AND OTHERS
while considering            
the duty of examining bodies, the relationship between the
examiner and examinee, what constitutes evaluation, has held as
follows.  In the above cases, the issue has arisen under the
Right to
Information Act
.  In the considered view of this Court, the following
paragraphs have bearing on the issue t4hat emerges for
consideration:
In a philosophical and very wide sense,
examining bodies can be said to act in a fiduciary
capacity, with reference to students who participate in an
examination, as a government does while governing its
citizens or as the present generation does with reference
to the future generation while preserving the
environment. But the words information available to a
person in his fiduciary relationship are used in
section
8(1)(e)
of RTI Act in its normal and well recognized
sense, that is to refer to persons who act in a fiduciary
capacity, with reference to a specific beneficiary or
beneficiaries who are to be expected to be protected or
benefited by the actions of the fiduciary  a trustee with
reference to the beneficiary of the trust, a guardian
with reference to a minor/physically/infirm/mentally
challenged, a parent with reference to a child, a lawyer or
a chartered accountant with reference to a client, a doctor
or nurse with reference to a patient, an agent with
reference to a principal, a partner with reference to
another partner, a director of a company with reference to
a share-holder, an executor with reference to a legatee, a
receiver with reference to the parties to a lis, an employer
with reference to the confidential information relating to
the employee, and an employee with reference to
business dealings/transaction of the employer. We do not
find that kind of fiduciary relationship between 33 the
examining body and the examinee, with reference to the
evaluated answer-books, that come into the custody of
the examining body.
The duty of examining bodies is to subject the
candidates who have completed a course of study or a
period of training in accordance with its curricula, to a
process of verification/examination/testing of their
knowledge, ability or skill, or to ascertain whether they
can be said to have successfully completed or passed
the course of study or training. Other specialized
Examining Bodies may simply subject candidates to a  
process of verification by an examination, to find out
whether such person is suitable for a particular post, job
or assignment. An examining body, if it is a public
authority entrusted with public functions, is required to act
fairly, reasonably, uniformly and consistently for public
good and in public interest.
This Court has explained the role of an examining
body in regard to the process of holding examination in
the context of examining whether it amounts to service
to a consumer, in
Bihar School Examination Board vs.
Suresh Prasad Sinha
(2009) 8 SCC 483, in the 
following manner: The process of holding examinations,
evaluating answer scripts, declaring results and issuing
certificates are different stages of a single statutory non-
commercial function. It is not possible to divide this
function as partly statutory and partly administrative.
When the Examination Board conducts an examination in   
discharge of its statutory function, it does not offer its
"services" to any candidate. Nor does a 34 student who
participates in the examination conducted by the Board,
hires or avails of any service from the Board for a
consideration. On the other hand, a candidate who
participates in the examination conducted by the Board,
is a person who has undergone a course of study and 
who requests the Board to test him as to whether he has
imbibed sufficient knowledge to be fit to be declared as
having successfully completed the said course of
education; and if so, determine his position or rank or
competence vis-avis other examinees. The process is not
therefore availment of a service by a student, but
participation in a general examination conducted by the
Board to ascertain whether he is eligible and fit to be
considered as having successfully completed the
secondary education course. The examination fee paid 
by the student is not the consideration for availment of
any service, but the charge paid for the privilege of
participation in the examination. The fact that in
the course of conduct of the examination, or evaluation of
answer-scripts, or furnishing of mark-books or
certificates, there may be some negligence, omission or
deficiency, does not convert the Board into a service-
provider for a consideration, nor convert the examinee
into a consumer  It cannot therefore be said that
the examining body is in a fiduciary relationship either
with reference to the examinee who participates in the
examination and whose answer-books are evaluated by  
the examining body.
An evaluated answer book of an examinee is a
combination of two different informations. The first is the
answers written by the examinee and second is the 
marks/assessment by the examiner. When an examinee     
seeks inspection of his evaluated answer-books or seeks
a certified copy of the evaluated answer-book, the
information sought by him is not really the answers he
has written in the answer-books (which he already
knows), nor the total marks assigned for the answers
(which has been declared). What he really seeks is the
information relating to the break-up of marks, that is, the
specific marks assigned to each of his answers. When an 
examinee seeks information by inspection/certified
copies of his answer-books, he knows the contents
thereof being the author thereof.
xxxxxx
   This takes us to the crucial issue of evaluation by the
examiner. The examining body engages or employs   
hundreds of examiners to do the evaluation of thousands
of answer books. The question is whether the information
relating to the evaluation (that is assigning of marks) is
held by the examining body in a fiduciary relationship.
The examining bodies contend that even if fiduciary
relationship does not exist with reference to the
examinee, it exists with reference to the examiner who
evaluates the answer-books. On a careful examination
we find that this contention has no merit.
On the other hand, when an answer-book is
entrusted to the examiner for the purpose of evaluation,
for the period the answer-book is in his custody and to
the extent of the discharge of his functions relating to
evaluation, the examiner is in the position of a fiduciary
with reference to the examining body and he is barred
from disclosing the contents of the answer-book or the
result of evaluation of the answer-book to anyone other
than the examining body. Once the examiner has  
evaluated the answer books, he ceases to have any 
interest in the evaluation done by him. He does not have
any copy-right or proprietary right, or confidentiality right
in regard to the evaluation. Therefore it cannot be said
that the examining body holds the evaluated answer
books in a fiduciary relationship, qua the examiner.
In
PRESIDENT, CENTRAL BOARD OF SECONDARY EDUCATION v.            
D.SUVANKAR AND ANOTHER
, the Apex Court held as follows:
It has to be ensured that the Examiners who make the
valuation of answer papers are really equipped for the job.
The paramount consideration in such cases is the ability of
the Examiner. The Board has bounden duty to select such 
persons as Examiners who have the capacity, capability to
make valuation and they should really equipped for the job.
Otherwise, the very purpose of evaluation of answer papers
would be frustrated. Nothing should be left to show even an
apprehension about lack of fair assessment. It is true that
valuation of two persons cannot be equal on golden scales,
but wide variation would affect credibility of the system of
valuation. If for the same answer one candidate gets higher
marks than another that would be arbitrary. As indicated
above, the scope for interference in matters of valuation of
answer papers is very limited. For compelling reasons and
apparent infirmity in valuation, the Court step in. Care should
be taken to see that the Examiners who have been appointed 
for a particular subject belong to the same faculty. It would be
a mockery of the system of valuation of a teacher belonging
to Arts stream is asked to evaluate answer papers of Science
stream. It may be that a teacher had Physics. Chemistry or
Biology at the Intermediate Level, but at Graduation stage he
had special paper in Zoology. To ask such a teacher to
evaluate Botany paper would not be proper. Similarly in the
case of a teacher having Mathematics in Intermediate Level
while he took his high studies in Physics, or Chemistry, or
Botany at the Graduation Level, evaluation of answer paper in
Mathematics by him would not be proper. May be that he has 
working knowledge in the subject. But the valuation should be
done by an Examiner who is well equipped in the subject.
That would rule out the chance of variation improper
valuation. Board authorities should ensure that anomalous
situations as pointed out above do not occur. Additional steps
should be taken for assessing the capacity of a teacher
before he is appointed as an Examiner. For this purpose, the
Board may constitute a Body of Experts to interview the
persons who intend to be appointed as Examiners. This 
process is certainly time-consuming but it would further the
ends for which the examinations are held. The Chief
Examiner is supposed to act as a safety-valve in the matter of
proper assessment.
The scope for interference in matters of evaluation of
answer papers is very limited.  For compelling reasons and
apparent infirmity in evaluation, the court steps in.
(emphasis added).
I have carefully perused the material available on record
and taken note of the submissions of counsel appearing for the
parties.  I have, with the assistance of service provider, appreciated
the online evaluation of answer scripts introduced in May/June,
2016 by 2nd respondent University.  At appropriate stage, the missing
link in online evaluation will be adverted to.
In the case on hand, it is contextual to note that  the answer
scripts are not valued by this Court to deal with the argument of
respondents or does not sit in appeal in academic matters or issuing
directions for revaluation of answer scripts contrary to the ratio
decidendi relied upon by the 2nd respondent.
The question for consideration is 

        Whether the pilot project and resultant
online evaluation introduced on 28.05.2016
warrants interference, and the 2nd respondent as
examining body discharged the onus of online
evaluation cast on the University? and to what
relief?
This Court, at the outset, hastens to add that the endeavour
of 2nd respondent to capacity build the human resources and
employ information technology is appreciated. These result in
perspective change of a few academic matters.   This Court is of
the view that the decision of Vice Chancellor of 2nd respondent
University to introduce online valuation and information technology
enhances transparency in conduct of affairs of the University and
also the confidence of the students at large, provided the change
is foolproof.  A reference to the following quotes is apt at this
juncture:
This Court is reminded of a quote of Lord Budha that

Everything changes. Nothing remains without change.
And of a German proverb:
To change and change for the better, are two different things

        

        The University to have meaningful existence and improve all
branches, functions and duties, no doubt, has to keep itself abreast
with the changing trends, including evaluation of Examinees.  But at
the same time, the change ought not to be a surprise to the
Examinees or a change introduced with loose ends.  The counter of
2nd respondent as already observed sets out the care and caution
taken to derive acute diagnostic results of Examinees
performance.  The missing link, if any, in the implementation is
discerned, either in pilot project or the project is put to operational
use, then these missing links are rectified along the journey.  To bring
home the observation, this Court considers it appropriate to scan
and paste a portion of the Script Marks Report, the Answer Scripts
and Evaluations-I & II on the one hand and on the other, a demo of
scanned printed matter with online valuation of such scanned
copy.
A careful scrutiny of the above excerpts discloses that except
entering marks in the sheet appended on the top of an answer
script, there is no trace of evaluation of answer sheet.
The reply of 2nd respondent in this behalf is that all the
Examiners have done online valuation and the marks scored or
comments are entered in Script Marks Report.  This reply does not
satisfy the requirement of evaluation of answer scripts. (See
Aditya
Bandopadyas
case (5 supra)).
The representative of service provider when specifically asked
whether the technology is compatible at all the places and that the
Examiners are familiarized to undertake online evaluation, it is
answered that the scanned and transmitted copies to the
respective evaluation centres, the software used enables making
notation, remarks and award marks to  a question.  One of the
online evaluation sheets with corrections by the Examiners is placed
before the Court, however, this sheet is not made part of the order
for brevity.  It is admitted that in the answer sheets produced in the
batch of cases, the scanned answer scripts do not bear the
evaluation marks/remarks of Examiners or the marks allotted by the
Examiner to each question.   It is not clear whether on account of
oral instructions issued by 2nd respondent not to write on the
scanned answer scripts, a few of the Examiners have not shown 
their evaluation.  But an answer sheet with online correction i.e.,
remarks of Examiner with the available software is produced.
The possibility of just filling up the Script Marks Report, even if done
(this Court is not doubting the bona fides of Examiners), facility for
verification, evaluation with compatible technology must be put in
place or used by the Examiners. But the marks have been entered 
in Script Marks Report. Normally, the presumption is marks are
allotted on evaluation.  The primary evidence to discharge onus of
evaluation is by relying on evaluated answers scripts, and not the
data entered on a separate Script Marks Report.
To bring the missing link in the online evaluation, the following
paragraphs from Laughter the Best Medicine from Readers Digest
are scanned and this Court illustratively does online evaluation by
using stylus.
The online evaluation as illustrated above when is pointed out
to the representative of service provider, the representative has
fairly admitted that the scanned answer sheets produced in the
batch of cases show no trace of evaluation by the Examiners.  It is
pertinent to remark that the utilization of available technology such
as Abode, PDF format, Wacom, Stylus etc., would have certainly 
helped the University to achieve the objectives which it wanted to
achieve by online evaluation.  Use of available tools could
have furnished complete, accurate and reliable Diagnostic Reports.
At this juncture, the ratio
laid down by
the Honble Supreme Court
in
Aditya Bandopadyayas
case (5 supra) is taken note of.   The
clinical examination of a patient is the preferred option of Doctors.
However, of late, more and more Diagnostic Reports are preferred
for accuracy. The accomplishment of accuracy of a Diagnostic
Report is possible with tools and technicians.  The Vice Chancellor of
2nd respondent University is equipped to decide on the missing links
viz., whether the incompleteness is due to tool or technician in
evaluation and fix the link for accurate results.  The issue ultimately
stumbles on evaluation of answer scripts by keeping in view the
reasoning/illustrations given above. The University cannot be said to
have discharged the onus or responsibility in this behalf or placed
before the Court evaluated scripts but is claiming Script Marks
Report as evaluation by Examiners of answer sheets of petitioners
and award of marks as correct.  This Court prefers to go that far and
not beyond because on the one hand evaluation of PG/Diploma  
answer scripts is an academic issue and on the other technological
issue of online valuation for neither strictly involves legal principles
for judicial review.  The Court has examined the deficiency in online
evaluation and to that extent, it is not the case of respondents that
judicial review is unavailable.
To the limited extent judicial review is
permitted particularly by following ratio decidendi of (1) Sahitis
case (
2) Adiya Bandopadyas
case, (
3) D.Suvankars
case, the 
discussion is concluded.  Further, the Script Marks Report copied
and posted in respect of a few answer sheets concur with the
omissions and commissions pointed out by the petitioners.
To complete the narration, the Court refers to the decision of
the Executive Council of respondent University in the meeting held
on 31.08.2016 on digital evaluation of answer scripts reads thus:
(4)
Digital evaluation of answer scripts:
Information given by the University in the said matter
was perused and noted by the council.
Also permitted the University to take up digital
evaluation of answer scripts of all examinations in future by
identifying an agency and duly following the relevant
procedures.
Now, online evaluation can be implemented for all
examinations.  The 2nd respondent reviews the infrastructure and
technical compatibility of online evaluation facilities at all centres
and appropriate further directions to all colleges/students are issued
so that the change now introduced is made a rule or practice in
the University.  From the resolution dated 31.08.2016, it can be said
that the Vice Chancellor has obtained ex post facto approval for
the midway change from manual to online evaluation and by the
experience now gained, and in view of the principle
laid down in
Sahitis
case (1 supra), this Court is of the view that the Vice
Chancellor of 2nd respondent University is entitled to take steps as
are required for accurate diagnostic reports for the prognosis/
disease now complained in this batch of writ petitions.
Hence, the summary and conclusions are as follows:
(a)     the online evaluation of answer scripts for the examinations
held in May/June, 2016 according to the stand taken by the
2nd respondent in para 2 of the counter-affidavit is in
continuation of a pilot project introduced in October, 2015
and requires updating tools and skills of Examiners.
(b)     The expertise and technical compatibility of Examiners at
respective centres is a matter required to be
re-examined by the University and compatibility is archived
by undertaking demo classes.
(c)     Consistency in the evaluation i.e., writing remarks by the
Examiner on the scanned/answer scripts could not be shown  
in the answer sheets. Hence, keeping in perspective the
technology uniform written instructions to Examiners could
be issued.
(d)     The legitimate expectation of a student is that the answers
written are at least looked at and appreciated for evaluation.
In the case on hand, with the illustration given above, this
Court is of the view that Script Answers Reports are treated
as evaluation of answer scripts and no material is placed to
satisfy that the evaluation of answer scripts, in fact, had
taken place and Script Marks Report is the summary of such 
evaluation.
The decision relied upon by the 2nd respondent University
comes to its aid.  The missing link examined and decided by
this Court is to be kept in mind. To make online evaluation
fully compliant, all steps are taken by 2nd respondent.  According to
the
ratio
laid down in
Sahitis
case (1 supra), the Vice Chancellors
jurisdiction in given cases to take decision and in the case on
hand, the circumstances warrant the Vice Chancellor of
2nd respondent/University to re-look at the total functionality of
online evaluation and change the manner of evaluation, as
already noted to better the overall situation.  From the present
experience, needful is implemented.   The grievance of petitioners is
looked into by 2nd respondent.  Therefore, a holistic view on the
evaluation of answer scripts of petitioners is taken by the Vice
Chancellor within three weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of
this order and answers scripts evaluated either manually or online,
however, by taking all required steps, and thereafter declare the
results.  The Court in the batch of writ petitions appreciates the
objectivity with which the academic and technical evaluation is
subjected to judicial review by 2nd respondent University.
Writ petitions are ordered as indicated above.   There shall be
no order as to costs.
Consequently, pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, also
stand disposed of.
____________  
S.V.BHATT, J  
Date: 31.10.2016