[Cites
7
, Cited by
5
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Virothi Tirupathi Rao vs Kota Venu on 30 March, 2016
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2016 HYD 24
Author:
M. Seetharama Murti
Bench:
M. Seetharama Murti
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE  M. SEETHARAMA MURTI          

Civil Revision Petition nos.2792 of 2014

30-03-2016 

Virothi Tirupathi Rao . Petitioner

Kota Venu . Respondent   

Counsel for the Petitioner: Sri C. Raghu

Counsel for the Respondent   : Sri S. Srinivasa Rao

<Gist :

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:

1.AIR 1999 SC 1441(1) 
2.AIR 2009 AP 47] 
3.2013(5) ALD 394 
4.AIR 1976 Madras 66  
5.AIR 1965 PATNA 29 (V 52 G 9)  


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.SEETHARAMA MURTI           


Civil Revision Petition Nos.2792 & 2798 of 2014


COMMON ORDER:
These two revision petitions under
Article 227
of the Constitution of
India by the unsuccessful petitioner/defendant are directed against the
common orders dated 19.08.2014 of the learned Principal District Judge,
Srikakulam passed in IA nos. 850 and 851 of 2014 in OS no. 1 of 2010.
1.1     IA no. 851 of 2014 is filed by the petitioner/defendant under Order VIII
Rule 1(3) read with
Section 151
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (the
Code, for brevity) to grant leave and permit the petitioner/defendant to file
the document viz., report/opinion of Sri Narindra Singh, Director, Documents
Division, Truth Labs of Hyderabad, by condoning the delay in filing the said
document.
1.2     IA no. 850 of 2014 is filed under Order XVI Rule 1 read with
Section 151
of the Code requesting to issue summons to the said expert Sri Narindra Singh,
to appear before the Court and give evidence on behalf of the
petitioner/defendant in regard to his opinion furnished to the defendant vide
File no.TLH/QD/070/2014 dated 15.04.2014.
2.       I have heard the submissions of the learned counsel for the revision
petitioner/defendant (the defendant, for brevity) and the learned counsel for
the respondent/plaintiff (the plaintiff, for brevity).  I have perused the
material record.
3.      The case of the defendant, in brief, is as follows:  The plaintiff filed
the suit for recovery of money in a sum of Rs.23,26,000/- with subsequent
interest and costs.  The said suit is filed on the foot of a promissory note for
Rs.15,00,000/-.  The defendant is resisting the said suit inter alia contending
that the suit is a false suit and is filed by forging the signature at the
instance
and instigation of Kota Venkata Vasudeva Rao and his brother Kota Sri Jaggu
Naidu and in gross collusion, connivance and conspiracy with them.  Indeed,
this defendant had also filed against Kota Venkata Vasudeva Rao the suit
OS.no.186 of 2009 on the file of the court of the learned XIII Additional
District
Judge for recovery of Rs.12,00,000/- with subsequent interest and costs and
also OS.no.283 of 2009 on the file of the Court of the learned Senior Civil
Judge, Gajuwaka for recovery of Rs.6,00,000/- with subsequent interest and
costs.  The said suits are pending.  The defendant had also filed CC no.730 of
2009 on the file of the Court of the learned III Additional Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate, Gajuwaka based on dishonoured cheque for Rs.2,00,000/- issued by 
the said Kota Venkata Vasudeva Rao.  The said CC was disposed of in favour of
this defendant on 09.05.2014.  Out of vengeance the said Kota Venkata
Vasudeva Rao got filed against this defendant, the present suit through the
present plaintiff.  To disprove the case of the plaintiff and to prove his
defence, it has become necessary to file these two petitions viz., one to
receive on file the experts report/opinion furnished by the expert Narindra
Singh, Director, Documents Division, Truth Labs of Hyderabad by granting
necessary leave and by condoning the delay in filing the same; and the other to
summon the said expert to give evidence in regard to his said opinion in regard
to exhibit A1-promissory note.  If the requests in these petitions are not
granted, the defendant would suffer serious and irreparable loss.
4.      Both the said petitions were resisted by the plaintiff by filing a counter
inter alia contending as follows:
The material allegations in the affidavits filed in support of the two
petitions are false.  The petitions are filed to drag on the matter.  The
affidavits are silent as to how the certified copies of the documents, which are
referred to in the report/opinion of the expert are obtained.  The admitted
signatures of the defendant ought to have been obtained in the open court, in
case the defendant wanted such signatures to be compared with the disputed 
signature on the promissory note.  There is every possibility to manage the
expert as the defendant himself has chosen to send the documents to the said
expert.  Such an opinion/report cannot be received on file by the Court.  The
opinion/report was received by the defendant in the month of April, 2014, but,
the defendant did not choose to file the same immediately before the (trial)
Court.  He had filed these petitions belatedly in June, 2014 to drag on the
matter.  The signatures of the defendant naturally vary from time to time; and
the standard of the signature made by a person depends on the paper and the
pen used; and hence, the opinion/report of the expert cannot be received.
Hence, the document viz., the opinion/report of the expert cannot be received
on file. The Photostat copies of documents are by themselves not admissible in
evidence.  Photostat copies are amenable for manipulations, is a well-known
and accepted fact.  Hence, the opinion/report based on Photostat copies is
inadmissible.  Further, there is direct evidence of PWs1 to 3 in regard to the
truth and validity of the suit promissory note.  The petitions are not bona fide
and are liable to be dismissed.
5.      The Court below had dismissed the petitions on the grounds - that the
experts report/opinion is dated 17.04.2014, but, the defendant had not
chosen to file the same immediately into Court;  and that having waited for
dismissal of his five more applications viz., IA.nos.431 to 435 in succession,
the
defendant had filed these two instant applications; and that the evidence on
the plaintiffs side is closed; and that on the defendants side, DWs1 to 4 were
already examined; and that his affidavits filed in support of the petitions do
not disclose any reasons for the delay;  and that the original promissory note
and the original documents containing the standard signatures of the defendant
have not been sent to the Expert of the Truth Labs for comparison of the
signatures on the said documents; and that the petitions are intended to drag
on the proceedings; and that the expert had only been supplied with the
Photostat copies of the suit promissory note and other documents, but, not the
originals for comparing the signatures on the said documents.
5.1     The learned counsel for the defendant while reiterating the case of the
defendant, which is stated at paragraph 3 supra, had submitted that all the
reasons which are assigned by the Court below, are unsustainable in the facts
and circumstances of the case.  He would further submit that the defendant is
seriously disputing the suit claim and is inter alia contending that the suit
promissory note is forged at the instance and instigation of two persons, whose
names are mentioned in his defence and that the suit is a result of vengeance
and that, therefore, by allowing both the petitions an opportunity ought to
have been given to the defendant to substantiate his defence instead of
dismissing the petitions.   It is further urged that an opinion/report obtained
privately cannot be rejected from reception merely because the same was
obtained without obtaining necessary orders from the Court below and that a
report/opinion cannot be rejected at the threshold even without granting
permission to file it and even without an opportunity to prove the same by
examining the expert.
5.2     While supporting the orders of the Court below, the learned counsel for
the plaintiff would contend as follows: The petition to receive the documents
namely the expert report/opinion is highly belated and it is filed after the
closure of the evidence on the side of the plaintiff and also after the
examination of DWs 1 to 4.  No explanation much less valid explanation is
offered for the delay.  No valid grounds are made out for granting leave to the
defendant for filing the document.  The document is an experts
report/opinion, which was obtained privately by the defendant directly from a
private laboratory; and, that if the defendant wanted to obtain an experts
opinion in support of his defence, he ought to have requested the Court to send
the relevant original documents to an expert of the Government and ought to
have taken steps for obtaining an experts opinion from a Government expert
of a Government Forensic Laboratory and not behind the back of the plaintiff.
Admittedly, the originals are in the court record and the originals are not
supplied to the private expert from whom the defendant had obtained the
opinion privately; any opinion of a hand writing expert based on
signatures/writings on the documents, which are Photostat copies, is unreliable
and inadmissible.  If the Courts permit parties to obtain private reports from
private experts directly without the orders of the Court, it would lead to
serious and complex situations; any report, which is obtained by a party
privately and behind the back of the plaintiff and without the intervention of
the Court and without orders from the Court cannot be permitted to be
received on record as receiving such report/opinion causes great prejudice to
the plaintiff.  What are the admitted and standard signatures fit for comparison
has to be decided by the Court after hearing both the side and on such an
important aspect the defendant cannot take a decision unilaterally to suit his
convenience and his defence. The law does not provide for the parties
directly/privately obtaining opinions from either Government or private experts
or for receiving on file of such privately/directly obtained reports.  The
orders
impugned in the revisions are valid and need no interference.
6.      Now the points for determination are  whether the defendant had
made out valid and sufficient grounds for granting leave and for receiving
the experts report/opinion obtained by him on file after condoning the
delay in filing the same; and for summoning the expert, who had furnished
the said opinion to him, to be examined as a witness on his side to prove
the said document?
7.      I have bestowed my attention to the facts and the submissions.  I have
given detailed, thoughtful and earnest consideration.
8.      In the light of the contentions of the parties, it is to be first noted
that
in a suit on the foot of a promissory note filed by the plaintiff, the
defendant,
having raised a contest that the suit promissory note is a rank forgery, had
obviously obtained privately a report/opinion from a private expert of a private
laboratory having ISO Certification and had filed these two petitions  (one) to
receive the said report/opinion of the private expert on file after granting
leave and by condoning the delay; and (the other) to summon the said expert
to prove the contents of his report/opinion.  Both the petitions were dismissed
by the Court below.  In this backdrop, and the sets of contentions advanced by
the learned counsel for the parties, it is necessary to refer to the relevant
provision of law.
Section 75
of the Code reads as follows:
Power of Court to issue commission  Subject to such conditions and
limitations as may be prescribed, the Court may issue a commission
a)      to examine any person;
b)      to make a local investigation;
c)      to examine or adjust accounts; or
d)      to make a partition;
e)      to hold a scientific, technical, or expert investigation;
f)      to conduct sale of property which is subject to speedy and natural
decay and which is in the custody of the Court pending the
determination of the suit;
g)      to perform any ministerial act.

8.1     The Power of the Court to issue Commissions as envisaged in the above
provision of law deals with the power of the Court to issue a Commission to
hold a scientific, technical or expert investigation.  The provision itself says
that the said power is subject to such conditions and limitations as may be
prescribed.  Therefore, even the power conferred on the Court is not an
unlimited power; and the power is circumscribed by certain conditions and
limitations.  Order XXVI of the Code which deals with Commissions also deals
with Commissions for scientific investigation, performance of ministerial act
and sale of movable property.
Rule 10A of Order XXVI reads as under:
10A. Commission for scientific investigation  (1) Where any
question arising in a suit involves any scientific investigation which
cannot, in the opinion of the Court, be conveniently conducted
before the Court, the Court may, if it thinks it necessary or
expedient in the interests of justice so to do, issue a commission to
such person as it thinks fit, directing him to inquire into such
question and report thereon to the Court.
(2) The provisions of rule 10 of this Order shall, as far as may be,
apply in relation to a Commissioner appointed under this rule as
they apply in relation to a Commissioner appointed under rule 9.
Rule 10 deals with the procedure of Commissioner.  The said Rule reads
as follows:
10. Procedure of Commissioner (1) The Commissioner, after  
such local inspection as he deems necessary and after reducing to
writing the evidence taken by him, shall return such evidence,
together with his report in writing signed by him, to the Court.
(2) Report and deposition to be evidence in suit. Commissioner
may be examined in personThe report of the Commissioner and   
the evidence taken by him (but not the evidence without the
report) shall be evidence
in the suit and shall form part of the record; but the Court or,
with the permission of the Court, any of the parties to suit may
examine the Commissioner personally in open Court touching any 
part of the matters referred to him or mentioned in his report, or
as to his report, or as to the manner in which he has made the
investigation.
(3) Where the Court is for any reason dissatisfied with the
proceedings of the Commissioner, it may direct such further
inquiry to be made as it shall think fit.
8.2     A plain reading of the provisions would show that if only the Court is of
the opinion that any question arising in a suit involves any scientific
investigation, which cannot be conveniently conducted before the Court, and,
if only the Court thinks it necessary or expedient in the interests of justice
so
to do, the Court may issue a Commission for scientific investigation directing
such person to whom the Commission is ordered to do the necessary scientific
investigation and report thereon to the Court.  Therefore, in the considered
view of this Court, the Court alone is empowered to give an order and
directions for scientific investigation.  A party is, therefore, not entitled to
directly ask any expert to enquire into any question involved in the suit in
regard to any scientific investigation and report thereon to the Court.  It is
for
the Court to exercise the said power, subject to such conditions and
limitations, in a case where the facts of the case warrant; and the Court
generally exercises the said power if the Court is of the opinion and thinks it
necessary or expedient in the interests of justice to issue a Commission for
scientific investigation.  Therefore, there is no provision in the Code which
empowers a party to the suit to directly obtain an opinion from an expert and
file the report with the opinion before the Court.
8.3     As noted supra, issuance of Commissions is dealt with in
Section 75
in
Part III of the Code, which deals with Incidental Proceedings; whereas the
other interlocutory proceedings like grant of temporary injunctions and
appointment of receivers etcetera are dealt with in
Section 94
of the Code
which deals with Supplemental Proceedings. Supplemental proceedings are 
separate proceedings in an Original action, in which the Court is called upon to
exercise jurisdiction in aid of the judgment in action.  Incidental Orders are
those, which follow as a matter of course being necessary complements in the
main order without which the matter would be incomplete or ineffective. [
Vide
M A Mohamed Ali v. R Ramadoss
(AIR 1966 Madras 441)]. Thus, incidental   
orders are complementary in nature and are intended to assist the Court in
arriving at a just decision in the lis unlike supplemental orders.
It is apt to refer to
Section 45
of the Indian evidence Act also, which
reads as under:
45. Opinions of experts.When the Court has to form an opinion
upon a point of foreign law, or of science or art, or as to identity of
handwriting or finger impressions, the opinions upon that point of
persons specially skilled in such foreign law, science or art, or in
questions as to identity of handwriting or finger impressions are
relevant facts.
Such persons are called experts.
8.4     As fairly stated by the learned counsel for both the sides, it is no doubt
true that no Government expert attached to a Government Forensic Science 
Laboratory would furnish an opinion directly and privately to parties.  A
Government expert would furnish an opinion or a report only under the orders
and directions of a Court.  Obviously for that reason, the defendant had
approached a private expert of a private laboratory and had obtained a report
by making available to the said expert some documents, which are in his
possession and which in his discretion are suited for comparison; and had thus,
obtained a report/opinion directly.  Therefore, the said report was obtained by
the defendant from a private expert by directly furnishing/giving documents,
which he considered in his opinion, are best suited for comparison and
furnishing a report.  There was no opportunity to the plaintiff to have his say
in
the matter particularly on the comparable standards of the signatures on the
documents, which are unilaterally furnished by the defendant to the private
expert for his opinion.  Generally, it is for one of the parties to make a
request
to the Court to order issuance of a commission for scientific investigation by
sending the documents said to be containing the disputed signatures and the
documents said to be containing admitted/standard signatures for comparison
by an expert and for furnishing his opinion in regard to the genuineness or
otherwise of the disputed signatures.  The courts in our States (Andhra Pradesh
and Telangana) are generally seeking experts opinions from the Government
experts of the Government Forensic Science Laboratories of the States.  No
doubt the Courts are empowered to seek opinion also from a private expert
attached to a private laboratory for reasons to be recorded.   In the case on
hand, as is fairly stated before this Court, all the documents are furnished
directly by the defendant to the private expert from whom a report/an opinion
was obtained by the defendant.  All those documents are only Photostat copies
and none of the documents is an original document.  Even the original
promissory note is not furnished to the expert.  Admittedly, the originals are
in
the Court record and the originals are not supplied to the private expert from
whom the defendant had obtained a report /opinion privately; any
opinion/report of a hand writing expert in regard to genuineness or otherwise
of signatures/writings on the Photostat copies is generally not of assured and
reliable nature.    When the originals are very much available in the Court
records and there is every opportunity to the defendant to obtain the
opinion/report from a qualified expert under the orders and supervision of the
Court, there is no reason for the defendant to obtain an opinion/report from an
expert that too based on Photostat copies.  The submission of the plaintiff that
if the Courts permit parties to obtain private reports from private experts
directly without the orders of the Court, it would lead to serious and complex
situations needs consideration and cannot be brushed aside without due
consideration; any report, which is obtained by a party privately and directly
and behind the back of one of the parties and without the intervention of the
Court and without the orders from a Court having seisin over the matter cannot
be permitted to be received on record.  It is apt to note that even a
Government servant like a Police officer cannot conduct further investigation
in a matter within the purview of the Court without obtaining necessary
permission from the Court.  Such legal principles are enunciated to preserve
the primacy of the justice administration and delivery system.  The provisions
of the Code do not provide for the parties directly and privately obtaining
opinions from either the Government or private experts and also do not provide
for receiving on record such privately or directly obtained reports/opinion.
No-
doubt it is true that a party, who is interested in knowing the strength of his
case may approach a private expert of a private Forensic Laboratory and obtain
an opinion in regard to the disputed document said to be containing his
handwriting or signature.  However, if he intends to obtain an opinion or report
and wants to place reliance on such report in support of his case/defence in
the suit, necessarily, he has to follow the procedure established by law and
obtain such opinion under the orders and supervision of the Court by filing an
appropriate application in accordance with the procedure established by law.
When the law is settled that expert's evidence as to handwriting or signatures
is
opinion evidence and it can rarely, if ever, take the place of substantive
evidence, there is no point in permitting a party to rely upon an opinion like
the present one, which was obtained directly and unilaterally from an expert
without the orders of the Court and by making available only the copies of the
documents and not the original documents.  The course adopted by the 
defendant in obtaining the instant opinion without orders of the Court is
impermissible and cannot be approved by the Court; and the opinion furnished
on the basis of the documents unilaterally furnished by the defendant, that too
not original documents, would make the opinion evidence further weak and
undependable.  Experts opinions that are obtained under the orders and
supervision of the Court will be relied upon by one of the parties by treating
them as important pieces of evidence and, therefore, such experts opinions
and reports shall be of reliable and assured nature; and hence, unless experts
opinion/report is obtained on an application made to a Court in accordance
with the procedure established by law and under the orders and supervision of
the Court, an opinion/report of the expert cannot be a part of the record of
the Court.  Neither the opinion/report privately obtained can be received nor
the expert, who has furnished the said report, be permitted to be examined as
a witness as any such evidence is inadmissible and will be of no probative
value.   In the well considered view of this Court, such report obtained
unilaterally by the defendant without following the procedure established by
law and without the necessary orders from the Court, cannot be forced either
upon the Court or the plaintiff.  Further, no explanation is forthcoming from
the defendant as to why the codified procedure was not followed by the
defendant and as to why an opinion was directly obtained from a private expert
of a private laboratory that too without the orders and supervision of the
Court, which is having seisin over the matter.  In deed, if the defendant
wanted to obtain an experts opinion he ought to have filed an appropriate
application and ought to have requested the Court to send the relevant original
and other documents to an expert and ought to have taken steps accordingly
for obtaining an experts opinion as per the codified procedure and norms; and
not behind the back of the plaintiff.  It is settled law that the opinion of an
expert in regard to genuineness or otherwise of signatures and/or hand writings
is purely opinion evidence and such opinion evidence in regard to
signatures/handwriting is not based on exact science as in the case of thumb
impressions.  In a case of this uncanny nature, where the reliefs sought for, if
granted pave way to a course or accord sanction to a conduct, which is
impermissible; and further, the reliefs, if granted, encourage imprudence and
insolence of procedure established by law; and such reliefs, if granted, come in
conflict with the primacy of justice administration and delivery system, the
Courts would be reluctant to grant any such reliefs.   One aspect, which may be
visualized and be noted is as under: If the parties to a lis are allowed to
obtain reports/opinions from experts privately and directly and submit the
same to the Court, then several outcomes may be possible.  In a given case, if
the reports/opinions obtained by both the parties from different experts are
akin, then the party who had privately obtained the opinion/report, which is
against his case, would tend to suppress that opinion/report obtained by him
and would prefer to raise all possible and available contentions against the
adverse opinion/report obtained privately by the opposite party.   Further, in
another given case, if the opinion/report obtained by one party from a private
expert is in direct conflict with the other report/opinion obtained by the
opposite party from another private expert, then such situation would lead to
complexities and results in burdening the record with unnecessary and
avoidable evidence.  Therefore, the best and only worthwhile course, which
would avoid unnecessary complexities and controversies, is to allow the
parties, who are desirous of obtaining an experts report/opinion, to make an
application to the Court as per the procedure established by law with a request
to the Court to send the relevant records to a qualified expert with necessary
directions to such expert to furnish a report/opinion as is required in the
matter.  Such a report/opinion thus obtained under the orders and supervision
of the Court would then be one more assured piece of evidence before the
Court; and the Court will have the advantage of considering such opinion
evidence along with the other evidence that would be available on record by
the time the suit comes up for final adjudication on merits.  Such a course
alone perfectly sub serves the ends of justice, in the well considered view of
this Court.  In any view of the matter, when the procedure established by law
presents a fair opportunity to a party to the lis to obtain an opinion of a
qualified expert under the orders and supervision of the Court and such
opinion/report will have the sanction of the law, subject to consideration of
its
probative value at an appropriate stage, any opinion or report of an expert
obtained privately and directly by any party, as the one that was obtained by
the defendant in the present suit shall not be accepted by the Court.   Even in
a case where the Court refuses to consider the request of a party to send the
disputed and other relevant documents to an expert for securing opinion, the
defendant is obliged to assail the orders of the Court before a superior Court,
but, cannot resort to obtaining an opinion/report privately on his own.
Further, even otherwise, in the case on hand there are no exceptional
circumstances to accept the requests of the defendant, by carving out an
exception.  Hence, this Court finds that the orders impugned in these revisions
are valid and sustainable both under facts and in law and do not warrant
interference in these revisions, which are misconceived.
9.      Before parting with the case, it is necessary to mention that the
following decisions are cited at the hearing.
1.      Vidhyadhar v. Mankikrao  is relied upon by the learned counsel for the
defendant in support of his contention that a witness, the private expert, who
has furnished his opinion is prepared to give evidence even without summoning
him and that, therefore, if his report is received on file by granting the
necessary leave, the same would be sufficient; and that even though the
witness is an expert, his examination without taking summons to him through
Court and without his name being mentioned in the list of witnesses are no
grounds to reject his testimony in case he voluntarily appears at the request of
the defendant as a witness on the side of the defendant.   The proposition of
law is not disputed by the plaintiff.
2.      Velaga Sivarama Krishna v. Velaga Veerabhadra Rao  is relied upon in
support of the contention that when the defendant denied execution of
promissory note and signature thereon, it is essential to send the document to
an expert for comparison of signatures.  There is no quarrel with the
proposition in this cited decision.  The defendant is always at liberty to file
an
application before the Court below requesting the Court to call for an
opinion/report regarding genuineness or otherwise of the suit promissory note
under its orders and supervision.   The defendant did not avail the said
opportunity for the reasons best known to him.
3.  In Rytu Depot, Draksharama, East Godavari District v. Sri Rajyalakshmi
Agencies, Ramachandrapuram  this Court considered the acceptability of
sending a carbon copy of a document for comparison of the writing/signature
thereon with the admitted signature by an expert.  In the cited case, the very
document on which the signature is disputed is itself a carbon copy.
Therefore, the ratio in the decided case has no application to the facts of the
present case.
4.  Doraiswamy Gounder v. Paravammal  is relied upon in support of the
contention that photographic copies of documents can be sent to an expert.
There is also no dispute with the proposition in this decision.  But, in the
case 
on hand, the question is as to whether Photostat copies of documents of the
choice of the defendant can be sent to the expert unilaterally without the
orders of the Court and whether the defendant can obtain opinion privately and
unilaterally without obtaining necessary orders from the Court.
5.  Order dated 20.06.2014 of this Court in CRP.Nos.1531 to 1535 and 1549 of
2014 (unreported) is called in aid to enlighten on the scope of jurisdiction of
the Court under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India, which is not disputed
by the plaintiff.
6.  In the Order dated 27.06.2013 of this Court in CRP.nos.2366 & 2434 of 2012
(unreported) this Court expressed its complete agreement with the order of the
Court below insofar as its finding that the signatures on documents such as
counter, vakalat and written statement cannot be considered as contemporary
signatures as there was a possibility of putting signatures in disguise in view
of
the possible defence to be taken.
7.
Dhuri Sah v. Kishun Prasad Sah
is relied upon in support of the following
proposition:  No doubt, D. W. 8 was a private expert examined on behalf
of the defendants, and that he had not been appointed as such by the
Court, but that fact by itself cannot be a ground for holding that in the
absence of any order in regard to his appointment as an expert, it was not
open to the defendants to examine him on their own behalf.  It is a
different matter that the evidence of such an expert has to be appreciated
in the light of the circumstances surrounding it. In this case the finding
given by the Court below on the question of non-payment of Rs. 2,200/- by
the plaintiff to Anandi Sah is based not exclusively on the evidence of D.
W. 8 but on an elaborate consideration of the entire materials on the
record. That being so, even the question of weight in regard to the
evidence of D. W. 8 cannot, now in the circumstances, arise for
consideration. Thus, the finding given by the Court below on the question
of payment of Rs. 2,200/- by the plaintiff to Anandi Sah now stands
concluded.  The facts of the cited case show that the property in dispute
in
that case
is a house property and the defence put up by the defendants who
had contested the suit is that the story set up by the plaintiff about payment
of
Rs.2,200/-  to Anandi Sah was false and that the receipt/exhibit A4 therein was
forged and fabricated document.  The defendants examined DW8 the private 
expert; considering the entire evidence brought on record, a finding was
recorded by the Court below on the question of non payment of Rs.2,200/- by
the plaintiff to the said Anandi Sah and the said finding is based not
exclusively
on the evidence of DW8 but on elaborate consideration of the entire material
on record.  In the instant case on hand, the disputed document is not a
document signed by a third party to the suit.  It is the very suit document
namely the suit promissory note.  Further, no explanation is forthcoming from
the defendant as to why he could not make a request to the Court below by
filing an application in accordance with the procedure established by law to
send the document disputed as well as the documents containing admitted and 
standard signatures to an expert for comparison and furnishing a report.  If
only
the possibility to obtain an opinion under the orders and supervision of the
Court is ruled out, then, may be in a given rarest of rare case, a private
opinion
obtained from a private expert may be permitted to be filed but not in a case
of this nature.
9.1     Having regard to the facts peculiar to this case, this Court has already
recorded reasoned findings while confirming the findings of the Court below;
and the said reasons are sufficient to say that the decisions relied upon by the
learned counsel for the petitioner/defendant do not advance his case any
further.
10.     Viewed thus, this court finds that in the facts and circumstances of the
case, the Court below was justified in refusing to receive on file the experts
report/opinion and to summon the expert for giving evidence and, therefore,
the common order impugned does not call for any interference.
11.     In the result, both the Civil Revision Petitions are dismissed.
It is needless to mention that the defendant is at liberty to file, if he
so
chooses and so advised, an appropriate and necessary application before the
Court below to send the suit promissory note and other relevant original and
other documents to an expert for furnishing an opinion as to the genuineness or
otherwise of the suit promissory note.  However, it is also made clear that if
any such application comes to be filed, the Court below shall give an
opportunity to the plaintiff to file a counter and then shall dispose of the
said
application in strict accordance with the procedure established by law.
Considering the fact that the suit is of the year 2010, the trial Court shall
dispose of the suit as expeditiously as possible and in accordance with the
procedure established by law within a period of three (03) months from the
date of the receipt of a copy of this common order.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Miscellaneous petitions, pending if any, in these CRPs also shall stand
closed.
__________________________    
JUSTICE M. SEETHARAMA MURTI        
30th March 2016