[Cites
4
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Riya George vs Kannur Medical College on 21 February, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 500
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                   WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No.1247 OF 2018

          RIYA GEORGE                                                   PETITIONER

                                                  VERSUS


          KANNUR MEDICAL COLLEGE AND ORS                                RESPONDENTS



                                              JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J


          1              The petitioner, who is a student of Medicine, has instituted these

          proceedings under
Article 32
of the Constitution seeking a direction to the first

          respondent to compensate her for the loss of an academic year.


          2              In
Sankalp Charitable Trust v Union of India1
, this Court issued a

          direction on 28 April 2016 to the effect that admissions to MBBS/BDS courses

          shall be conducted through the National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test 2.
On 9

          August 2016, the Union government directed all States and Union Territories to

          conduct combined/centralised counselling for the 2016-17 MBBS admissions,

          consistent with the judgment of this Court in
Modern Dental College and

          Research Centre v State of Madhya Pradesh3
.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MANISH SETHI
Date: 2019.02.21
16:32:05 IST
Reason:
1 (2016) 7 SCC 487
          2 NEET
          3 (2016) 7 SCC 353
1
3        The petitioner secured 97.16 percent marks in her 12th standard Board

examinations. In 2016, she qualified for NEET 2016-17 with a percentile score of

94.36.
4        On 20 August 2016, the Government of Kerala directed all medical

colleges to admit only students who were selected by the Commissioner for

Entrance Examinations4 through common counselling. A Writ Petition 5 was

instituted in the Kerala High Court by medical colleges for challenging this

direction.
5        On 26 August 2016, the High Court issued interim directions to the effect

that MBBS admissions for 2016-17 shall be conducted on the basis of NEET

2016 and that all applications shall be made online to facilitate transparency with

regard to merit and the identities of student applicants. On 3 September 2016

the Admission Supervisory Committee for Professional Colleges in Kerala 6 issued

directions to medical colleges in the state, stating that admissions in

contravention of those directions will not be registered by the Kerala University of

Health Sciences.
6          On 15 September 2016, ASC cancelled all the admissions made by the

first respondent (Kannur Medical College) after conducting an enquiry, on the

ground that it had neither called for online applications nor did it comply with the

requirements in the revised approval of prospectus dated 10 September 2016.

On 17 September 2016, ASC issued an order reiterating its directions and called

upon all colleges to publish relevant details online. Applications for the MBBS
4 CEE
5 WP (C) No 28041 of 2016
6 ASC
2
degree course with the first respondent for 2016-17 were also invited. The

petitioner applied for admission pursuant to this process.


7       On 26 September 2016, the petitioner handed over all relevant documents,

including her certificates to the first respondent and secured admission to the first

year of the MBBS degree course. The petitioner paid a total fee of Rs 21.65

lakhs to the first respondent which comprised, inter alia, of Rs 10 lakhs as annual

fees, Rs 10 lakhs as fee deposit and Rs 1.65 lakhs as a special fee. On 28

September 2016, this Court passed an order directing that all counselling should

be centralised7. Classes for the MBBS degree course commenced on 1 October

2016.
8       Shortly thereafter, on 2 October 2016, the ASC cancelled MBBS

admissions granted by the first respondent due to non-compliance with its orders.

The Government of Kerala was requested to direct CEE to conduct centralised

admissions. Against the order of cancellation, the first respondent moved a Writ

Petition8 before the Kerala High Court. On 4 October 2016 the petitioner

registered for spot allotment with the first respondent. On 6 October 2016, the

High Court, in an interim order, directed the first respondent to submit the records

for spot allotment to the CEE. On 13 October 2016, CEE submitted its report

decrying the absence of cooperation by the first respondent. The Commissioner

had this to state in his report:
“12. The proceedings of the Spot Admission Process started
                 at 9.30 am on 07.102016 at the Auditorium, Govt. Medical
                 College, Thiruvananthapuram. Officials including the Director
                 of Medical Education, the Joint Director of Medical Education
                 and officials representing various Medical and Dental
7 SLP (C) No 9862 of 2016
8 Writ Petition (C) No 32186 of 2016
3
Colleges were also present. The representatives of Kannur
                 Medical College, Anjarakkandy, Kannur reported at the venue
                 of the Spot Admission only at 11.30 am and they furnished
                 the following records.
1. List of total applications received (without NEET rank &
                     Roll. No) – 448 applicants.
2. List of disqualified applications: 7 applicants
3. Category-wise Merit list (without NEET rank & Roll No.) –
                     448 applicants.
4. List of candidates admitted – 150 candidates
5. List of students registered with KUHS – 150 candidates
                     (Annexure 14 – copy of lists)
                 The persons who claimed to be the representatives of the
                 college didn’t furnish the letter of authorization from the
                 college authorities. Whey they were asked to register their
                 attendance, they immediately left the counselling hall around
                 12’O clock without registering their attendance.”
9       On 28 October 2016, the High Court delivered a judgment imposing costs

of Rs one lakh on the first respondent and directing the ASC to scrutinise all the

records of the medical colleges with regard to the admissions made. This order

of the High Court was challenged before this Court 9. On 14 November 2016

admissions to the first respondent were cancelled again due to non-compliance

with various directions including the non-publication of lists and conducting

admissions offline, among other reasons. On 22 March 2017, this Court declined

to interfere with the order of the Kerala High Court. Pursuant to the said order, on

31 March 2017, the Registrar of Kerala University of Health Sciences directed the

principal of the first respondent to discharge all the 150 students who were

admitted for the academic year 2016-17 and report compliance.


10      The petitioner, together with other students, instituted a writ petition 10 in the

Kerala High Court to challenge the order of cancellation. The High Court



9 SLP(C) No 32580-81 of 2016
10 Writ Petition (C) No 15088 of 2017
4
dismissed the writ petition on 22 June 2017, which was confirmed by this Court

on 10 July 2017.
11     The Kerala Professional Colleges (Regulation of Admissions in Medical

Colleges) Ordinance 2017 was promulgated by the Governor. The Ordinance

sought to regularise MBBS admissions in certain medical colleges against the

payment of Rs 3 lakhs per student as a regularisation fee. The Ordinance was

held to be ultra vires by this Court in MCI v State of Kerala11The petitioner, in the

meantime, appeared for NEET 2017 and secured admission at the Amrita

Institute of Medical Sciences.
12     On 26 September 2017, the father of the petitioner addressed a

communication to the principal of the first respondent seeking a refund of the

documents and fees submitted to the college since the petitioner had joined

another college for pursuing her MBBS course. The letter read thus:
“Sub: Request to withdraw from MBBS Course
               My daughter Riya George has joined for the first year MBBS
               Course in Kannur Medical College, Anjarakandy for the
               academic year 2016-17. Since the admission to your college
               is under dispute, my daughter no longer waned to continue
               with the course. My daughter has already joined another
               college for MBBS Course. I request you to return/refund all
               the documents and fees submitted by me/my daughter at the
               earliest.”
13     Simultaneously the petitioner’s father addressed a letter to the Station

House Officer of the Chakkarakkal police station, Kannur where he had lodged a

complaint on 26 September 2017 stating that the dispute with the college had

been settled against the receipt of an amount of Rs 20 lakhs on 25 September


11 (2018) SCC Online SC 1467
5
2018 towards full and final settlement, as a result of which the petitioner did not

wish to proceed with the complaint any further. The petitioner’s father had also

instituted a petition before the Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee for

Medical Education in Kerala. The father of the petitioner submitted an application

for the withdrawal of the petition in the following terms:
“Petition filed by the petitioner KV George in the above matter
             to permit him to withdraw the above complaint.
             Since the matter has been talked over and settled between
             the petitioner and respondent amicably and as the petitioner
             has received Rs 20 lakhs as per Demand Draft No 960174
             and 960175 for Rs 10 lakhs each drawn on Canara Bank,
             Chakkarakal Branch dated 25.9.2017 in full and final
             settlement of the claim of the petitioner, the petitioner does
             not want to proceed with the above complaint any further.
             Hence it is humbly prayed that the Hon’ble Chairman may be
             pleased to permit the petitioner to withdraw the above
             complaint in the interest of justice.
Dated this the 26th day of September 2017.”



14    It is admitted that two demand drafts dated 25 September 2017, each in

the amount of Rs 10 lakhs towards refund of the fee were received by the

petitioner. The father of the petitioner submitted an affidavit dated 26 September

2017 in the following terms:
“I, KV George, S/o Varkey, aged 58 years, Kanjiramkuzhi
             House Chengalayi PO, Sreekandapuram, Kannur do hereby
             solemnly and undertake as follows:
My daughter Riya George joined for the first year MBBS
             Course in Kannur Medical College, Anjarakandy for the
             academic year 2016-17. Since the admission to the aid
             college is under dispute, I have filed complaint before
             Chakkarakal police station against the college and its various
             officials and management. I have also filed a complaint before
             admission and Fee Regulatory Committee. The matter has
             been talked over and settled between me and the college and
             I have received Rs 20 lakhs as per Demand Draft No 960174
             and 960175 for Rs 10 lakhs each drawn on Canara Bank,
             Chakkarakal Branch dated 25.9.2017 towards the amount
             claimed by me from the college towards the full and final
             settlement. Therefore, I undertake to withdraw the complaint
6
filed before the above Forum and to withdraw from the
             course. I have already submitted letters/memos to that effect.
             I undertake to appear before the above Forums in person or
             through lawyer and submit orally or in writing any other
             submissions required by concerned authorities to fully and
             effectively closing the entire dispute between the college and
             me.”



15    The Chairperson of the Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee for

Medical Education passed an order dated 26 September 2017 permitting the

withdrawal of the complaint filed by the petitioner as having been settled. The

order reads as follows:
“ORDER
             Sri KV George, the father of Riya George who got admission
             to the MBBS Course in the academic year 2016 in the
             respondent college, Kannur Medical College filed this petition
             for directing the respondent college to return the amount of
             Rs 21,65,000/- remitted by him towards fee. The matter has
             been settled between the parties. As per the settlement the
             complainant has agreed to receive 2-post-dated cheques
             each for Rs 10 lakhs drawn on Canara Bank, Chakkarakkal
             branch dated 25.09.2017 in full and final settlement of the
             claim of the petitioner.
In view of the settlement between the parties, Sri KV George
             is permitted to withdraw the complaint. The settlement is
             recorded.”



16    Subsequently, it appears that another complaint was filed by the

petitioner’s father stating that he had received an amount of Rs 20 lakhs but, that

the remaining amount of Rs 1.65 lakhs had not been paid. He also claimed an

amount of Rs 3.50 lakhs towards interest on the amount paid. Rejecting the

objection of the first respondent that there had been a full and final settlement

between the parties, the Committee passed an order on 29 December 2017

allowing the claim for the balance of Rs 1.65 lakhs. The Committee rejected the

claim for interest, leaving it open to the complainant to work out his remedies in
7
an appropriate forum. The first respondent filed a petition for review of the order

dated 29 December 2017 on the ground that there had been a final settlement of

Rs 20 lakhs. While rejecting the review petition, the Committee observed thus:
“Shri KV George submitted that he was in a hurry to get back
                 the certificates and the money and in the above
                 circumstances there was no other alternative but to sign in
                 the Memo prepared by the college for withdrawing the
                 complaint. He further submitted that he was in dire need of
                 the money in connection with the admission of his daughter,
                 and hence he had no other alternative, but to sign in the
                 Memo prepared by the college. After considering all the
                 aspect the committee had taken the view that the signing of
                 the Memo seeking permission to withdraw the complaint was
                 not an act made on free consent of the complainant but was
                 made in compelling circumstances. Hence the Principles of
                 Waiver and Estoppel shall not have application in the present
                 circumstances.”



        In consequence, the Committee has maintained that the college was liable

to return an amount of Rs 1.65 lakhs to the petitioner.
17      In the meantime, on 29 August 2018, a consent order was passed by a two

Judge Bench of this Court in
The Principal, Kannur Medical College v

Admission Supervisory Committee
for Professional Colleges in Kerala 12.
The terms of the consent order, inter alia, envisage that:
“1.The college shall return the double of the amount than the
                 fees deposited by each one of 150 students with college, by 4
                 September, 2018. It is submitted that the amount shall be
                 remitted in the bank account of each of the students. Let
                 compliance report including bank statements, bank account
                 numbers with names of students be filed not only in this Court
                 but also to the Admission Supervisory Committee (ASC). The
                 ASC shall ascertain and submit the report whether amount
                 has been refunded, as ordered, to the students and bank
                 accounts belong to them.”
12 Special Leave Petition (C) No 23225 of 2018
8
18    Subsequently, the issue of refund was revisited by another order of the two

Judge Bench of this Court dated 4 October 2018. Before this Court, the ASC

submitted a report on 1 September 2018 recording that diverse amounts ranging

from Rs 1 lakh to Rs 35 lakhs were collected from most of the 150 students who

had been admitted by the college. Dealing with this aspect of the matter, this

Court observed thus:
“It is a seriously disputed fact in the instance case how much
            amount had been collected from each of the students and
            what has been refunded as per the Order passed by this
            Court is not the appropriate sum. In the facts and
            circumstances of the case, as certain material has been
            placed on record by the college in this Court only and that
            was not placed before the ASC and students have also come
            up with certain documents indicating how they had collected
            amount paid, they are also required to be considered by the
            ASC. This Court cannot conduct factual enquiry. It was
            suggested by Mr. Jaideep Gupta, learned senior counsel that
            the parties may be relegated to the ASC for adjudication of
            the aforesaid aspect. The 6 ASC to consider the material
            which may be placed on record by the respective parties and
            take a decision in accordance with law on the basis of the
            evidence adduced in each of the case with respect to each of
            the students.”
19    On the aspect of refund, the Court directed that an inquiry be made by the

ASC and an appropriate order should be passed thereon. In pursuance of the

above directions of this Court, the ASC issued a notice on 28 November 2018

stating that the complaints of 12 students were being posted for hearing on 3

December 2018. The complainants and the first respondent were directed to

appear before the Committee (with relevant documents) for establishing the right

of claim. The students to whom a notice has been issued include the petitioner.


20    The petitioner has moved these proceedings under
Article 32
of the

Constitution seeking an order for the payment of damages by the first
9
respondent. The basis of the claim is that she has lost one year of education as

a result of the legal proceedings emanating from the cancellation of the

admissions granted by the first respondent. Learned counsel submitted that the

first respondent was guilty of violating the regulations governing the process of

admissions. As a result, students have had to suffer, the petitioner being one

among them. Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner

should not be relegated to pursue her claims before the Committee since that will

only delay the proceedings. She appealed to this Court to bring a finality to the

matter by a suitable award for damages against the first respondent.


21      A preliminary objection has been raised on behalf of the first respondent to

the maintainability of the writ petition on the ground of a wilful suppression of

material facts by the petitioner. Mr Huzefa Ahmadi, learned Senior Counsel

appearing on behalf of the first respondent submits that the petition contains no

disclosure of the following material facts:
(i)     The complaint lodged with the police was withdrawn specifically on the

        ground that an amount of Rs 20 lakhs had been received in full and final

        settlement from the first respondent;
(ii)    An application was submitted on 26 September 2017 to the Admission and

        Fee Regulatory Committee for the withdrawal of the complaint in lieu of the

        receipt of Rs 20 lakhs in full and final settlement;
(iii)   An affidavit filed by the father of the petitioner withdrawing all claims; and
(iv)    By an order dated 26 September 2017, the Chairperson of the Admission

        Fee Regulatory Committee for Medical Education permitted the withdrawal

        of the complaint.
10
22    We have, during the course of the hearing, perused relevant parts of the

writ petition. In the synopsis and the list of dates, there is a significant absence of

the facts which have been disclosed in the counter affidavit filed by the first

respondent. The only reference to the refund of an amount of Rs 21.65 lakhs is

contained in para 2(o) of the Special Leave Petition in the following terms:
“A perusal of the factual backdrop thus clearly reveals that the
             Petitioner was a victim of deliberate actions of Respondent
             that were illegal and contrary to the directions of the Court,
             MCI and the ASC. Even for refund of Rs 21,65,000/- collected
             by the College, the Petitioner had to move the ASC since the
             College refused to refund moneys deposited.”
23    Apart from this, the petitioner has annexed a copy of the order dated 29

May 2018 passed by the Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee on the

review petition filed by the first respondent against the order of the Committee

dated 29 December 2017 for the refund of an amount of Rs 1.65 lakhs. Material

facts pertaining to what had been transpired prior to that order have not been

disclosed in the pleadings.          We find this conduct of the petitioner to be

unsatisfactory.
24    While moving a writ petition before this Court, the petitioner ought to have

made a full, fair and candid disclosure of all facts. The fact that while seeking a

refund of the fees paid to the first respondent, the father of the petitioner had

executed several documents by which he had unconditionally withdrawn the

claim, was certainly a material circumstance which ought to have been disclosed

before this Court. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that facts pertaining

to the withdrawal of the claim, including the documents which were executed by her

father, were unknown to both her and her father.                She submitted that these
11
documents were obtained by the first respondent when the fee was refunded. It is

not possible to accept this contention. The execution of the documents is not in

dispute. That apart, the petitioner has annexed a copy of the review order passed by

the Committee. There is sufficient indication in the order to lead the petitioner to a

knowledge of what had transpired earlier. Despite this, a full statement of facts has

not been made. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submits

that the claim was withdrawn under duress, since the petitioner was required to

obtain a refund of fees, having secured admission to the Amrita Institute of

Medical Sciences. In order to enable the Court to consider the plea of duress, it

was the bounden duty and obligation of the petitioner to disclose a full and

complete statement of facts. This has not been done.
25    Ordinarily, this should result in the dismissal of the writ petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution. However, justice to the petitioner should not

become a victim of the prestige of this Court. In deciding not to dismiss the

petition, we have borne in mind the fact that the Admission and Fee Regulatory

Committee has issued a notice to the petitioner on 28 November 2018, fixing a

hearing for the purpose of deciding upon her claim, amongst the claims of other

students. The Committee, in its review order dated 29 May 2018 has already

adverted to this aspect, which we have extracted earlier.


26    There is another reason why we are of the opinion that it would be

inappropriate for this Court to quantify damages in the present proceedings. As

we have noted earlier, another two Judge Bench of this Court issued directions

by consent on 29 August 2018 requiring the first respondent to deposit “double

the amount” of “the fees deposited by each one of 150 students” with the college.
12
This batch of 150 students includes the petitioner. Technically, it is true that the

petitioner was not a party to the earlier proceedings and that the order dated 29

August 2018 is a consent order. However, any determination by this Court in the

present proceedings of the quantum of damages payable to the petitioner would

be contrary to the underlying purpose and object of the order passed by the

coordinate bench. In the order dated 29 August 2018, the two Judge Bench laid

down the principle – refund of double the amount of the fee – but left the exact

quantification of the amount in each case to be determined by the Committee.

Quantification of damages in monetary terms in the present writ petition will have

a bearing on the pending proceedings before the Committee. That proceeding

covers the entire batch of 150 students. Moreover, in pursuance of the order, the

petitioner has received a notice from the Committee to appear in support of her

claim.
27       There can be no manner of doubt that the petitioner is entitled to be

compensated for the loss of a valuable year which was occasioned by the

misdemeanors of the first respondent. A student who has been deprived of a

valuable year in pursuing her studies, cannot be left in the lurch. It is in this

background, that the explanation that the complaints made by the father of the

petitioner were withdrawn only because there was an urgent need to obtain a

refund of the fee, to enable the petitioner to secure admission to the Amrita

Institute of Medical Sciences must be understood. Middle class parents do not

have the luxury of resources.     We must form a robust understanding of the

circumstances in which the father of the petitioner withdrew his complaint. The

Committee has in fact recorded a finding of fact that the withdrawal was not
13
voluntary and was occasioned by the serious impediment in receiving a refund of

fees. Hence, the petitioner would be entitled to the benefit of the principle which

was formulated in the orders of this Court dated 29 August 2018 and 4 October

2018. Since the issue has been remitted back to the Committee by a coordinate

bench, following the norm of judicial discipline, we are inclined to follow the same

course of action.
28    In order not to prejudice the case of the petitioner, we leave it open to her

to pursue her claim before the Committee. The petitioner would be at liberty to

pursue her claim before the Committee in terms of Clause 1 of the order dated 29

August 2018 passed by this Court as clarified by the subsequent order dated 4

October 2018. We request the Admissions Committee to take a decision

expeditiously and within a period of three months of the receipt of a certified copy

of this judgment. All the rights and contentions of the parties are kept open.


29    The Writ Petition shall accordingly stand disposed of. There shall be no

order as to costs.
…………..…….……..………………………….J
                                   [Dr DHANANJAYA Y CHANDRACHUD]



                                   …….………..…….………….………………….J
                                   [HEMANT GUPTA]

NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY 21, 2019
14