[Cites
44
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
International Spirits And Wines ... vs The State Of Haryana on 12 February, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 955, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 74
Author:
Navin Sinha
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
Navin Sinha
,
K.M. Joseph
REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9533 OF 2018


         INTERNATIONAL SPIRITS AND WINES
         ASSOCIATION OF INDIA                                    ....APPELLANT(S)

                                               VERSUS

         STATE OF HARYANA AND OTHERS                           ...RESPONDENT(S)




                                             JUDGMENT
NAVIN SINHA, J.
The appellant having been unsuccessful in its challenge to

         Rule 24(i-eeee) of the Haryana Liquor License Rules 1970 (as

         amended by the Haryana Liquor License (Amendment) Rules

         2017), (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Rules’) as being ultra vires the
Punjab Excise Act, 1914
(hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’), is in

         appeal before this Court. The amended Rule provides for a single

         L-1BF license for the entire State to deal in imported foreign liquor,

         bottled outside India and imported into the country in a bottled
Signature Not Verified
form (i.e. bottled in original). Under challenge is also clause 9.5.1.2
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2019.02.12
15:31:34 IST
Reason:
of the State Excise Policy for the year 2017-2018 to that extent,
1
carried forward to the year 2018-2019 also.            The procedure for

grant of the single license under the amended Rule is through

tender by e-bidding, with a reserve price of Rs. 50 crores.
2.      Sri Gopal Subramanium, learned senior counsel for the

appellant, submitted that the creation of a monopoly by the State

in favour of a private entity, to trade in liquor, is contrary to
Article

19(6)
of   the   Constitution   of   India.   The    impugned   order

acknowledges that it would lead to serious distortions in the

market, yet erroneously declines interference holding that once the

matter moves from State control into the hands of private

enterprise, the restrictions applicable to the State cease to apply.

Reliance was placed on
Akadasi Padhan vs. State of Orissa
, AIR

1963 SC 1047, to contend that if a monopoly is created by the State

in its favour, the same cannot be constitutionally permitted if the

private agents appointed pursuant thereto, act as independent

entities.
Sri Subramanium also relied on
Khoday Distilleries Ltd.

vs. State of Karnataka (I
), (1995)1 SCC 574, to submit that once

the State parts with its privilege to trade in liquor, in favour of

private individuals, the rigours of
Article 14
will continue to apply

to provide equal opportunity to all desirous to do so. Alternatively,

it was submitted that the absence of sufficient checks and balances
2
gives untrammeled and uncanalised powers to the sole licensee

which again is constitutionally impermissible.
Sri Subramanium

further relied on
Khoday        Distilleries Ltd.    vs.   State of

Karnataka (II
) (1996) 10 SCC 304, to submit that the

interpretation of
Section 58 (2)(e)
and
59(a)
of the Act by the High

Court was flawed.     Rule 24 (i-eeee) was ultra vires the Act. The

interpretation put by the High Court grants wider powers to the

Financial Commissioner, than the State Government itself. The

single monopolistic L-1BF license was also discriminatory and

violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution in so far as no such

requirement was stipulated for wholesale trade in Indian made

foreign liquor or country liquor in the State. There was no rational

or reasonable classification for this distinction between licensees,

having any rationale or nexus with any object to be achieved.
3.   Ms. Pinky Anand, learned Additional Solicitor General,

submitted that the appellant never participated in the bidding

process for the L-1BF license. A mere apprehension that a single

L-1BF license for the entire State may affect market dynamics,

when the reality was otherwise, resulting in rise of revenue, negates

the challenge laid out by the appellant. The issue of monopoly in

the hands of a private entity is devoid of merit as the process is
3
through public auction, open to participation by all, and not

tailored to suit any particular person or activated by malafides,

relying on
Association of Registration Plates vs. Union of India
,

(2005) 1 SCC 679. Trade in original bottled foreign liquor was only

a fraction of the entire liquor trade in the State, ranging between

0.64 percent to 1.98 per cent.        The aim and object of the

amendment was to increase revenue, curb pilferage, control illicit

trade in the State of Indian made foreign liquor and bottled in

original bottled foreign liquor. The Financial Commissioner was

competent under
Section 59(a)
read with
Section 13
to amend Rule

24 by incorporation of Rule 24 (i-eeee) providing for a single L-1BF

license for the entire State, as the competence of the State for

issuance of license under
Section 58(2)(e)
was limited to a local

area only.
4.   Sri M.K. Dutta, learned counsel for the sole L-1BF licensee for

2017-2018, submitted that the appellant was not even a bidder.

The question of any apprehension on its part simply does not arise.

There are sufficient checks and balances in the excise license

providing for cancellation also if the conditions of the license were

not followed. The grant of a monopolistic license as the agent of

the State Government was permissible in the law for trade in liquor.
4
5.   We have considered the submissions on behalf of parties. The

appellant assails the amended Rule 24(i-eeee) as ultra vires the

provisions of the Act. Integral to the issue is whether the state

government is competent to issue licences for a local area alone

under
Section 58(2)(e)
of the Act, while the Excise Commissioner,

a sub-delegate of the Financial Commissioner is competent under
Section 13(b)
read with
Section 59(a)
to issue L-1BF licence for the

entire state under the amended rule, notwithstanding the

prohibition in
Section 13(a)
to the delegation of powers under
Section 58
by the State Government. The amended Rule 24(i-eeee)

relevant to the controversy reads as follows:
“ (xiv) for clause (i-eeee), the following clause
       shall be substituted, namely: -
(i-eeee) For a license in form L-1BF –
(a) Reserve price shall be Rs.50,00,00,000/-.
(b) The license in form L-1BF shall be allotted
           through e-bidding to the highest bidder.
(c) There shall be only one L-1BF license in the
           State.”
6.   Under
Section 8
of the Act, the State government exercises

general superintendence and control of Excise Administration and

Excise Officers.
Section 9
provides for vesting powers of the
5
Financial Commissioner in the Excise Commissioner by the State

Government.
Section 13
dealing with delegation of powers

provides:
“Delegation:
(a) The State Government may by notification
            delegate to the Financial Commissioner or
            Commissioners all or any of its powers under
            this Act, except the powers conferred by
sections
            14
,
21
,
22
,
31
,
56
and
58
of this Act.
(b) The State Government may by notification
            permit the delegation by the Financial
            Commissioner, Commissioner or Collector to
            any person or class of persons specified in such
            notification of any powers conferred by this Act
            or exercised in respect of excise revenue under
            any Act for the time being in force.”


The Financial Commissioner is therefore competent to delegate

only such powers to the Excise Commissioner which the State

Government can delegate to the former under the Act, in view of

the prohibition contained in
Section 13(a)
of the Act.
7.
Section 58
of the Act, in its relevant extract reads as follows:
“Power of State Government to make Rules:
(1) The State Government may by notification
            make rules for the purpose of carrying out the
            provisions of this Act or any other law for the
            time being in force relating to excise revenue.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the
            generality of the foregoing provisions, the State
            Government may make rules:
……
6
(e) Regulating the period and localities for which,
           and, the persons or classes of persons, to whom
           licenses, permits and passes for the vend by
           wholesale or by retail of any intoxicant may be
           granted and regulating the number of such
           licenses which may be granted in any local area;
(3) Previous publication of rules: - The power
           conferred by this section of making rules is
           subject to the condition that the rules be made
           after previous publication;
Provided that any such rules may be made
           without    previous     publication if State
           Government consider that they should be
           brought into force at once.”


Under
Section 58(2)(e)
of the Act, the State Government alone has

the power to regulate the number of licenses which may be granted

in any local area for wholesale or retail sale.
8.   Relevant to the discussion are also Rules 3 and 4 which

provide as follows :
“3. The authority given by these rules to grant
           and renew licenses is, in each case, subject to
           the restrictions contained in the Punjab
           Intoxicants License and Sale Order as to the
           localities in which licenses may be granted and
           the number of licenses which may be granted in
           any local area, and to such reservations from the
           general superintendence of the Financial
           Commissioner as the State Government may
           notify under
Section 8
of the Punjab Excise Act,
           1914.
7
4. Every license shall be granted to a particular
           licensee in respect of particular premises/area.”
9.    Chapter D of the Punjab Intoxicants License and Sales

Orders, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Order’) provides for the

number of licences and reads as under :
“6. The number of liquor vends except vends
           licenced in form L-2 for the wholesale and retail
           sale of foreign liquor to the public only and drug
           shops, which may be licenced in any local area,
           shall be the number which the Financial
           Commissioner, subject to the control of the
           State government considers necessary. The
           number of L-2 vends, which may be licenced in
           any local area, shall be the number of such
           licences granted by the Collector under the
           rules.”
10.   In the scheme of the Act, the Rules and the Order read

together it is apparent that a liquor license is to be granted for a

local area only. The power to determine the number of licences

that may be granted in any category in a local area is exclusively

vested in the State Government under
Section 58(2)(e)
of the Act.

The delegation of this power by the State Government to the

Financial Commissioner is prohibited by
Section 13(a)
. This is only

in consonance with the general power of superintendence vested in

the State Government under
Section 8
.
8
11.
In
Khoday Distilleries vs. State of Karnataka (II
) (supra),

a similar provision under the
Karnataka Excise Act
1965 fell for

consideration therein:
“71(1):     The State Government may, by
          notification and after previous publication,
          make Rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the
          generality of the foregoing provision, the State
          Government may make Rules –
          …..
(e)  regulating the periods and localities in
          which and the persons or classes of persons to
          whom, licenses for the wholesale or retail sale of
          any intoxicant may be granted and regulating
          the number of such licenses which may be
          granted in any local area:
(f)   ……
(g)   ……
(h) prescribing the authority by which, the
          form in which and the terms and conditions on
          and subject to which any license or permit shall
          be granted, and may, by such Rules, among
          other matters.”

          This Court held as follows :-
“11. ….
The Act
itself provides that the number
          of licenses can be regulated by the State. If the
          State chooses to regulate licenses by providing
          that the license shall be granted only to a
          company owned by the State, it cannot be said
          that such a license is something which is outside
          the purview of the Act or the rule-making
          authority of the State under the Act.”
9
12.
The Act
maintains a clear distinction between a local area as

the unit for grant of licence, and the entire State for other purposes.

The State government is the sole repository of these other powers

with regard to the entire State evident from
Sections 5
and
6
which

read:
“5. Power of State Government to declare
             limit of sale by retail and by wholesale- The
             State Government may by notification declare
             with respect either to the whole of Punjab or to
             any local area comprised therein, and as regards
             purchasers generally or any specified class of
             purchasers, and generally or for any specified
             occasion, the maximum or minimum quantity or
             both of any intoxicant which for the purposes of
             this Act may be sold by retail and by wholesale.
6.    Power     to     limit  application   of
             notifications, permits, etc., made under this
             Act.- Where under this Act any notification is
             made, any power conferred, any appointment
             made or any license, pass or permit granted, it
             shall be lawful to direct –
(a) That it shall apply to the whole of Punjab or
                 to any specified local area or areas;
xxxxx"
The power to declare by notification that a licence granted shall be

applicable to the entire State is exclusively vested in the State

Government under
Section 6(a)
of the Act.
10
13.   The High Court has held that in contradistinction to
Section

58(2)(e)
of the Act, which limits the powers of the State Government

to grant of licence for a local area, the Excise Commissioner, as the

delegatee of the Financial Commissioner, was competent under
Section 59(a)
to grant a single L-1BF licence for the entire State.
“59. Powers of Financial Commissioner to
        make rules:-
The Financial Commissioner may, by notification,
        make rules,-
(a) regulating the manufacture, supply, storage or
            sale of any intoxicant, including-
(i)   the character, erection, alteration, repair,
                  inspection, supervision, management and
                  control of any place for the manufacture,
                  supply, storage or sale of such article and
                  the fittings, implements, apparatus and
                  registers to be maintained therein;
(ii) the cultivation of the hemp plant and the
                  collection of spontaneous growth of such
                  plant and the preparation of any
                  intoxicating drug;
(iii) the tapping or drawing of tari from any tari
                  producting tree;
(b) regulating the bottling of liquor for purposes of
           sale;
(c) regulating the deposit of any intoxicant in a
           warehouse and the removal of any intoxicant
           from any warehouse or from any distillery or
           brewery;
(d) prescribing the scale of fees or the manner of
           fixing the fees payable in respect of any license,
           permit or pass or in respect of the storing of any
           intoxicant;
11
(e) regulating the time, place and manner of
   payment of any duty or fee;
(f) prescribing the authority by, the restrictions
    under, and the conditions on, which any license,
    permit or pass may be granted, including
    provisions for the following matters-
(i)     the prohibition of the admixture with any
          intoxicant of any substance deemed to be
          noxious or objectionable;
(ii) the regulation or prohibition of the
          reduction of liquor by a licensed
          manufacturer or licensed vendor from a
          higher to a lower strength;
(iii) the strength at which intoxicant shall be
          sold, supplied or possessed;
(iii-a) the fixing of the price below and above which
          any intoxicant shall not be sold or supplied
          by the licenced vendor.
(iv) the prohibition of sale of any intoxicant
          except for cash;
(v) the fixing of the days and hours during
          which any licensed premises may or may not
          be kept open, and the closure of such
          premises on special occasions;
(vi) the specification of the nature of the
          premises in which any intoxicant may be
          sold, and the notice to be exposed at such
          premises;
(vii) the form of the accounts to be maintained
          and the returns to be submitted by license-
          holders; and
(viii) the prohibition or regulation of the transfer
          of licenses;
(g) (i) declaring the process by which spirit shall
   be denatured;
(ii) for causing spirit to be denatured through
        the agency or under the supervision of its
        own officers;
12
(iii)   for ascertaining whether such spirit has
                   been denatured;
(h) providing for the destruction or other disposal of
           any intoxicant deemed to be unfit for use;
(i) regulating the disposal of confiscated articles;
(j) prescribing the amount of security to be
            deposited by holders of leases, licenses, permits
            or passes for the performance of the conditions of
            the same.”
14.   The nature of powers conferred under
Section 59
of the Act,

make it manifest that it is but a regulatory power available only

after a license is granted to the licensee for a local area, to ensure

supply, storage, sale or otherwise that the conditions of the license

are adhered to and necessary directions can also be given for the

purpose.
15.   The Excise Commissioner, a sub-delegate of the Financial

Commissioner, in exercise of the powers conferred under
section

59
of the Act by virtue of the Haryana Government Excise and

Taxation notification dated 01.04.2016, made the impugned

amendment to the Haryana Liquor License Rules, 1970. The same

were notified on 29.03.2017. These rules were called the Haryana

Liquor License (Amendment) Rules, 2017. Rule 1(2) stated that

they shall come into force with effect from 01.04.2017. Rule 3 of
13
the amendment substituted Rule 24 (i-eeee) which provided that

there shall be only one L-1BF license in the State. The amendment

with regard to the number of licenses that could be issued for the

entire State is in teeth of
Sections 6
and
58(2)(e)
, delegation of

which by the State Government is expressly prohibited by
Section

13(a)
.
16.   The distinction sought to be drawn by the High Court with

regard to the term ‘local area’ under
Section 58(2)(e)
of the Act as

being confined to small compact area only and that the Financial

Commissioner by virtue of the power to regulate supply, storage

or sale of any intoxicant had the power to determine the number

of licenses to be granted for the entire State in a particular

category, in our view, is not only unreasonable but also in teeth of

the statutory Scheme and its provisions. To hold that the power of

Financial Commissioner under
Section 59(a)
of the Act to regulate

sale of liquor, and that sale could be regulated through grant of

licence, the Financial Commissioner was vested with the power to

determine the number of licences, to our mind is not only

unreasonable but also unsustainable.       Such an interpretation

amounts to reading words into the statute which the legislature

itself never intended.   The amendment notified by the Excise
14
Commissioner as a delegate of the Financial Commissioner was

per se ultra vires the powers of the latter under
Section 6
and
13(a)
read with
Section 58(2)(e)
of the Act. The unreasonableness and

incongruity in the reasoning by the High Court would vest wider

powers in the Excise Commissioner than the State Government

itself. While the State Government would have the power to

determine the number of licences and to issue licence for a local

area only, the Excise Commissioner would have a superior power

to determine the number of licences and issue licences for the

entire State.
17.   The meaning and scope of a regulatory power fell for

consideration in
Deepak Theatre vs. State of Punjab
, 1992 Supp

(1) SCC 684,

           “4. The power to regulate includes the power
           to restrain, which embraces limitations and
           restrictions on all incidental matters
           connected with the right to trade or business
           under the existing licence. Rule 12(3)
           regulated entry to different classes to the
           cinema hall and it was within the rule making
           power of the State Government to frame such
           rule. The court further held that fixing limit of
           rate of admission was an absolute necessity
           in the interest of the general public and the
           restriction so placed was reasonable and in
           public interest….”
15
18. The Financial Commissioner was therefore not competent to

amend the Rules with regard to grant of number of licences for the

entire state, and which power was exclusive to the State

Government under
Section 6
read with
Section 13(a)
and
58(2)(e)
of the Act. In conclusion, we hold that Rule 24(i-eeee) as amended

by the Financial Commissioner in exercise of powers under
Section

59(a)
of the Act is ultra vires the powers of the Financial

Commissioner under the Act and is therefore struck down. In view

of Rule 24(i-eeee) itself having been struck down, it is not

considered necessary to discuss or consider the other grounds of

challenge raised.
19. The appeal is allowed.
………............................CJI.
[RANJAN GOGOI]




                                     …………............................J.
                                                  [NAVIN SINHA]



NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY 12, 2019.
16
1
Reportable
           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

           CIVIL APPEAL NO.9533 OF 2018

INTERNATIONAL SPIRITS AND WINES
ASSOCIATION OF INDIA                      ..APPELLANT(S)
                       VERSUS

STATE OF HARYANA AND ORS.                ..RESPONDENT(S)

                        JUDGMENT

K.M. JOSEPH,J.
1.        Having    perused   the     judgment   authored    by

brother   Justice    Navin    Sinha    notwithstanding      the

highest respect that I maintain for him, I express my

inability to accept the reasoning given in support of

the conclusion on the point which has been dealt with

by him and the consequent verdict.
2.        The appellant is the writ petitioner before

the High Court in writ petition No.6870 of 2017 which

came to be decided along with another writ petition.

Appellant is a company registered under
Section 25
of

the Companies Act.     It claims to be a representative

body of International spirits and wines companies
2
doing business in India.     On 06.03.2017, the excise

policy for the State of Haryana came to be announced

for the period 01.04.2017 to 31.03.2018.     Under clause

9.5.1.1, a wholesale licence in the form of L-1BF for

imported foreign liquor (BIO) was prescribed.               The

licensee was authorized to import IFL (BIO) including

beer from other countries and supply it to L-1s, L-4

and L-5s, L-12Cs and L-12Gs of the State.              Clause

9.5.12, however, provided that there will be only one

wholesale licence in the form of L-1BF in the State.

It was contemplated that licence was to be settled by

e-tenders   through   the   Departmental    Portal     in    a

completely secure and transparent manner. The reserve

price was fixed at Rs.50 crores.       Under the general

conditions provisions for L-1BF it was provided as

follows:
“(vi) The licensee will have to submit pricing
      of each brands at the time of approval of the
      brand and department will approve his maximum
      sale price factoring in the landing price,
      expenses, profit margin, prevalent rates of
      same or equivalent brands in the neighboring
      States and the Government levies. The licensee
      shall do this preferably in the first quarter
      of the financial year.”
3
3.         Originally        Clause   9.5.1.2    was    challenged.
The third respondent had been appointed as exclusive

licensee     and      declaration      was     sought    that    the

appointment was invalid.          While the Writ Petition was

pending, the Haryana Liquor License (Amendment) Rules,

2017 was introduced.           The rules came into effect on

01.4.2017.       Thereupon the appellant challenged Rule

24   (i-eeee)    of    the    1970    Rules    introduced   by   the

amending Rules.        The said Rule reads as follows:
“3. In the said rules, in rule 24, -
…....
(xiv)    for clause (i-eeee), the following
        clause shall be substituted, namely:-
“(i-eeee) For a license in form L-1BF -
(a) Reserve price shall be Rs. 50,00,00,000/-
(b) The license in form L-1BF shall be
          allotted through e-bidding to the highest
          bidder
(b) There shall be only one L-1BF license in
            the State.
(d) In case no eligible bid equal to or above
          the reserve price is received for the lone L-
1BF license, the same shall be allotted
          exclusively to a Government owned entity on
          the terms and conditions as decided by the
          Government. The permit and brand label fee
          shall be levied as under to procure Stock of
          liquor by the L-1BF licensee.”
4.         The   ground      which    failed    to   persuade    the

Division Bench of the High Court but which has found

acceptance at the hands of my learned Brother Sinha J.
4
is that the impugned rule is ultra vires, the power

of the Finance Commissioner under
Section 59
of the

Punjab Excise Act, 1914 (hereinafter referred to as

“the Act”).   The argument of the appellant is that the

power to make a rule regarding number of licenses is

with the State Government and it is said power which

has been usurped by the Financial Commissioner in

purported exercise of the power under
Section 59
of

the Act. To put it differently, the question would be

whether the power is vested with the State Government

under
Section 58
or with the Financial Commissioner

under
Section 59
of the Act.       It is but natural that

I set out the provisions of
Section 58
and
59
of the

Act.
“58. Power of State Government to make Rules
       – (1) The State Government may by notification
       make rules for the purpose of carrying out the
       provisions of this Act or any other law for the
       time being in force relating to excise revenue.

       (2) In particular and without prejudice to the
       generally of the foregoing provisions, the
       State Government may make rules: -
(a) prescribing the duties of excise officers;
(b) regulating the delegation of any power by
           the Financial Commissioner, Commissioner or
           Collector, under
Section 13
, Clause (b);
(c) prescribing   the   time  and   manner   of
           presenting    and the procedure for dealing
5
with appeals from   orders     of     excise
   officers;
(d) regulating the import, export, transport or
possession of any intoxicant or Excise bottle
and the transfer, price or use of any type of
description of such bottle.
(e) regulating the period and localities for
which, and, the persons or classes of persons,
to whom licenses, permits and passes for the
vend by wholesale or by retail of any
intoxicants may be granted and regulating the
number of such licenses which may be granted in
any local area;
(f) prescribing the procedure to be followed
and the matters to be ascertained before any
license is granted for the retail vend of liquor
for consumption on the premises;
(g) for the prohibition of the sale of any
intoxicant to any person or class of persons;
(h) regulating the power of excise officers to
summon witnesses form a distance;
(I) regulating the grant of expenses to
witnesses and compensation to persons charged
with offences under this Act and subsequently
released, discharged or acquitted.
(j) for the prohibition of the employment by a
license holder of any person or class of persons
to assist in his business in any capacity what
so ever;
(k) for the prevention of drunkness, gambling
and disorderly conduct in or near any licensed
premises and the meeting or remaining of
persons of bad character in such premises;
(l) prohibiting the printing, publishing or
otherwise   displaying   or   distributing   any
advertisement or other matter commending or
soliciting the use of, or offering any
intoxicant calculated to encourage or incite
any individual or class of individuals or the
public generally to commit an offence under
this Act, or to commit a breach or evade the
provisions of any rule or order made there under,
6
or the conditions of any license, permit or pass
obtained there under:-
(m)   prohibiting   within   the   State   the
circulation, distribution or sale of any
newspaper, book, leaflet, booklet, or other
publication printed and published outside the
State which contains any advertisement or
matter of the nature described in clause (1);
(n) declaring any newspaper, book, leaflet,
booklet or other publication, wherever printed
or published, containing any advertisement or
matter [of the nature described in clause (1)]
to be forefeited to the State Government; and
(o) implementing    generally   the   policy   of
prohibition.
(3) Previous publication of rules – The power
conferred by this section of making rules is
subject to the condition that the rules be made
after previous publication.
Provided that any such rules may be made
without   previous    publication   if    State
Government consider that they should be brought
into force at once.
59. Powers of Financial Commissioner to make
rules – The Financial Commission may, by
notification, make rules.
(a) regulating the manufacture, supply, storage
or sale of any intoxicant, including:-
(i) the character, erection, alteration,
  repair, inspection, supervision, management
  and control of any place for the manufacture,
  supply storage or sale of such article and
  the   fittings,  implements   apparatus   and
  registers to be maintained therein;
(ii) the cultivation of the hemp plant and
  the collection of spontaneous growth of such
  plant and the preparation of any intoxicating
  drug.
(iii) the tapping of drawing of tari from any
  tari producting tree.
7
(b) regulating the bottling      of   liquor   for
purposes of   sale.
(d) regulating the deposit of any intoxicant in
    a warehouse and the removal of any
    intoxicant from any warehouse or from any
    distillery or brewery.
(e) prescribing the scale of fees or the manner
    of fixing the fees payable in respect of any
    license, permit or pass or in respect of the
    storing of any intoxicant;
(f) regulating the time, place and manner of
    payment of any duty or fee;
(g) prescribing   the    authority  by,   the
    restrictions under, and the conditions on
    which any license, permit or pass may be
    granted   including   provision  for  the
    following matters: -
(i)The prohibition of the admixture with any
  intoxicant of any substance deemed to be
  noxious or objectionable;
(ii) The regulation or prohibition of the
  reduction of liquor by a licensed manufacture
  or licensed vendor from a higher to a lower
  strength;
(iii) [the strength at which intoxicant shall
  be sold], supplied or possessed;
(iii-a) the fixing of the price below and
  above which any intoxicant shall not be sold
  or supplied by the licensed vendors;
(iv)   The  prohibition   of   sale    of    any
  intoxicant except for cash;
(v) The fixing of the days and hours during
  which any licensed premises may or may not be
  kept open, and the closure of such premises
  on special occasions;
(vi) The specification of the nature of the
  premises in which any intoxicant may be sole,
  and the notice to be exposed at such premises;
8
(vii)The   form  of   the  accounts   to  be
         maintained and the return to be submitted by
         license holders; and
(viii) The prohibition or regulation of the
         transfer of licenses;
(g-i) declaring the process by which spirit
       shall be denatured;
(ii) for causing spirits to be denatured
       through the agency or under the supervision of
       its own officers;
(iii) for causing spirits to be denatured
       through the agency or under the supervision of
       its own officers;
(h) providing for the destruction or other
           disposal of any intoxicant deemed to be
           unfit for use;
(i) regulating   the   disposal   of   confiscated
       articles;
(j) prescribing the amount of security to be
       deposited by holders of leases, licenses,
       permits or passes for the performance of the
       conditions of the same.”
5.       The case of the appellant is built around the

provisions contained in
Section 58(2)(e)
of the Act.
6.
The Punjab Excise Act, 1914
as extended to

the State of Haryana contains the following provisions

inter alia:
Section 5
of the said Act reads as follows:
“5. Power of State Government to declare limit of
     sale by retail and by wholesale. –
     The [State] Government may by notification declare
     with respect either to the whole of [Haryana] or
     to any local area comprised therein, and as regards
9
purchasers generally or any specified class of
     purchasers, and generally or for any specified
     occasion, the maximum or minimum quantity or both
     of any [intoxicant] which for the purposes of this
     Act may be sold by retail and by wholesale.”
                                       (emphasis supplied)
The expression “any local area” stands out in the said

statutory provision as distinct from the whole of

Haryana.         It is to be noted that
Section 5
does not

deal with the rule making power of the State.                   In

fact, it relates to the maximum and minimum quantity

or both of any intoxicants which may be sold by retail

and by wholesale.          Similarly,
Section 6(a)
reads as

follows:
“6. Power     to     limit    application    of
     notifications, permits, etc., made under this Act.-
     Where under this Act any notification is made, any
     power conferred, any appointment made or any
     license, pass or permit granted, it shall be lawful
     to direct –
(a)     that it shall apply to the whole of [Har-
yana] or to any specified local area or
                   areas;
(b)     …..
           (c)     …..
           (d)     …..”

                                       (emphasis supplied)
Equally
Section 6
also does not deal with the power

to make rules.
7.         It      is   apparent   that   the   legislature    has

maintained a distinction between the whole and a part
10
and the part is what is captured in the expression

“local area”.      Further
Section 8
of the said Act reads

as follows:
“8. Superintendence   and   control   of       excise
     administration and excise officers. -
(a)   Subject to the control of the [State] Gov-
ernment and unless the [State] Government
                 shall by notification otherwise direct,
                 the general superintendence and admin-
                 istration of all matters relating to ex-
                 cise shall vest in the Financial Commis-
                 sioner.”
(b)   ….
(c)   ….”
                                    (emphasis supplied)
8.
Section    9
of   the   said   Act   provides    for

appointment of an Excise commissioner and it reads as

follows:
“9. Excise Commissioner. -    The State Government
     may by notification appoint an Excise Commissioner,
     and, subject to such conditions and restrictions
     as it may deem fit, may invest him with all or any
     of   the   powers  conferred    on  the   Financial
     Commissioner by this Act.”
9.         In terms of the notification vesting powers

of the finance Commissioner apparently under
Section

59
it is that the Excise Commissioner has made the

rules “Haryana Liquor Licence Rules 1970.                 It is

undoubtedly true that
Section 13
forbids delegation
11
of power under
Section 58
inter alia on the Financial

Commissioner or Commissioner.
Section 34
comes under

Chapter VI and is relevant.           It reads as follows:
“34. Fee for terms, conditions and form of, and
        duration of licenses, permits and passes. –
        (1) Every licence, permit or pass granted under
        this Act shall be granted, -
(a)    On payment of such fees, if any;

            (b)    Subject to such restrictions and on such
                   conditions;

            (c)    In such form and containing such partic-
                   ulars;

            (d)    For such period;
as the Financial Commissioner may direct.
        (2) …..
(3) …..”
10.
Section 35
speaks about grant of licences for

sale.     Sub-section (1) of the said provision reads as

follows:
“35. (1) Grant of lincenses for sale. - Subject to
        the rules made by the Financial Commissioner under
        the powers conferred by this Act, the Collector may
        grant licenses for the sale of any [intoxicant]
        within his district.”
                                       (emphasis supplied)
12
11.          Coming    to
Section      58
undoubtedly      what   is

pressed before us by the appellant is a specific

provision contained in
Section 58(2)(e)
. Breaking down

the   said     sub-section,        in    my    view    produces       the

following inevitable result. The State Government has

the power to frame rules.
1) To regulate the periods of licences, permits and

      passes either wholesale or retail;
2) To regulate the localities for which wholesale or

      retail licences, permits or passes may be granted.
3) To regulate the persons or classes of persons to

      whom    the     licences,    permits      or    passes   may    be

      granted either by way of a wholesale or retail

      licence;
12.          The latter part of
Section 58(2)(e)
on the

other hand also permits the Government to regulate by

rules,   the     number     of    such   licences      which    may    be

granted in any local area.                Therefore, it is clear

that it is in respect of the licences which are

referred, be it wholesale or retail mentioned earlier
13
in the provision which can be regulated but however

limited to any local area.             As against this and

immediately    following
Section   58
in
Section   59
,

legislature     has   also     empowered      the    financial

Commissioner to make rules inter alia to regulate the

manufacture,    supply,      storage    or    sale    or    any

intoxicant.
13.     It is relevant to notice that the High Court

in the impugned judgment has specifically dealt with

the expression “local area” by adverting to a judgment

of this Court reported in 1995 (1) SCC 351.                 The

expression “local area” has been designedly employed

and it has to be given full play.       It certainly cannot

mean the whole of the State.      Any other interpretation

would render the word ‘local area’ in
Section 58(2)(e)
meaningless and, in fact, it would involve doing

complete violence to the plain meaning of the words

“local area”.     It may be true that the whole may

include the part (see in this regard the maxim in

Brooms Legal Maxims Omne Majus Continet in Se Minus)

but I do not think that the converse namely the part

would include the whole could hold good.             Thus, the
14
expression “local area” as used in
Section 58(2)(e)
would   appear   to   convey   the    impression     that   the

legislature intended to confer power on the State to

place restrictions on the number of licences which are

to be given qua any local area. In fact, in the written

submission given by the State of Haryana, a definite

case is set up that the State in its wisdom can

conclude that a particular local area owing to the

special   conditions    should   be    protected     from   the

harmful effects of alcohol consumption. An example of

tribal sub plan area is enlisted where the State may

be carrying on a special programme. I would think that

this view finds support also from another circumstance

in the form of Rule 3 of Haryana Liquor Licence Rules,

1970.   The said Rule reads as under:
“3. The authority given by these rules to
        grant and renew licenses is, in each case,
        subject to the restrictions contained in the
        Punjab Intoxicants License and Sale Order as
        to the localities in which licenses may be
        granted and the number of licenses which may
        be granted in any local area, and to such
        reservations from the general superintendence
        of the financial commissioner as the State
        government may notify under
Section 8
of the
        Punjab Excise Act, 1914.
(emphasis supplied)
15
14.       Thus, the said rule reinforces the view that

the expression “number of licences” which may be

granted in the local area is within the exclusive

domain of the State Government and reliance placed by

the appellant on the number of licences which may be

granted in
Section 58(2)(e)
to strike at the impugned

rule which is otherwise sourced under
Section 59
is

without any basis.    In other words going through both

the Act and the Rules, a distinction is made between

the whole of the State and the local area.            In regard

to rule making power, undoubtedly, the legislature has

specifically   conferred     rule   making   power     qua   the

number of licences in any local area upon the State.

Unless it can be reasoned that the powers to regulate

sale of liquor within the meaning of
Section 59
which

is    undoubtedly   placed   on     the   shoulders    of    the

financial Commissioner would not include the power to

make rules in regard to the number of licences for the

State as a whole, the argument of the appellant must

fail.
16
15.       The    word   `regulate’     in   fact    came    to   be

considered by the decision of this Court in
D.K.

Trivedi and Sons v. State of Gujarat
1986 (Suppl.)

SCC 20.   The matter arose under
Section 13
inter alia

of the
Mines and Minerals (Regulation & Development)

Act, 1957
.      This Court went on to hold inter alia as

follows :
“30.     Bearing this in mind, we now turn to
      examine the nature of the rule-making power
      conferred upon the State Governments by
Section
      15(1)
. Although under
Section 14
,
Section 13
is one
      of the sections which does not apply to minor
      minerals, the language of
Section 13(1)
is in
      pari materia with the language of
Section 15(1)
.
      Each of these provisions confers the power
      to make rules for "regulating". The Shorter
      Oxford English Dictionary, Third Edition,
      defines the word "regulate" as meaning "to
      control, govern, or direct by rule or
      regulations; to subject to guidance or
      restrictions; to adapt to circumstances or
      surroundings". Thus, the power to regulate
      by rules given by
Sections 13(1)
and
15(1)
is a
      power to control, govern and direct by rules
      the grant of prospecting licences and mining
      leases in respect of minerals other than
      minor minerals and for purposes connected
      therewith in the case of
Section 13(1)
and the
      grant of quarry leases, mining leases and
      other mineral concessions in respect of minor
      minerals     and   for    purposes       connected
      therewith in the case of
Section 15(1)
and to
      subject such grant to restrictions and to
      adapt them to the circumstances of the case
      and the surroundings with reference to which
      such power is exercised. It is pertinent to
      bear in mind that the power to regulate
17
conferred by
Sections 13(1)
and
15(1)
is not only
      with respect to the grant of licences and
      leases mentioned in those sub-sections but
      is also with respect to "purposes connected
      therewith", that is, purposes connected with
      such grant.”
16.     No doubt it is true that
Section 13
of the

Mines and Minerals (Regulation & Development) Act,

1957 which was considered by the Court inter alia read

as follows:
"13. Power of Central Government to make
      rules in respect of minerals. -
(1)   The    Central  Government    may,   by
      notification in the Official Gazette, make
      rules for regulation the grant of prospecting
      licences and mining leases in respect of
      minerals    and   for   purposes    connected
      therewith.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
      the generality of the foregoing power, such
      rules may provide for all or any of the
      following matters, namely :-
*          *          *          *
(i) the fixing and collection of dead rent
      fines, fees or other charges and the
      collection of royalties in respect of -
(i) prospecting licences,
(ii) mining leases,
(iii) minerals mined, quarried, excavated or
      collected;
*          *          *          *
(r) any other matter which is to be, or may
      be, prescribed under this Act."
18
17.     However, having regard to the connotation of

the word ‘regulate’ it would include power to control

the sale of liquor under the Act.            Control of sale is

possible by providing for licences as it is through

licencing     that    the   authority        can   provide     for

conditions    under    which    the   sale     could    be    best

controlled.     If the power to regulate include the

power to stipulate licences it undoubtedly also would

include power to provide for number of licences qua

the State as a whole a matter which I have reasoned

does not fall under
Section 58(2)(e)
of the Act.
18.
In    the    judgment   of    this    court    in
Khoday

Distilleries Ltd. and Others v. State of Karnataka and

Others
reported in 1996 (10) SCC 304, the issue arose

under the
Karnataka Excise Act, 1965
.              Undoubtedly,

there is a provision therein which is pari materia

with
Section 58(2)(e)
of the Punjab Excise Act in the

Karnataka Excise Act, 1965 which has been extracted

at para 8 of
the said judgment
.
The case in fact

related to a distributor licence and not wholesale or

retail licence which is what the provision speaks of.
19
19.      The Court was not dealing with the specific

question which is posed before us as is clear from the

judgement.    I have in fact, gone through the
Karnataka

Excise Act
and I find that while
Section 71
confers

power on the State Government to make rules there is

no provision akin to
Section 59
of the Punjab Excise

Act which confers power on any other authority in

which case it could not possibly be contended that

sub-section (2) of
Section 71
would in any manner cut

down the width of the general power of
Section 71(1)
for the State Government to make rules for the purpose

of the Act.
20.      In such circumstances, I would respectfully

disagree with the majority view as expressed in the

judgment of my learned Brother Justice Navin Sinha.

I would confirm the finding by the learned Division

Bench   of    the   High   Court   that   the   Financial

Commissioner has power to decide upon the number of

licenses.
21.      Having expressed my disagreement with regard

to the finding of the sole issue which has been dealt

with in the majority judgment I must necessarily
20
proceed to consider the two other contentions which

has been raised by the appellant.       The appellant has

contended that the rule leads to the creation of a

monopoly and what is really objectionable, in favour

of a private party and it is contrary to the guarantee

embedded under
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution.

The High Court has repelled this argument also.           It

relied upon the judgment of this Court reported in
Khoday Distilleries Ltd. and Others Vs. State of

Karnataka and Others
; 1995(1) SCC 574 wherein this

Court in paragraph 22 held as follows :
“22.
In
Cooverjee B. Bharucha v. Excise
      Commissioner and the Chief Commissioner
AIR 1954
      SC 220, where the vires of Excise Regulation I
      of 1915 was under challenge on the ground of
      violation of
Article 19(1)(g)
, the Constitution
      Bench of five learned Judges, among other things,
      held that:
(a)In order to determine the reasonableness of
      restrictions, envisaged by
Article 19(6)
, regard
      must be had to the nature of the business and
      the conditions prevailing in that trade. These
      factors would differ from trade to trade and no
      hard and fast rule concerning all trades can be
      laid down. It cannot also be denied that the
      State has the power to prohibit trades which are
      illegal or immoral or injurious to the health
      and welfare of the public. Laws prohibiting
      trades in noxious or dangerous goods or
      trafficking in women cannot be held to be illegal
      as enacting a prohibition and not a mere
      regulation. The nature of the business is,
      therefore, an important element in deciding the
      reasonableness of the restrictions. The right of
      every citizen to pursue any lawful trade or
21
business is obviously subject to such reasonable
conditions as may be deemed by the governing
authority of the country essential to the safety,
health, peace, order and morals of the community.
Some occupations by the noise made in their
pursuit, some by the odours they engender, and
some by the dangers accompanying them require
regulation as to the locality in which they may
be conducted. Some, by the dangerous character
of the articles used, manufactured or sold,
require also special qualification in the
parties permitted to use them, manufacture or
sell them. The Court in this connection referred
to the observations of Field, J. in P. Crowley
v. Henry Christensen; 34 L ED 620 : 137 US 86
(1890) a part of which is as follows:
"The sale of such liquors in this way has,
  therefore been, at all times, by the courts
  of every State, considered as the proper
  subject of legislative regulation. ... Their
  sale in that form may be absolutely
  prohibited. It is a question of public
  expediency and public morality and not of
  federal law. The police power of the State
  is fully competent to regulate the business
  to mitigate its evils or to suppress it
  entirely. There is no inherent right in a
  citizen to thus sell intoxicating liquors by
  retail; it is not a privilege of a citizen
  of the State or of a citizen of the United
  States. As it is a business attended with
  danger to the community, it may, as already
  said,   be   entirely  prohibited,   or   be
  permitted under such conditions as will
  limit to the utmost its evils. ... It is a
  matter of legislative will only."
(b)The elimination and exclusion from business
is inherent in the nature of liquor business and
it will hardly be proper to apply to such a
business principles applicable to trade which
all could carry on. The provisions of the law
cannot be attacked merely on the ground that they
create a monopoly. Properly speaking, there can
be a monopoly only when a trade which could be
carried on by all persons is entrusted by law to
one or more persons to the exclusion of the
general public. Such, however, is not the case
with the business of liquor. The Court for this
purpose relied upon the following observations
of Lord Porter in Commonwealth of Australia v.
22
Bank of New South Wales; 1950 AC 235 : (1949) 2
         AII ER 755:
"Yet about this, as about every other
           proposition in this field, a reservation
           must be made, for their Lordships do not
           intend   to   lay   it  down    that  in   no
           circumstances    could   the   exclusion   of
           competition so as to create a monopoly either
           in a State or Commonwealth agency, or in some
           other body, be justified. Every case must be
           judged on its own facts and its own setting
           of time."
(c)When the contract is thrown open to public
         auction, it cannot be said that there is
         exclusion of competition and thereby monopoly is
         created.
(Emphasis supplied)
22.        I may also refer to the judgment of this Court

in
Maninderjit Singh Bitta v. Union of India and

others
reported in 2005(1)SCC 679.             In this case

undoubtedly the rule provided that there will be only

one license of the nature concerned.               However, the

right to the license was settled by way of e-tender.

It was open to any person who is otherwise eligible

to participate in the e-tender.               Undoubtedly the

guarantee of fairness of the State action and the

taboo against arbitrariness must inform the State

action once it decides to permit trade in liquor.               It

is to be noticed that the introduction of the rule was
23
primarily to earn maximum profits.                 The case of the

state is that introduction of the rule has enabled

collection of greater amounts by way of revenue.                 This

cannot     be     said   to       be   entirely     an    irrelevant

consideration.         Going too far in these matters may

involve the court making a foray into the ordinarily

forbidden territory of policy.
23.        No doubt, the appellant draws our attention

to the recent decision of this Court in
The Kerala

Bar Hotels Association & Another            v. State of Kerala

&   Others
AIR   2016   SC    163.    In     fact,   one   the

contentions of the appellants was that the state

had 3 options. The first is prohibition, the second

is State monopoly in manufacture or trade and the

third was to allow private players into the business

in which everyone has a right to partake in the

business.       The court went on to hold inter alia as

follows:
“24.    We disagree with the submissions of the
         Respondents that there is no right to trade in
         liquor because it is res extra commercium. The
         interpretation of Khoday put forward by Mr.
         Sundaram is, in our opinion, more acceptable. A
         right under
Article 19(1)(g)
to trade in liquor
24
does exist provided the State permits any person
         to undertake this business. It is further
         qualified by
Article 19(6)
and
Article 47.
The
         question, then, is whether the restrictions
         imposed on the Appellants are reasonable.”



The Court found support from the judgment of this

Court in the Constitution Bench in Krishna Kumar

Narula v. State of Jammu & Kashmir AIR 1957 SC 1368

which took the view that dealing in liquor is a

legitimate business although the State could impose

reasonable restriction.        The court however noted

that in Khoday’s case (supra), the concept of res

extra commercius came to be applied on the business

of manufacture and trade of potable liquor.
I may also notice paragraph 27 of
The Kerala

Bar Hotels Association
case (supra) which reads as

below:
“27. We now move to the arguments predicated
    on
Article 19
of the Constitution. We have already
    noted that the business in potable liquor is in the
    nature of res extra commercium and would therefore
    be subject to more stringent restrictions than any
    other trade or business. Thus while the ground
    of
Article 19(1)(g)
can be raised, in light of the
    arguments discussed with regard to
Article 14
, it
    cannot be said that the qualification on that right
    is unreasonable.”
                                         (Emphasis supplied)
25
24. I would not lose sight of in the facts of this

case one dimension in this regard.           The appellant is

an association of companies.
Article 19
provides for

various fundamental freedoms. However, unlike
Article

14
and
21
, these freedoms are not conferred on non-

citizens.      In other words,
Article 19
is confined to

citizens. It is well settled that a company though a

juristic person but not being a natural person is not

a citizen within the meaning of
Article 19.
The writ

petition is filed without joining any shareholder who

is a citizen.         I would also take the view that

therefore reliance placed on
Article 19
may not hold

good.
25.          Judicial review of policy is justified

only    if   the   policy   is   arbitrary    or   unfair   or

violative of fundamental rights.             Courts must be

loathe    to   venture   into    an   evaluation    of   State

policy.      I have noticed the principles enunciated

in paragraph 25 and also noted the view taken by

this Court in paragraph 27 of the
Kerala Bar Hotel

Cases
Supra.       I may also notice that the question
26
which actually fell for consideration was in a

different factual matrix.
I do not think that the

earlier view taken by this Court both in
Cooverjee

B. Bharucha Vs. Excise Commissioner and the Chief

Commissioner, Ajmer and Others
AIR 1954 SC 220 and

Khodays’ case (supra) in relation to the effect of

throwing open the right to obtain an exclusive

privilege not flowering into a monopoly has not been

overridden.
26.       The third complaint of the appellant is

this. The assumption of the monopolistic position

by the licensee would lead to arbitrary and unfair

practices which would leave the members of the

appellant without redress. The High Court, it is

pointed   out   has   rejected    the    contention       by

essentially reasoning that the licensee as long as

it confirms to the conditions and law is a free

agent and shut out the prospect of judicial review.

This is what the High Court finds:-
“32.    There may be some safeguards within the
      policy which protect the rights of the upstream
      licenses such as manufacturers as well as the
      downstream licenses i.e. the purchasers, such as,
      retailers and holders of licences for bars, clubs
      and restaurants.    There is no doubt, however,
      that a sole wholesaler can pick and choose the
27
parties that he wishes to deal with and, in
effect, refuse to deal with those he does not
wish to deal with including by devising various
strategies. In doing so, the sole wholesaler can
also   effectively   promote   and  encourage   a
particular brand or brands in preference to
others. For instance, he may grant a particular
dealer or a dealer in particular brands different
payment facilities and not grant the same to
others or others who deal in certain other
brands.   There is nothing that stops him from
doing so.    The question is whether that would
render the appointment of a sole wholesaler
illegal.
33.    The State, we will presume, even in the
trade and business of liquor must act fairly and
impartially and not arbitrarily. We will presume
that in granting liquor licences and permits the
State cannot adopt a pick and choose policy and
must throw the field open to all those who are
otherwise eligible.     In the present excise
policy, the State has permitted every eligible
party to bid. It has not discriminated against
or in favour of any party.        The essential
criteria for the appointment of the wholesaler
is the value of the bid.
34.    The challenge to the policy and to the
rule on the ground that the appointment of a sole
wholesaler in respect of an L-1BF Licence would
adversely affect the commercial interests of
those who he deals with or those who must deal
with him, such as, the petitioners is not well
founded. As we noted earlier, theoretically it
is possible that the commercial interests of
certain dealers and manufacturers will be
affected, in as much as, the sole wholesaler will
have the choice of who it would deal with. The
sole wholesaler would also be entitled to grant
better facilities to some of the dealers. That,
however, would not render the policy illegal. A
private party is entitled to deal with any person
or enterprise.      The State, absent special
circumstances, cannot do so. We will presume it
cannot do so, even in so far as the trade and
business of liquor is concerned. However, once
a matter moves from the control of the State or
the instrumentalities of the State into the
hands of private enterprises, the restrictions
applicable     to    the     State     and    its
instrumentalities cease to be applicable. This
28
is invariably the case in auctions and tenders.
Take for instance, a case where the State decides
      to construct a building or a group of buildings.
      It can do so itself to the exclusion of all
      others. It is also entitled to engage private
      parties to do so.     The State cannot pick and
      choose who to deal with.     Absent any special
      circumstances, the State would be bound to
      consider the claim of every party that is
      otherwise eligible to undertake the work.
      However, once the State parts with its rights to
      construct a building and hands it over to a
      private enterprise, the matter ends there so far
      as it concerns the work that it has contracted
      to the private party.     The contractor is not
      bound to call for tenders in respect of every
      item involved in the construction.            The
      contractor is not bound to consider the
      application of every party for the supply of
      material required for the construction of the
      buildings. The contractor is entitled to obtain
      the material from such parties as it desires and
      on such terms and conditions that the contractor
      desires.   The suppliers of the material would
      not be entitled to compel the contractor to
      afford them an opportunity of supplying the
      material. The rules of the game that apply to
      a State or an instrumentality of the State do
      not apply to such contractors.”
27.       In this case, in fact, Mr. Gopal Subramanium,

learned senior counsel for the appellant drew our

attention to the fact that the figures would show that

the licensee has indeed being acting unfairly.            It is

the case of the appellant that the sole licensee can

misuse his position in at least three ways.               It is

contended   that    it   is   possible   that   the   licensee

prefers   certain   brands     to   others   inasmuch   as   it

concerns negotiation, longer credit period and other
29
terms and conditions.         BIO suppliers would be at the

mercy of the licensee and they would have no option

but to reconcile with the terms and conditions which

would be laid down by the licensee.              Secondly, it is

contended that failure to adhere with the terms and

conditions set out may result in a situation where a

particular brand would not be made available in the

State of Haryana.           It is further contended that in

view of the monopolistic position enjoyed by the

licensee it may choose to promote certain brands over

others on account of unfair negotiating position made

available to it by the license.              There are no checks

and balances to ensure that interest of other stake

holders is taken care of.              Though the conditions

provide that the licensee will have to supply goods

demanded there are no means by which the actual demand

can be ascertained.          It is further pointed out that

it is open to the licensee to offer discounts to the

retailers      it   seeks    to   favour.      This    results   in

neutralizing the condition relating to the maximum

sale   price    being   fixed     by   the    excise   authority.

Onerous conditions can be placed upon purchasers as
30
well as suppliers by the sole licensee and the lack

of checks and balances renders the same violative of
Article 14.
28.        The guarantee of
Article 14
against the State

undoubtedly embraces all spheres of its activities.

If the action falls foul of the mandate of
Article 14
it is vulnerable, though different yardsticks may

operate.     Undoubtedly the expression ‘state’ would

also include within its sweep an instrumentality of

the State as it would fall under the expression “other

authorities” in
Article 12
of the Constitution.         The

matter   relating   to   which    authorities   fall   under
Article 12
has been the subject matter of a catena of

decisions of this Court.         The principles have been

culled out with sufficient clarity and I do not see

any occasion or any reason to dwell more upon the same

as the appellant even does not have a case that the

licensee would be an instrumentality of the state

within the meaning of
Article 12
of the Constitution.

It is a trite law that an effort at bringing a body

within
Article 12
must originate specifically in the

pleadings.
31
29.      Pleadings     in    this   case   on   this   point   is

conspicuous by its absence.
30.      The appellant would point out that in fact,

after the new regime has been put in place, 5 star

hotels were not being provided sufficient stocks of

BIO products being supplied by the members of the

appellant. Further it is pointed out that immediately

upon grant of the licence in 2017, there has been a

sudden decline in the sales of BIO prod8ucts supplied

by the members of the appellant.           The reason for this

decline is sought to be placed at the door step of

the sole licensee. The appellant has pointed out that

there has been sudden decline of 25% in the supply of

BIO   brands   of   United   Spirits   Ltd..      There   is   a

reference of 30% decline of BIO products of Pernod

Ricard as well.      There has been significant rise of

the product of Pernod Ricard in the neighboring states

of Rajasthan and Delhi, it is pointed out.
31.      I would notice that many of the contentions

of the appellant are in the form of apprehensions

about what may happen in future.           In fact, there is

a case for the respondents that no complaint as such
32
was moved against the licensee during the period.

The licensee is duty bound under the terms and

conditions of licence to submit pricing of each

brand at the time of approval of the brand.                     The

department is bound to approve the maximum sales

price factoring in various elements.                The licensee

must indicate among other things, the landing price,

expenses,    profit    margin.         The     price    is     also

determined based on the prevalent rates of the same

and equivalent rate at the neighboring states and

the Government levies.
32.     Furthermore,         the    exclusive       licensee    is

under the condition required to keep sufficient

stock of all brands as are demanded by the procuring

licensees and all such brands as were registered

with the department in 2016-17.              Thus at least two

restrictions exist as in built safeguards which

operate against the exclusive licensee. The licensee

is obliged to keep sufficient number of stock of

all brands which are demanded by the procuring

licensees.     In     this   case,    the     members     of   the

appellant    would     fall        within     the      expression
33
‘procuring      licensees’.      Secondly,          there      is    a

regulation of the maximum price which the exclusive

licensee can demand as the price is to be fixed by

the State itself.        A question however, no doubt,

arises as to what would happen if the exclusive

licensee himself also operates retail outlets and

he promotes certain brands and/ or dampens the trade

in others.      In the first place I would think that

ordinarily on the principle that a person would act

in his own self interest there would be no reason

for the licensee to deny himself the proceeds of

the    higher   turnover      based   on     more   sales      as   by

seeking to dampen the sale of certain brands it is

the licensee who would suffer a loss.               Let me assume

however that he is placed in a situation where there

is a conflict of interest and by suppressing the

sale of certain brands and permitting the sale of

other brands the exclusive licensee is placed in a

more    advantageous     position,         and     therefore,       he

prefers it.     I must remind myself that the complaint

of the individual company would be that brand which

it    wishes    to   import    and    deal    in    is   not    made
34
available.       Quite    clearly     if    there    is    any    such

concrete incident which is pointed out, it would be

an infraction of the condition of the licence.

Certainly it would give rise to power with the

authorities to take suitable action as available in

law including in appropriate cases, cancellation of

the licence.        If such provisions are not already

there I would observe that the State may devise

suitable provisions so that an individual who acts

as the licensee of the state would not do what the

State itself would be forbidden from doing under

the Constitution.          I must also remind myself that

at the same time, the State has apparently gained

by way of enhanced collection of revenue by the new

regime    put     in     place.       The    State’s      power    to

experiment in economic matters shall not suffer

invalidation at the hands of the Court.                   Such power

must be premised solely on State action falling foul

of the Constitution and the laws.                     State would

however do well to provide for a suitable mechanism

by which it can provide appropriate safeguards so

that     there    is     fair     dealing    by     the   exclusive
35
licensee. Subject to the above observations I would

dismiss the appeal with no order as to costs.
………………………………….J.
                                  (K.M. Joseph)

New Delhi;
February 12, 2019