[Cites
13
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Board Of Trust.For The Port Of Kolkata vs Apl (India) Pvt. Ltd . on 21 February, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 3459, 2019 (14) SCC 374, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 499, (2019) 134 ALL LR 305, (2019) 197 ALLINDCAS 27, (2019) 2 ALL RENTCAS 385, (2019) 2 CAL HN 258, (2019) 2 RECCIVR 286, (2019) 2 RENTLR 33, (2019) 3 ICC 730, 2019 (4) KCCR SN 363 (SC), (2019) 4 SCALE 687, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 2558
Author:
S. Abdul Nazeer
Bench:
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
REPORTABLE



                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3910 OF 2013


          BOARD OF TRUSTEES FOR THE PORT OF
          KOLKATA AND ORS.                                          …APPELLANTS


                                                   VERSUS

          APL (INDIA) PVT. LTD. AND ORS.                            …RESPONDENTS

          WITH
          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3912 OF 2013
          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3911 OF 2013

                                            JUDGMENT
S. ABDUL NAZEER, J.
1.             These appeals, arising out of a reference to the Full Bench of

          the Calcutta High Court, raise an important question on the

          meaning, interpretation and applicability of Section 6 of the Public
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971
(for short
MANISH SETHI
Date: 2019.02.21
17:07:01 IST
Reason:
'the
PP Act
'). The issue revolves around the right of the appellants
1
(hereinafter referred to as the "Port Trust") to seize and dispose of

goods and materials lying on the "public premises" which goods

may not necessarily belong to the erstwhile tenant/licensee of such

"public premises" under the
PP Act
.
2.    The brief facts of the case necessary for disposal of these

appeals are as under:
3.   A piece of land altogether measuring 17238.15 sq. mtr.

situated at Transport Depot Road, P.S. Taratola, Kolkata, (for short

'the premises') was allotted to M/s. Shalimar Tar Products Ltd.

(hereinafter referred to as 'the STPL') by way of Deed of Assignment

dated 06.12.1963. The STPL stopped the payment of rent to the

Port Trust since 1973. The lease in respect of the premises granted

in favour of the STPL expired by afflux of time in the year 1981.

Therefore, the Port Trust issued a notice dated 31.08.2000 to the

STPL to quit the premises and deliver its possession. As the STPL

failed to deliver back possession of the premises, the Port Trust

initiated the proceedings for eviction, as well as for recovery of
2
arrears of rent and dues on account of unauthorized occupation

before the Estate Officer under the provisions of the
PP Act
.
4.   The Estate Officer issued a notice dated 24.01.2006 under
Sections 4
and
7
of the PP Act to the STPL.       All the concerned

persons in occupation of the premises were also notified by affixing

the aforesaid notices on the outer wall of the premises. The STPL

duly appeared before the Estate Officer.
5.   The Estate Officer, upon hearing the Port Trust and the STPL,

passed an order of eviction on 09.07.2007, and also directed the

STPL to pay damages for unauthorized use and occupation of the

premises   amounting     to   Rs.2,46,64,411/­,    calculated   upto

30.06.2005, excluding the interest thereon. The Port Trust applied

to the Estate Officer for execution of the said order and

appointment of an authorized officer for recovery of the possession

of the premises under the provisions of the
PP Act
.              On

19.02.2008, the Estate Officer passed an order appointing Smt.

Subarna Thakur, Officer­in­Charge (Estate) of the Port Trust as an
3
authorized officer for recovery of possession in terms of the order of

eviction dated 09.07.2007.
6.   The authorized officer took possession of the premises and

the containers stacked thereon.       Immediately upon eviction and

taking possession, the Port Trust deployed security guards for

protection of the premises.    Several containers remained at the

premises at the time of taking possession.
7.   After taking possession, the authorized officer wrote a letter

dated 10.03.2008 informing the Estate Officer that the land has

been recovered from the STPL on 08.03.2008 along with the

containers stacked on the premises. The Estate Officer passed an

order directing the authorized officer to take inventory of the

materials/articles/goods lying on the premises in the presence of a

competent officer of the Port Trust and also directed the issue of

notice under
Section 6
of the PP Act for disposal of the properties

left by the unauthorized occupant and also to publish a copy of the

said notice in the newspaper as per the provisions of the
PP Act
and the rules made thereunder for disposal of the property lying on
4
the premises. In the said proceedings, the respondent No.6

appeared      on   10.03.2008     and      filed   an   application   seeking

permission to remove the huge number of containers from the

premises. The Estate Officer rejected the application, which has

not been questioned by the sixth respondent.
8.    In terms of the aforesaid order, a notice under sub­section (1)

of
Section 6
of the PP Act was issued by the Estate Officer to

remove or cause to be removed or disposed of by public auction

any property remaining on the premises.            A copy of the said notice

was    also    issued   through    a       local   daily   newspaper.    The

respondents/writ petitioners herein preferred a writ petition, inter

alia, seeking permission to remove the containers lying on the

premises by contending that they could not be restrained from

removing the containers till realization of dues from the STPL. It

was further contended that the Port Trust had wrongly withheld

the containers belonging to them and that they had no privity of

contract with the Port Trust and, therefore, not liable to pay any

rent to the Port Trust.
5
9.   The Port Trust opposed the writ petition. The learned Single

Judge of the Calcutta High Court, while holding that there are

different views taken by two different Division Benches of the

Calcutta High Court on the scope and ambit of
Section 59
of the

Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, (for short 'the MPT Act'), referred the

matter to the Chief Justice for constitution of a larger Bench to

determine the following question:
"Whether
Section 59
of the Major Port
             Trusts Act, 1963, read with
Sections 5
and
6
of the 1971 Act confers on KPT a
             right of lien on, or the right to detain,
             seize and/or sell the goods of third
             parties, lying on the public premises, for
             realization of arrears of rent due from
             tenants, irrespective of whether the
             owner of those goods had any privity of
             contract with KPT".
10. The Full Bench of the High Court held that the observations

of the Division Bench in The Board of Trustees for the
Port of

Kolkata v. Canoro Resources Ltd. & Ors.
reported in 2008 (1)

CHN 941, (for short 'Canoro Resources') on Sections 59 and 61 of

the MPT Act were at best obiter dicta.
While holding so, the Full

Bench opined that there was no conflict between the judgments of
6
the Division Bench in Board of Trustees for the
Port of Calcutta

v. Indian Rayon Corpn. Ltd. & Ors.
, reported in 1987 (28) ELT

334 (Cal.), (for short 'Indian Rayon') and Canoro Resources. The

observations of the Full Bench are as under:
"With due respect to the observation of
             the Division Bench, we are not in
             agreement with the same. In our opinion,
             Sections 59 and 61 of MPTA cannot be
             read into proceedings under PPA, 1971.
             There can be no general lien under
             Section 59 of MPTA which would cover
             the goods of a party having no privity of
             contract with KPT, which are sought to be
             sold in execution proceeding under PPA,
             1971. The Division Bench in fact notices
             that KPT had in execution obtained
             possession of the land from its tenant,
             and seized some timbers and casing pipes
             which were lying on the lease hold lands
             at the time of taking delivery of
             possession. The owner had imported the
             goods. They were kept on open ground
             for the purpose of sending the same to
             further destination. Clearly, therefore,
             KPT had no claim against the goods on
             account of rates and rents for services
             rendered under Section 42 of the MPTA.
             In such circumstances, the provisions of
             Section 59 and 61 of MPTA were not at all
             relevant for deciding the controversy
             between the parties. The issue decided
             by the Division Bench did not arise on
             the pleadings. Nor was the point argued
7
by any of the parties. The three points
argued by the parties, 1) that KPT should
have been made a party, 2) under
Section
6
of the PPA, 1971 KPT was entitled to
sell the goods, even of a stranger, found
in/on premises under unauthorized
occupation and 3) that alternative remedy
was available. Therefore, in our opinion,
findings in paragraph 18 are at best only
obiter dicta. In our opinion, the first part
of para 18 of the judgment does not deal
with the issue raised before the Court.
Mr. Anindya Mitra had not even raised
the issue about the power of KPT under
Sections 59 or 61. No grievance had also
been made while Mr. Jayanta Kumar
Mitra, learned counsel for the petitioners
submitted that the KPT had wrongly
invoked Sections 59 and 61 of MPTA.
The whole issue was limited only to the
powers of KPT under the PPA, 1971. In
our opinion, it was a territory travelled
into by the Division Bench, without being
invited therein, either in the pleadings or
the submissions of the learned counsel.
These observations, therefore, cannot be
treated as a precedent on interpretation
of Sections 59 and 61 of MPTA.
In our
opinion, the issue with regard to the
ambit of Section 59 and 61 has been
correctly decided by the Division Bench
in
Indian Rayon Corporation Ltd.
(supra).
This judgment is in consonance
with the law
laid down by
the Supreme
Court in M/s. Sriyanesh Knitters
(supra).
For the reasons stated above, we are
unable to accept the submission of Mr.
8
Anindya Mitra that there is no conflict
             between the earlier.      Division Bench
             Judgment in
Indian Rayon Corporation
             Ltd.
(supra) and the later Division Bench
             judgment in Canoro Resources Ltd.
(supra). The view taken in first part of
             paragraph 18 of the judgment in
Canoro
             Resources Ltd.
(supra) is contrary to the
             law
laid down by
the Supreme Court and
             therefore, cannot be said to be good law."
11. After answering the reference as above, the Full Bench

directed placing of the writ petition before the learned Single Judge

for decision on merits. The Port Trust has challenged the legality

and correctness of the aforesaid judgment of Full Bench in these

appeals.
12. Appearing for the appellants, Shri Parag P. Tripathi, learned

senior counsel, submits that the premises in question is a "public

premises" as defined under the
PP Act
. There is no bar for the Port

Trust to initiate action for eviction of unauthorized occupant from

the premises or to dispose of goods and materials lying in public

premises which may not necessarily belonging to the erstwhile

tenant/licensee of the said premises. The Port Trust has initiated

action for the eviction of the unauthorized occupant under the
PP

Act
. The Port Trust has not initiated any action under the MPT
9
Act.
Section 6
of the PP Act must be read and interpreted on its

own. It is not dependent upon Sections 59 and 61 of the MPT Act.

It is argued that the judgment of the Division Bench of the High

Court in Indian Rayon has no application to the facts of the

present case.    It is unnecessary for the Court to conjointly read

Sections 59 and 61 of the MPT Act and
Sections 5
and
6
of the PP

Act for the purpose of evicting an unauthorized occupant.                     It is

further argued that the Full Bench ought to have held that the

proceedings     initiated    by   the        Port   Trust    also   covers     the

respondents/writ petitioners and that they are bound by the order

of the Estate Officer passed under
Sections 5
and
6
of the PP Act.
13. On the other hand, Shri Chira Ranjan Addy, learned counsel

appearing for the respondents, submits that there is no privity of

contract between the Port Trust and the respondents/writ

petitioners and that the Port Trust does not acquire any right in

respect of the goods of the third parties. Hence, the observations

made    in    Canoro        Resources          cannot       be   justified.   The

respondents/writ petitioners being third parties, their goods can

never be the subject­matter of lien having regard to the express
10
language contained in Section 61 of the MPT Act.       It is further

argued that the writ petition is pending before the learned Single

Judge of the High Court and that all contentions in relation to the

application
Section 6
of the PP Act can be considered by the High

Court. The Full Bench has considered all the aspects of the case

and has clarified the legal position.    This Court in
Board of

Trustees of the Port of Bombay and Ors. v. Sriyanesh Knitters
,

(1999) 7 SCC 359, has considered the scope of different provisions

of the MPT Act and has held that these provisions do not authorize

the Port Trust to have general lien over goods belonging to the writ

petitioners.
14. We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned

counsel made at the Bar and perused the materials placed on

record.
15. It is not in dispute that the premises is a "public premises" as

defined under the
PP Act
. The Port Trust initiated action for

eviction of the STPL, an unauthorized occupant of the premises

under the provisions of the
PP Act
. The STPL has contested the

proceedings before the Estate Officer.     On 09.07.2007, Estate
11
Officer passed an order of eviction and also directed the STPL to

pay the damages for unauthorized use and occupation of the

premises. Notice was issued under
Section 5(1)
of the PP Act for

evicting the STPL. It is clear from the records that all the persons

concerned with the premises were also notified in accordance with

law. An order was passed on 19.02.2008 appointing an authorized

officer for recovery of possession in terms of the aforesaid order of

eviction.   The authorized officer took possession of the premises

and the containers lying on the premises. The authorized officer

was permitted to take inventory of the materials/articles goods

lying on the premises and was also directed to issue notice under
Section 6
of the PP Act for disposal of the properties left by the

unauthorized occupant. A notice was also published under
Section

6(1)
of the Act in the local newspaper to remove or cause to be

removed or dispose of by public auction any property remaining

within the premises. At this stage, the respondents/writ petitioners

have filed the writ petition before the High Court for a direction to

the Port Trust to permit them to remove the containers belonging

to them which were lying on the premises.
12
16.
The PP Act
provides for eviction of occupants from public

premises and for certain incidental matters.
This Act
was enacted

to provide for a speedy machinery for the eviction of unauthorized

occupants of the public premises. It is clear from the statement of

object and reasons of the
PP Act
that it has become impossible for

government to take expeditious action even in flagrant cases of

unauthorised occupation of public premises and recovery of rent or

damages for such unauthorised occupation. It is, therefore,

considered imperative to restore a speedy machinery for the

eviction of persons who are in unauthorised occupation.
17.
Section 2(g)
defines the expression 'unauthorised occupation'

in relation to public premises as under:­
(g) "unauthorized occupation", in
              relation to any public premises, means
              the occupation by any person of the
              public premises without authority for
              such occupation, and includes the
              continuance in occupation by any
              person of the public premises after the
              authority (whether by way of grant or
              any other mode of transfer) under
              which he was allowed to occupy the
              premises has expired or has been
              determined       for    any      reason
              whatsoever".
13
18.
Section    5
lays   down   the   procedure      for    eviction   of

unauthorized occupants.
Section 5A
was inserted by Act 61 of

1980, which has come into force with effect from 20.12.1980.

This Section provides for removal of unauthorized construction on

or against or in front of any public premises.              The relevant

provisions for the purpose of this case are sub­section (1)(b) and

sub­section (3) of
Section 5A
, which are as under:­


              "5A. Power to remove unauthorized
              constructions, etc.­ (1) No person
              shall­
(a) …….
(b) display or spread any goods.
(c) …….
on, or against, or in front of, any
              public premises except in accordance
              with the authority (whether by way of
              grant or any other mode of transfer)
              under which he was allowed to occupy
              such premises.
(2) …….
(3) Where any movable structure or
              fixture has been erected, placed or
              raised, or any goods have been
              displayed or spread, or any cattle or
              other animal has been brought or kept,
14
on     any    public     premises,   in
              contravention of the provisions of sub­
              section (1) by any person, the estate
              officer may, by order, remove or cause
              to be removed without notice, such
              structure, fixture, goods, cattle or
              other animal, as the case may be, from
              the public premises and recover the
              cost of such removal from such person
              as an arrear of land revenue."
19.
Section 6
provides for disposal of the property left on the

public premises by unauthorized occupants.       The relevant sub­

Sections for the purpose of this case are sub­sections (1A) and (2)

of
Section 6
, which are as under:­


              "6. Disposal of property left on pub­
              lic premises by unauthorized occu­
              pants.­

              (1) …..
(1A) Where any goods, materials, cattle
              or other animal have been removed
              from any public premises under
section 5A
, the estate officer may, after
              giving fourteen days’ notice to the
              persons owing such goods, materials,
              cattle or other animal and after
              publishing the notice in at least one
              newspaper having circulation in the
              locality, dispose of, by public auction,
              such goods, materials, cattle or other
              animal.
15
(1B) …..
(2) Where any property is sold under
              sub­section (1), the sale proceeds
              thereof shall, after deducting the
              expenses of the sale and the amount, if
              any, due to the Central Government or
              the [statutory authority] on account of
              arrears of rent or damages or costs, be
              paid to such person or persons as may
              appears to the estate officer to be
              entitled to the same:
Provided that where the estate officer
              is unable to decide as to the person or
              persons to whom the balance of the
              amount is payable or as to the
              apportionment of the same, he may
              refer such dispute to the civil court of
              competent     jurisdiction   and    the
              decision of the court thereon shall be
              final".
20. It is clear from the above provisions that any person in

occupation of the public premises without authority for such

occupation is an unauthorized occupant. The expression 'spread

on any public premises', contained in sub­section (1)(b) of
Section

5A
in the context also means 'lying on any premises'. Sub­section

(3) of
Section 5A
authorizes the Estate Officer to remove any goods

lying on any public premises after an order of eviction has been

made under
Section 5
of the Act. It is immaterial whether the said
16
goods belong to the erstwhile tenant/licensee or to any other party.
Sub­section (1A) of
Section 6
authorises the Estate Officer to

dispose of such goods/materials, etc. after giving fourteen days'

notice to the persons owning such goods and other procedure

prescribed therein. It is not necessary that the persons owning the

goods lying on the premises should be erstwhile tenants/licensees.

It is also not necessary that there should be a privity of contract

between the Port Trust and the third party to whom such goods

and materials belong for disposing of the property by the Estate

Officer under
Section 6
.
21. In Indian Rayon, the Division Bench was dealing exclusively

with lien under the MPT Act.     It has not considered eviction of

unauthorized tenants under
Section 6
of the PP Act. This judgment

is in conformity with the judgment of this Court in M/s.
Sriyanesh

Knitters
(supra).
22. In Canoro Resources the Division Bench was considering the

matter where an eviction order had been passed by the Estate

Officer under the
PP Act
. In the execution of the said order, the
17
Estate Officer obtained possession of the land from the tenant and

seized the timber and casing pipes which were lying on the

leasehold land. The owner of these goods, challenged the order of

the Estate Officer in a writ petition by contending that there was no

privity of contract between him and the Port Trust. In this

background, the Division Bench held that a conjoint reading of

Sections 59 and 61 of the MPT Act vis­a­vis
Sections 5
and
6
of the

PP Act make it clear that if any goods are found to be lying on the

land of the Port Trust, and for such land any rent is due or

payable, the Port Trust has not only the lien over the goods, but

also the right to sell those goods so as to appropriate the sale

proceedings towards the rental dues.
23. As   noticed   above,   the   proceeding   initiated   in   Canoro

Resources was under the
PP Act
. Therefore, it was not necessary

for the Division Bench to read Sections 59 and 61 of the MPT Act

into the proceeding initiated under the
PP Act
. The Full Bench, in

our view, was justified in holding that those observations were, at

best, obiter dicta. The Full Bench was also justified in holding that

there is no conflict between the two judgments of the Division
18
Bench in Indian Rayon and Canoro Resources.
24. In the instant case, the contention urged on behalf of the Port

Trust is that even if the goods belonging to the third parties are

found lying on the premises after an order of eviction passed under
Section 5
, it was entitled to sell the goods and deduct from the sale

proceeds any amount due to the Port Trust on account of arrears of

rent or damages, etc and that the balance of the sale proceeds

shall be paid to such person or persons, as may appear to the

Estate Officer, to be entitled for the same. We are in complete

agreement with this submission made on behalf of the Port Trust.

We are of the view that
Section 6
of the PP Act has been enacted

with obvious purpose of enabling statutory authorities to take all

consequential steps after receiving possession of public premises

and for recovery of dues, etc. The said provision ought not to be

interpreted in a way which defeats the very purpose of its

enactment.
Section 6
of the PP Act must be read independent of,

and not dependant on, Sections 59 and 61 of the MPT Act.          As

noticed above,
Section 6
of the PP Act applies, inter alia, to the

persons who keep their goods in the public premises whether they
19
are tenants/licensees, sub­tenants or any other parties. The Estate

Officer, under
Section 6
of the PP Act, is entitled to sell the goods

even of a stranger, found in/on the premises under unauthorized

occupation.
25. The Full Bench of the High Court had already directed the

writ petition to be placed before the learned Single Judge for

decision on merits. We request the learned Single Judge of the

High Court to decide the writ petition expeditiously, preferably

within a period of six months from the date of receipt of a copy of

this Order, keeping in mind the observations made in this

Judgment.
26. The Civil Appeals are disposed of in the above terms. There

will be no order as to costs.
…………………………………J.
                                       (A.K. SIKRI)

                                       …………………………………J.
                                       (ASHOK BHUSHAN)

                                       …………………………………J.
                                       (S. ABDUL NAZEER)
New Delhi;
February 21, 2019.
20