[Cites
35
, Cited by
45
]
Supreme Court of India
Perry Kansagra vs Smriti Madan Kansagra on 15 February, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 536, (2019) 1 CLR 1151 (SC), (2019) 1 DMC 568, (2019) 1 HINDULR 757, 2019 (1) KLT SN 84 (SC), (2019) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 704, (2019) 2 ICC 213, 2019 (2) KLT SN 757 (SC), (2019) 2 RECCIVR 550, (2019) 3 SCALE 573
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Uday Umesh Lalit
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra

                                                                         1
                                                                 Reportable


                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1694 OF 2019
          (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.9267 OF 2018)


 PERRY KANSAGRA                                               ……Appellant

                                            VERSUS

 SMRITI MADAN KANSAGRA                                      ..…. Respondent



                                           JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.     Leave granted.
2.     This appeal challenges the final Judgment and Order dated 11.12.2017

 passed by the High Court of Delhi allowing Review Petition No.221 of 2017

 preferred by the respondent against the judgment and order dated 17.02.2017

 passed by the High Court of Delhi in MAT App. (F.C.) No.67 of 2016.
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
2
3.     The appellant (Kenyan and British Citizen) and Respondent (Indian

 Citizen) got married on 29.07.2007 at New Delhi.           After marriage, the

 Respondent shifted to Nairobi, Kenya and settled into her matrimonial home

 with the appellant. A son, named Aditya Vikram Kansagra was born to the

 couple on 02.12.2019 at New Delhi. After delivery, the respondent returned

 back to Nairobi along with Aditya. Thereafter, the Respondent and Aditya

 travelled from Kenya to India on few occasions. Aditya holds Kenyan as well

 as British passport.
4.     The appellant, Respondent and Aditya came from Nairobi to New Delhi

 on 10.03.2012. According to the appellant, the return tickets for travel back

 to Nairobi were booked for 06.06.2012. While in India, in May 2012, the

 Respondent filed a civil suit registered as CS (OS) No.1604 of 2012 before

 the High Court of Delhi praying inter alia for an injunction to restrain the

 appellant from removing Aditya from the custody of the Respondent. Upon

 notice being issued, the appellant contested the suit in which visitation orders

 were passed by the High Court from time to time. The appellant thereafter

 filed Guardianship Petition praying inter alia that he be declared the legal

 Guardian of Aditya and be given his permanent custody.
The Guardianship
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
3
Petition
dated 06.11.2012 was registered as No.G-53 of 2012 before the

 Family Court, Saket, New Delhi.
5.     In terms of visitation orders passed by the High Court, the appellant

 along with paternal grandparents were permitted to meet Aditya for 2 hours

 on Friday, Saturday and Sunday in the 2nd week of every month. According to

 the appellant he flew from Nairobi to New Delhi every month to meet Aditya

 along with the paternal grandparents.       In view of the pendency of the

 guardianship petition, CS (OS) No.1604 of 2012 was disposed of by the High

 Court on 31.08.2015, leaving the parties to place their grievances before the

 Family Court. The arrangement of visitation was thereafter modified by the

 Family Court by its orders dated 09.02.2016 and 09.03.2016.
6.     On 18.04.2016, an application was filed by the appellant praying that the

 Family Court may direct the Court Counsellor to bring Aditya to the Court for

 an in-chamber meeting, which prayer was objected to by the Respondent.
After hearing both sides, the Family Court allowed said application vide

 Order dated 04.05.2016, and directed that Aditya be produced before the

 Court 07.05.2016. The relevant part of the Order was as under:-
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
4
“…..The
court is parens patriae in such proceedings.
               Petitioner’s visitation with the child is anyway
               scheduled for 07.05.2016. Let the child be produced
               before the court at 10 am on 07.05.2016 before he goes
               for meeting with his father and grand parents.”
7.     The Respondent being aggrieved, filed MAT App. (FC) No.67 of 2016

 before the High Court. On 06.05.2016, after hearing both sides, Division

 Bench of the High Court referred the parties to mediation and also directed

 that Aditya be produced before the Court on 11.05.2016. Paragraphs 7 and 9

 of said Order were :-
“7. During our interaction with the parties, a desire is
               expressed by the parties to make one more attempt for
               a negotiated settlement of all disputes between the
               parties by recourse to mediation. The parents of the
               respondent are also present and have joined the
               proceedings before us. They have also submitted that
               they would like to make an attempt for a negotiated
               settlement for all disputes between the parties.
……………
9. With the consent of parties, it is directed as
               follows:
(i) The parties shall appear before Ms. Sadhana
               Ramchandran, learned Mediator in SAMADHAN-
Delhi High Court Mediation and Conciliation Centre
               on 9th May, 2016 at 2:30 pm.
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
5
(ii) It shall be open for the learned Mediator to join
               any other person or relative of the parties, as may be
               deemed necessary, for a holistic and effective
               mediation.
(iii) In case, the respondent or any of his relative are
               not available in India, it shall be open for the learned
               Mediator to join them by any electronic mode of
               communication including Skype, Video Conferencing,
               etc. at the cost of the respondent.
(iv) It shall also be open for the learned Mediator to
               meet the child at any place, as may be deemed
               convenient to her, and to arrange any visitation or
               meetings with the respondent of the child with the
               consent of the parties.”
8.     Thereafter, the matter came up on 11.05.2016.            The High Court

 interacted with Aditya and following observations were made in paras 2 to 6

 of its Order :-
“2. We are also informed that the child has today met
               with Ms. Sadhana Ramachandran, learned Mediator as
               well as Ms. Swati Shah, Counsellor in SAMADHAN –
               Delhi High court Mediation and Conciliation Centre
               and that the mediation efforts are still underway.
3. The son of the parties – Master Aditya Vikram
               Kansagra has been produced before us today. We have
               also had a long conversation with him and are deeply
               impressed with the maturity of this intelligent 6½ year
               old child who displays self confidence and a
               remarkable capacity of expressing himself with clarity.
He exhibits no sign of confusion or nervousness at all.
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
6
4. We also note that the child was comfortable in his
               interaction with his father and grandparents in court.
               The child has expressed happiness at his visitations
               with his father and grandparents. He unreservedly
               stated that he looks forward to the same. Master
               Aditya Vikram Kansagra is also able to identify other
               relatives in Kenya and enthusiastically refers to his
               experiences in that country. It is apparent that the
               child has bonded well with them.
5. We must note that the child is at the same time
               deeply attached to his mother and Nani. His bearing
               and personality clearly bear the stamp of the fine
               upbringing being given to him by the appellant and her
               mother.
6. As of now, since 9th February, 2016, the child is
               meeting his father and grandparents between 10:30 am
               and 05:00 pm on Saturday and Sunday in the second
               week of every month and for two hours on Friday in
               the second week of every month. The visitation is
               supervised as the court has appointed a Counsellor who
               has been directed to remain present throughout the
               visitation.”
9.     During the ensuing mediation sessions, the Mediator and the Counsellor

 interacted with Aditya. The Counsellor interacted with Aditya on 08.07.2016

 and 11.07.2016.             Based upon her interactions with him, the Counsellor

 submitted a report dated 21.07.2016 in a sealed cover. Though, mediation

 was attempted on many occasions, the parties were unable to resolve their
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
7
disputes and differences and an interim report was submitted by the Mediator

 on 22.07.2016. On 11.08.2016, the sealed cover containing the report of the

 Counsellor was opened and the report was taken on record. Copies of the

 report of the Counsellor were given to the parties. In an application moved

 the next day, i.e. on 12.08.2016, the appellant relied upon the report of the

 Counsellor dated 21.07.2016 and prayed for permission to speak to Aditya on

 telephone.         While opposing the prayer, the respondent objected to such

 reliance on the ground of confidentiality. The Mediator thereafter filed final

 report in November, 2016 reporting failure.
10. Thereafter the matter came up for final arguments before another

 Division Bench of the High Court. The Respondent raised the issue of

 admissibility of the reports submitted by the Mediator and Counsellor

 contending that the reports could not be relied upon in view of principle of

 confidentiality.         The High Court dealt with said submissions and while

 disposing of the appeal, by its judgment dated 17.02.2017 observed as under:-
“10. The mediation has failed.
11. But we are called upon to decide an important
               question concerning confidentiality of the mediation
               process for the reason on October 11, 2016 a report
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
8
was received from the Mediator which was taken on
               record and copy given to both parties. The report of
               the Mediator refers to a child counsellor being involved
               who had also given an independent report which was
               also taken on record.
…… … …………

               “13. The report of the child counsellor is to the effect
               that the child was normal and in spite of being happy
               with his mother he seems to idolize his father and
               affectionately remembers his house in Kenya; about
               which house he loved talking with the counsellor. The
               affection and the bond of the child with the father was
               commended as the positive attitude of the appellant
               who, obviously was not torturing the child. The child
               showed his love, affection and comfort for the
               appellant, evidenced by he fondly and happily talking
               about a recent vacation in Kashmir with his mother.
               The child was not uncomfortable with the idea of
               making a trip to Kenya.
…… … …………
17. There can be no quarrel with the proposition that
               mediation proceedings are confidential proceedings
               and anything disclosed, discussed or proposed by the
               parties before the mediator cannot be recorded, much
               less divulged. The reason being that very often during
               mediations, offers, counter offers and proposals are
               made. The ethos of mediation would bar disclosure of
               specified communications and writings associated with
               mediation. Parties are encouraged during mediation to
               engage in honest discussions as regards their problems
               and in matrimonial disputes these honest discussions
               many a time give rise to a better understanding
               between the couple. Such an approach encourages a
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
9
forget and forgive attitude to be formed by the parties.
               If either spouse is under an apprehension that the well-
               meant deliberations might subsequently be used
               against them it would hamper an unreserved
               consideration of their problems. The atmosphere of
               mutual trust during mediation warrants complete
               confidentiality.
18. But where the scope of mediation is the solution of
               a child parenting issue, report by a mediator or a child
               counsellor concerning the behavior and attitude of the
               child would not fall within the bar of confidentiality for
               the reason no information shared by the couple is being
               brought on record. The mandate of Section 12 of the
               Family Courts Act, 1984 cannot be lost sight of.
19. In the instant case, what has been taken on record
               during mediation proceedings is the report of the Child
               Counsellor and the mediator, which we find are reports
               commending the good attitude of both parents who,
               unlike many other couples, are not using the child as a
               tool to take revenge against the other. As noted above,
               the interaction by the previous Division Bench with the
               child has been recorded in the order dated May 11,
               2016 i.e. the child being equally comfortable with both
               parents and having a desire to spend quality time with
               not only his mother and relatives from the maternal
               side but even with the father and relatives from the
               paternal side. Such reports are a neutral evaluation of
               expert opinion to a Court to guide the Court as to what
               orders need to be passed in the best interest of the
               child.       These reports are not confidential
               communications of the parties.
20. Having answered the issue which incidentally
               arose, and noting that otherwise the appeal has been
               rendered infructuous, we terminate further proceedings
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
10
in the appeal inasmuch as no orders are now warranted
               to be passed in the appeal.
21. The learned Judge Family Court would consider
               granting over night interim custody to the respondent
               when he is in India by imposing such terms and
               conditions which would ensure that the child is not
               removed from the territory of India. The issue
               concerning the appellant claiming that she has lost the
               Kenyan passport of the child and a fresh passport being
               issued in the name of the child would also be looked
               into by the learned Judge, Family Court.”
11. On 18.03.2017, the respondent filed Review Petition No.221 of 2017

 questioning the judgment dated 17.02.2017.            The Review Petition was

 allowed by yet another Division Bench of High Court by judgment and order

 dated 11.12.2017. After posing the question, “..whether the Counsellor’s

 report furnished in the course of mediation proceedings or the Mediator’s

 report in case of mediation, when the process fails, can be used by either of

 the parties during trial”, the High Court concluded that the reports of the

 Mediator and the Counsellor “..shall be disregarded by the family court, when

 it proceeds to decide the merits of the case”. During the course of its

 discussion, the High Court noted Delhi High Court Mediation and

 Conciliation Rules, 2004; Format of application of SAMADHAN (the Delhi

 High Court Mediation and Conciliation Centre); Conciliation rules of
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
11
UNCITRAL
;
Sections 75
and
81
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,

 1996; Mediation Training Manual issued by the Mediation and Conciliation

 Project Committee, Supreme Court of India and Chartered Institute of

 Arbitrator’s Rules mandating confidentiality in matters pertaining to

 mediation and observed as under:-
“21. There can, be no quarrel with the proposition that
               the mediation proceedings are confidential and
               anything disclosed, discussed or proposed before the
               mediator need not be recorded, much less divulged and
               that if it is done there would always be an apprehension
               that the discussion may be used against the parties and
               it would hamper the entire process. The atmosphere of
               mutual trust warrants complete confidentiality and the
               same is in fact noted in the main judgment. The
               petitioner is aggrieved by its later part which notes
               “but where the scope of the mediation is resolution of
               child parenting issue, the report concerning the
               behavior and attitude of the child would not fall within
               the bar of confidentiality”. To our mind, this is against
               the principle of mediation and charts the course of a
               slippery slope, as this judgment would hereafter
               discuss.
22. No exceptions are made in the mediation rules
               either in our laws or in various jurisdictions mentioned
               above to the absolute rule of confidentiality. This
               Court held the mandate of
Section 12
of the Family
               Courts Act, 1984 cannot be lost sight of; yet the issue
               is whether the order dated May 6, 2016 was passed
               purely under
Section 12
of the Family Courts Act,
               1984 or it was simply to facilitate mediation of
               disputes between the parents of the child.
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
12
……………………
25.
Section 12
of the 1984 Act, empowers the Family
               Court with the discretion to refer the parties to a
               counsellor, Undoubtedly, that power also extends to the
               appellate court. However, this case has three rather
               unusual features: one that the Court never authorized
               the mediator to exercise power that is vested statutorily
               with it. The discretion to involve or not to involve a
               counsellor is the Court’s and is non delegable. The
               respondent husband’s argument that the referral order
               permitted the mediator to involve “others” cannot be
               meant to authorize the exercise of discretion that is
               solely vested with the Court. Second, the issue of
               confidentiality is to be examined because the mediator
               furnished two reports-to the Court, in this case. A
               mediator’s position is unique; undoubtedly she (or he)
               has professional training and competence to handle
               issues that involve intense and bitter struggle over
               matrimonial issues, properties, shared household,
               custody, (temporary or permanent) and in commercial
               matters, issues that have monetary and financial
               impacts. In all cases, parties express their fears, their
               expectations and their dearly held positions on the
               strength of the confidence that they repose in the
               mediator and the mediation process- both of which are
               reinforced by the absolute cloak of confidentiality.
               Given these imperatives, mediator’s reports, where the
               process has led to failure, should not record anything
               at all. Having regard to this position the fact that a
               mediator in a given case, proposes-for all the best and
               bona fide reasons, the involvement of a counsellor,
               does not in any manner undermine or take away the
               Court’s sole power to exercise it. In the eventuality of
               the parties’ agreeing, to such a course, they have to be
               asked to approach the Court, for appropriate orders: the
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
13
Court would then refer them to the counsellor. The
               question of the kind of report to be submitted to the
               Court and whether it would be a part of the record
               would be known during the course of the proceeding.
               In the present case, the parties merely consented.
               There is nothing to show that the parties were aware
               that the mediator’s report, with regard to not merely
               what transpired, but with respect to her reflections,
               would be given to the court; nor was there anything to
               show that they were aware - when they consented to
               the involvement of a counsellor that her report would
               be given to the court. The third unusual feature is that
               in at least two sittings with the counsellor, the mediator
               was present. This “joint” proceeding is, in the opinion
               of the Court, unacceptable. It can lead to undesirable
               consequences, especially if the mediator and counsellor
               proceed to furnish their reports (as they did in this
               case). A reading of both reports in the present case,
               paints a definite picture to the reader strongly
               suggestive of a plausible course of action or
               conclusion. It is this, the power of suggestion, which
               parties are guaranteed protection from, when they
               agree to mediation. Imagine if there were to be a
               possibility of divergence of opinion. Where would that
               lead? Aside from adding to contentiousness, the Court
               too would be left confounded.
……………………
29. The observations made in the main judgment
               dated February 17, 2017 in effect would permit the
               mediators to exercise de facto, or in default, the
               exclusive powers of the Court under
Section 12
of the
               1984 Act, which are non delegable. There is no
               question of validation of such action, by a later order of
               the Court. The danger of this would be that Courts can
               well draw upon such irregularly produced material, to
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
14
arrive at conclusions. The requirement of
Section 12
also has to be understood as the mandate of law that
               only the Court and no other body can refer the parties
               to counseling. The proposition that something which
               the law mandates to be performed in one manner and
               no other manner “where a power is given to do a
               certain thing in a certain way, the thing must be done
               in that way or not at all”1 applies with full force. The
               order dated May 06, 2016 in this case merely referred
               the parties to the mediator and carved out the course
               and ambit of mediation. The report of the counsellor
               was never sought by the Court, and yet was treated to
               be one under
Section 12
of the Act of 1984. Had the
               Court invoked
Section 12
of the Family Courts Act,
               1984 it would have clearly spelt out and recorded that
               while doing so; and in that sense there ought to have
               been a clear invocation of
Section 12
. The absence of
               such reference necessarily meant that the reference to
               “others’ meant only those connected with the dispute,
               such as family members of either the husband or the
               wife, whose participation was to facilitate amicable
               dispute resolution, not independent evaluation by a
               counsellor in an unguided manner to be incorporated
               or annexed to a mediation report.
30. If such a position is allowed as in this case,
               mediation may then well be used as a forum for
               gathering expert opinion which would then enter the
               main file of the case. The mandate of Section 89 of the
               Civil Procedure Code, 1908, read with Rule 20 and
               Rule 21 of the Delhi High Court Mediation and
               Conciliation Rules, 2004 provides for confidentiality
               and non-disclosure of information shared with the
               mediator and during the proceedings of mediation.
In
               the present case, the help of the counsellor sought by
1
Nazir Ahmed v King Emperor
AIR 1936 PC 243 followed by
State of UP v. Singhara
 Singh
AIR 1964 SC 358
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
15
the mediator to get holistic settlement between the
               parties was not ordered in the manner visualized by
Section 12
of the Family Courts Act, 1984.
Consequently, neither the report of the mediator nor of
               the counsellor could have been allowed to be exhibited.
               They are contrary to the mandate of principles
               governing the mediation – they undermine party
               autonomy and choice; besides, they clearly violate
Section 75
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act. The
               observations in the judgment dated February 17, 2017
               to the extent it notes that “the reports of the mediator
               as also of the counsellor concerning the behavior and
               attitude of the child, especially when the mediation
               process has failed would not fall within the bar of
               confidentiality and hence cannot be used in any
               proceeding…… Such reports are a neutral evaluation
               of expert opinion to a Court to guide the Court as to
               what orders need to be passed in the best interest of the
               child.      These reports are not confidential
               communications of the parties” and carving a general
               exception to mediation confidentiality in child custody
               matters and disputes for which the Family Court can
               seek the assistance of the counsellor, under
Section 12
of the 1984 Act, are hereby recalled. We hasten to add
               that this judgment is not a reflection on the mediator
               whose unstinted track record is known to all, or the
               endeavor of the counsellor, who too is very
               experienced in her field. Their commitment and
               sincerity to secure a settlement satisfactory to all, and
               the mediation process in general, is not doubted; this
               judgment should in no way dampen that zeal and
               determination that they have displayed.”
12.        The view taken by the High Court in allowing the review is presently

 under challenge. Mr. Anunya Mehta, learned Advocate for the appellant
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
16
submitted - (a) the High Court exceeded the scope of review jurisdiction as if

 it was sitting in appeal over the earlier judgment; that in terms of law
laid

 down by
this court an error which is not self-evident and which is required to

 be detected by a process of reasoning cannot be termed as error apparent on

 the face of the record; b) the report of the Counsellor was not hit by

 confidentiality as it merely recorded the interaction of the Counsellor with the

 child and did not record any information or submission by parties to the lis;
that there is a recognized exception to the rule of confidentiality in child

 custody matters as the court, in such matters exercises parens patriae

 jurisdiction.
Mr. Saurabh Kirpal, learned Advocate for the respondent responded -
(i) mediation reports are part of confidential proceedings and cannot be

 permitted to be used in court proceedings for which reliance was placed on

 various statutory provisions; (ii) the Counsellor was not appointed under

 Section 6 of the Family Courts Act; (iii) exception under Rule 8 (viii) to (xiv)

 of the Family Court Rules cannot be read as exception to Rules 20 and 23 of

 the Mediation Rules; (iv) the mediation reports given by the Counsellor-in-
mediation did not fall within the exceptions provided in rule 8; (v) there was

 no waiver of confidentiality and the respondent had objected to the use of the
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
17
reports at the first instance; (vi) the earlier order being based on a

 misconception of law, the High Court was right in exercising review

 jurisdiction.
13. The issues that arise for our consideration can broadly be put under two

 heads:
a) Whether the High Court was justified in exercising review

            jurisdiction and setting aside the earlier judgment and
b) Whether the High Court was correct in holding that the reports of

            the Mediator and the Counsellor in this case were part of confidential

            proceedings and no party could be permitted to use the same in any

            court proceedings or could place any reliance on such reports.
14. As regards the first issue, relying on the decisions of this Court in

 Inderchand Jain (dead) through Lrs. vs. Motilal (dead) through Lrs. 2,
Ajit

 Kumar Rath vs. State of Orissa and others
3 and
Parsion Devi and others vs.

 Sumitri Devi
and others4, it was submitted by the appellant that the exercise

 of review jurisdiction was not warranted at all. In Inderchand Jain2 it was

 observed in paras 10, 11 and 33 are as under:-
2
(2009) 14 SCC 663
3
(1999) 9 SCC 596
4
(1997) 8 SCC 715
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
18
“10. It is beyond any doubt or dispute that the review
               court does not sit in appeal over its own order. A
               rehearing of the matter is impermissible in law. It
               constitutes an exception to the general rule that once a
               judgment is signed or pronounced, it should not be
               altered. It is also trite that exercise of inherent
               jurisdiction is not invoked for reviewing any order.
11. Review is not appeal in disguise.
In
Lily Thomas
               v. Union of India5
this Court held: (SCC p. 251, para
56)

               “56. It follows, therefore, that the power of review can
               be exercised for correction of a mistake but not to
               substitute a view. Such powers can be exercised within
               the limits of the statute dealing with the exercise of
               power. The review cannot be treated like an appeal in
               disguise.”

                                  …………………………
33. The High Court had rightly noticed the review
               jurisdiction of the court, which is as under:
“The law on the subject—exercise of power of review,
               as propounded by the Apex Court and various other
               High Courts may be summarised as hereunder:
(i) Review proceedings are not by way of appeal
                    and have to be strictly confined to the scope and
                    ambit of
Order 47 Rule 1 CPC
.
(ii) Power of review may be exercised when
                    some mistake or error apparent on the fact of record
                    is found. But error on the face of record must be such
                    an error which must strike one on mere looking at the
5
(
2000) 6 SCC 224
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
19
record and would not require any long-drawn process
                    of reasoning on the points where there may
                    conceivably be two opinions.
(iii) Power of review may not be exercised on the
                    ground that the decision was erroneous on merits.
(iv) Power of review can also be exercised for
                    any sufficient reason which is wide enough to
                    include a misconception of fact or law by a court or
                    even an advocate.
(v) An application for review may be necessitated
                    by way of invoking the doctrine actus curiae
                    neminem gravabit.”

               In our opinion, the principles of law enumerated by it, in
               the facts of this case, have wrongly been applied.”

        In Ajit Kumar Rath3, it was observed:-
“29. In review proceedings, the Tribunal deviated
               from the principles laid down above which, we must
               say, is wholly unjustified and exhibits a tendency to
               rewrite a judgment by which the controversy had been
               finally decided. This, we are constrained to say, is not
               the scope of review under
Section 22(3)(f)
of the
               Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985…………”

        Similarly, in Parsion Devi4 the principles were summarized as under:
“9. Under
Order 47 Rule 1 CPC
a judgment may be
               open to review inter alia if there is a mistake or an error
               apparent on the face of the record. An error which is
               not self-evident and has to be detected by a process of
               reasoning, can hardly be said to be an error apparent on
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
20
the face of the record justifying the court to exercise its
               power of review under
Order 47 Rule 1 CPC
. In
               exercise of the jurisdiction under
Order 47 Rule 1 CPC
it is not permissible for an erroneous decision to be
               “reheard and corrected”. A review petition, it must be
               remembered has a limited purpose and cannot be
               allowed to be “an appeal in disguise”.
15. On the other hand, reliance was placed by the respondent on the decision

 in Board of Control for Cricket in
India and another vs. Netaji Cricket Club
and others6 to submit that exercise in review would be justified if there be

 misconception of fact or law. Para 90 of said decision was to the following

 effect:
“90. Thus, a mistake on the part of the court which
               would include a mistake in the nature of the
               undertaking may also call for a review of the order. An
               application for review would also be maintainable if
               there exists sufficient reason therefor. What would
               constitute sufficient reason would depend on the facts
               and circumstances of the case. The words “sufficient
               reason” in Order 47 Rule 1 of the Code are wide
               enough to include a misconception of fact or law by a
               court or even an advocate. An application for review
               may be necessitated by way of invoking the doctrine
               “actus curiae neminem gravabit”.”
6
(
2005) 4 SCC 741
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
21
16. We have gone through both the judgments of the High Court in the

 instant case and considered rival submissions on the point. It is well settled

 that an error which is required to be detected by a process of reasoning can

 hardly be said to be an error apparent on the face of the record. To justify

 exercise of review jurisdiction, the error must be self-evident. Tested on this

 parameter, the exercise of jurisdiction in the present case was not correct.
The exercise undertaken in the present case, in our considered view, was as

 if the High Court was sitting in appeal over the earlier decision dated

 17.02.2017. Even assuming that there was no correct appreciation of facts

 and law in the earlier judgment, the parties could be left to challenge the

 decision in an appeal. But the review was not a proper remedy at all. In our

 view, the High Court erred in entertaining the review petition and setting aside

 the earlier view dated 17.02.2017. Having so concluded, the logical course in

 the circumstances would be to set aside the judgment under appeal and permit

 the respondent to challenge the judgment dated 17.02.2017.         But such a

 course would entail further litigation and therefore, we have considered the

 matter from the stand point of second issue as well.
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
22
17. At the outset, we must, therefore, consider various provisions on which

 reliance was placed by either side.
18.
The Family Courts Act, 1984
(hereinafter referred to as the Act) was

 enacted to provide for the establishment of Family Courts with a view to

 promote conciliation and secure speedy settlement of disputes relating to

 marriage and family affairs and for matters connected therewith.
Section 4
deals with “appointment of Judges” and sub-section (4) states that while

 selecting persons for appointment as Judges – every endeavor shall be made

 to ensure that persons committed to the need inter alia to promote the welfare

 of children and to promote settlement of disputes by conciliation and

 counselling, are selected. Under
Section 6
Counsellors can be appointed by

 the State Government in consultation with the High Court.
Section 7
deals

 with “jurisdiction” and under sub clause (g) of sub-section (1) the jurisdiction

 extends in relation to guardianship issues, or the custody of, or access to, any

 minor.
Section 9
deals with “duty of Family Court to make efforts for

 settlement” and empowers the Court, subject to any rules made by the High

 Court, to follow such procedure as may be deemed fit.
Section 10
deals with

 “procedure generally” and states inter alia that Family Court can lay down its
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
23
own procedure with a view to arrive at a settlement.
Section 12
deals with

 “assistance of medical and welfare experts” and
Section 20
gives overriding

 effect to the Act.
Section 21
enables the High Court to frame rules which may

 inter alia provide for “efforts which may be made by, and the procedure

 which may be followed by, a Family Court for assisting and persuading

 parties to arrive at a settlement”.
The relevant Sections being
Sections 6
,
9
and
12
of the Act are as

 under:-
“6. Counsellors, officers and other employees of
               Family Courts. – (1) The State Government shall in
               consultation with the High Court, determine the
               number and categories of counsellors, officers and
               other employees required to assist a Family Court in
               the discharge of its functions and provide the Family
               Court with such counsellors, officers and other
               employees as it may think fit.
(2) The terms and conditions of association of the
               counsellors and the terms and conditions of service of
               the officers and other employees, referred to in sub-
section (1), shall be such as may be specified by rules
               made by the State Government.
9. Duty of Family Court to make efforts for
               settlement – (1) In every suit or proceeding, endeavor
               shall be made by the Family Court in the first instance,
               where it is possible to do so consistent with the nature
               and circumstances of the case, to assist and persuade
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
24
the parties in arriving at a settlement in respect of the
               subject-matter of the suit or proceeding and for this
               purpose a Family Court may, subject to any rules made
               by the High Court, follow such procedure as it may
               deem fit.
(2). If, in any suit or proceeding, at any stage, it
               appears to the Family Court that there is a reasonable
               possibility of a settlement between the parties, the
               Family Court may adjourn the proceedings for such
               period as it think fit to enable attempts to be made to
               effect such a settlement.
(3) The power conferred by sub-section (2) shall
               be in addition to, and not in derogation of any other
               power of the Family Court to adjourn the proceedings.
12. Assistance of medical and welfare experts.- In
               every suit or proceedings, it shall be open to a Family
               Court to secure the services of a medical expert or such
               person (preferably a woman where available), whether
               related to the parties or not, including a person
               professionally engaged in promoting the welfare of the
               family as the court may think fit, for the purposes of
               assisting the Family Court in discharging the functions
               imposed by this Act.”
19.        Pursuant to the rule making power, the High Court of Delhi notified

 the Family Courts (Procedure) Rules, 1992 (hereinafter referred to as the

 Rules). Rule 5 deals with Institution of Proceedings while Rule 8 deals with

 procedure to be followed to arrive at a settlement. Rule 8 is to the following

 effect.
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
25
“8. Procedure to be followed to arrive at a settlement
(i) In every suit or proceeding the Judge may, at any
               stage, direct the parties to attend a counsellor with a
               view to promote conciliation and to secure speedy
               settlement of disputes.
(ii) The parties shall be bound to attend the counsellor
               on the date and time fixed by the Judge.
(iii) The counsellor may require the parties or any one
               of them to appear on a date and time fixed for further
               counselling. In case any of the parties fails to appear,
               the counsellor may report the matter to the Judge and
               the Judge shall pass such orders including awarding of
               costs, as the circumstances of the case may require.
               The Judge may nevertheless require the counsellor to
               submit a report.
(iv) The counsellor, in the discharge of his duties may:-
(a) Pay visits to the homes of both or any of the
                       parties.
(b) Interview,      relatives,     friends     and
                       acquaintances of the parties or any of them.
(c) Seek such information from the employer of
                       any of the parties, as may be deemed necessary.
v) With the prior permission of the Judge the
               counsellor may:-
a) refer the parties to an expert in other areas,
                       such as medicine or psychiatry.
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
26
b) seek assistance of any of the institutions,
                       organizations or persons mentioned in
Section 5
of the Act.
vi) The counsellor shall maintain a diary in respect of
               every case giving in brief the steps taken.
vii) Information gathered by the counsellor, any
               statement made before the counsellor or any notes or
               report prepared by the counsellor will be treated as
               confidential. The counsellor shall not be called upon to
               disclose such information, statements, notes or report
               to any court except with the consent of both the parties.
viii) The counsellor shall not be asked to give evidence
               in any court in respect of such information statements
               or notes.
Provided, however, that the counsellor will submit
               to the Judge a report relating to the home environment
               of the parties concerned, their personalities and their
               relationship with their child and/or children in order to
               assist the Judge in deciding the question of the custody
               or guardianship of any child or children of the
               marriage.
Provided further that the counsellor will also submit to
               the Judge a report relating to the home environment,
               income or standard of living of the party or parties
               concerned in order to assist the Judge in determining
               the amount of maintenance and/or alimony to be
               granted to one of the parties.
ix) The Judge may also request the counsellor to
               submit a report on any other matter, the Judge consider
               necessary.
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
27
x) A copy of any report may be supplied to the
               parties, on such request being made by the parties.
xi) The parties will be entitled to make their
               submissions on the report.
xii) The counsellor shall not be asked to give evidence
               in any court in respect of any report made by him.
xiii) Save as aforesaid, the counsellor will submit a
               brief memorandum to the Judge informing the Judge of
               the outcome of the proceedings within the time
               specified by the Judge.
xiv)When the parties arrive at a settlement before the
               counsellor relating to the dispute or any part thereof,
               such settlement shall be reduced to writing and shall be
               signed by the parties and countersigned by the
               counsellor. The Judge shall pronounce a decree or
               order in terms thereof unless the Judge considers the
               terms of the settlement unconscionable or unlawful.
xv) Cohabitation between the parties in the course of
               conciliation proceedings will not be deemed to be
               condonation of the matrimonial offence.
xvi)Even after passing of the decree or order the Judge
               may require the counsellor to supervise the placement
               of children in custody of a party and to pay surprise
               visits to the home where the child resides. In case any
               alternation is required in the arrangements the
               counsellor will make a report to the Judge. The Judge
               may after notice to the parties pass such orders as
               Judge may deem fit.
xvii) The Judge may require the counsellor to
               supervise, guide and/or assist reconciled couples, even
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
28
after the disposal of the case for such further period as
               the court may order.
xviii)    On a request received from the counsellor
               the Judge may issue process to any person to appear
               before the counsellor at such place, date and time as
               may be desired by the counsellor.”
20. Since reliance has been placed on various other statutory provisions to

 bring home the issue regarding confidentiality in mediation process, some of

 those provisions are also extracted herein:-
A]
Sections 75
and
81
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 are

        to the following effect:-
“75. Confidentiality – Notwithstanding anything
               contained in any other law for the time being in force,
               the conciliator and the parties shall keep confidential
               all matters relating to the conciliation proceedings.
               Confidentiality shall extend also to the settlement
               agreement, except where its disclosure is necessary for
               purposes of implementation and enforcement.
81. Admissibility of evidence in other proceedings.
– The parties shall not rely on or introduce as evidence
               in arbitral or judicial proceedings, whether or not such
               proceedings relate to the dispute that is the subject of
               the conciliation proceedings,-
(a) views expressed or suggestions made by the other
               party in respect of a possible settlement of the dispute;
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
29
(b) admissions made by the other party in the course
               of the conciliation proceedings;
(c) proposals made by the conciliator;
(d) the fact that the other party had indicated his will-
               ingness to accept a proposal for settlement made by the
               conciliator.”


        B]     Rule 20 of the Delhi High Court Mediation and Conciliation Centre

        (SAMADHAN) is to the following effect:-
“Rule 20: Confidentiality,              disclosure     and
               inadmissibility of information.
(a) When a Mediator /Conciliator receives factual
                   information concerning the dispute(s) from any
                   party, he shall disclose the substance of that
                   information to the other party, so that the other party
                   may have an opportunity to present such
                   explanation as it may consider appropriate.
Provided that, when a party gives information to the
                    Mediator/Conciliator subject to a specific condition
                    that it be kept confidential, the Mediator/Conciliator
                    shall not disclose that information to the other party.
(b) Receipt or perusal, or preparation of records, reports
                   or other documents by the Mediator/Conciliator,
                   while serving in that capacity shall be confidential
                   and the Mediator/Conciliator shall not be compelled
                   to divulge information regarding those documents
                   nor as to what transpired during the
                   Mediator/Conciliator before any Court or tribunal
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
30
or any other authority or any person or group of
                    persons.
(c) Parties shall maintain confidentiality in respect of
                   events that transpired during the Mediation/
                   Conciliation and shall not rely on or introduce the
                   said information in other proceedings as to:
(i)      views expressed by a party in the course of
                             the mediation/conciliation proceedings;
(ii)     documents        obtained      during       the
                             mediation/conciliation which were expressly
                             required to be treated as confidential or other
                             notes, drafts or information given by the
                             parties or the Mediator/Conciliator;
(iii)    proposals made or views expressed by the
                             Mediator/Conciliator.
(iv)     admission made by a party in the course of
                             mediation/conciliation proceedings;
(v)      The fact that a party had or had not indicated
                             willingness to accept a proposal.
d) There shall be no audio or video recording of the
                   mediation/conciliation proceedings.
e) No statement of parties or the witnesses shall be
                   recorded by the
Mediator/Conciliator.”
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
31
C]     The
format of the application which the Centre for Mediation and

        Conciliation (SAMADHAN) requires every party to fill in is to the

        following effect :-
“I agree to attend all the Mediation Sessions at the time
               and place fixed by the Mediator. Any party can
               withdraw from mediation if they so choose on finding
               that it is not helping them or their case. Each party will
               bear its own lawyer’s fees. Each party will also share
               the cost of the Mediator’s fees equally, unless the Court
               directs otherwise.
The entire process of mediation will be confidential
               and whatever is submitted to the Mediator will not be
               divulged or produced or be admissible in any Court
               proceedings. The Mediator will not be compelled to
               appear as a witness in any Court of law.
The mediation process is voluntary and not binding on
               the parties till they, on their own volition, reach a
               settlement agreement and sign the same.”


        D] Certain other provisions relied upon by the respondent are:-
“i) The UNICITRAL Conciliation Rules contain
Article
               14
, which provides for confidentiality of all matters
               relating to conciliation.
ii) That Section of the Uniform Mediation Act, USA,
               2003, provides for privilege against disclosure,
               admissibility and discovery of communication and
               information exchanged during mediation process.
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
32
iii) That Rule of the Honk Kong International Arbitration
               Centre Rules mandates mediation to be a private and a
               confidential process.
iv) The Code of Practice of Family Mediators followed
               by the Family Mediation Council, England and Wales in
               paragraph 5.5 provides that the Mediator must not
               disclose any information about, or obtained in the course
               of the mediation to anyone, including a court appointed
               officer or court, without express consent of each
               participant, an order of the court or where the law imposes
               an overriding obligation of disclosure on Mediator to do
               so.
v) The Family Justice Courts, Singapore also mandates
               that all information and matters discussed during the
               Family Dispute Resolution Conferences, counselling,
               mediation or co-mediation are to be confidential.
vi) The Members Code of Professional Conduct of
               Family Mediation Canada in
Article 7
extends the
               principle of confidentiality to the documents prepared
               specifically for or resulting from mediation.
vii) The California Rules of Court, 2017 also provides for
               confidentiality to be maintained in mediation relating to
               child custody matters.”
21.
In
Afcons Infrastructure Limited and another vs. Cherian Varkey

 Construction Company Private Limited
and others7              while dealing with

 issues concerning scope and width of Section 89 Civil Procedure Code and
7
(2010) 8 SCC 24
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
33
the modalities of Alternative Dispute Resolution mentioned therein, this Court

 noted various kinds of disputes in respect of which process of Alternative

 Dispute Resolution has normally been found to be suitable. Para 28 of the

 decision was as under:-
“28. All other suits and cases of civil nature in
               particular the following categories of cases (whether
               pending in civil courts or other special
               tribunals/forums) are normally suitable for ADR
               processes:
(i) All cases relating to trade, commerce and contracts,
               including
               • disputes arising out of contracts (including all money
               claims);
• disputes relating to specific performance;
               • disputes between suppliers and customers;
               • disputes between bankers and customers;
• disputes between developers/builders and customers;
               • disputes between landlords and tenants/licensor and
               licensees;
• disputes between insurer and insured;
(ii) All cases arising from strained or soured
               relationships, including
               • disputes relating to matrimonial causes, maintenance,
               custody of children;
• disputes relating to partition/division among family
               members/coparceners/co-owners; and
               • disputes relating to partnership among partners.
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
34
(iii) All cases where there is a need for continuation of
               the pre-existing relationship in spite of the disputes,
               including
               •       disputes between neighbours (relating to
               easementary rights, encroachments, nuisance, etc.);
               • disputes between employers and employees;
• disputes           among           members           of
               societies/associations/apartment owners’ associations;
(iv) All cases relating to tortious liability, including
               • claims for compensation in motor accidents/other
               accidents; and
(v) All consumer disputes, including
               •                    disputes         where            a
               trader/supplier/manufacturer/service provider is keen to
               maintain his business/professional reputation and
               credibility or product popularity.
The above enumeration of “suitable” and “unsuitable”
               categorisation of cases is not intended to be exhaustive
               or rigid. They are illustrative, which can be subjected
               to just exceptions or additions by the court/tribunal
               exercising its jurisdiction/discretion in referring a
               dispute/case to an ADR process.”
22. In Moti Ram (dead) through Lrs. and
another vs. Ashok Kumar
and

 another8 it was held that mediation proceedings are totally confidential and in

 case the mediation is unsuccessful, the Mediator should not write anything
8
(
2011) 1 SCC 466
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
35
that was discussed, proposed or done during the mediation proceedings. The

 observations in that behalf were:-
“2. In this connection, we would like to state that
               mediation proceedings are totally confidential
               proceedings. This is unlike proceedings in court which
               are conducted openly in the public gaze. If the
               mediation succeeds, then the mediator should send the
               agreement signed by both the parties to the court
               without mentioning what transpired during the
               mediation proceedings. If the mediation is
               unsuccessful, then the mediator should only write one
               sentence in his report and send it to the court stating
               that the “mediation has been unsuccessful”. Beyond
               that, the mediator should not write anything which was
               discussed, proposed or done during the mediation
               proceedings. This is because in mediation, very often,
               offers, counter offers and proposals are made by the
               parties but until and unless the parties reach to an
               agreement signed by them, it will not amount to any
               concluded contract. If the happenings in the mediation
               proceedings are disclosed, it will destroy the
               confidentiality of the mediation process.”


        Similarly, while dealing with a matter arising under the
Arbitration and

 Conciliation Act, 1996
, it was held by this Court in
Govind Prasad Sharma

 and others vs. Doon Valley Officers Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
9

 that “both the Conciliator and the parties must keep as confidential all matters

 relating to conciliation proceedings”.
9
AIR 2017 SC 4968 : 2017 (
11) SCALE 231
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
36
23. Reliance was placed by the respondent on the decisions mentioned above

 and some statutory provisions including procedural norms in different

 jurisdictions to submit that there must be absolute confidentiality in respect of

 any statements made during the course of mediation. The appellant, however,

 relies upon Sub-Rule(viii) of Rule 8 of the Rules in support of the submission

 that in relation to matters, inter alia, of custody or guardianship of any child

 or children, the Counsellor could be asked to submit to the Judge a report

 relating to home environment of the parties concerned, their personalities and

 their relationship with the child and or children in order to assist the Judge in

 deciding the questions involved in the matter.
24. We, thus, have line of cases dealing with mediation/conciliation and

 other proceedings in general and Rule 8 of the Rules dealing inter alia, with

 custody issues which is in the nature of an exception to the norms of

 confidentiality. It is true that the process of mediation is founded on the

 element of confidentiality. Qualitatively, Mediation or Conciliation stands on

 a completely different footing as against regular adjudicatory processes.
Instead of an adversarial stand in adjudicatory proceedings, the idea of

 mediation is to resolve the dispute at a level which is amicable rather than
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
37
adversarial. In the process, the parties may make statements which they

 otherwise they would not have made while the matter was pending

 adjudication before a court of law. Such statements which are essentially

 made in order to see if there could be a settlement, ought not to be used

 against the maker of such statements in case at a later point the attempts at

 mediation completely fail.                If the statements are allowed to be used at

 subsequent stages, the element of confidence which is essential for healthy

 mediation/conciliation would be completely lost.                    The element of

 confidentiality and the assurance that the statements would not be relied upon

 helps the parties bury the hatchet and move towards resolution of the disputes.
The confidentiality is, thus, an important element of mediation/conciliation.
25. Complete adherence to confidentiality would absolutely be correct in

 normal matters where the role of the court is purely of an adjudicator. But

 such an approach may not essentially be conducive when the court is called

 upon and expected to discharge its role in the capacity as parens patriae and

 is concerned with the welfare of a child. All custody and guardianship issues

 are resolved on the touchstone or parameter of “best interest of the child”.
In

 custody and guardianship disputes between two parties, a minor child is in a
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
38
peculiar situation. At times, both sides are busy fighting legal battles and the

 court is called upon in parens patriae to decide what is in the best interest of

 the child. In order to reach correct conclusion, the court may interview the

 child or may depend upon the analysis of an expert who may spend some

 more time with the child and gauge the upbringing, personality, desires or

 mental frame of the child and render assistance to the court. It is precisely for

 this reason that the element of confidentiality which is otherwise the basic

 foundation of mediation/conciliation, to a certain extent, is departed from in

 Sub-Rule (viii) of Rule 8 of the Rules.
26. If the reports of the Counsellor touching upon the home environment of

 the parties concerned, their personalities and their relationship with their child

 or children would assist the court in determining the custody or guardianship

 issues, any technicality ought not to stand in the way. Sub-Rule (viii) of Rule

 8 seeks to achieve that purpose and makes such material available for the

 assessment of the court. The observations of this Court in
Ashish Ranjan vs.

 Anupma Tandon
and another10 have crystalized the approach to be adopted

 in matters concerning custody or guardianship issues. Paras 18 & 19 of the

 decision are as under:
10
(
2010) 14 SCC 274
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
39
“18. It is settled legal proposition that while
               determining the question as to which parent the care
               and control of a child should be given, the paramount
               consideration remains the welfare and interest of the
               child and not the rights of the parents under the statute.
Such an issue is required to be determined in the
               background of the relevant facts and circumstances and
               each case has to be decided on its own facts as the
               application of doctrine of stare decisis remains
               irrelevant insofar as the factual aspects of the case are
               concerned. While considering the welfare of the child,
               the “moral and ethical welfare of the child must also
               weigh with the court as well as his physical well-
               being”. The child cannot be treated as a property or a
               commodity and, therefore, such issues have to be
               handled by the court with care and caution, with love,
               affection and sentiments applying human touch to the
               problem. Though, the provisions of the special statutes
               which govern the rights of the parents or guardians
               may be taken into consideration, there is nothing which
               can stand in the way of the court exercising its parens
               patriae jurisdiction arising in such cases. (
Vide Gaurav
               Nagpal v. Sumedha Nagpal11
.)
19. The statutory provisions dealing with the custody
               of the child under any personal law cannot and must
               not supersede the paramount consideration as to what
               is conducive to the welfare of the minor. In fact, no
               statute on the subject, can ignore, eschew or obliterate
               the vital factor of the welfare of the minor. (
Vide
               Elizabeth Dinshaw v. Arvand M. Dinshaw12
,
Chandrakala Menon v. Vipin Menon13, Nil Ratan
11
(2009) 1 SCC 42 : (2009) 1 SCC (Civ) 1 : AIR 2009 SC 557
12
(1987) 1 SCC 42 : 1987 SCC (Cri) 13 : AIR 1987 SC 3
13
(1993) 2 SCC 6 : 1993
SCC (Cri) 485
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
40
Kundu
v.
Abhijit Kundu14, Shilpa Aggarwal v. Aviral
               Mittal15
and
Athar Hussain v. Syed Siraj Ahmed16
.)”
27. Statements made by the parents during the course of mediation may not

 be relied upon on the ground of confidentiality but natural responses and

 statements made by the minor to the Counsellor would certainly afford a

 chance to decide what is in the best interest of the child. A child may respond

 naturally and spontaneously in its interactions with the Counsellor, who is

 professionally trained to make the child feel comfortable. Record of such

 interaction may afford valuable inputs to the Court in discharge of its duties in

 parens patriae jurisdiction.              If during such interaction issues or aspects

 concerning welfare of a child are noticed, there is no reason why the Court be

 deprived of access to such aspects.                As held by this Court in various

 judgments, the paramount consideration ought to be to see what is in the best

 interest of the child.
28.
In terms of Sub Rule (viii) of Rule 8, the Counsellor is obliged to give

 report, inter alia, relating to home environment of the parties concerned, their

 personalities and their relationship with the child and/or children in order to
14
(2008) 9 SCC 413
15
(2010) 1 SCC 591 : (2010) 1 SCC (Civ) 192
16
(2010) 2 SCC 654 : (
2010) 1 SCC (Civ) 528
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
41
assist the Judge in deciding the question of guardianship of any child or

 children. The intention is clear that the normal principle of confidentiality

 will not apply in matters concerning custody or guardianship issues and the

 Court, in the best interest of the child, must be equipped with all the material

 touching upon relevant issues in order to render complete justice. This

 departure from confidentially is consistent with the underlined theme of the

 Act in general and
Section 12
in particular. Once there is a clear exception in

 favour of categories stated therein, principles in any other forms of

 mediation/conciliation or other modes of Alternative Dispute Resolution

 regarding confidentiality cannot be imported. The effect of such exception

 cannot be diluted or nullified. In our view, the High Court considered the

 matter in correct perspective in paragraphs 17 to 20 of its judgment dated

 07.02.2017.
29. There is, however, one aspect which must also be considered and that is

 who is the “Counsellor” within the meaning of Rule 8 and whether the

 Counsellor who assisted the court in the present matter comes within the four

 corners of said provision. It is true that under
Section 6
the Counsellors are

 appointed by the State Government in consultation with the High Court. It is
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
42
also true that the Counsellor in the present case was not the one who was

 appointed in terms of
Section 6
but was appointed by a committee of the High

 Court and her assistance had been requested for in connection with many

 matters. The order passed on 06.05.2016 had indicated that the Mediator

 could join “any other person” as may be deemed necessary for a holistic and

 effective mediation. The next order dated 11.05.2016 did mention the name

 of the Counsellor and the fact that the Counsellor had a fruitful meeting with

 Aditya.       The Counsellor, thereafter, interacted with him on 08.07.2016 and

 11.07.2016, based on which interaction, a report was submitted on

 21.07.2016.          The engagement of the Counsellor was thus in complete

 knowledge of the parties as well as with express acceptance of the High

 Court. It may be that said Counsellor was not appointed under
Section 6
of

 the Act but if the paramount consideration is the welfare of the child, there

 cannot be undue reliance on a technicality. As a matter of fact, the width of
Section 12
of the Act would admit no such restriction. The report given by

 the Counsellor in the present case cannot, therefore, be eschewed from

 consideration.
It is noteworthy that there was absolutely nothing against the

 Counsellor and in the judgment under appeal, the High Court went on to

 observe in para No.30 that the Counsellor was well experienced and known
SLP(C)No.9267 of 2018
Perry Kansagra vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra
43
for her commitment and sincerity to secure a settlement which would be

 satisfactory to all.
30. We do not, therefore, see any reason why the reports in the present case,

 be kept out of consideration.
31. We, therefore, allow this appeal, set aside the judgment dated 11.12.2017

 passed by the High Court and restore the earlier judgment dated 17.02.2017

 passed by the High Court of Delhi. There shall be no order as to costs.
…………..…..……..……J.
                                                    (Abhay Manohar Sapre)



                                                   ....………….……………J.
                                                         (Uday Umesh Lalit)
 New Delhi,
 February 15, 2019