[Cites
27
, Cited by
76
]
Supreme Court of India
Sunita vs Rajasthan State Road Transport ... on 14 February, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 994, (2019) 199 ALLINDCAS 155 (SC), AIRONLINE 2019 SC 81, (2019) 135 ALL LR 279, (2019) 199 ALLINDCAS 155, (2019) 1 ACC 486, (2019) 1 CURCC 439, (2019) 1 GUJ LH 488, (2019) 1 TAC 710, (2019) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 283, (2019) 2 ACJ 801, (2019) 2 ANDHLD 38, (2019) 2 RAJ LW 1575, (2019) 2 RECCIVR 209, (2019) 2 UC 822, (2019) 3 MAD LJ 644, (2019) 3 SCALE 393, (2019) 6 MAH LJ 792, (2019) 74 OCR 168, 2019 AAC 592 (SC), (2020) 1 MPLJ 1, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 949
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
Ajay Rastogi
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
1


                                                                       REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1665            OF 2019
                                (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 33757 of 2018)

                         Sunita & Ors.                             …Appellants

                                                  :Versus:
                         Rajasthan State Road Transport
                         Corporation & Anr.                        ….Respondents




                                               JUDGMENT
A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   The captioned appeal assails the decision of the High

                         Court of Judicature for Rajasthan, Jaipur Bench, dated 25 th

                         July, 2018 in S.B. Civil Miscellaneous Appeal No. 521 of

                         2017, whereby the appeal filed by respondent No.1 (The

                         Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation) owner of the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEETU KHAJURIA
offending vehicle, was allowed. The High Court was pleased
Date: 2019.02.14
17:50:52 IST
Reason:
to set aside the Award passed by the Motor Accident Claims
2
Tribunal, Sawai Madhopur (for short “the Tribunal”)       in

favour of the appellants/claimants for the death of their

family member, Sitaram and consequently dismissed the

SBCMA       No.581/2017   filed   by   the   appellants   for

enhancement of the compensation amount granted by the

Tribunal.
3.   Briefly stated, on 28th October, 2011 at around 7 A.M.,

Sitaram (husband of appellant No.1 and father of appellant

Nos.2 and 3, minor children) was riding a motorcycle,

bearing registration number RJ­25 SA 6923, along with a

pillion rider, one Rajulal Khateek, when the motorcycle

collided with a bus coming from the opposite direction

bearing registration number RJ­26/P.A. 0042, owned by

respondent No.1 and rashly and negligently driven by

respondent No.2. The accident resulted in the death of

Sitaram and severe injuries to the pillion rider, Rajulal

Khateek. Thereafter, the appellants and the parents of the

deceased Sitaram filed two separate petitions before the

Tribunal seeking compensation for the death of Sitaram,

who was a senior teacher in a Government school, from the
3
respondents,   to   the    tune   of   Rs.2,62,02,408/­   and

Rs.1,13,42,984/­, respectively.
4.   The respondents resisted the said claim petitions. They

denied that the offending bus had caused the accident. They

contended that the accident was caused due to the mistake

and negligence on the part of the deceased Sitaram himself

as he was riding on the wrong side of the road and he did

not know how to ride the motorcycle. He did not have a

valid driving licence and was not wearing a helmet at the

time of the accident, which was in violation of traffic rules.

The respondents also doubted the validity of the evidence

and witnesses on record.
5.   The Tribunal in its judgment dated 14th December,

2016, extensively analysed the evidence on record. It

considered the evidence of the deceased’s wife Sunita

(appellant No.1 herein), who deposed about the accident

which resulted in Sitaram’s death. The father of Sitaram,

Mool Chand Kirad (A.D.3), also deposed about the accident

of the offending bus with the motorcycle causing the death
4
of Sitaram at the spot of the accident. The Tribunal also

considered FIR No.247/2011 (Exh.1) and charge­sheet

(Exh.2)    filed   against     respondent     No.2    for   offences

punishable under
Sections 279
,
337
and
304A
of the Indian

Penal Code (‘
IPC
’) and
Sections 134
/
187
of the Motor

Vehicles Act (for short “the Act”). It noted that the

respondents had not challenged the FIR or the charge­sheet

before any authority.
6.   The    Tribunal    also       examined   the    deposition   of

Bhagchand Khateek (A.D.2), a witness to the incident who

deposed that he had gone to his brother’s house at Shivad

village, one day prior to the date of the accident. At the time

of the accident, he had gone to relieve himself and was

walking on the left side of the road when he saw the

motorcycle with number RJ 25 SA 6923, which was also on

the left side of the road, being hit by the offending bus

bearing registration No. RJ­26/P.A. 0042, being driven at a

high speed coming on to the wrong side of the road,

resulting in the instant death of the rider of the motorcycle.

He further deposed that the name of the driver of the
5
offending bus was Banwari (respondent No.2). In his cross­

examination, Bhagchand revealed that he did not see

Banwari (respondent No.2) after the accident and further,

that there was a pillion rider on the motorcycle who was a

man, but he couldn’t identify the man’s age.
7.   The    respondents    challenged    the   evidence    of

Bhagchand (A.D.2) on the ground that his name was not

mentioned in the list of witnesses set out in the charge­

sheet (Exh.2) and could not have been near the spot when

the accident occurred. For, he was a resident of Pakhala

village, which was 3 (three) Kilometres away from the

alleged accident spot. Despite these objections, the Tribunal

accepted the veracity of Bhagchand’s deposition. It held that

not all the eye­witnesses to the incident needed to be named

in the charge­sheet and that the respondents had failed to

ask Bhagchand any question during the cross examination

so as to cast any doubt on the veracity of his statement.

Further, the respondents had also failed to ask Bhagchand

about giving any statement to the police. Bhagchand had

deposed that on the day of incident, he was at his brother’s
6
house in Shivad village, which did not preclude him from

being an eye­witness to the incident.
8.   The Tribunal then noted that respondent No.2 driver of

the offending bus, Banwari Lal, had not been examined as a

witness by the respondents. Additionally, it found that the

site map of the accident (Exh.3) showed that the accident

had occurred at a turning in the road, and yet the offending

vehicle was driven at a high speed. This aspect was read

with the unchallenged evidence of the witness Bhagchand

Khateek (A.D.2), who inter alia deposed that at the time of

the accident, the offending bus was being driven recklessly

at a high speed and also that the respondents had failed to

ask the said witness Bhagchand any question about the

purported negligence of the rider of the motorcycle, Sitaram.

Further, the respondents had failed to show that they had

challenged the filing of the charge­sheet (Exh.2) against

respondent No.2 driver of the offending vehicle. Finally, the

Tribunal   adverted   to   the   post­mortem   report   (Exh.4)

wherein it was recorded that the deceased had died due to
7
shock arising from various fractures on his body. The

Tribunal also took into account the notice under
Section

134
of the Act (Exh.7), wherein respondent No.2 had not

made any statement that the accident had occurred due to

the negligence of the motorcycle rider. On a combined

reading of the aforesaid evidence, the Tribunal held that

there was no negligence on the part of the deceased

Sitaram, while riding the motorcycle and that he was fatally

hit by the bus being driven recklessly and at a high speed

by respondent No.2.
9.   The Tribunal also examined the notice under
Section

133
of the Act (Exh.6) in which the Assistant Transport

Inspector, Tonk Bus Depot, stated that respondent No.2

was the driver of the offending bus bearing registration

number RJ­26/P.A. 0042.       It then examined the notice

under
Section 134
of the Act (Exh.7), wherein respondent

No.2 stated that the offending bus bearing registration

number RJ­26/P.A. 0042 was being operated by him on the

date and place of the accident. The Tribunal thus concluded

that respondent No.2 was under the employment of
8
respondent No.1 at the time of the accident and was driving

the offending bus which caused the accident.
10. On        the   basis    of       the   aforesaid   findings   and

observations, the Tribunal partly allowed the two claim

petitions.      After deducting income tax payable on the

income       received   by   Sitaram,        the   Tribunal   awarded

compensation of Rs.48,33,235 (Rupees Forty Eight Lakh

Thirty Three Thousand Two Hundred and Thirty Five only)

jointly and severally to the appellants and the parents of

Sitaram, along with interest. The Tribunal observed that

there was evidence on record to show that Sunita (appellant

No.1) wife of the deceased was having estranged relations

with her husband and thus ordered that the compensation

be divided in such a way that the appellants herein would

receive Rs.38,33,235 (Rupees Thirty Eight Lakh Thirty

Three Thousand Two Hundred and Thirty Five only) and the

remaining amount of Rs.10,00,000 (Rupees Ten Lakh only)

would be given to the parents of the deceased.
9
11. The appellants, aggrieved by the deduction of income

tax from the calculated income of the deceased, filed S.B.

Civil Miscellaneous Appeal No.581 of 2017 while the

respondents filed two appeals viz. S.B. Civil Miscellaneous

Appeal No.521 of 2017 and S.B. Civil Miscellaneous Appeal

No.522 of 2017, before the High Court of Rajasthan, Jaipur

Bench. Vide a common judgment dated 25 th July, 2018, the

High Court set aside the Tribunal’s judgment in entirety, on

the grounds that non­examination of the pillion rider,

Rajulal Khateek, was fatal to the case of the       appellants,

that the witness Bhagchand (A.D. 2) was unreliable and his

evidence could not be reckoned and that the site map of the

accident (Exh.3) showed that the deceased Sitaram was

riding his motorcycle on the wrong side of the road at the

time when the accident occurred, thus, proving that it was

Sitaram, and not respondent No.2 (bus driver), who was

guilty of negligence. The High Court thus allowed the two

appeals filed by the respondents and set aside the

Tribunal’s   judgment,   and      consequently   dismissed   the

appeal filed by the appellants.
10
12. We have heard Mr. Anuj Bhandari, learned counsel

appearing for the appellants and Mr. S.K. Bhattacharya,

learned   counsel   appearing   for   the   respondents.   Mr.

Bhandari submits that the Motor Accident Claims are

summary proceedings so as to adjudicate the adequate

amount of compensation in case of an accident and that a

claim under the Act has to be decided on the touchstone of

preponderance of probability rather than on the standard of

proof beyond reasonable doubt which applies in criminal

matters. He submits that evidence of Bhagchand (A.D.2)

was justly accepted by the Tribunal and the High Court

discarded the same on specious ground that he was not

cited as a witness in the criminal case registered by the

local police in respect of the subject accident and was

unable to tell the age of the pillion rider. Further, the non­

examination of a witness cited in the charge sheet would not

be fatal to the appellant’s claim and the entire claim could

not be rejected merely on such ground. Besides, the

statement of the pillion rider Rajulal Khateek, as recorded

by the police under
Section 161
of the Criminal Procedure

Code (‘
CrPC
’), clearly stated that the offending bus was
11
being driven in a rash and negligent manner and on the

wrong side of the road and although this witness has not

been   examined   in   these   proceedings,   his   statement

nevertheless remained on the record as part of the final

report filed under
Section 173
CrPC and hence, that could

not be discarded merely for lack of examination of the said

witness.
13. Mr. Bhandari also submits that on the issue of

negligence by the rider of the motorcycle and the said

motorcycle being driven on the wrong side of the road, the

High Court came to a diametrically opposite finding from

the Tribunal, merely by reference to the site plan, on the

basis of conjuncture and surmises and in complete

disregard of the other evidence and, in particular, the

factual position as set out in the site plan (Exh.3). He

submits that the Tribunal had justly opined that the site

plan indicated that the offending bus was being driven at a

high speed and after hitting the motorcycle, it went further

ahead and rammed into an electricity pole off the road, well
12
past the accident spot. The Tribunal’s judgment was a well­

        reasoned decision and a plausible view of the matter. Thus,

        the High Court committed grave illegality in setting aside

        the said decision.
He relied upon
Kusum Lata and Ors. Vs.

        Satbir and Ors.1
,
Bimla Devi and Ors. Vs. Himachal

        Road Transport Corporation and Ors.2
,
United India

        Insurance Company Limited Vs. Shila Datta and Ors.,3
and
Dulcina Fernandes and Ors. Vs. Joaquim Xavier

        Cruz and Anr.
4, in support of his arguments.
14. Per contra, Mr. S.K. Bhattacharya, learned counsel for

        the respondents, argues that the Tribunal’s decision was

        wholly untenable. Not only did the appellants failed to

        examine any independent witness to the case but also, the

        testimony of Bhagchand (A.D. 2) was not credible as neither

        was his name set out in the list of witnesses nor could he

        identify the age of the pillion rider on the motorcycle.

        However, the same witness could clearly identify both, the


1   (2011)   3 SCC 646
2   (2009)   13 SCC 530
3   (2011)   10 SCC 509
4   (2013)   10 SCC 646
13
number of the motorcycle and the number of the offending

bus, thus indicative of the fact that the witness was tutored

and not a natural witness. Mr. Bhattacharya submits that

the Tribunal’s opinion, that not all witnesses named in the

charge­sheet   were   required   to   be   presented    by   the

investigating agency rather, only the spot witnesses were

required, was contradictory, since the pillion rider on the

motorcycle, Rajulal Khateek, was mentioned as a witness in

the charge­sheet but the said person was not presented for

examination.
15. Mr.    Bhattacharya    further    argues   that    the   two

principles applicable to the assessment of evidence in

matters of reckless driving and negligence are res ipsa

loquitor and preponderance of probability.     That principle

casts a burden on the appellants/claimants to show that

the deceased Sitaram was not negligent in riding his

motorcycle. The facts, however, indicate that the accident

occurred in the middle of the road and although the

offending bus was being driven in the middle of the road,
14
the fault lay with the lighter vehicle namely, the motorcycle.

Merely because the bus was being driven fast, it does not

follow that the same was also being driven negligently. The

evidence on record lacked basic requirements to prove the

guilt   of   respondent    No.2   driver,   let   alone   on   the

preponderance of probability and there was no evidence to

indicate the callousness or negligence of the bus driver.

There was no assessment of contributory negligence on the

part of the deceased Sitaram and the appellants failed to

prove any negligence on behalf of the respondents.
16. Finally,     Mr.      Bhattacharya      submits   that     the

compensation awarded by the Tribunal to the parents of the

deceased Sitaram was incorrect since there was no evidence

on record to show that the parents were dependent on the

deceased or that they were staying with him. Sitaram was

admittedly not a bachelor and was not staying with his

parents. While the parents did have the right to filial

consortium, however, compensation under such head was

to be awarded separately and not on a structured basis.
15
17. We have cogitated over the above submissions and

have examined the relevant record. The pivotal question is

about the correctness of the approach of the High Court in

setting aside the findings of fact recorded by the Tribunal.

Further, whether the circumstances emanating from the

evidence produced by the parties justify the conclusion

reached by the High Court on the factum of negligence on

the part of the motorcycle rider, the deceased Sitaram, in

causing the accident with the offending bus driven by

respondent No.2.
18. Indeed, we are conscious of the scope of an appeal

under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India. This Court

ordinarily   does   not   re­examine   or   re­appreciate   the

evidence. But it is certainly open to this Court to interfere if

the findings recorded in the judgment under appeal are

found to be manifestly wrong or perverse.
19. We may immediately turn to the manner in which the

well­considered and exhaustive judgment of the Tribunal

running into over 24 pages came to be reversed by the High
16
Court, if we may say so, in a cryptic manner in 5 pages. The

relevant portion of the High Court judgment under appeal,

after recording facts and submissions of the counsel, reads

thus:
“In order to prove Issue No.1, claimants examined AW­2
        Bhagchand. The said witness deposed that on
        28.10.2011, while he was returning after answering the
        call of nature, he saw that a motorcycle was coming from
        village Manhapura side. The Roadsways but came from
        opposite direction and struck against the motorcycle. As a
        result, one person, who was sitting on the motorcycle died.
In his cross­examination, he deposed that one more person
        was also sitting on the motorcycle. However, he could not
        tell if the said person was young, old or a child.
FIR Exhibit­1 was lodged by Kailash Chand with
        regard to the accident in question. A perusal of the same
        reveals that the motorcycle was being driven by Sita Ram
        and Raju Lal Khateek was sitting on the pillion seat. Best
        eye­witness in the present case can be said to be Raju Lal
        Khateek, who was travelling with the deceased at the time
        of accident. However, Raju Lal Khateek has not been
        examined by the claimants before the Tribunal. The name
        of Bhagchand is not shown in the list of witnesses as an
        eye­witness in the criminal case. In the criminal case, Raju
        Lal Khateek has been shown as an eye­witness. A perusal
        of the site plan Exhibit­3 reveals that the bus was going on
        its correct side of the road, whereas, the motorcycle was
        coming on the wrong side of the road, had struck against
        the bus.
In the facts and circumstances of the present case,
        no reliance can be placed on the statement of AW­2
        Bhagchand, who had been examined by the claimants as
        an eye­witness to the accident. The said witness could not
        even tell in his cross­examination with regard to the age of
        the person, who was sitting on the pillion seat. Thus, the
        learned Tribunal fell in error in deciding Issue No.1 in
        favour of the claimants. Accordingly, finding of the
17
Tribunal on Issue No.1 is reversed and the said issue is
      decided against the claimants.”



This is the only analysis/discussion in
the entire judgment
to reverse the exhaustive analysis done by the Tribunal to

which we have set out in brief in paragraphs 5 to 9 above.

The thrust of the reasoning given by the High Court rests on

the   unreliability   of   the     witnesses   presented   by    the

appellants: first, that the evidence given by Bhagchand

(A.D.2) was unreliable because he was not shown as a

witness in the list of witnesses mentioned in the charge

sheet filed by the police and that the said witness could not

identify the age of the pillion rider, Rajulal Khateek. Second,

the said pillion rider himself, Rajulal Khateek, who was the

“best” witness in the matter, was not presented for

examination by the appellants. The High Court also relies

on the site map (Exh.3) to record the finding on the factum

of negligence of the deceased Sitaram in causing the

accident which resulted in his death.
20. We have no hesitation in observing that such a hyper­

technical and trivial approach of the High Court cannot be
18
sustained in a case for compensation under the Act, in

      connection with a motor vehicle accident resulting in the

      death of a family member. Recently, in
Mangla Ram Vs.

      Oriental Insurance Company Limited and Ors.5
, (to

      which one of us, Khanwilkar, J. was a party), this Court has

      restated the position as to the approach to be adopted in

      accident claim cases. In that case, the Court was dealing

      with a case of an accident between a motorcycle and a jeep,

      where the Tribunal had relied upon the FIR and charge­

      sheet, as well as the accompanying statements of the

      complainant and witnesses, to opine that the police records

      confirmed the occurrence of an accident and also the

      identity of the offending jeep but the High Court had

      overturned that finding inter alia on the ground that the oral

      evidence supporting such a finding had been discarded by

      the Tribunal itself and that reliance solely on the document

      forming part of the police record was insufficient to arrive at

      such a finding. Disapproving that approach, this Court,

      after adverting to multitude of cases under the Act, noted as

      follows:
5 (2018) 5 SCC 656
19
“22. The question is: Whether this approach of the High
             Court can be sustained in law? While dealing with a
             similar situation, this Court in Bimla Devi6 noted the
             defence of the driver and conductor of the bus which inter
             alia was to cast a doubt on the police record indicating
             that the person standing at the rear side of the bus,
             suffered head injury when the bus was being reversed
             without blowing any horn. This Court observed that while
             dealing with the claim petition in terms of
Section 166
of
             the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, the Tribunal stricto sensu
             is not bound by the pleadings of the parties, its function
             is to determine the amount of fair compensation. In paras
             11­15, the Court observed thus: (SCC pp. 533­34)
                  “11. While dealing with a claim petition in terms of
Section 166
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, a tribunal
                  stricto sensu is not bound by the pleadings of the
                  parties; its function being to determine the amount of
                  fair compensation in the event an accident has taken
                  place by reason of negligence of that driver of a motor
                  vehicle. It is true that occurrence of an accident having
                  regard to the provisions contained in
Section 166
of
                  the Act is a sine qua non for entertaining a claim
                  petition but that would not mean that despite evidence
                  to the effect that death of the claimant’s predecessor
                  had taken place by reason of an accident caused by a
                  motor vehicle, the same would be ignored only on the
                  basis of a post­mortem report vis­à­vis the averments
                  made in a claim petition.
12. The deceased was a constable. Death took place
                  near a police station. The post­mortem report clearly
                  suggests that the deceased died of a brain injury. The
                  place of accident is not far from the police station. It
                  is, therefore, difficult to believe the story of the driver
                  of the bus that he slept in the bus and in the
                  morning found a dead body wrapped in a blanket. If
                  the death of the constable had taken place earlier, it
                  is wholly unlikely that his dead body in a small town
                  like    Dharampur         would     remain     undetected
                  throughout the night particularly when it was lying
                  at a bus­stand and near a police station. In such an
                  event, the Court can presume that the police officers
                  themselves should have taken possession of the dead
                  body.
13. The learned Tribunal, in our opinion, has rightly
                  proceeded on the basis that apparently there was
6 Supra at footnote 2
20
absolutely no reason to falsely implicate Respondents
                2 and 3. The claimant was not at the place of
                occurrence. She, therefore, might not be aware of the
                details as to how the accident took place but the fact
                that the first information report had been lodged in
                relation to an accident could not have been ignored.
14. Some discrepancies in the evidence of the
                claimant’s witnesses might have occurred but the
                core question before the Tribunal and consequently
                before the High Court was as to whether the bus in
                question was involved in the accident or not. For the
                purpose of determining the said issue, the Court was
                required to apply the principle underlying the burden
                of proof in terms of the provisions of
Section 106
of
                the Evidence Act, 1872 as to whether a dead body
                wrapped in a blanket had been found at the spot at
                such an early hour, which was required to be proved
                by Respondents 2 and 3.
15. In a situation of this nature, the Tribunal has
                rightly taken a holistic view of the matter. It was
                necessary to be borne in mind that strict proof of an
                accident caused by a particular bus in a particular
                manner may not be possible to be done by the
                claimants. The claimants were merely to establish
                their case on the touchstone of preponderance of
                probability. The standard of proof beyond reasonable
                doubt could not have been applied. For the said
                purpose, the High Court should have taken into
                consideration the respective stories set forth by both
                the parties.”                  (emphasis supplied)

            The Court restated the legal position that the claimants
            were merely to establish their case on the touchstone of
            preponderance of probability and standard of proof
            beyond reasonable doubt cannot be applied by the
            Tribunal while dealing with the motor accident cases.
Even
in that case
, the view taken by the High Court to
            reverse similar findings, recorded by the Tribunal was set
            aside.
23. Following the enunciation in
Bimla Devi
case, this
            Court in
Parmeshwari v. Amir Chand7
noted that when
            filing of the complaint was not disputed, the decision of
            the Tribunal ought not to have been reversed by the High
            Court on the ground that nobody came from the office of
            the SSP to prove the complaint.
The Court appreciated

7 (2011) 11 SCC 635
21
the testimony of the eyewitnesses in paras 12 & 13 and
            observed thus: (
Parmeshwari
case, SCC p. 638)
                 “12. The other ground on which the High Court
                 dismissed the case was by way of disbelieving the
                 testimony of Umed Singh, PW 1. Such disbelief of the
                 High Court is totally conjectural. Umed Singh is not
                 related to the appellant but as a good citizen, Umed
                 Singh extended his help to the appellant by helping
                 her to reach the doctor’s chamber in order to ensure
                 that an injured woman gets medical treatment. The
                 evidence of Umed Singh cannot be disbelieved just
                 because he did not file a complaint himself. We are
                 constrained to repeat our observation that the total
                 approach of the High Court, unfortunately, was not
                 sensitised enough to appreciate the plight of the
                 victim.
13. The other so­called reason in the High Court’s
                 order was that as the claim petition was filed after
                 four months of the accident, the same is “a device to
                 grab money from the insurance company”. This
                 finding in the absence of any material is certainly
                 perverse. The High Court appears to be not cognizant
                 of the principle that in a road accident claim, the
                 strict principles of proof in a criminal case are not
                 attracted. …”
24. It will be useful to advert to the dictum in N.K.V.
            Bros. (
P) Ltd. v. M. Karumai Ammal8
, wherein it was
            contended by the vehicle owner that the criminal case in
            relation to the accident had ended in acquittal and for
            which reason the claim under the
Motor Vehicles Act
ought to be rejected. This Court negatived the said
            argument by observing that the nature of proof required
            to establish culpable rashness, punishable under
IPC
, is
            more stringent than negligence sufficient under the law of
            tort to create liability. The observation made in para 3 of
            the judgment would throw some light as to what should
            be the approach of the Tribunal in motor accident cases.
            The same reads thus: (SCC pp. 458­59)
                 “3. Road accidents are one of the top killers in our
                 country, specially when truck and bus drivers
                 operate nocturnally. This proverbial recklessness
                 often persuades the courts, as has been observed by
                 us earlier in other cases, to draw an initial
                 presumption in several cases based on the doctrine
                 of res ipsa loquitur. Accidents Tribunals must take

8 (1980) 3 SCC 457
22
special care to see that innocent victims do not suffer
                  and drivers and owners do not escape liability merely
                  because of some doubt here or some obscurity there.
                  Save in plain cases, culpability must be inferred from
                  the circumstances where it is fairly reasonable. The
                  court should not succumb to niceties, technicalities
                  and mystic maybes. We are emphasising this aspect
                  because we are often distressed by transport
                  operators getting away with it thanks to judicial
                  laxity, despite the fact that they do not exercise
                  sufficient disciplinary control over the drivers in the
                  matter of careful driving. The heavy economic impact
                  of culpable driving of public transport must bring
                  owner and driver to their responsibility to their
                  neighbour. Indeed, the State must seriously consider
                  no­fault liability by legislation. A second aspect
                  which pains us is the inadequacy of the
                  compensation or undue parsimony practised by
                  tribunals. We must remember that judicial tribunals
                  are State organs and
Article 41
of the Constitution
                  lays the jurisprudential foundation for State relief
                  against accidental disablement of citizens. There is
                  no justification for niggardliness in compensation. A
                  third factor which is harrowing is the enormous
                  delay in disposal of accident cases resulting in
                  compensation, even if awarded, being postponed by
                  several years. The States must appoint sufficient
                  number of tribunals and the High Courts should
                  insist upon quick disposals so that the trauma and
                  tragedy already sustained may not be magnified by
                  the injustice of delayed justice. Many States are
                  unjustly indifferent in this regard.”
25.
In Dulcina Fernandes9, this Court examined similar
             situation where the evidence of claimant’s eyewitness was
             discarded by the Tribunal and that the respondent
in that
             case
was acquitted in the criminal case concerning the
             accident. This Court, however, opined that it cannot be
             overlooked that upon investigation of the case registered
             against the respondent, prima facie, materials showing
             negligence were found to put him on trial. The Court
             restated the settled principle that the evidence of the
             claimants ought to be examined by the Tribunal on the
             touchstone of preponderance of probability and certainly
             the standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt could not
             have been applied as noted in Bimla Devi.
In paras 8 & 9

9 Supra at footnote 4
23
of the reported decision, the dictum in
United India
            Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Shila Datta10
, has been adverted to
            as under: (
Dulcina Fernandes
case, SCC p. 650)
                “8.
In
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Shila Datta
while considering the nature of a claim petition
                under the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
a three­Judge
                Bench of this Court has culled out certain
                propositions of which Propositions (ii), (v) and (vi)
                would be relevant to the facts of the present case
                and, therefore, may be extracted hereinbelow: (SCC
                p. 518, para 10)
                ‘10. (ii) The rules of the pleadings do not strictly
                apply as the claimant is required to make an
                application in a form prescribed under the Act. In
                fact, there is no pleading where the proceedings are
                suo motu initiated by the Tribunal.
*              *                 *
(v) Though the Tribunal adjudicates on a claim and
                determines the compensation, it does not do so as in
                an adversarial litigation. …
(vi) The Tribunal is required to follow such summary
                procedure as it thinks fit. It may choose one or more
                persons possessing special knowledge of and matters
                relevant to inquiry, to assist it in holding the
                enquiry.’
9. The following further observation available in para
                10 of the Report would require specific note: (
Shila
                Datta
case, SCC p. 519)
                ‘10. … We have referred to the aforesaid provisions to
                show that an award by the Tribunal cannot be seen
                as an adversarial adjudication between the litigating
                parties to a dispute, but a statutory determination of
                compensation on the occurrence of an accident, after
                due enquiry, in accordance with the statute.’”

            In para 10 of Dulcina Fernandes, the Court opined that
            non­examination of witness per se cannot be treated as
            fatal to the claim set up before the Tribunal. In other
            words, the approach of the Tribunal should be holistic
            analysis of the entire pleadings and evidence by applying
            the principles of preponderance of probability.”




10 (2011) 10 SCC 509
24
It is thus well settled that in motor accident claim cases,

once the foundational fact, namely, the actual occurrence

of the accident, has been established, then the Tribunal’s

role   would   be   to   calculate   the   quantum   of   just

compensation if the accident had taken place by reason of

negligence of the driver of a motor vehicle and, while doing

so, the Tribunal would not be strictly bound by the

pleadings of the parties. Notably, while deciding cases

arising out of motor vehicle accidents, the standard of proof

to be borne in mind must be of preponderance of probability

and not the strict standard of proof beyond all reasonable

doubt which is followed in criminal cases.
21. In the present case, we find that the Tribunal had

followed a just approach in the matter of appreciation of the

evidence/materials on record. Whereas, the High Court

adopted a strict interpretation of the evidence on the

touchstone of proof beyond reasonable doubt to record an

adverse finding against the appellants and to reverse the

well considered judgment of the Tribunal in a cryptic

manner.
25
22.   Reverting to the factual matrix, the actual occurrence

of the accident between the motorcycle driven by Sitaram

bearing registration number RJ 25 SA 6923 coming from

one side and a bus belonging to respondent No.1 (the

Rajasthan   State   Road   Transport    Corporation)   bearing

registration number RJ­26/P.A. 0042 coming from the

opposite direction, is duly proved. The Tribunal has relied

upon the uncontroverted evidence of witnesses A.D.1 and

A.D. 3, and the documents presented by them, especially

FIR No. 247/2011 (Exh. 1) and charge­sheet (Exh.2) against

one Banwari Lal Bairwa (respondent No.2), charging him

with offences under
Sections 279
,
337
and
304A
of the IPC

and
Sections 134
/
187
of the Act, to establish that on

28.10.2011 at around 7 A.M., Sitaram, along with pillion

rider Rajulal Khateek, was riding on a motorcycle bearing

number RJ 25 SA 6923 from village Bapuee to Chaut ka

Barwad for Daug, to his sister, when, near Mahapura tri­

section,   bus   number    RJ­26/P.A.   0042   belonging    to

respondent No.1 (the Rajasthan State Road Transport
26
Corporation) coming from the opposite direction hit the

motorcycle from the front, resulting in the death of Sitaram.
23. The Tribunal had justly accepted the appellants’

contention that the respondents did not challenge the

propriety of the said FIR No. 247/2011 (Exh. 1) and charge­

sheet (Exh. 2) before any authority. The only defence raised

by the respondents to this plea was that the said FIR No.

247/2011 was based on wrong facts and was filed in

connivance between the appellants/complainants and the

police, against which the respondents complained to the in­

charge of the police station and the District Superintendent

of Police but to no avail. Apart from this bald assertion, no

evidence was produced by the respondents before the

Tribunal to prove this point. The filing of the FIR was

followed by the filing of the charge­sheet against respondent

No.2 for offences under u/
Sections 279
,
337
and
304A
of

the IPC and
Sections 134
/
187
of the Act, which, again,

reinforces the allegations in the said FIR insofar as the

occurrence of the accident was concerned and the role of

respondent No.2 in causing such accident. Be that as it
27
may, the High Court has not even made a mention, let alone

record a finding, of any impropriety against FIR 247/2011

(Exh. 1) or charge­sheet (Exh. 2) or the conclusion reached

by the Tribunal in that regard. Yet, the FIR and the Charge­

sheet has been found to be deficient by the High Court.
24. Before the Tribunal, respondent No.1 has neither

denied that respondent No.2 was in its employment at the

time of the accident nor has it denied that respondent No.2

was driving the offending bus no. RJ­26/P.A. 0042 at the

time of the accident. The Tribunal has also referred to the

Post­mortem report (Exh.4) which establishes that Sitaram

died due to shock arising from various fractures on his

body, which, undoubtedly, were rendered due to his

accident with the offending bus. All of the aforesaid evidence

remained uncontroverted. While the Tribunal has accepted

these depositions and the evidence presented in that regard,

the High Court has, surprisingly, not even referred to it or

even the numerous documents presented by the said

witnesses as evidence, apart from a passing reference to FIR

247/2011 (Exh.1).
28
25. The Tribunal’s reliance upon FIR 247/2011 (Exh. 1)

and charge­sheet (Exh. 2) also cannot be faulted as these

documents indicate the complicity of respondent No.2. The

FIR and charge­sheet, coupled with the other evidence on

record, inarguably establishes the occurrence of the fatal

accident and also point towards the negligence of the

respondent No.2 in causing the said accident. Even if the

final   outcome   of   the    criminal   proceedings   against

respondent No.2 is unknown, the same would make no

difference atleast for the purposes of deciding the claim

petition under the Act. This Court in
Mangla Ram
(supra),

noted that the nature of proof required to establish

culpability under criminal law is far higher than the

standard required under the law of torts to create liability.
26. Accordingly, we have no hesitation in upholding the

finding recorded by the Tribunal that there was an accident

on 28­10­2011 at around 7AM between the motorcycle

driven by Sitaram bearing registration number RJ 25 SA

6923 and a bus belonging to respondent No.1. (the
29
Rajasthan     State   Road   Transport    Corporation)       bearing

registration number RJ­26/P.A. 0042 coming from the

opposite direction and being driven rashly and negligently

by respondent No.2, which resulted in the death of Sitaram.
27. The       next    question    is   whether      the   purported

shortcomings in the evidence of Bhagchand Khateek (A.D.2)

and the lack of evidence of the pillion rider on the

motorcycle,    Rajulal    Khateek,     would   be    fatal   to   the

appellants’ case. As regards the evidence of Bhagchand, the

High Court found that the deposition of the said witness

was unreliable because his name was not mentioned in the

list of witnesses in the criminal proceedings and also

because he was unable to tell the age of the pillion rider.

Besides, the said witness lived in Pakhala village, which was

3 (three) kilometres away from the accident spot and hence,

he could not have been near the said spot when the

accident occurred. The Tribunal had dealt with these

objections quite substantially and, in our opinion, correctly,

in its judgment, wherein it records:
30
“     In the present case the petitioners have got examined
the eye­witness A.D.2 Bhag Chand son of Ram Dev.
Admittedly the name of the witness Bhag Chand is not
mentioned in the list of witnesses in exhibit­2 charge
sheet but if the interrogation with this witness is
perused then the opponent in order of not considering
this witness as eye­witness, has not asked about giving
police statement or not having his name in the list of
witnesses. The witness A.D.2 Bhag Chand Khateek, in
interrogation on behalf of opponents has accepted this that
he neither knows Banwari nor after the incident he has seen
Banwari.
During interrogation the statement of the witness has been
that I was near the place of incident itself. That time I was
returning after relieving myself. The argument of the
opponents has been that the witness Bhag Chand is
resident of village Pakhala whereas the place of incident
is at distance of 3 k.m. therefore, the statement of going
to toilet is false. Therefore, he should not be considered
eye­witness. But the witness A.D.2 Bhag Chand Khateek
has stated in his main statement that one day from
dated 28.10.2011, he had come to his brother’s house at
village Shivad. In such a Situation, in our humble
opinion, the witness being at a distance of 3 k.m. from
spot of incident, being resident of Pakhala village, this
cannot be considered that this witness would not be
considered eye­witness.
Whereas there is question of his name not being in the
charge­sheet as witness, definitely due to this fact, each
such witness cannot be considered eyewitness who gives
little statement about incident. But the evidence which the
witness A.D.2 Bhag Chand Khateek has given on oath, in
order to prove that distrust worthy, the opponents have
not done any such interrogation from which there is
suspicion in the statements of witness. The witness Bhag
Chand Khateek was not even this suggestion that his
police statement was not taken or the police had not
interrogated him. In our humble opinion, in cases like
accident occurring suddenly, the persons present near
the place of incident are eye­witness of the incident. But
during investigation this is not necessary that the
investigation agency should name all the eye­witnesses
as witness in the charge sheet. Therefore, the statement
31
of witness A.D.2 Bhag Chand Khateek cannot be
      considered distrust worthy that his name in the charge
      sheet is not mentioned as witness.”

                                          (emphasis supplied)
28. Clearly, the evidence given by Bhagchand withstood

the respondents’ scrutiny and the respondents were unable

to shake his evidence. In turn, the High Court has failed to

take note of the absence of cross examination of this

witness by the respondents, leave alone the Tribunal’s

finding on the same, and instead, deliberated on the

reliability   of   Bhagchand’s      (A.D.2)   evidence   from    the

viewpoint of him not being named in the list of eye

witnesses     in   the   criminal   proceedings,    without     even

mentioning as to why such absence from the list is fatal to

the case of the appellants. This approach of the High Court

is mystifying, especially in light of this Court’s observation

[as set out in
Parmeshwari
(supra) and reiterated in
Mangla Ram
(supra)] that the strict principles of proof in a

criminal case will not be applicable in a claim for

compensation under the Act and further, that the standard

to be followed in such claims is one of preponderance of
32
probability rather than one of proof beyond reasonable

      doubt. There is nothing in the Act to preclude citing of a

      witness in motor accident claim who has not been named in

      the list of witnesses in the criminal case. What is essential

      is that the opposite party should get a fair opportunity to

      cross examine the concerned witness. Once that is done, it

      will not be open to them to complain about any prejudice

      caused to them. If there was any doubt to be cast on the

      veracity of the witness, the same should have come out in

      cross examination, for which opportunity was granted to the

      respondents by the Tribunal.
29. The importance of cross­examining a witness has been

      elucidated by this Court on several occasions, notably in
Kartar Singh Vs. State of Punjab,11
where a Five­Judge

      Bench of this Court elaborated:
“278.
Section 137
of the Evidence Act defines what cross­
            examination means and
Sections 139
and
145
speak of the
            mode of cross­examination with reference to the documents
            as well as oral evidence. It is the jurisprudence of law that
            cross­examination is an acid­test of the truthfulness of
            the statement made by a witness on oath in
            examination­in­chief, the objects of which are:
11 (1994) 3 SCC 569
33
(1) to destroy or weaken the evidentiary value of the
     witness of his adversary;
(2) to elicit facts in favour of the cross­ examining
     lawyer's client from the mouth of the witness of the
     adversary party;
(3) to show that the witness is unworthy of belief by
     impeaching the credit of the said witness;
     and the questions to be addressed in the course of cross­
     examination are to test his veracity; to discover who he
     is and what is his position in life; and to shake his credit
     by injuring his character.
279. The identity of the witness is necessary in the normal
     trial of cases to achieve the above objects and the right of
     confrontation is one of the fundamental guarantees so
     that he could guard himself from being victimized by any
     false and invented evidence that may be tendered by the
     adversary party.”
                                             (emphasis supplied)



The High Court has not held that the respondents were

successful in challenging the witnesses’ version of events,

despite being given the opportunity to do so. The High Court

accepts that the said witness (A.D.2) was cross examined by

the respondents but nevertheless reaches a conclusion

different from that of the Tribunal, by selectively overlooking

the deficiencies in the respondent’s case, without any

proper reasoning.
30. The High Court discarded the evidence of Bhagchand

(A.D. 2) also because he could not recollect the age of the
34
pillion rider. The inability of the witness to identify the age

of the pillion rider cannot, per se, be a militating factor to

discard his entire version especially since the presence of

the witness at the time and place of the accident has

remained unshaken and including his deposition regarding

the manner of occurrence of the accident and identity of the

driver   of   the   offending    vehicle.   The   filing   of   FIR

No.247/2011 (Exh.1) and the subsequent filing of the

charge­sheet (Exh.2) corroborate the witnesses’ evidence.

The view taken by the Tribunal therefore, on the veracity of

the evidence of A.D. 2, is unexceptionable and there was no

reason for the High Court to interfere with the same.
31. Similarly, the issue of non­examination of the pillion

rider, Rajulal Khateek, would not be fatal to the case of the

appellants. The approach in examining the evidence in

accident claim cases is not to find fault with non

examination of some “best” eye witness in the case but to

analyse the evidence already on record to ascertain whether

that is sufficient to answer the matters in issue on the

touchstone of preponderance of probability. This court, in
35
Dulcina Fernandes
(supra), faced a similar situation where

the evidence of claimant's eyewitness was discarded by the

Tribunal and the respondent was acquitted in the criminal

case concerning the accident. This Court, however, took the

view that the material on record was prima facie sufficient

to establish that the respondent was negligent. In the

present case, therefore, the Tribunal was right in accepting

the claim of the appellants even without the deposition of

the pillion rider, Rajulal Khateek, since the other evidence

on record was good enough to prima facie establish the

manner in which the accident had occurred and the identity

of the parties involved in the accident.
32. On the issue of negligence by the deceased Sitaram in

causing the accident, the Tribunal has referred to the notice

issued under
Section 134
of the Act (Exh. 7) to the driver of

the offending vehicle, respondent No.2. It records that in the

said notice, respondent No.2 failed to give any statement

indicating that the accident occurred due to any mistake by

the rider of the motorcycle, Sitaram. The Tribunal has

further relied upon the evidence of Bhagchand (A.D.2) and
36
also upon the site plan of the accident (Exh. 3) to reach a

conclusion that respondent No.2 recklessly drove the

speeding bus on the wrong side of the road, into the

motorcycle being ridden by Sitaram, who was on the correct

side of the road, and caused his death. Whereas, the High

Court has disregarded the evidence of Bhagchand. Further,

the site plan (Exh. 3) cannot be read in isolation. It will have

to be examined in conjunction with the other evidence.
33. The site plan (Exh. 3) has been produced in evidence

before the Tribunal by witness A.D. 1 (appellant No.1

herein) and the record seems to indicate that the accident

occurred in the middle of the road. However, the exact

location of the accident, as marked out in the site plan, has

not been explained muchless proved through a competent

witness by the respondents to substantiate their defence.

Besides, the concerned police official who prepared the site

plan has also not been examined. While the existence of the

site plan may not be in doubt, it is difficult to accept the

theory propounded on the basis of the site plan to record a

finding   against   the   appellants    regarding    negligence
37
attributable to deceased Sitaram, moreso in absence of

ocular evidence to prove and explain the contents of the site

plan.
34. Be it noted that the evidence of witness A.D.2

(Bhagchand) unequivocally states that the respondent No.2

bus driver was negligent in driving recklessly at a high

speed on the wrong side of the road, thus, resulting in the

accident which caused the death of Sitaram. It was not open

to the High Court to discard this evidence. Additionally, the

Tribunal had justly placed reliance on the contents of FIR

No.247/2011 (Exh. 1) and charge­sheet (Exh.2) which

prima facie indicate the negligence of respondent No.2 in

driving the bus.     We once again remind ourselves of the

dictum in
Dulcina Fernandes
(supra) and thereafter in
Mangla Ram
(supra), and answer the factum of negligence

of   the   driver   of   the   offending   vehicle   against   the

respondents.
35. Reverting to the question of adequacy of compensation

amount determined by the Tribunal, the appellants have not
38
assailed the order of the High Court rejecting their appeal.

      Further,    in their appeal before the High Court (SBCMA

      No.581 of 2017), the limited grievance was about deduction

      of income tax from the calculated income. That ground is

      unsustainable    in   light   of   the   decision   in
National

      Insurance Company Limited Vs. Pranay Sethi and Ors.12

      We
cannot permit the appellants to widen the scope in the

      present appeal, muchless pray for enhanced compensation.

      We are instead inclined to restore the Award passed by the

      Tribunal as it has determined the just compensation

      amount, keeping in mind all the relevant parameters

      including the apportionment thereof between the family

      members of the deceased. Upholding that Award would be

      doing complete justice.
36. Resultantly, this appeal must succeed. We hold that

      the impugned judgment and order of the High Court

      deserves to be set aside and instead, the Award passed by

      the Tribunal dated 14th December, 2016 be restored.




12 (2017) 16 SCC 680
39
37. Appeal is allowed in the above terms. No order as to

costs.
................................J
                                  (A.M. Khanwilkar)




                                  ................................J
                                  (Ajay Rastogi)
New Delhi.
February 14, 2019.