[Cites
2
, Cited by
23
]
Supreme Court of India
A Murugesan vs Smt. Jamuna Rani on 7 February, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2203, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 114
Author:
R. Subhash Reddy
Bench:
R. Subhash Reddy
,
R. Banumathi
1

                                                                                    NON-REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1545    OF 2019
                               [Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.36394 of 2014]



                      A. Murugesan                                                   ...Appellant

                                                        Versus

                      Smt. Jamuna Rani                                              ...Respondent

                                                    J U D G M E N T
R. SUBHASH REDDY,J.
1.    Leave granted.
2.    This civil appeal is preferred by the defendant, in

                      Original    Suit      No.   92/1997       on     the   file    of    Sub-Judge,

                      Chidambaram,     aggrieved       by       the    order   dated      17.04.2014,

                      passed     by   the    High    Court        of    Judicature        at   Madras,

                      dismissing the Civil Revision Petition (NPD) No. 1202 of

                      2014. By virtue of the aforesaid order, the High Court has

                      confirmed the order of the Trial Court, dismissing the

                      application filed by the petitioner, under
Order IX Rule

                      13 of CPC
.
3.    The respondent-plaintiff has filed the aforesaid suit
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
for   specific        performance          of     the    Agreement         dated
Date: 2019.02.14
10:32:55 IST
Reason:
11.10.1995. It is a case of the respondent-plaintiff that

                      out of total consideration of Rs.3,00,000/-(Rupees Three
2
Lakhs), he has already paid Rs.2,25,000/-(Rupees Two Lakh

Twenty-Five Thousand) and in spite of his readiness to pay

the balance amount, the appellant-defendant is not ready

to     execute      the    sale    deed           by    receiving        the     balance

consideration amount. During the trial, the aforesaid suit

was listed for hearing on 16.03.2009. On the aforesaid

date, on the ground that there was no representation on

behalf of the appellant, the appellant was put ex-parte,

and ex-parte decree was passed, decreeing the suit.
4.      The   appellant-defendant                 has    filed     the    application

under
Order IX Rule 13 of CPC
, for setting aside the

ex-parte decree in I.A. No. 117/2009. In the aforesaid

application,        the     case    of       the        appellant    was       that   on

16.03.2009, there was a boycott of all the courts on the

call    of    Bar      Association,          as    such,     all    the        advocates

boycotted        the      courts    in       the        District     of        Cuddalore

including Chidambaram District. He has also pleaded that

as he was suffering from viral fever, he also did not

attend the court. It is a case of the appellant that in

spite of showing sufficient cause for not attending the

court    on   16.03.2009,          the       Trial       Court   has      erroneously

rejected the application filed under
Order IX Rule 13 of

CPC
.
5.      The Trial Court, while considering the application
3
filed by the appellant herein, under
Order IX Rule 13 of

CPC
, has considered the past events in the suit stating

that the appellant is trying to protract the litigation

dismissed    the     application        by    order   dated     30.06.2009.

Aggrieved by the said order, the appellant-defendant has

filed Civil Miscellaneous Appeal No. 15/2009 before the

Additional      District      Court/Fast         Track     Court        No.1,

Chidambaram. Same was dismissed by order dated 13.07.2010.

The matter was further carried by way of Civil Revision

Petition No. 1202 of 2014 before the High Court, which

also ended in dismissal by order dated 17.04.2014.
6.    We have heard the learned counsel for the appellant

as well as the learned counsel for the respondent and

perused the relevant material on record.
7.    Mainly it is contended by learned counsel appearing

for the appellant that on 16.03.2009, there was a total

boycott of courts by the advocates in the District of

Cuddalore including Chidambaram District, therefore, his

counsel could not appear before the Court when the matter

was   called.      Further,   it       is    submitted   that    even    the

appellant was suffering from viral fever, as such, he also

could not appear on the said date. It is pleaded that

though there was sufficient cause shown, the Trial Court,

erroneously by considering the past events anterior to
4
16.03.2009, has dismissed the application. It is contended

that    the    appellate      and        the     revisional          courts    also

committed     same   error     in        rejecting          the    plea   of    the

appellant by looking at the past events. It is mainly

contended that when the application is filed under
Order

IX Rule 13 of CPC
, the relevant consideration should have

been confined to whether the appellant herein has shown

any    sufficient    cause    or     not       for    not    appearing    in   the

matter when it was called on 16.03.2009. It is submitted

that    the   reasons   assigned         in     the       impugned    orders   for

rejection of the application is irrelevant.
In support of

his argument, learned counsel for the appellant has placed

reliance on the judgment of this Court in the case of
G.P.

Srivastava vs. R.K. Raizada and Others
reported in 2000(3)

SCC 54.
8.     On the other hand, it is contended by the learned

counsel for the respondent that suit was filed by the

respondent for specific performance of the contract.
9.     It is submitted that out of total consideration of

Rs.3,00,000/-(Rupees         Three       Lakhs),      he     has   already     paid

Rs.2,25,000/-(Rupees         Two    Lakh       Twenty-Five         Thousand)   and

deposited      the   balance         amount          of     Rs.75,000/-(Rupees

Seventy-Five Thousand) in the court. It is contended by

the learned counsel for the respondent that though the
5
suit was of the year 1997, the appellant-defendant tried

his best to prolong the litigation on one pretext or the

other. It is submitted that in view of the concurrent

findings recorded by the courts below, no case is made out

to interfere with the same.
10.   We have considered the submissions of the learned

counsel appearing on both the sides and perused the order

of the Trial Court, rejecting the application filed by the

appellant under
Order IX Rule 13 of CPC
and further orders

passed in Civil Miscellaneous Appeal as well as in Civil

Revision Petition.
11.   From a perusal of the order of the Trial Court, it is

clear that the Trial Court has taken into consideration

the past conduct of the appellant-defendant in the suit,

instead of confining the consideration as to whether the

appellant    has    shown      sufficient    cause     or    not    for    not

appearing in the matter on 16.03.2009. It is fairly well

settled    that    when   an   application     is    filed    for    setting

aside ex-parte decree under
Order IX Rule 13 of CPC
, the

only aspect which is required to be considered is whether

any sufficient cause is shown for absence in the matter

when the matter was called. Without recording the specific

finding,    on    the   plea    of   the   appellant    that       there   was

sufficient cause, the Trial Court has committed error in
6
rejecting the application under
Order IX Rule 13 of CPC
.

Even    the   appellate   and   the   revisional     court   have   not

considered the matter in proper perspective and rejected

the claim of the appellant. The judgment in a case of
G.P.

Srivastava
(supra) supports the case of the appellant. In

the    aforesaid   judgment,    the   very   issue   was   fallen   for

consideration before this Court. The relevant paragraph

no.7 reads as under:
“7. Under
Order IX Rule 13 CPC
an ex parte
        decree passed against a defendant can be set
        aside upon satisfaction of the Court that
        either the summons were not duly served upon
        the defendant or he was prevented by any
        “sufficient cause” from appearing when the suit
        was called on for hearing. Unless “sufficient
        cause” is shown for non-appearance of the
        defendant in the case on the date of hearing,
        the Court has no power to aside an ex parte
        decree.    The words “was prevented by any
        sufficient cause from appearing” must be
        liberally construed to enable the court to do
        complete    justice    between   the    parties
        particularly when no negligence or inaction is
        imputable to the erring party.       Sufficient
        cause for the purpose of Order IX rule 13 has
        to be construed as an elastic expression for
        which no hard and fast guidelines can be
        prescribed. The courts have a wide discretion
        in deciding the sufficient cause keeping in
        view the peculiar facts and circumstances of
        each case    The “sufficient cause” for non-
        appearance refers to the date on which the
        absence was made a ground for proceeding ex
        parte and cannot be stretched to rely upon
        other circumstances anterior in time.        If
        “sufficient cause” is made out for non-
        appearance of the defendant on the date fixed
        for hearing when ex pate proceedings were
        initiated against him, he cannot be penalised
        for his previous negligence which had been
        overlooked and thereby condoned earlier. In a
        case where the defendant approaches the court
        immediately and within the statutory time
7
specified, the discretion is normally exercised
        in his favour, provided the absence was not
        mala fide or intentional. For the absence of a
        party in the case the other side can be
        compensated by adequate costs and the lis
        decided on merits.
12.    The aforesaid view taken by this Court in the judgment
referred     above
supports    the    case   of   the   appellant.   It   is

further brought to our notice that on the aforesaid date, i.e.,

16.03.2009, on which date the suit was listed for trial, in

view of the boycott of the courts by the advocates, all other

cases were adjourned and only this case was proceeded and ex-

parte decree was passed.
13.    As the suit is for a substantive relief, i.e., for grant

of decree of specific performance, and further we are satisfied

that the appellant has shown sufficient cause for not appearing

in the matter when the matter was called on 16.03.2009, we are

of the view that it is a fit case to allow the application

filed by the appellant, by setting aside the impugned orders.

All    the   courts     below     committed     error      in   rejecting    the

application on the grounds which are not relevant to consider

the application filed under
Order IX Rule 13 of CPC
.
14.    We are conscious of the fact that all the three courts

have held against the appellant, but if we allow the impugned

orders to stand, it will result in miscarriage of justice.
15.    For the aforesaid reasons, the impugned orders are set

aside, consequently I.A. No.117/2009 filed in O.S. No.92 of

1997    on    the     file   of     Sub-Judge,       Chidambaram,       stands

allowed.
8
16.     As the suit is of the year 1997, we direct the Trial

   Court to dispose of the same as expeditiously as possible

   preferably within a period of six months from today. Both

   the parties shall co-operate for proceeding with the trial

   and for expeditious disposal in the suit.
17.     It is also made clear that we have not expressed any

   opinion on the merits of the matter. It is open for the

   Trial    Court   to   decide   the      issues      for    consideration

   independently,    uninfluenced     by    any   of    the    observations

   made in the impugned order or the order passed by this

   Court.
18.     This appeal is, accordingly, allowed, with directions

   as indicated above. No order as to costs.
.................... J.
[R. Banumathi]



                                           .................... J.
[R. Subhash Reddy]

New Delhi;
February 07, 2019