[Cites
4
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Sanjay K.Dixit vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 22 February, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 497, (2019) 162 FACLR 931, (2019) 1 SERVLJ 450, (2019) 2 PAT LJR 224, (2019) 2 SCT 162, (2019) 3 SCALE 671
Author:
L. Nageswara Rao
Bench:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
L. Nageswara Rao
1


                                   NON -REPORTABLE


       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


          CIVIL APPEAL No.1961 of 2019
 [ Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 31539 of 2012 ]


SANJAY K. DIXIT AND OTHERS           .... Appellants


                       Versus

THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH AND OTHERS
                               ….Respondents
                      WITH

          CIVIL APPEAL No. 1962 of 2019
 [ Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 33506 of 2012 ]

JAIPRAKASH                              .... Appellant


                       Versus

THE STATE OF U.P.                      ….Respondent

                      WITH

          CIVIL APPEAL No. 1963 of 2019
  [ Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 8945 of 2013 ]


HARINDER SINGH TOMAR                    .... Appellant


                       Versus

ATUL KUMAR SHARMA                     ….Respondent
                                                       2




                      WITH

          CIVIL APPEAL No. 1964 of 2019
  [ Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 9419 of 2013 ]

JAHANGEER KHAN                          .... Appellant


                       Versus

STATE OF U.P.                        ….Respondent

                      WITH


          CIVIL APPEAL No. 1965 of 2019
 [ Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 14853 of 2013 ]

SACHIDANAND PRASAD                    .... Appellant


                       Versus

STATE OF U.P.                        ….Respondent

                      WITH

          CIVIL APPEAL No. 1966 of 2019
 [ Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 22782 of 2013 ]


AJAY KUMAR                              .... Appellant


                       Versus

THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH            ….Respondent
                                                                    3




                         JUDGMENT
L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.
Leave granted.
1.   All the above Appeals pertain to the selection and

appointment         to   the    post    of     Technician    Grade-2

(Apprenticeship Electrical) in the Uttar Pradesh Power

Corporation.    An       advertisement        was   issued    inviting

applications from the eligible candidates for filling up

2,974   posts       of   Technician     Grade-2     (Apprenticeship

Electrical) by the Electricity Service Commission, Uttar

Pradesh on 4th March, 2011.                  The eligibility criteria

according to the said advertisement was that a candidate

should have two years National/State level professional

certificate in Electrician Trade with High School from

Board    of    Secondary        Education,      Uttar     Pradesh   or

equivalent with Science and Math subjects. In addition,

production     of    Course     on     Computer     Concept     (CCC)

certificate   given      by    the   Department      of    Electronics
4
Accreditation of Computer Courses (DOEACC) (hereinafter

referred to as ‘DOEACC certificate’), at the time of

interview was compulsory.            16,712 persons applied for

selection to 2,974 posts which were advertised. Out of

13,576     candidates        who    appeared       in   the   written

examination conducted on 7th August, 2011, 6,218

persons qualified.       5,687 persons appeared for the

interviews which were conducted from 28th November,

2011 to     28th December, 2011.             A large number of

candidates who attended the interview could not produce

the DOEACC certificate.            On the said account, several

representations       were    made      to   the    Chairman     and

Managing Director of the U.P. Power Corporation wherein

a request was made for extension of time for submitting

the DOEACC certificate and to permit such of those

candidates who were found meritorious, to participate in

the interview without submitting the DOEACC certificate.

A decision was taken by the Chairman and Managing

Director   of   the    U.P.   Power     Corporation      to   permit

candidates without DOEACC certificate to participate in

the interviews, subject to their submitting the certificate
5
within a period of three months. However, it was made

clear that the appointment letters would be issued to

such candidates only after they submit the certificates.
2.   The extension of time for submission of DOEACC

certificate expired on 28th March, 2012 and the process of

recruitment was conducted.             The result could not be

declared      due   to   the   ban     on     recruitment      by    the

Government.         Such of those candidates who could not

submit     their    certificates    before     28th    March,       2012

approached the Chairman of the U.P. Power Corporation

and requested for further extension.                   Pursuant to a

decision taken by the Corporation on 19 th April, 2012,

time for submission of the certificate was further

extended by three months.            The results of the selection

to the posts of Technician Grade-2 (Apprenticeship

Electrical)    were      announced       on     21st    May,    2012.

Candidates who did not produce the DOEACC certificate

were informed that they should submit the certificate by

31st July, 2012 failing which their selection would stand

cancelled automatically.           Unsuccessful candidates filed

Writ Petitions challenging the selections that were notified
6
on 21st May, 2012. The grievance of the Writ Petitioners

was   that    the   select   list   contained   the    names   of

candidates who could not submit the DOEACC certificates

at the time of interview. They also sought for a direction

to exclude such candidates and publish a revised list. A

learned Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the Writ

Petitions.
3.    The learned Single Judge relied upon Rule 45 of the

U.P. Rajya Vidyut Parishad Parichalkiya Karmchari Varg

Sewa Niyamawali, 1995 to hold that the Chairman was

competent to relax the Rules.          He observed that there

was nothing wrong in the exercise of the power of

relaxation as the Chairman/ Managing Director of the

Corporation     relaxed      the    Rule   after   a    thorough

consideration of several representations made on behalf

of the candidates. The submission made on behalf of the

Writ Petitioners that the relaxation of the Rule could not

have been done after the selection process commenced

and that such endeavour would amount to changing the

rules of the game mid-way, was rejected by the High

Court.       The unsuccessful Writ Petitioners preferred an
7
appeal against the judgment of the learned Single Judge

in which they submitted that the rules for the selection

could not have been altered after the selection process

commenced. They urged that the advertisement did not

mention anything pertaining to the relaxation. According

to them, even if the power of relaxation is provided in the

Rules, it is mandatory that the advertisement should also

indicate the existence of such power.        It was argued

before the Division Bench of the High Court that

submission of DOEACC certificate at the time of the

interview is compulsory according to the Rules and the

advertisement.     Such of those candidates who did not

produce the certificates were ineligible for appointment

as Technician Grade-2 (Apprenticeship Electrical).      The

Division Bench partly allowed the appeals by holding that

those candidates who submitted the DOEACC certificate

prior to 31st March, 2012 were entitled to be included in

the select list.    The learned Division Bench further

concluded   that    all   candidates   who   produced   the

certificates after 31st March, 2012 were not eligible for

appointment.     The authorities were directed to declare
8
the results afresh by deleting the names of candidates

who produced the CCC certificate after 31 st March, 2012,

from the select list.
4. By relying on a judgment of this Court in Bedanga

Talukdar v. Saifudullah Khan & Ors.1 the Division

Bench of the High Court held that relaxation of the Rule

was impermissible as there was no mention about the

relaxation in the advertisement.        However, the first

relaxation by which candidates were permitted to submit

the certificate before 28th March, 2012 was upheld in

larger public interest as DOEACC did not issue the

certificate, for which the candidates could not be

penalized.
5.    Originally, the selection was finalized on the basis of

the results announced on 21st May, 2012 and the

candidates who submitted certificates till 31 st July, 2012

were appointed.      However, by virtue of the judgment of

the Division Bench, candidates who produced their

certificates after 31st March, 2012 were removed from the

service.      Aggrieved thereby,    they have filed SLPs.

Unsuccessful candidates who did not find place in the


1 (2011) 12 SCC 85
9
select list have also assailed the judgment of the High

Court as, according to them, even the first relaxation

given for submission of certificates till 28 th March, 2012

was arbitrary and illegal.
6.     After hearing the learned counsel appearing for the

Petitioners and the Respondents, we are of the opinion

that    the   impugned       judgment   does   not   warrant

interference for the reasons given below.
7.     Admittedly, the Rules governing the selection to the

posts of Technician Grade-2 (Apprenticeship Electrical)

require every candidate to submit a DOEACC certificate

signifying completion of 80 hours CCC at the time of

interview.    Such condition was made compulsory. The

advertisement     also   contained the condition regarding

submission of the certificate at the time of interview.

There is no doubt that there exists a power of relaxation

of any of the Rules which could be exercised by the

Chairman of the Corporation. It is nobody’s case that the

Chairman/ Managing Director was not competent to relax

the Rules.    But, the submission made by the learned

counsel for the Writ Petitioners is that the relaxation

could not have been done as the advertisement did not
10
mention about a possible relaxation of the Rules. We find

force in the said submission made on behalf of the Writ

Petitioners as this Court in Bedanga Talukdar (supra)

held as follows:
“29. .. .. .. In our opinion, it is too well settled
     to   need   any       further    reiteration      that   all
     appointments to public office have to be made
     in   conformity       with
Article     14
of     the
     Constitution of India.          In other words, there
     must be no arbitrariness resulting from any
     undue favour being shown to any candidate.
     Therefore, the selection process has to be
     conducted strictly in accordance with the
     stipulated selection procedure. Consequently,
     when a particular schedule is mentioned in an
     advertisement,         the      same       has     to    be
     scrupulously maintained. There cannot be any
     relaxation in the terms and conditions of the
     advertisement         unless     such      a     power    is
     specifically reserved. Such a power could be
     reserved in the relevant statutory rules. Even
     if power of relaxation is provided in the rules,
     it   must     still     be      mentioned         in     the
     advertisement. In the absence of such power
     in the rules, it could still be provided in the
     advertisement.          However,          the    power    of
     relaxation, if exercised, has to be given due
     publicity. This would be necessary to ensure
11
that those candidates who become eligible
     due to the relaxation, are afforded an equal
     opportunity to apply and compete. Relaxation
     of any condition in advertisement without due
     publication would be contrary to the mandate
     of equality contained in
Articles 14
and
16
of
     the Constitution of India.”
8.   We are in respectful agreement with the above

judgment of this Court.       Exercise of the power of

relaxation without informing the candidates about the

existence of such power would be detrimental to the

interests of others who did not possess the certificate and

did not take part in the selection process.    We are unable

to accept the submission that selection is on the basis of

the performance of the candidates in the written test and

interview and that the DOEACC certificate is not an

essential   requirement.     The   Rule   as   well   as   the

advertisement provide for submission of the certificate at

the time of interview, compulsorily.      The Rule further

provides for production of the certificate as an additional

requirement for selection.    The above stipulation in the

Rule as well as the advertisement cannot be ignored.
12
9.    On the basis of the said findings, the point that

remains to be considered is whether the High Court was

right in upholding the relaxation in respect of candidates

who submitted the certificate before 28 th March, 2012.

The High Court took note of the fact that the certificates

were not being issued by DOEACC to candidates who had

already completed the course.           The learned Division

Bench of the High Court was of the opinion that there was

a    genuine     problem   and   in   the     interest   of   those

meritorious      candidates   who     could    not   secure     the

certificate for no fault of theirs, they could not be

penalized.         The High Court placed reliance on the

judgment of this Court in
Amlan Jyoti Borooah v. State

of Assam & Ors.2
to support its view that relaxation can

be done in larger public interest.
10. The question that then arises is whether the High

Court could have granted such a relief after holding that

the relaxation of the Rule could not have been made.

The final relief in a case can be different from the ratio

decidendi. It was held in
Sanjay Singh & Anr. v. U.P.
2 (2009) 3 SCC 227 ¶ 40
13
Public Service Commission, Allahabad & Anr. 3 as

follows:
“10. … …. Broadly speaking, every judgment of
      superior courts has three segments, namely, (i)
      the facts and the point at issue;          (ii) the
      reasons for the decision; and (iii) the final order
      containing the decision. The reasons for the
      decision or the ratio decidendi is not the final
      order containing the decision. In fact, in a
      judgment of this Court, though the ratio
      decidendi may point to a particular result, the
      decision (final order relating to relief) may be
      different and not a natural consequence of the
      ratio decidendi of the judgment. This may
      happen either on account of any subsequent
      event or the need to mould the relief to do
      complete justice in the matter. It is the ratio
      decidendi of a judgment and not the final order
      in the judgment, which forms a precedent. ..”
11. In view of the above, the conclusion of the High

Court in favour of those candidates who submitted their

certificate before 28th March, 2012 is correct and need not

be interfered with.
12. The next question is, whether the candidates who

utilized the 2nd relaxation for submitting their certificates
3 (2007) 3 SCC 720
14
in the extended period, by 31 st July, 2012 can be given

the same benefit.      We are of the opinion that the

beneficiaries of the   2nd relaxation cannot be said to be

similarly situated to those who produced their certificates

prior to 28th March, 2012. Pursuant to the declaration of

results on 21st May, 2012, the candidates who submitted

their certificates were appointed. The Writ Petitions filed,

challenging the selection list were dismissed on 30 th

August, 2012.    The impugned judgment passed by the

Division Bench of the High Court, modifying the relief and

extending the benefit of relaxation only in favour of those

candidates who submitted their certificates prior to

28th March, 2012 was delivered on 26 th September, 2012

pursuant to which, the candidates who submitted their

certificates after 28th March, 2012, were removed from

service. Persons who submitted their certificates prior to

28th March, 2012 have been working continuously till

date. It has been stated by the Corporation in the written

note submitted to this Court that recruitment to the post

of Technician Grade-2 (Apprenticeship Electrical) was

being done every year from 2013 onwards.           The last
15
notification   for    appointment     of   Technician   Grade-2

(Apprenticeship Electrical), was issued in January, 2019.

Any relief of a relaxation given in favour of those who

were not diligent in furnishing the certificates prior to 28 th

March, 2012 could have an adverse effect on the ongoing

selection process. There are no posts of the year 2012

which were kept unfilled.          There is no interim order

reserving any posts of the year 2012 in which the

candidates who did not submit their certificates prior to

28th March, 2012 and who have been out of service can

be accommodated.                Another important difference

between the first group of persons who were given the

benefit   of   relaxation   subject   to   production   of    the

certificates prior to 28th March, 2012 and the others who

produced the certificates later is that there is no material

on record to suggest there was any further delay on the

part of DOEACC in the issuance of the certificates. The

very   fact    that   certain    candidates   submitted      their

certificates prior to 28th March, 2012 would show that

persons who sought further relaxation after 28 th March,

2012 were not vigilant. It is settled law that there is no
16
indefeasible right of appointment on the basis of inclusion

in the select list. None of the candidates in whose favour

relaxation   was   given   have       any      right    to    claim

appointment. However, we uphold the judgment of the

High Court in favour of the candidates who submitted

their certificates prior to       28th March, 2012, to do

complete justice in the matter.
13. For the aforementioned reasons, the judgment of the

High Court is upheld and the Civil Appeals are disposed

of.
..................................J.
                                  [ L. NAGESWARA RAO ]



                                ..................................J.
                              [ SANJAY KISHAN KAUL ]

New Delhi,
February 22, 2019.