[Cites
16
, Cited by
17
]
Supreme Court of India
Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited vs Tata Communication Limited on 27 February, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 1233, 2019 (5) SCC 341, 2019 (3) ADR 190, (2019) 2 CIVILCOURTC 810, (2019) 2 ICC 705, 2019 (2) KCCR SN 83 (SC), (2019) 2 RECCIVR 321, (2019) 3 PAT LJR 67, (2019) 3 RAJ LW 2070, (2019) 3 SCALE 864, (2020) 1 MAH LJ 795, (2020) 1 MPLJ 316, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 1259, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 128
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
Vineet Saran
,
R.F. Nariman
REPORTABLE


                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.1766 OF 2019



                 MAHANAGAR TELEPHONE NIGAM LTD.                       … APPELLANT

                                                     VERSUS

                 TATA COMMUNICATIONS LTD.                             … RESPONDENT



                                                 JUDGMENT
R.F. NARIMAN, J.
1.     The present appeal arises out of a dispute under the
Telecom

                         Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997
. The relief sought through a

                         petition before the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate

                         Tribunal, New Delhi [“TDSAT”] by the respondent, Tata Communication

                         Ltd. against the appellant, Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd., is for a
Signature Not Verified   recovery of a sum of INR 1,10,57,268/- plus interest thereon. The
Digitally signed by
NIDHI AHUJA
Date: 2019.02.27
17:51:35 IST
Reason:                  question that arose between the parties is whether the appellant was
1
justified in adjusting this amount from the dues payable to the

respondent by deduction from the bills raised by the respondent. Since

the Purchase Order dated 01.10.2008 forms the basis for the claim, it

is important to set out clauses 4 and 8 of the said Purchase Order as

under:
“4. SCOPE OF ORDER
         xxx xxx xxx
         iv. Termination of the bandwidth on STM-1 would be
         done at the MTNL sites/locations in Delhi (Kidwai
         Bhawan and Nehru Place) and Mumbai (Fountain Head
         & Prabha Devi) respectively as per the requirement with
         redundancy in last mile connectivity. For this bandwidth
         termination purpose, optical/electrical converter, cable
         and any other hardware/software etc. required, if any,
         would be arranged by the bidder free of cost.”
         xxx xxx xxx
         “8. DELIVERY SCHEDULE
(i) The physical connectivity for bandwidth should be
         completed within two months from the date of place of
         Purchase Order.”


The TDSAT, on considering this Purchase Order, held:
“25. At this stage, it falls for consideration as to what
         relief the petitioner is entitled to on the basis of strength
         of its own case. For this purpose, it is useful to note at
         the outset that the petitioner was required to provide the
         last mile connectivity as per paragraph 4(iv) of the P.O.
         within two months. It is also not in dispute that petitioner
         did not provide the required connectivity not only by
2
December 2008 but even by time when it chose to
terminate the contract on 11.01.2011. The defence
pleaded and argued on behalf of petitioner is that it was
neither given access to the buildings/premises of the
respondents nor the permission for affecting the last mile
connectivity. This stand was sought to be justified by
placing reliance on Emails written by the petitioner on
01.06.2010 which is more than a year after grant of
permission by Delhi and Mumbai units around March and
April 2009. On going through the communication dated
01.06.2010, it is evident that the plea that respondents
did not allow entry to the petitioner into their premises in
Mumbai has been raised quite belatedly and does not
appear to be correct and convincing. Hence, we find
petitioner’s case to be weak and unacceptable in so far
as it puts the blame totally upon the respondent for its
inability or failure to provide the last mile connectivity. No
doubt there was some delay by the respondents at the
initial stage but that alone cannot justify or absolve
petitioner’s total failure.
26. If we had reliable materials to find out the exact cost
of providing the last mile connectivity at each of the two
premises in Mumbai and Delhi, we would have reduced
that much amount from the claim of the petitioner and
allowed the rest. That would have served the interest of
justice and prevented unjust enrichment of the petitioner.
However, in absence of such reliable materials as to
actual costs which the petitioner has saved by non-
compliance with the requirements of paragraph 4(iv) of
the P.O., we have looked closely at the case of both the
parties and we find that at best the respondents could
have invoked clause 16 and more particularly, clause
16.2 which provide for liquidated damages in certain
eventualities like failure to deliver the stores/services or
to install and commission the project in whole or in part.
The admitted default on the part of the petitioner can
safely be treated as failure or delay affecting the
installation/commissioning of a part of the project
requiring last mile connectivity. In such a case, as per
3
clause 16.2(b) of the Agreement (P.O.), liquidated
      damages can be levied on the affected part of the
      project. As per clause 16.2(c), the liquidated damages
      must be limited to a maximum of 12%. In the present
      case the full amount billed and receivable by the
      petitioner for services rendered is disclosed as
      Rs.2,15,25,512/-, hence, on account of limitation of 12%,
      the respondents could not have levied and deducted an
      amount more than Rs.25,83,181/-. Instead of adopting
      this lawful course, the respondents proceeded to
      unilaterally impose rentals at their own rate of dark fibre.
      Such action of the respondents amounts to adjudicating
      a claim in its own favour without any authority for such
      unilateral act either under
Section 70
of the Contract Act
      or under any of the provisions of the Contract(P.O.).
      xxx xxx xxx
28. As a result of aforesaid discussion, the claim of the
      petitioner is allowed but in part only. The principal
      amount which the respondent must refund or pay back to
      the petitioner would be Rs.1,10,57,268 – Rs.25,83,181=
      Rs.84,74,087/-. Petitioner has also claimed an amount of
      Rs.66,33,414/- by way of interest from the date the
      amounts became due and upto 15.07.2012. It has
      calculated this amount by applying a rate of 18%. The
      calculations are in Annexure P-14 which discloses the
      dates when the short payments were made after
      deductions. We are not persuaded to allow interest @
      18% in absence of any such stipulation in the Agreement
      (P.O.). Hence, while allowing the principal amount of
      Rs.84,74,087/- in favour of the petitioner, we direct
      payment of interest at the rate of 9% from the date the
      amounts became due upto the date of this
      judgment/order.”
2.    Having heard the learned counsel for both sides, one neat

question arises before this Court, which is, whether, when parties are
4
governed by contract, a claim in quantum meruit under
Section 70
of

the Indian Contract Act, 1872 [“
Contract Act
”] would be permissible.
Section 70
of the Contract Act reads as under:
“70. Obligation of person enjoying benefit of non-
      gratuitous act.—Where a person lawfully does anything
      for another person, or delivers anything to him, not
      intending to do so gratuitously, and such other person
      enjoys the benefit thereof, the latter is bound to make
      compensation to the former in respect of, or to restore,
      the thing so done or delivered.”


This Section occurs in
Chapter V of the Contract Act
, which chapter is

headed, “of certain relations resembling those created by contract”.
There are five sections that are contained in this Chapter. Each of

them is posited on the fact that there is, in fact, no contractual

relationship between the parties claiming under this Chapter. For

example, under
Section 68
, if a person incapable of entering into a

contract is supplied necessaries by another person, then the person

who has furnished such supplies becomes entitled to be reimbursed

from the property of the person so incapable of entering into the

contract.
Section 69
also deals with a case where a person has no

contractual relationship with the other person mentioned therein, but

who is interested in the payment of money which the other person is
5
bound by law to pay, and who, therefore, pays it on behalf of such

person. Such person is entitled to be reimbursed by the other person.
Under
Section 71
, again, the finder of goods spoken of is a person

who is fastened with the responsibility of a bailee as there is no

contractual relationship between the finder of goods and the goods

which belong to another person. Equally, under
Section 72
, a person to

whom money has been paid or anything delivered by mistake or

coercion must repay or return it, or else, such person would be unjustly

enriched. Here again, there is no contractual relationship between the

parties. It is in this setting that
Section 70
occurs.
3.     An early judgment reported as
Moselle Solomon v. Martin &

Co., ILR
(1935) 62 Cal 612 resulted in a split verdict between the two

judges on the point of whether
Section 70
of the Contract Act can

apply when there is, in fact, a contract between the parties. Lort-
Williams, J. held:
“There remains to be decided the question whether the
       second defendant is liable under
section 70
of the Indian
       Contract Act and to what extent. The remedy provided by
       this section is not dependent upon the law relating to the
       liabilities of principal and agent. It is an independent
       remedy, which is based upon a different cause of action,
       namely, upon whether a person has lawfully done
       anything for another or has delivered anything to him not
6
intending to do so gratuitously, and such other person
       has enjoyed the benefit thereof. If so, he must either
       make compensation in respect of, or restore the thing so
       done or delivered.”
                                                 (at page 619)

On the other hand, Jack, J. held:
“As regards the appeal, it is clear that the second
       defendant cannot be held liable under
section 70
of the
       Contract Act, in as much as this is a case of contract
       and, where there is an express contract,
section 70
has
       no application, as shown by the heading of
Chapter V of
       the Act
, in which the section finds a place. It is headed
       “Of Certain Relations Resembling Those Created by
       Contract”, evidently excluding relations actually created
       by contract, as in this case.
The Contract Act
is,
       however, not exhaustive.”
                                                   (at page 623)
4.     In Kanhayalal Bisandayal Bhiwapurkar (Dr.) v. Indarchandji

Hamirmalji Sisodia, AIR 1947 Nag 84, a learned Single Judge of the

High Court was dealing with an application by an eye-specialist of

repute who wished to recover an amount of INR 188/- as the price of

professional work, i.e., getting a cataract removed in accordance with

an agreement with one Mt. Laxmibai and her son-in-law, Mohan Lal,

by which agreement, the said operation was to be performed. An

appeal to
Sections 68
and
70
of the Contract Act was turned down in

the following terms:
7
“10. In the course of the argument, an appeal was made
       to the principles underlying Ss. 68 and 70,
Contract Act
,
       for making the husband liable. Indeed
S. 68
, deals with
       the supply of necessaries but that is in respect of a
       person incapable of entering into a contract or “any one
       whom he is legally bound to support”, i.e. the dependent
       of a person incompetent to contract. Indarchandji was
       not incompetent to contract and this section is
       inapplicable to him. As to
S. 70
, it must be observed that
       this section cannot be availed of by a person who relies
       on an express contract as the plaintiff alleged to have
       entered into with Mt. Laxmibai in this case. The husband
       never entered into the picture when the plaintiff settled
       the terms with her. Nor is there anything to show how the
       husband received any benefit. It is only actual benefit
       which will famish a ground of action. If the wife had been
       cured of her ailment completely, perhaps that
       circumstance might be material; but there is no evidence
       on the point.”
5.
In
Alopi Parshad and Sons Ltd. v. Union of India
, (1960) 2

SCR 793, this Court dealt with an arbitration award which, inter alia,

awarded certain amount on the basis of quantum meruit. In setting

aside the Award on the ground of error apparent on the face of the

record, this Court held:
“…… Ghee having been supplied by the Agents under
       the terms of the contract, the right of the Agents was to
       receive remuneration under the terms of that contract. It
       is difficult to appreciate the argument advanced by Mr.
       Chatterjee that the Agents were entitled to claim
       remuneration at rates substantially different from the
       terms stipulated, on the basis of quantum meruit.
       Compensation quantum meruit is awarded for work done
8
or services rendered, when the price thereof is not fixed
      by a contract. For work done or services rendered
      pursuant      to   the     terms     of     a     contract,
      compensation quantum meruit cannot be awarded where
      the contract provides for the consideration payable in
      that    behalf. Quantum     meruit   is but    reasonable
      compensation awarded on implication of a contract to
      remunerate, and an express stipulation governing the
      relations between the parties under a contract, cannot be
      displaced by assuming that the stipulation is not
      reasonable……”
                                                   (at page 809)
6.
In
Mulamchand v. State of M.P.
, (1968) 3 SCR 214, this Court

held that the provisions of
Section 175(3)
of the Government of India

Act are mandatory in character and based on public policy. Therefore,

the formalities that are stipulated when contracts are entered into on

behalf of the Government cannot be waived or dispensed with. In

dealing with a claim made under
Section 70
of the Contract Act, this

Court then went on to hold:
“…… In other words, if the conditions imposed by
Section 70
of the Indian Contract Act are satisfied then
      the provisions of that section can be invoked by the
      aggrieved party to the void contract. The first condition is
      that a person should lawfully do something for another
      person or deliver something to him; the second condition
      is that doing the said thing or delivering the said thing he
      must not intend to act gratuitously; and the third
      condition is that the other person for whom something is
      done or to whom something is delivered must enjoy the
      benefit thereof. If these conditions are satisfied,
Section
9
70
imposes upon the latter person the liability to make
      compensation to the former in respect of, or to restore,
      the thing so done or delivered. The important point to
      notice is that in a case falling under
Section 70
the
      person doing something for another or delivering
      something to another cannot sue for the specific
      performance of the contract, nor ask for damages for the
      breach of the contract, for the simple reason that there is
      no contract between him and the other person for whom
      he does something or to whom he delivers something.
So where a claim for compensation is made by one
      person against another under
Section 70
, it is not on the
      basis of any subsisting contract between the parties but
      on a different kind of obligation. The juristic basis of the
      obligation in such a case is not founded upon any
      contract or tort but upon a third category of law, namely,
      quasi-contract or restitution……”
                                                 (at pp. 221-222)
7.     This judgment has been recently referred to and followed in
Orissa Industrial Infrastructure Development Corpn. v. Mesco

Kalinga Steel Ltd.
, (2017) 5 SCC 86 at paragraph 21.
8.     Indeed, the aforesaid position in law is made clearer by
Section

73
of the Contract Act.
Section 73
reads as follows:
“73. Compensation for loss or damage caused by
      breach of contract.— When a contract has been
      broken, the party who suffers by such breach is entitled
      to receive, from the party who has broken the contract,
      compensation for any loss or damage caused to him
      thereby, which naturally arose in the usual course of
      things from such breach, or which the parties knew,
10
when they made the contract, to be likely to result from
      the breach of it.
Such compensation is not to be given for any remote
      and indirect loss or damage sustained by reason of the
      breach.
Compensation for failure to discharge obligation
      resembling those created by contract.—When an
      obligation resembling those created by contract has
      been incurred and has not been discharged, any person
      injured by the failure to discharge it is entitled to receive
      the same compensation from the party in default, as if
      such person had contracted to discharge it and had
      broken his contract.
Explanation.—In estimating the loss or damage arising
      from a breach of contract, the means which existed of
      remedying the inconvenience caused by the non-
      performance of the contract must be taken into account.”
9.    This Section makes it clear that damages arising out of a

breach of contract is treated separately from damages resulting from

obligations resembling those created by contract. When a contract has

been broken, damages are recoverable under paragraph 1 of Section
73. When, however, a claim for damages arises from obligations

resembling those created by contract, this would be covered by

paragraph 3 of
Section 73
.
10.   Indeed, the present case is really covered by
Section 74
of the

Contract Act, which occurs in Chapter VI, which is headed, “of the

consequences of breach of contract”.
Section 74
states:
11
“74. Compensation for breach of contract where
      penalty stipulated for.— When a contract has been
      broken, if a sum is named in the contract as the amount
      to be paid in case of such breach, or if the contract
      contains any other stipulation by way of penalty, the
      party complaining of the breach is entitled, whether or
      not actual damage or loss is proved to have been
      caused thereby, to receive from the party who has
      broken the contract reasonable compensation not
      exceeding the amount so named or, as the case may be,
      the penalty stipulated for.
Explanation.—A stipulation for increased interest from
      the date of default may be a stipulation by way of
      penalty.
Exception.—When any person enters into any bail-
      bond, recognizance or other instrument of the same
      nature, or, under the provisions of any law, or under the
      orders of the Central Government or of any State
      Government, gives any bond for the performance of any
      public duty or act in which the public are interested, he
      shall be liable, upon breach of any condition of any such
      instrument, to pay the whole sum mentioned therein.
         Explanation.—A person who enters into a contract
      with Government does not necessarily thereby undertake
      any public duty, or promise to do an act in which the
      public are interested.”
11.
In
Kailash Nath Associates v. DDA
, (2015) 4 SCC 136, after

considering the case law on
Section 74
, this Court held:
“43. On a conspectus of the above authorities, the law on
      compensation for breach of contract under
Section 74
can be stated to be as follows:
12
43.1. Where a sum is named in a contract as a liquidated
amount payable by way of damages, the party
complaining of a breach can receive as reasonable
compensation such liquidated amount only if it is a
genuine pre-estimate of damages fixed by both parties
and found to be such by the court. In other cases, where
a sum is named in a contract as a liquidated amount
payable by way of damages, only reasonable
compensation can be awarded not exceeding the
amount so stated. Similarly, in cases where the amount
fixed is in the nature of penalty, only reasonable
compensation can be awarded not exceeding the penalty
so stated. In both cases, the liquidated amount or
penalty is the upper limit beyond which the court cannot
grant reasonable compensation.
43.2. Reasonable compensation will be fixed on well-
known principles that are applicable to the law of
contract, which are to be found inter alia in
Section 73
of
the Contract Act.
43.3. Since
Section 74
awards reasonable compensation
for damage or loss caused by a breach of contract,
damage or loss caused is a sine qua non for the
applicability of the section.
43.4. The section applies whether a person is a plaintiff
or a defendant in a suit.
43.5. The sum spoken of may already be paid or be
payable in future.
43.6. The expression “whether or not actual damage or
loss is proved to have been caused thereby” means that
where it is possible to prove actual damage or loss, such
proof is not dispensed with. It is only in cases where
damage or loss is difficult or impossible to prove that the
liquidated amount named in the contract, if a genuine
pre-estimate of damage or loss, can be awarded.”
13
12.    In the present case, clauses 16.2 to 16.4 are relevant, and are

set out as under:
“16.2 (a) FOR DELIVERY OF STORES:
Should the supplier fail to deliver the
           store/services or any consignment thereof
           within the period prescribed for delivery, the
           purchaser shall be entitled to recover 0.5% of
           the value of the delayed supply for each week
           of delay or part thereof for a period up to 10
           (TEN) weeks and thereafter at the rate of 0.7%
           of the value of the delayed supply for each
           week of delay or part thereof for another TEN
           weeks of delay. In the case of package supply
           where the delayed portion of the supply
           materially     hampers      installation   and
           commissioning of the systems, L/D charges
           shall be levied as above on the total value of
           the concerned package of the Purchase Order.
However, when supply is made within 21 days
           of QA clearance in the extended delivery
           period, the consignee may accept the stores
           and in such cases the LD shall be levied upto
           the date of QA clearance.
16.2 (b) FOR INSTALLATION & COMMISSIONING

           Should the supplier fail to install and
           commission the project within the stipulated
           time the purchaser shall be entitled to recover
           0.5% of the value of the purchase order for
           each week of delay or part thereof for a period
           upto 10 (TEN) weeks and thereafter @ 0.7% of
           the value of purchase order for each week of
           delay or part thereof for another 10 (TEN)
           weeks of delay. In cases, where the delay
           affects installation/commissioning of part of the
14
project and part of the equipment is already in
           commercial use, then in such cases, LD shall
           be levied on the affected part of the project.
16.2 (c). The Liquidated Damages, as per Clause 16.2
(a) and 16.2 (b) above shall be limited to a maximum of
      12%, even in case the DP extension is given beyond 20
      weeks.
16.3. Provisions contained in Clause 16.2(a) shall not be
      applicable for durations (periods) which attract L.D.
      against clause 16.2(b) above.
16.4. Quantum of liquidated damages assessed and
      levied by the purchaser shall be final and not
      challengeable by the supplier.”
13.    As has been correctly held by the impugned judgment, a

maximum of 12% can be levied as liquidated damages under the

contract, which sum would amount to a sum of INR 25 lakh. Since this

clause governs the relations between the parties, obviously, a higher

figure, contractually speaking, cannot be awarded as liquidated

damages, which are to be considered as final and not challengeable

by the supplier. This being the case, the appellant can claim only this

sum. Anything claimed above this sum would have to be refunded to

the respondent.
15
14.   In this view of the matter, we uphold the impugned judgment of

the TDSAT and dismiss the present appeal.
…………………………..J.
                                            (R.F. NARIMAN)



                                            .…………………………..J.
                                            (VINEET SARAN)
 New Delhi;
February 27, 2019.
16