[Cites
38
, Cited by
31
]
Supreme Court of India
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 28 February, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 3498, (2019) 198 ALLINDCAS 110 (SC), AIRONLINE 2019 SC 516, 2019 (137) ALR SOC 15 (SC), (2019) 198 ALLINDCAS 110, (2019) 1 ALL RENTCAS 660, (2019) 2 ARBILR 121, (2019) 2 CURCC 25, (2019) 2 RECCIVR 542, (2019) 2 RENTLR 293, (2019) 3 KANT LJ 82, (2019) 4 CIVLJ 52, (2019) 4 ICC 595, (2019) 4 SCALE 749, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 2969
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
Vineet Saran
,
R.F. Nariman
REPORTABLE


                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO.2402 OF 2019
                                (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 22211/2018)


                         VIDYA DROLIA & ORS.                       … APPELLANT(S)

                                                           VERSUS

                         DURGA TRADING CORPORATION                       … RESPONDENT(S)



                                                      JUDGMENT
R.F. Nariman, J.
1.        Leave granted.
2.        The facts, in this appeal, are as follows:
(i)       A Tenancy Agreement was entered into between the

                         landlord’s predecessor-in-title (Shree Bajrang Land & Trading

                         Company) and the appellants/tenant on 02.02.2006 in respect of

                         certain godowns and other structures.
(ii)      The maximum period of tenancy was for 10 years. The initial
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
Date: 2019.03.07
period was 5 years, with an option for renewal for another 5 years
17:26:52 IST
Reason:
with a 10% enhancement in the rent.
1
(iii)   It was agreed that the tenant should pay the agreed rent of

Rs.12,985/- per month.      It was also agreed that upon expiry or

earlier determination of the lease, the tenant shall deliver vacant and

peaceful possession of the premises. Clause 23 of the aforesaid

Agreement stated as follows:
“23. That in case of any disputes, differences and/or
        claims arising by and between the parties out of this
        agreement and/or in respect to the subject matter of
        this agreement, the same shall be referred to the
        Arbitral Tribunal consisting of three arbitrators, out of
        which one arbitrator shall be appointed by the party of
        the first part, one by the party of the other part
        collectively and the Presiding Arbitrator shall be
        appointed mutually by the two arbitrators so appointed
        by the parties. The decision of the Arbitral Tribunal
        shall be final and binding on the parties. The
        Arbitration proceedings shall be governed by the
        provisions of
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996
with
        all statutory modifications for the time being in force.
        The venue of arbitration shall always be within the
        Ordinary Original Civil Jurisdiction of the High Court at
        Kolkata.”
(iv)    On 16.10.2012, the tenancy was attorned in the name of the

respondent, and the appellants paid rent to the respondent as the

earlier landlord had surrendered his leasehold rights in favour of the

respondent with effect from 01.11.2012.
(v)     On 24.08.2015, a letter was sent by the respondent calling

upon the appellants to deliver vacant and peaceful possession on

the expiry of the 10 year period, i.e., on 01.02.2016. A reminder to
2
this effect was also sent on 30.12.2015. As the tenant did not vacate

the premises, arbitration was invoked by the respondent on

29.02.2016 by a notice sent to the appellants.
(vi)     On 28.04.2016, the respondent filed the present
Section 11
petition before the Calcutta High Court for appointment of an

arbitrator.
(vii)    On 07.09.2016, the High Court passed the impugned order

appointing an arbitrator, after rejecting the appellants’ objections on

arbitrability of the dispute between the parties. After this, the arbitral

proceedings began and we are informed that as many as 18 sittings

have taken place.
(viii)   Meanwhile, however, on 12.10.2017, a judgment was

delivered by this Court in
Himangni Enterprises v. Kamaljeet

Singh Ahluwalia
, (2017) 10 SCC 706 [“Himangni Enterprises”], in

which it was held that where the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
applied between landlord and tenant, disputes between the said

parties would not be arbitrable.
(ix)     Even though four arbitration sittings took place after this

judgment, a review/recall application was filed by the appellants

before the Calcutta High Court on 04.06.2018 in the light of this

judgment. This review was dismissed by the Calcutta High Court on

08.06.2018.
3
3.     Mr. Debajyoti Basu, learned counsel appearing for the

appellants has argued that the
Transfer of Property Act
is an Act

which created rights in rem insofar as the landlord and tenant are

concerned. He has further argued that the public policy contained in

the statute in
Sections 111(g)
,
114
, and
114A
, in particular, make it

clear that by necessary implication the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act,

1996
stands excluded. For this purpose, he also relied upon
Section

2(3)
of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act read with
Section 5
thereof.

He referred us to the statement of claim made before the learned

Arbitrator and said that, in any event, grant of mesne profits would

be outside the arbitration agreement inasmuch as mesne profits are

to be decided by way of damages only after the agreement has

come to an end. He also referred to and relied upon
Order XX Rule

12 of the Code of Civil Procedure
[“
CPC
”] to state that mesne profits

could only be given in the manner provided in Order XX Rule 12,

i.e., by a Civil Court and not by an arbitrator. He further went on to

argue that even if it be held that certain sub-clauses of Section 111

would be arbitrable, yet it being clear that so far as at least arrears

of rent and forfeiture are concerned, such disputes being non-

arbitrable, it would be difficult to bifurcate the aforesaid grounds as

often, one petition for eviction may contain several grounds, some of

which are relatable to arrears of rent and forfeiture and some of
4
which may relate to other grounds. Therefore, according to him, the

entirety of the subject-matter of landlord and tenant disputes arising

under the
Transfer of Property Act
is excluded by necessary

implication. He also stated that it is well settled that this case is one

of inherent lack of jurisdiction and that therefore, participation in the

arbitral proceedings would make no difference as consent cannot

confer jurisdiction, nor can waiver be inferred so as to confer

jurisdiction. He relied strongly upon a number of judgments to

buttress these submissions.
In any event, according to him, this

Court’s judgment in
Himangni Enterprises
(supra) would apply on all

fours in the facts of his case and would therefore, govern this case,

which would necessarily lead to an arbitrator in the present

proceedings having no jurisdiction to decide disputes between

landlord and tenant. He also argued that
Section 11(6A)
of the

Arbitration & Conciliation Act should be read in a purposive manner,

and that “existence” of an arbitration agreement that is spoken of

would also refer to disputes which are non-arbitrable as such.
4.     Mr. Saurav Agarwal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

the respondent countered these submissions. According to him, this

is a case in which the appellants have participated in the arbitral

proceedings. Arbitral proceedings are well on their way, and we
5
ought, therefore, to exercise our discretionary jurisdiction under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India against the appellants. He has

further argued relying upon various judgments, including certain

High Court judgments that were passed after
Himangni Enterprises
(supra) to state that, on facts,
Himangni Enterprises
(supra) was

wholly distinguishable as it did not apply to a situation of a lease

expiring by efflux of time.
He also pointed out that certain High Court

judgments had, after
Himangni Enterprises
(supra), distinguished
the said judgment
on this and other grounds.
As an alternative

submission, he said that, in any case,
Himangni Enterprises
(supra)

would require reconsideration as it did not state the law correctly.
5.     Having heard the learned counsel on both sides, we may first

set out
Section 11(6A)
of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, which

reads as follows:
“11. Appointment of arbitrators.—
       xxx xxx xxx
       (6A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the
       High Court, while considering any application under
       sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6),
       shall, notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order
       of any court, confine to the examination of the
       existence of an arbitration agreement.
xxx xxx xxx”

The 246th Law Commission Report, which led to the enactment of
Section 11(6A)
, stated as follows:-
6
“
Section 11(6A)
of the amendment contemplates a
       two-step process to be adopted by a judicial authority
       when considering an application seeking the reference
       of a pending action to arbitration. The amendment
       envisages that the judicial authority shall not refer the
       parties to arbitration only if it finds that there does not
       exist an arbitration agreement or that it is null and
       void. If the judicial authority is of the opinion that
       prima facie the arbitration agreement exists, then it
       shall refer the dispute to arbitration, and leave the
       existence of the arbitration agreement to be finally
       determined by the arbitral tribunal. However, if the
       judicial authority concludes that the agreement does
       not exist, then the conclusion will be final and not
       prima facie. The amendment also envisages that there
       shall be a conclusive determination as to whether the
       arbitration agreement is null and void.”
                                              (emphasis supplied)
6.     It will be seen that though the Law Commission Report

speaks not only of “existence” but also of an arbitration clause being

null and void, this has not translated itself into the language of
Section 11(6A)
. On the contrary,
Section 11(6A)
is to be contrasted

with
Section 16(1)
of the Act which reads as follows:
“16. Competence of arbitral tribunal to rule on its
       jurisdiction.—(1) The arbitral tribunal may rule on its
       own jurisdiction, including ruling on any objections with
       respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration
       agreement, and for that purpose,—
(a) an arbitration clause which forms part of a
           contract shall be treated as an agreement
           independent of the other terms of the
           contract; and
(b) a decision by the arbitral tribunal that the
           contract is null and void shall not entail ipso
           jure the invalidity of the arbitration clause.”
7
7.     It will be noticed that “validity” of an arbitration agreement is,

therefore, apart from its “existence”. One moot question that

therefore, arises, and which needs to be authoritatively decided by

a Bench of three learned Judges, is whether the word “existence”

would include weeding-out arbitration clauses in agreements which

indicate that the subject-matter is incapable of arbitration. A Division

Bench of this Court, through one of the learned Judges, Kurian

Joseph, J., has stated, in
Duro Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram Port

Ltd.
, (2017) 9 SCC 729, that the scope of
Section 11(6A)
is limited

to the following:
“59. The scope of the power under
Section 11(6)
of the
       1996 Act was considerably wide in view of the
       decisions in SBP and Co. [SBP and Co. v. Patel Engg.
       Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618] and Boghara Polyfab
       [National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Boghara Polyfab (P)
       Ltd., (2009) 1 SCC 267 : (2009) 1 SCC (Civ) 117]. This
       position continued till the amendment brought about in
       2015. After the amendment, all that the courts need to
       see is whether an arbitration agreement exists—
       nothing more, nothing less. The legislative policy and
       purpose is essentially to minimise the Court’s
       intervention at the stage of appointing the arbitrator
       and this intention as incorporated in
Section 11
(6-A)
       ought to be respected.”
8.     We now come to the meat of the matter.
9.     It is important first to set out certain provisions of the
Transfer

of Property Act, 1882
and the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996
in
8
order to appreciate the controversy before us.
Section 111
of the

Transfer of Property Act, relating to determination of lease, reads as

follows:
“111. Determination of lease.— A lease of immovable
       property, determines—
(a) by efflux of the time limited thereby;
(b) where such time is limited conditionally on
           the happening of some event—by the
           happening of such event;
(c) where the interest of the lessor in the
           property terminates on, or his power to
           dispose of the same extends only to, the
           happening of any event—by the happening of
           such event;
(d) in case the interests of the lessee and the
           lessor in the whole of the property become
           vested at the same time in one person in the
           same right;
(e) by express surrender; that is to say, in
           case the lessee yields up his interest under
           the lease to the lessor, by mutual agreement
           between them;
(f) by implied surrender;
(g) by forfeiture, that is to say, (1) in case the
           lessee breaks an express condition which
           provides that on breach thereof the lessor
           may re-enter; or (2) in case the lessee
           renounces his character as such by setting
           up a title in a third person or by claiming title
           in himself; or (3) the lessee is adjudicated an
           insolvent and the lease provides that the
           lessor may re-enter on the happening of such
           event; and in any of these cases the lessor or
           his transferee gives notice in writing to the
           lessee of his intention to determine the lease;
9
(h) on the expiration of a notice to determine
           the lease, or to quit, or of intention to quit, the
           property leased, duly given by one party to
           the other.”
10.    Section 114, which deals with relief against forfeiture for non-

payment of rent, reads as follows:-
“114. Relief against forfeiture for non-payment of
       rent.— Where a lease of immovable property has
       been determined by forfeiture for non-payment of rent,
       and the lessor sues to eject the lessee, if, at the
       hearing of the suit, the lessee pays or tenders to the
       lessor the rent in arrear, together with interest thereon
       and his full costs of the suit, or gives such security as
       the Court thinks sufficient for making such payment
       within fifteen days, the Court may, in lieu of making a
       decree for ejectment, pass an order relieving the
       lessee against the forfeiture; and thereupon the lessee
       shall hold the property leased as if the forfeiture had
       not occurred.”
11.    Section 114A, which deals with relief against forfeiture in

certain other cases, reads as follows:
“114A. Relief against forfeiture in certain other
       cases.—Where a lease of immovable property has
       been determined by forfeiture for a breach of an
       express condition which provides that on breach
       thereof the lessor may re-enter, no suit for ejectment
       shall lie unless and until the lessor has served on the
       lessee a notice in writing—
(a) specifying    the       particular     breach
           complained of; and
(b) if the breach is capable of remedy,
           requiring the lessee to remedy the breach;
10
and the lessee fails, within a reasonable time
            from the date of the service of the notice, to
            remedy the breach, if it is capable of remedy.
Nothing in this section shall apply to an express
       condition against assigning, under-letting, parting with
       the possession, or disposing, of the property leased, or
       to an express condition relating to forfeiture in case of
       non-payment of rent.”
12.    While appreciating that a lease is a transfer of an interest in

property, and therefore, a conveyance, in law, there is nothing in the
Transfer of Property Act
to show that a dispute as to determination

of a lease arising under Section 111 cannot be decided by

arbitration. However, what was argued was that Sections 114 and

114A, which provide for statutory reliefs against forfeiture for non-

payment of rent and for breach of an express condition, would

indicate that the statute itself is based on a public policy in favour of

tenants as a class, which can be decided by the courts only.
13.
In
Praduman Kumar v. Virendra Goyal (Dead) by LRs.
,

(1969) 3 SCR 950, this Court explained the raison d’etre for Section

114 as follows:
“The covenant of forfeiture of tenancy for non-payment
       of rent is regarded by the courts as merely a clause for
       securing payment of rent, and unless the tenant has
       by his conduct disentitled himself to equitable relief the
       courts grant relief against forfeiture of tenancy on the
       tenant paying the rent due, interest thereon and costs
       of the suit. Jurisdiction to relieve against forfeiture for
       non-payment of rent may be exercised by the Court if
11
the tenant in a suit in ejectment at the hearing of the
       suit pays the arrears of rent together with interest
       thereon and full costs of the suit. ……”
                                                 (at page 953)


The Court went on to quote from Namdeo Lokman Lodhi v.
Narmadabai & Ors., [1953] SCR 1109 as follows:
“… in exercising the discretion (under
Section 114
of
       the Transfer of Property Act), each case must be
       judged by itself, the delay, the conduct of the parties
       and the difficulties to which the landlord has been put
       should be weighed against the tenant. … It is a maxim
       of equity that a person who comes in equity must do
       equity and must come with clean hands and if the
       conduct of the tenant is such that it disentitles him to
       relief in equity, then the court’s hands are not tied to
       exercise it in his favour.”
                                                 (at page 1025)
14.    In fact, a close reading of
Section 114
would show that the

rights of landlord and tenant are balanced by the aforesaid

provision. This is because where a lease of immoveable property

has determined by forfeiture for non-payment of rent, and at the

hearing of the suit, the lessee pays or tenders to the lessor the rent

in arrears, together with interest thereon and his full costs within 15

days, the Court in its discretion may relieve the lessee against the

forfeiture. This shows two things – one that the landlord’s interest is

secured not only by the deposit of rent in arrears but also interest

thereon and full costs of the suit. The option given, of course, is that
12
security may also be given but what is important is that the Court is

given a discretion in making a decree for ejectment if this is done.
The discretion may be exercised in favour of the tenant or it may

not. This itself shows that
Section 114
cannot be said to be a

provision conceived for relief of tenants as a class as a matter of

public policy. The same goes for
Section 114A
. Here again, a lessee

is given one opportunity to remedy breach of an express condition,

provided such condition is capable of remedy. However, the

exception contained in this section shows that it is a very limited

right that is given to a tenant, as this would not apply to assigning,

sub-letting, parting with the possession, or disposing of the property

leased, or even to an express condition relating to forfeiture in case

of non-payment of rent. Thus, it is clear that every one of the

grounds stated in
Section 111
, whether read with
Section 114
and/or

114A, are grounds which can be raised before an arbitrator to

decide as to whether a lease has or has not determined.
15.    So far so good on principle. However, we have now to refer

to certain decisions of this Court. The basic decision in cases of this

kind is the judgment contained in
Booz Allen and Hamilton Inc. v.

SBI Home Finance Limited and Others
, (2011) 5 SCC 532. This

judgment has
laid down in
great detail what is the meaning of the
13
expression “arbitrability” [see paragraph 34]. Paragraph 35 is

important and reads as follows:
“35. The Arbitral Tribunals are private fora chosen
       voluntarily by the parties to the dispute, to adjudicate
       their disputes in place of courts and tribunals which
       are public fora constituted under the laws of the
       country. Every civil or commercial dispute, either
       contractual or non-contractual, which can be decided
       by a court, is in principle capable of being adjudicated
       and resolved by arbitration unless the jurisdiction of
       the Arbitral Tribunals is excluded either expressly or by
       necessary implication. Adjudication of certain
       categories of proceedings are reserved by the
       legislature exclusively for public fora as a matter of
       public policy. Certain other categories of cases, though
       not expressly reserved for adjudication by public fora
       (courts and tribunals), may by necessary implication
       stand excluded from the purview of private fora.
       Consequently, where the cause/dispute is inarbitrable,
       the court where a suit is pending, will refuse to refer
       the parties to arbitration, under
Section 8
of the Act,
       even if the parties might have agreed upon arbitration
       as the forum for settlement of such disputes.”

Paragraph 36 then goes on to give certain well recognized examples

of non-arbitrable disputes as follows:
“36. The well-recognised examples of non-arbitrable
       disputes are: (i) disputes relating to rights and liabilities
       which give rise to or arise out of criminal offences; (ii)
       matrimonial disputes relating to divorce, judicial sepa-
       ration, restitution of conjugal rights, child custody; (iii)
       guardianship matters; (iv) insolvency and winding-up
       matters; (v) testamentary matters (grant of probate,
       letters of administration and succession certificate);
       and (vi) eviction or tenancy matters governed by spe-
       cial statutes where the tenant enjoys statutory protec-
       tion against eviction and only the specified courts are
       conferred jurisdiction to grant eviction or decide the
       disputes.”
14
Paragraphs 37 and 38 then go on to state that a right in rem is a

right exercisable against the world at large, and is not amenable to

arbitration, whereas a right in personam, in which an interest is pro-
tected against specific individuals, is. It was also stated that disputes

relating to subordinate rights in personam arising from rights in rem

have always been considered to be arbitrable.
16.    We now come to the sheet anchor of the appellants’ case be-

fore us, namely, the decision in
Himangni Enterprises
(supra). This

judgment concerned itself with a landlord-tenant dispute in which the
Delhi Rent Act, 1995
was admittedly inapplicable. However, in para-

graph 18 of
the said judgment
, this Court said:
“18.
In our considered opinion, the question involved
       in the appeal remains no longer res integra and stands
       answered by two decisions of this Court in Natraj Stu-
       dios (
P) Ltd. vs. Navrang Studios
, (
1981) 1 SCC 523
       and Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc. vs. SBI Home Finance
       Ltd.
against the appellant and in favour of the respon-
       dent.”
17.    We may point out that the judgment in
Natraj Studios
(supra)

is a judgment in which Section 28 of the Bombay Rent Act, in the

context of arbitrability, arose for consideration. This section made it

clear that disputes between landlords and statutory tenants would

be referable only to the small causes court in Bombay and “no other

court has jurisdiction to entertain any such suit, proceeding or
15
application or to deal with such claim or question”. Given this

provision, and the fact that the Bombay Rent Act is a welfare

legislation, this Court held:
“17. The Bombay Rent Act is a welfare legislation
       aimed at the definite social objective of protection of
       tenants against harassment by landlords in various
       ways. It is a matter of public policy. The scheme of
       the Act shows that the conferment of exclusive
       jurisdiction on certain Courts is pursuant to the social
       objective at which the legislation aims. Public policy
       requires that contracts to the contrary which nullify the
       rights conferred on tenants by the Act cannot be
       permitted.      Therefore, public policy requires that
       parties cannot also be permitted to contract out of the
       legislative mandate which requires certain kind of
       disputes to be settled by special Courts constituted by
       the Act. It follows that arbitration agreements between
       parties whose rights are regulated by the Bombay
       Rent Act cannot be recognized by a Court of law.”

It then concluded in paragraph 24 as follows:
“24. In the light of the foregoing discussion and the
       authority of the precedents, we hold that both by
       reason of
S. 28
of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and
       Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 and by reason
       of the broader considerations of public policy
       mentioned by us earlier and also in Deccan Merchants
       Co-operative Bank Ltd. v. M/s Dalichand Jugraj Jain
       (AIR 1969 SC 1320), the Court of Small Causes has
       and the Arbitrator has not the jurisdiction to decide the
       question whether the respondent-licensor-landlord is
       entitled to seek possession of the two studios and
       other premises together with machinery and
       equipment from the appellant-licensee-tenant.”
18.    So far as
Booz Allen
(supra) is concerned, we have already

extracted paragraph 36. Sub-paragraph (vi) of this paragraph makes
16
it clear that only those tenancy matters that are (i) governed by

special statutes (ii) where the tenant enjoys statutory protection

against eviction and (iii) where only specified courts are conferred

jurisdiction to grant eviction or decide disputes, are cases where the

dispute between landlord and tenant can be said to be non-

arbitrable.
19.    A perusal of both the aforesaid judgments, therefore, shows

that a
Transfer of Property Act
situation between a landlord and

tenant is very far removed from the situation in either
Natraj Studios
(supra) or in sub-paragraph (vi) of paragraph 36 of
Booz Allen
(supra). We are, therefore, of the respectful view that the question

involved in a
Transfer of Property Act
situation cannot possibly be

said to have been answered by the two decisions of this Court, as

has been stated in paragraph 18 of
the said judgment
.
20.    The said judgment then goes on to state:
“23. The learned counsel for the appellant, however,
       argued that the provisions of the
Delhi Rent Act, 1995
are not applicable to the premises by virtue of
Section
       3(1)(c)
of the Act and hence, the law
laid down in
the
       aforementioned two cases would not apply. We do not
       agree.
24.
The Delhi Rent Act
, which deals with the cases
       relating to rent and eviction of the premises, is a
       special Act. Though it contains a provision (
Section 3
)
       by virtue of it, the provisions of the Act do not apply to
       certain premises but that does not mean that the
17
Arbitration Act
, ipso facto, would be applicable to such
       premises conferring jurisdiction on the arbitrator to
       decide the eviction/rent disputes. In such a situation,
       the rights of the parties and the demised premises
       would be governed by the
Transfer of Property Act
and
       the civil suit would be triable by the civil court and not
       by the arbitration. In other words, though by virtue of
Section 3
of the Act, the provisions of the Act are not
       applicable to certain premises but no sooner the
       exemption is withdrawn or ceased to have its
       application to a particular premises, the Act becomes
       applicable to such premises. In this view of the matter,
       it cannot be contended that the provisions of the
Arbitration Act
would, therefore, apply to such
       premises.”
21.    It may be noticed that none of the provisions of the
Transfer

of Property Act
have been noticed by this judgment. In fact, none of

the aforesaid provisions would indicate that disputes under the said

Act are triable only by the civil court and not by arbitration, as has

been held in this paragraph. It is clear that the
Transfer of Property

Act
is silent on arbitrability, and does not negate arbitrability.
22.
In    a    similar   situation,    this   Court,    in
Olympus

Superstructures Pvt. Ltd. v. Meena Vijay Khetan and Others
,

(1999) 5 SCC 651, held that when it came to the grant of specific

performance, there is no prohibition in the
Specific Relief Act
that

issues relating to specific performance cannot be referred to

arbitration, unlike the English statute [see paragraph 34].
18
23.    Equally, merely because a discretion had to be exercised by

the court on whether or not to grant specific performance, would not

militate against specific performance being granted [see paragraph

44, in particular, of
Booz Allen
(supra)].
It is clear, therefore, that the

judgment in
Himangni Enterprises
(supra) will require a relook by a

Bench of three Hon’ble Judges of this Court.
24.    One more thing held in
Himangni Enterprises
(supra) is that

the mere fact that an exemption from the
Rent Act
is available does

not mean that the matter becomes non-arbitrable. The Court held

that as soon as the exemption is withdrawn, the
Rent Act
will apply,

and therefore, it cannot be contended that the
Arbitration &

Conciliation Act
would apply. This reasoning is also, in our respectful

view, not correct. Persons may be exempt from a
Rent Act
not

merely for a certain period but also because the rent contained in

the agreement between the landlord and tenant is above a certain

amount. When the rent is fixed above the amount stated by a

statute, in the normal course of human conduct, such rent can only

be increased and not decreased so as to fall back within the

provisions of the
Rent Act
. Further, the exemption based on a

certain rent payable need not be withdrawn or cease to have

application to a particular premises for many years to come. For all
19
these reasons, we are of the view that this reason also does not

hold good.
25.
In
Vimal Kishor Shah and Others v. Jayesh Dinesh Shah

and Others
, (2016) 8 SCC 788, this Court, after referring to
Dhulabhai v. State of M.P.
, (1968) 3 SCR 662, came to the

conclusion that disputes which arose under the
Indian Trusts Act,

1882
, which applies only to private trusts, were also not arbitrable as

this was excluded by necessary implication. This was so stated as

follows:
“49. So far as the question involved in the case at
       hand is concerned, it is governed by
Condition 2
       of Dhulabhai
case [
Dhulabhai v. State of M.P.
, AIR
       1969 SC 78] which reads as under: (AIR p. 89, para
32)
            “32. (2) Where there is an express bar of the
            jurisdiction of the court, an examination of the
            scheme of the particular Act to find the
            adequacy or the sufficiency of the remedies
            provided may be relevant but is not decisive
            to sustain the jurisdiction of the civil court.
Where there is no express exclusion the
            examination of the remedies and the scheme
            of the particular Act to find out the intendment
            becomes necessary and the result of the
            inquiry may be decisive. In the latter case it is
            necessary to see if the statute creates a
            special right or a liability and provides for the
            determination of the right or liability and
            further lays down that all questions about the
            said right and liability shall be determined by
            the tribunals so constituted, and whether
            remedies normally associated with actions in
20
civil courts are prescribed by the said statute
    or not.”
50. When we examine the scheme of the
Trusts Act,
1882
in the light of the principle
laid down in
Condition
2, we find no difficulty in concluding that though the
Trusts Act, 1882
does not provide any express bar in
relation to applicability of other Acts for deciding the
disputes arising under the
Trusts Act, 1882
yet, in our
considered view, there exists an implied exclusion of
applicability of the
Arbitration Act
for deciding the
disputes relating to trust, trustees and beneficiaries
through private arbitration. In other words, when the
Trusts Act, 1882
exhaustively deals with the trust,
trustees and beneficiaries and provides for adequate
and sufficient remedies to all aggrieved persons by
giving them a right to approach the Principal Civil
Court of Original Jurisdiction for redressal of their
disputes arising out of trust deed and the
Trusts Act,
1882
then, in our opinion, any such dispute pertaining
to affairs of the trust including the dispute inter se
trustee and beneficiary in relation to their right, duties,
obligations, removal, etc. cannot be decided by the
arbitrator by taking recourse to the provisions of the
Act. Such disputes have to be decided by the civil
court as specified under the
Trusts Act, 1882
.
51. The principle of interpretation that where a specific
remedy is given, it thereby deprives the person who
insists upon a remedy of any other form of remedy
than that given by the statute, is one which is very
familiar, and which runs through the law, was adopted
by this Court in Premier Automobiles Ltd. v. Kamlekar
Shantaram Wadke [Premier Automobiles Ltd. v.
Kamlekar Shantaram Wadke, (1976) 1 SCC 496 :
1976 SCC (L&S) 70 : AIR 1975 SC 2238] while
examining the question of bar in filing civil suit in the
context of remedies provided under the
Industrial
Disputes Act
(see G.P. Singh, Principles of Statutory
Interpretation, 12th Edn., pp. 763-64). We apply this
principle here because, as held above, the
Trusts Act,
1882
creates an obligation and further specifies the
rights and duties of the settlor, trustees and the
beneficiaries apart from several conditions specified in
21
the trust deed and further provides a specific remedy
       for its enforcement by filing applications in civil court. It
       is for this reason, we are of the view that since
       sufficient and adequate remedy is provided under the
Trusts Act, 1882
for deciding the disputes in relation to
       trust deed, trustees and beneficiaries, the remedy
       provided under the
Arbitration Act
for deciding such
       disputes is barred by implication.”
Dhulabhai
(supra) refers to and relies upon the three famous cate-
gories that are contained in Wolverhampton New Waterworks Co.
v. Hawkesford, 141 ER 486. Willes, J. had set out these three cate-
gories as follows:
“There are three classes of cases in which a liability
       may be established founded upon a statute. One is,
       where there was a liability existing at common law, and
       that liability is affirmed by a statute which gives a spe-
       cial and peculiar form of remedy different from the
       remedy which existed at common law: there, unless
       the statute contains words which expressly or by nec-
       essary implication exclude the common law remedy,
       and the party suing has his election to pursue either
       that or the statutory remedy. The second class of
       cases is, where the statute gives the right to sue
       merely, but provides no particular form of remedy:
       there, the party can only proceed by action at common
       law. But there is a third class, viz. where a liability not
       existing at common law is created by a statute which
       at the same time gives a special and particular remedy
       for enforcing it.”
                                                    (at page 495)
26.
The Indian Trusts Act, 1882
, in fact, provides an excellent

instance of how arbitration is excluded by necessary implication. It

is important to bear in mind the fact that the statute, considered as a
22
whole, must lead necessarily to a conclusion that the disputes which

arise under it cannot be the subject matter of arbitration.
27.    A few sections of the
Indian Trusts Act
will suffice to

demonstrate how disputes under this Act cannot possibly be the

subject matter of arbitration. Under
Section 34
of the Indian Trusts

Act, a trustee may, without instituting a suit, apply by petition to a

principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction for its opinion, advice, or

direction on any present questions respecting management or

administration of trust property, subject to other conditions
laid down

in
the Section. Obviously, an arbitrator cannot possibly give such

opinion, advice, or direction. Under
Section 46
, a trustee who has

accepted the trust, cannot afterwards renounce it, except, inter alia,

with the permission of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction.
This again cannot be the subject matter of arbitration. Equally,

under
Section 49
of the Indian Trusts Act, where a discretionary

power conferred on a trustee is not exercised reasonably and in

good faith, only a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction can

control such power, again making it clear that a private consensual

adjudicator has no part in the scheme of this Act. Under
Section 53
,

no trustee may, without the permission of a principal Civil Court of

original jurisdiction, buy or become mortgagee or lessee of the trust
23
property or any part thereof. Here again, such permission can only

be given by an arm of the State, namely, the principal Civil Court of

original jurisdiction. Under
Section 74
of the Indian Trusts Act, under

certain circumstances, a beneficiary may apply by petition to a

principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction for the appointment of a

trustee or a new trustee, and the Court may appoint such trustee

accordingly. Here again, such appointment cannot possibly be by a

consensual adjudicator. It can only be done by a petition to a

principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction. Also, it is important to

note that it is not any civil court that has jurisdiction, but only one

designated court, namely, a principal Civil Court of original

jurisdiction. All this goes to show that by necessary implication,

disputes arising under the
Indian Trusts Act
cannot possibly be

referred to arbitration.
28.
Insofar as the
Transfer of Property Act
or the
Specific Relief

Act
, no such thing exists, as has been held by
Olympus

Superstructures
(supra) and by
Booz Allen
(supra).
29.    We may only indicate that
Vimal Kishor Shah
(supra) has, in

a
Consumer Protection Act
situation, been recently followed by a

Division Bench of this Court in
Emaar MGF Land Limited v. Aftab
24
Singh
, 2018 SCC OnLine SC 2771.
30.    In this view of the matter, this case is referred to a Bench of

three Hon’ble Judges.
31.    Given the facts of this case and the fact that 18 hearings

have been held, the stay that has been granted to the arbitral

proceedings by our order dated 13.08.2018 is lifted, and the

proceedings may go on and culminate in an award. The award

cannot be executed without applying to this Court. The appeal is

disposed of accordingly.
………........................... J.
(R.F. NARIMAN)


                                          ………........................... J.
(VINEET SARAN)
New Delhi;
February 28, 2019.
25