[Cites
32
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
All India Institute Of Medical Sciences vs Sanjiv Chaturvedi on 1 February, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 2971, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 350, 2019 LAB IC 3305, (2019) 162 FACLR 180, (2019) 1 CURCC 323, (2019) 1 SCT 683, (2019) 1 SERVLJ 435, (2019) 2 SCALE 403, (2019) 3 SERVLR 167, 2019 (4) KCCR SN 382 (SC), AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 2215
Author:
Indira Banerjee
Bench:
Indira Banerjee
,
R. Banumathi
1


                                                                           REPORTABLE
                                        THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1392 OF 2019
                                        (@ SLP(C) NO. 27490 OF 2018)


                         All India Institute of Medical Sciences            …Appellant


                                                       Versus


                         Sanjiv Chaturvedi & Ors.                         …Respondents




                                                 JUDGMENT
Indira Banerjee, J.
Leave granted.
2.   This appeal is against the final judgment and order dated

                         21.08.2018 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of

                         Uttarakhand at Nainital allowing the writ petition being WPSB

                         No.359 of 2018 filed by the respondent no.1 and quashing the

                         order dated 18.09.2017 passed by the Chairman of the Central

                         Administrative Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as “CAT”) at the

                         Principal Bench at Delhi, inter alia, staying proceedings in OA

                         331/00790/ 2017 filed by the respondent no.1 and pending

                         before a Division Bench of CAT at Nainital.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
POOJA ARORA
Date: 2019.02.01
17:06:07 IST
3.   The respondent no.1, an Indian Forest service officer of the
Reason:
Uttarakhand cadre of 2002 Batch was posted as Deputy
2
Secretary at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New

Delhi from 29.6.2012 till 28.6.2016.
4.   The said post of Deputy Secretary was created with the

approval of the Department of Expenditure, inter alia, to

coordinate and manage infrastructure projects and ensure their

timely completion, to exercise management and control of the

Institute and to coordinate with Multi Disciplinary Experts.
5.   At its 195th meeting held on 20.7.2010, the Standing

Finance Committee of the Institute decided against the creation

of a new post of Central Vigilance Officer and resolved that the

work of Central Vigilance Officer should also be assigned to the

officer, joining the newly created post of Deputy Secretary of

AIIMS. The Governing Body and Institute body of AIIMS headed

by the Union Health Minister ratified the decision of the

Standing Finance Committee.
6.   An order dated 23.6.2011 was issued by the Ministry of

Health and Family Welfare enumerating the duties pertaining to

the said post of Deputy Secretary of AIIMS.
7.   As stated above, respondent no.1 was appointed Deputy

Secretary of AIIMS on 29.6.2012.       As per the work allocation

order the respondent no.1 was also made Central Vigilance

Officer of the AIIMS.
3
8.   It is the case of the respondent no.1 that the work of the

General Section was withdrawn from the respondent no.1 in

November 2012, the work of Central Vigilance Officer was

withdrawn from him in August 2014, the work of dealing with

grievances was withdrawn from him some time in 2015 and in

December 2015 the work of the Estate Section was withdrawn

from him.   Ultimately the respondent no.1 was left practically

without any work, apart from signing pension papers and

booking guest houses.
9.   According to the respondent no.1, there was delay in

completion of infrastructure projects, which along with the way

in which the respondent no.1 had been denuded of duties by

successive office orders, attracted severe criticism in a report

of the Parliamentary Committee.
10. According to the respondent no.1, at the time when he

was assigned the work of Central Vigilance Officer, the then

Health   Secretary    had   commented      on     his   “exemplary

performance”    and     “absolute   integrity”.    Moreover,   the

respondent no.1 was, in his Annual Performance Appraisal

Reports for the years 2012-13 and 2013-14 graded as

‘outstanding’, with the following remarks by the then Union

Health Minister “Shri Sanjiv Chaturvedi, Deputy Secretary and

CVO, AIIMS, New Delhi, is a man of integrity, sincerity, who is

keen on performing his assigned role to the best of his ability
4
and knowledge without fear or favour”.
11. The respondent no.1 had been awarded the Ramon

Magsaysay Award for the year 2015 in recognition of his

exemplary integrity, courage and tenacity, inter alia, in

uncompromisingly exposing and painstakingly investigating

corruption in public office. Records reveal that the respondent

no.1 had donated the award money of Rs.14,23,000/- to the

Prime Minister’s Relief Fund after the All India Institute of

Medical Sciences refused to accept his donation of the award

money to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences for free

treatment of under privileged patients.
12. According to the respondent no.1, no complaint of any

kind was received against him from any employee during his

two year tenure as Central Vigilance Officer of the Institute.

However, the very same persons, who had earlier showered

praises on the respondent no.1 turned against him for

extraneous    reasons,    particularly    his   role   in   exposing

corruption.
13. Being aggrieved, the respondent no.1 filed an application

being O.A. No.1887 of 2015 before the Principal Bench of the

CAT at Delhi, inter alia, for directions on the concerned

authorities to allocate the work of Deputy Secretary to the

respondent no.1.   The said application has been dismissed by

a judgment and order dated 17.5.2016.
5
14. The respondent no.1 has alleged that the duties of Central

Vigilance Officer were withdrawn from him as he had unearthed

irregularities and corruption in infrastructure projects.     The

nature or reasons for the disputes between the respondent no.1

and the appellant are not relevant to the issues involved in this

appeal.
15. A memorandum dated 7.1.2016 was served on the

respondent no.1,     informing him that the Director of the All

India Institute of Medical Sciences had placed on record his

displeasure with insubordination, indiscipline and lack of work

ethics of the respondent no.1 during the       Winter Session of

Parliament in the year 2015, and directed that a copy of the

said memorandum be kept in the personal file of the

respondent no.1.     A representation made by the respondent

no.1 against the aforesaid memorandum was rejected by the

Competent Authority.
16. Being aggrieved, the respondent no.1 filed OA No.1342 of

2016 before the Principal Bench of the CAT at New Delhi

challenging the said Memorandum dated 7.1.2016 and praying

for orders, restraining the Director of the All India Institute of

Medical   Sciences    from   writing   the   Annual   Performance

Appraisal Report of the respondent no.1. The said application is

pending. On the application being filed, the learned Tribunal
6
directed issuance of notices, but declined the prayer of the

respondent no.1 for interim relief.
17. On 28.6.2016, the four year deputation of the respondent

no.1 as Deputy Secretary at AIIMS came to an end, and he

joined his new post at Uttarakhand in August, 2016, after

availing leave of two months.
18. By an order dated 11.1.2017 AIIMS communicated an

adverse Annual Confidential Report for the year 2015 -2016 to

the respondent no.1 wherein he had uniformly been given

‘Zero’ grading in all attributes.     On 23.1.2017, the respondent

no.1 filed an appeal against the order dated 11.1.2017 before

the Competent Authority. The appeal was rejected by an order

dated 15/20.4.2017.
19. On 19.6.2017, the respondent no.1 filed a writ petition

being WPSB No.225 of 2017 before the Uttarakhand High Court

challenging the orders dated 11.1.2017 and 15/20.4.2017. The

respondent no.1 also filed an application being PT No.286/2017

in OA No. 1342/2016 before the Principal Bench of the CAT at

Delhi for transfer of OA No. 1342/2016 from the           Principal

Bench of the     CAT at Delhi to its Bench at Nainital.        The

appellant has filed a counter affidavit to the said application.
20. By an order dated 19.6.2017 in the writ petition being

WPSB No.225 of 2017, the Division Bench of Uttarakhand High

Court relegated the respondent no.1 to approach the Tribunal
7
under the
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985
(for short ‘the

Act’) and to seek all reliefs available to him. The respondent

no.1 was given the liberty to approach the High Court in the

event any relief prayed for by the respondent was rejected by

the Tribunal.
21. Thereafter, the respondent no.1 instituted an application

being OA No.331/00790/2017 before the Nainital Bench of the

CAT challenging the Annual Performance Appraisal Report

(APAR) of the year 2015-16 whereupon an interim order was

passed in favour of the respondent no.1 on 18.9.2017, by a

Division Bench of the Tribunal, the operative part whereof is set

out hereinbelow:-
“Matter be posted for further hearing on interim
      relief on 03.10.2017. Respondents shall file their
      reply before the said date. In the meantime, in the
      interest of justice, it is directed that if any matter
      related to the career progression of the applicant
      comes up for consideration before the terms of the
      impugned orders shall not be taken into account
      while assessing and the applicant’s suitability or
      fitness and he shall be considered on the basis of
      the rest of his ACRs/APARs.
22. The Union of India filed an application before the Chairman

of the Tribunal being PT 316 /2017 seeking transfer of OA No.

331/00790/2017 to the Principal Bench at Delhi.       By an ex

parte order dated 18.9.2017 passed in the said transfer

application, the Chairman of the CAT, sitting singly, stayed

proceedings in OA No.331/00790/2017 pending before a two
8
member Bench at Nainital for a period of six weeks, and

directed that notice be issued to the respondent no.1.
23. Challenging the aforesaid order on the ground that the

Chairman of CAT, sitting singly, could not have stayed

proceedings pending before a Division Bench, the respondent

no.1 filed a writ petition being W.P.(SB) No. 259/2018 in the

High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital.
24. By the impugned order dated 21.8.2018, which is under

appeal, the High Court allowed the writ petition and set aside

the   impugned   order   dated   18.9.2017   of   the   Chairman,

observing that the Chairman of the Tribunal, while sitting

singly, could not stay the proceedings pending before the

Division Bench. The High Court imposed costs of Rs.25,000/- on

the appellant.
25. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant

submitted that the impugned order was passed without giving

the appellant an opportunity of hearing. No Vakalatnama was

executed by the appellant authorizing the learned Additional

Solicitor General of India Shri Rakesh Thapliyal to appear before

the High Court on behalf of AIIMS.
26. Learned Counsel for the appellant next submitted that the

High Court had erred in holding that the Chairman of CAT,

sitting singly, could not stay proceeding before the Division

Bench. He argued that a conjoint reading of the preamble of
9
the Act with
Section 5(2)
,
5(6)
, the proviso to
Section 24
and
Section 25
of the said Act, shows that the Chairman sitting

       singly can stay proceedings before any other Bench.         Such

       power has been conferred upon the Chairman under
Section

       5(6)
read with
Section 25
of the Act.
27. Learned counsel submitted that it was necessary for the

       Chairman to pass an order of stay of proceedings in O.A.

       No.331/790/2017 pending before the Bench at Nainital to avoid

       multiplicity of proceedings and for judicial uniformity, more so,

       since the lis in OA No.1342 of 2016 before the Principal Bench

       and in O.A. No. 331/790/2017 at the Bench at Nainital were

       similar. The subject matter of both the applications related to

       the APAR of the year 2015-2016.
28.
In support of his submission, that the Chairman of the

       CAT, considering an application for transfer under
Section 25
of

       the Act, had the power to stay the proceedings before the

       Nainital Bench, of which transfer had been sought, counsel

       cited
Dr. Mahabal Ram vs. Indian Council of Agricultural

       Research
and others1 and
L. Chandra Kumar vs. Union of

       India & Ors.2
.
29. Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent no.1

       refuted the submission that the appellant had not been heard

       by the High Court, arguing that the appellant had duly been

1 (1994) 2 SCC 401
2 (1997) 3 SCC 261
10
represented by Shri Rakesh Thapliyal, Additional Solicitor

General of India.    He submitted that, as per the rules of the

High Court an advance copy of the writ petition had also been

served   on   the   Additional   Solicitor   General   Shri   Rakesh

Thapliyal.    The Additional Solicitor General and            senior

government counsel had been representing both Union of India

and AIIMS in the High Court as well as in Nainital Bench of CAT

where the Union of India and AIIMS had jointly filed reply

through counsel for Union of India.
30. Counsel appearing for the Respondent no.1 emphatically

argued that the Chairman of CAT sitting singly had no power

under the Act to stay the proceedings in a part-heard matter

before a Division Bench of the same Tribunal.      It was trite that

a body created by statute could only have those powers

provided by statute and nothing more.
31. Counsel for the respondent no.1 further argued that the

appellant had filed O.A No.331/790 of 2017 pursuant to the

order of the Division Bench of the High Court, in the writ

petition filed by the respondent no.1, being WPSB No.225 of

2017. The order of the Chairman was, thus, in violation of the

order of the Division Bench of the High Court.
32. Counsel appearing for the respondent no.1 also submitted

that under
Section 24
of the Act, the maximum duration of an

ex-parte interim order could be two weeks and that too subject
11
to certain conditions, including service of advance copy, which

had not been done in this case.    Moreover, there had to be a

prima facie finding that the appellant would suffer irreparable

loss, which could not be monetarily compensated, if no interim

order were passed. In this case, the Chairman passed a non-

speaking interim order for six weeks.     The order does not

disclose any urgency or irreparable loss which could not be

monetarily compensated.
33. Counsel for the respondent no.1 also submitted that the

cause of action in OA No. 331/790/2017 was distinct from cause

of action in OA No. 1342/2016. The communication of adverse

APAR for the year 2015-16 gave rise to a fresh cause of action.

Unless challenged, the APAR would have led to adverse

consequences for the respondent no.1, such as, denial of

promotion.
34. Counsel for the respondent no.1 submitted that OA No.

1342/2016 and OA No. 331/790/2017 arose as a result of two

completely different orders and, in any case, the issue of

whether there was similarity of cause of action in the two

proceedings had been dealt with by the Nainital Bench. The

finding of the Nainital Bench had never been challenged by the

appellant and had attained finality.
35. Relying on the judgment of this Court in
Ramrameshwari
12
Devi    and Ors. v. Nirmala Devi & Ors.
3, Counsel for the

         respondent no.1 submitted that the High Court had rightly

         imposed a fine on the appellant, as the appellant had obtained

         an ex parte order by misrepresentation.
36. Counsel for the respondent no.1 finally submitted that this

         appeal might be dismissed, as it is purely based on perjury and

         concealment of facts, citing
Kishorbhai Gandubhai Pethani

         v. State of Gujarat & Anr.4
,
Kishore Samrite V. State of

         Uttar Pradesh & Ors.5
and
Prestige Lights Ltd. v. State

         Bank of India6
.
37. It is not in dispute that the impugned order, under

         challenge in this Court, records the appearance of Shri Rakesh

         Thapliyal, Additional Solicitor General on behalf of AIIMS as

         well. Any objection with regard to        erroneous recording of

         appearances, or the authority of the learned Additional Solicitor

         General of India to represent the AIIMS ought to have been

         urged before the High Court by making an appropriate

         application. The objection to the appearances of the Additional

         Solicitor General, representing the Central government in the

         same proceedings, is prima facie preposterous, considering

         that the AIIMS is under full control of the Central Government.

         It is, however, not for this Court to examine whether the


3   (2011) 8 SCC 249
4   (2014) 13 SCC 539
5   (2013) 2 SCC 398
6   (2007) 8 SCC 449
13
learned    Additional   Solicitor   General   of   India   had    been

       authorized to appear before the High Court on behalf of AIIMS

       or not.
38. The judgments of this Court in
Munna Lal Karosia vs.

       State of Madhya Pradesh and Others
7 and Association of

       Synthetic Fibre Industries vs. Apollo Tyres Limited and

       Others8, cited by the appellant to argue that a final order

       ought not be passed by the High Court against any person

       without giving that person an opportunity of hearing, have no

       application in the facts and circumstances of this case, since

       the   appellant   had   apparently    been    represented    by    the

       Additional Solicitor General. The judgments were rendered in

       the particular facts and circumstances of those cases.
39.
In
Munna Lal Karosia
(supra), the High Court had held

       Munna Lal Karosia to be guilty of contempt without hearing

       him. It was in the aforesaid context that this Court deprecated

       the passing of stigmatic orders against a person without giving

       that person an opportunity of hearing.        An order of contempt

       may be stigmatic. The order under appeal is not so. Imposition

       of costs does render an order stigmatic, as sought to be argued

       on behalf of the appellant.
40. The main question before this Court is, whether the

       Chairman of the Tribunal, sitting singly and exercising his power

7 (2012) 12 SCC 255
8 (2010) 13 SCC 735
14
under
Section 25
of the Act, to transfer proceedings from one

        Bench to another, could have stayed proceedings before a two

        member Bench and rendered interim orders passed by that

        Bench inoperative. The answer to the aforesaid question has to

        be in the negative for the reasons discussed hereinafter.
41.
The Act
has been enacted in pursuance of
Article 323
A,

        inserted into the Constitution of India by the Constitution (42 nd

        Amendment) Act, 1976, which enables Parliament to enact law

        to provide for adjudication and/or trial by Administrative

        Tribunals of disputes in respect of recruitment and conditions of

        service of persons in public services and posts inter alia in

        connection with the Union of India and authorities under its

        control.
42. As observed by the Supreme Court in
Vatticherukuru

        Village Panchayat v. Nori Venkatarama Deekshithulu

        and Ors.9
, the Parliament has enacted
Article 323A
for the

        reason that the Civil Courts, gripped with rules of pleading and

        strict rules of evidence and tardy trial, four-tier appeals,

        endless revisions and reviews under the Civil Procedure Code,

        are not suited to the need for expeditious dispensation of

        litigation relating to services.
43. CAT has been established under
Section 4
of the Act and

        exercises jurisdiction, powers and authority as stipulated in


9   (1991) Supp. (2) SCC 228
15
Section 14
of the Act.
44. Under
Section 14(1)
read with 14(3) of the Act, CAT

exercises all the jurisdiction authority and powers, exercised by

all Courts except the Supreme Court before the establishment

of a Tribunal under the Act.
45. Even though the
Evidence Act
and Civil Procedure Code

may not apply to Tribunals constituted in pursuance of
Article

323
A of the Constitution, such        Tribunals, like ordinary law

courts are bound by rules of evidence and procedure as laid

down under the law under which the Tribunal is constituted

and/or the rules and regulations framed thereunder and are

required to determine the lis brought before them strictly in

accordance with the law.
46. The preamble         to the Act states the object of the Act,

which is to provide for adjudication or trial by Administrative

Tribunals, of disputes and complaints in respect of recruitment

and conditions of service of persons appointed to public

services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or

of any State or of any local or other authority within the

territory of India or under the control of the Government of

India or of any corporation owned or controlled by the

Government, in pursuance of
Article 323A
of the Constitution of

India and for the matters connected therewith or incidental

thereto.
16
47. The reference by Counsel for the appellant to the

Preamble of the Act is of no relevance. The respondent no.1

approached the Tribunal for redressal of his grievances.     His

case was heard by a Division Bench and a reasoned interim

order passed on 18.9.2017.     The preamble, which states the

aims and objects of the Act is of no assistance to the appellant,

as it does not lend support to appellant’s contention that the

Chairman of the Tribunal sitting singly could have stayed

further proceedings before a Division Bench.       The reliance

placed by Counsel on the Preamble is misconceived.
48.
Sections 5
,
24
and
25
of the Act provide as follows:-
5. Composition of Tribunals and Benches thereof.—
    (1) Each Tribunal shall consist of a Chairman and such
    number of Judicial and Administrative Members as the
    appropriate Government may deem fit and, subject to the
    other provisions of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and
    authority of the Tribunal may be exercised by Benches
    thereof.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench
    shall consist of one Judicial Member and one
    Administrative Member.
(3) Omitted
    (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
    the Chairman—
(a) may, in addition to discharging the functions of the
    Judicial Member or the Administrative Member of the
    Bench to which he is appointed, discharge the functions of
    the Judicial Member or, as the case may be, the
    Administrative Member, of any other Bench;
(b) may transfer a Member from one Bench to another
    Bench;
(c) may authorise the Judicial Member or the
    Administrative Member appointed to one Bench to
    discharge also the functions of the Judicial Member or the
17
Administrative Member, as the case may be, of another
Bench; and
(d) may, for the purpose of securing that any case or
cases which, having regard to the nature of the questions
involved, requires or require, in his opinion or under the
rules made by the Central Government in this behalf, to
be decided by a Bench composed of more than two
Members issue such general or special orders, as he may
deem fit:
Provided that every Bench constituted in pursuance of this
clause shall include at least one Judicial Member and one
Administrative Member.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing
provisions of this section, it shall be competent for the
Chairman or any other Member authorised by the
Chairman in this behalf to function as a Bench consisting
of a single Member and exercise the jurisdiction, powers
and authority of the Tribunal in respect of such classes of
cases or such matters pertaining to such classes of cases
as the Chairman may by general or special order specify:
Provided that if at any stage of the hearing of any such
case or matter it appears to the Chairman or such
Member that the case or matter is of such a nature that it
ought to be heard by a Bench consisting of two Members,
the case or matter may be transferred by the Chairman
or, as the case may be, referred to him for transfer to,
such Bench as the Chairman may deem fit.
(7) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Benches
of the Central Administrative Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at
New Delhi (which shall be known as the principal Bench),
Allahabad, Calcutta, Madras, New Bombay and at such
other places as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify.
(8) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the places
at which the principal Bench and other Benches of a State
Administrative Tribunal shall ordinarily sit shall be such as
the State Government may, by notification, specify.
xxx          xxx         xxx          xxx
24. Conditions as to making of interim orders. -
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other
provisions of this Act or in any other law for the time being
in force, no interim order (whether by way of injunction or
stay or in any other manner) shall be made on, or in any
proceedings relating to, an application unless -
18
(a) copies of such application and of all
            documents in support of the plea for such interim
            order are furnished to the party against whom such
            application is made or proposed to be made; and
(b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard
            in the matter:
Provided that a Tribunal may dispense with the
     requirements of clauses (a) and (b) and make an interim
     order as an exceptional measure if it is satisfied, for
     reasons to be recorded in writing, that it is necessary so to
     do for preventing any loss being caused to the applicant
     which cannot be adequately compensated in money but
     any such interim order shall, if it is not sooner vacated,
     cease to have effect on the expiry of a period of fourteen
     days from the date on which it is made unless the said
     requirements have been complied with before the expiry
     of that period and the Tribunal has continued the
     operation of the interim order.
25. Power of Chairman to transfer cases from one
     Bench to another. - On the application of any of the
     parties and after notice to the parties, and after hearing
     such of them as he may desire to be heard, or on his own
     motion without such notice, the Chairman may transfer
     any case pending before one Bench, for disposal, to any
     other Bench.
49.
Section 5
provides that a Tribunal is to consist of a

Chairman and such number of judicial and administrative

members as the appropriate Government may deem fit and,

subject to the other provisions of the Act, the jurisdiction,

powers and authority of the Tribunal may be exercised by the

Benches thereof.    Sub-
section 2
provides that a Bench is to

consist of one Judicial Member and one Administrative Member.

This, however, is subject to the other provisions of the said Act.
50. The Chairman of the Tribunal is an entity distinct from the

Tribunal and exercises administrative powers and such other
19
powers as are expressly conferred o him under the Act.
Section

5(4)(a)
of the Act empowers the Chairman to discharge in

addition to the functions of the Judicial Member or the

Administrative Member, of the Bench to which he is appointed,

the functions of the Judicial Member or the Administrative

Member of any other Bench.
51.
Section 5(4)(b)
empowers the Chairman to transfer a

Member from one Bench to another Bench, and
Section 5(4)(c)
enables the Chairman to authorize the Judicial Member or the

Administrative Member of one Bench to discharge the duties

and functions of Judicial Member or Administrative Member, as

the case may be, of any other Bench. The Chairman can also

constitute Benches of more than two Members having regard to

the nature of the cases involved, by issuance of general or

special orders.
52.
Section 5(6)
enables the Chairman or any other Member

authorized by the Chairman to function as a Single Bench and

exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal in

respect of such classes of cases or such matters pertaining to

such classes of cases as the Chairman may by general or

special order specify.
53. The proviso to
Section 5(c)
of the Act states that if at any

stage of hearing of any such case or matter it appears to the

Chairman or the Member functioning singly that the case or
20
matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard by a Bench

consisting of two Members, the case or matter may be

transferred by the Chairman, or as the case may be, referred to

him for transfer to such Bench as the Chairman may deem fit.
54. A perusal of
Section 5
indicates that the Chairman is

empowered       to   discharge     administrative    functions    of

constituting Benches by transferring a Member from one Bench

to   another,    authorizing     the   Judicial   Member   or    the

Administrative Member appointed to one Bench to discharge

the functions of Judicial Member or Administrative Member of

another Bench.
55. Sub-section (6) of
Section 5
empowers the Chairman or

any other Member authorized by the Chairman to sit singly to

exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal only

in respect of such classes of cases or such matters pertaining

to such classes of cases as the Chairman might, by general or

special orders specify. The aforesaid provision does not enable

the Chairman sitting singly to nullify orders passed by a larger

Bench.
56.
Section 24
of the Act limits the power to pass interim order

whether by way of injunction, stay or otherwise by imposing

conditions on the exercise of such power. No interim order is to

be made unless copies of the application along with documents

in support of the plea for interim order are furnished to the
21
party against whom such application is made and opportunity

to the heard is given to such party.
57. The aforesaid condition can only be dispensed with in

exceptional cases, if the Tribunal is satisfied, for reasons to be

recorded in writing, that it is necessary to pass an interim order

for preventing any loss      to the applicant which       cannot

adequately be compensated in money.        The interim order, in

such case is to be of maximum duration of fourteen days

unless the requirements of sub-sections (a) and (b) are

complied with, before the expiry of fourteen days and the

interim order is extended.
58. The power under
Section 25
of the Act to transfer cases

from one Bench to another is essentially an administrative

power of the Chairman of CAT.     Such power is to be exercised

by the Chairman on his own motion or on the application of any

of the parties after notice to the parties, and after hearing such

of them as he may desire to be heard. The Chairman may, on

his motion, transfer any case pending before one Bench to

another without notice.
59.   A careful reading of
Section 25
of the Act makes it clear

that the Chairman deciding the question of whether a matter

should be transferred from one Bench to another cannot grant

interim stay of proceedings, their being no power conferred on

the Chairman under the said section to pass such interim stay.
22
60. Power under
Section 24
to grant interim orders has been

       conferred on the Tribunal, and/or in other words, a Bench of the

       Tribunal in seisin of proceedings in respect of which the Bench

       is entitled to exercise the jurisdiction and powers of the

       Tribunal.
61.    A Tribunal created under the Act as also its Chairman

       derives its powers from the Act and can only exercise such

       powers as are conferred by the Act.       The Chairman of the

       Tribunal exercising its power under
Section 25
of the Act does

       not function as a Tribunal.   The proposition that the power to

       grant interim relief must expressly be provided by statute finds

       support from the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Morgan

       Stanley Mutual Fund vs. Kartick Das10
. The Chairman of

       CAT does not have power under
Section 25
to pass any interim

       order of stay of proceedings pending before a Bench of the

       Tribunal.
62. A careful reading of the provisions of the Act and in particular
Sections 14
and
15
thereof in juxtaposition with
Article 323A
of the

        Constitution leaves no manner of doubt that an Administrative

        Tribunal constituted under the Act to give effect to
Article 323A
of

        the Constitution exercises all the jurisdiction powers and authority

        exercisable by all the Courts before commencement of the Act and

        has all the attributes of a Court of law except that it is not bound

        by the strict rules of procedure embodied in the Civil Procedure

10 (1994) 4 SCC 225
23
Code or the strict rules of evidence prescribed by the
Evidence

Act
, as observed above. All norms of judicial propriety and judicial

discipline apply as much to the Tribunal as to Courts including the

High Court.
63. A judicial order passed by a Tribunal is binding on all

concerned, including the Tribunal itself on its administrative side,

unless set aside or modified by a higher forum in exercise of

appellate or revisional powers. In no circumstance, can a judicial

order of a Bench of the Tribunal be nullified or rendered nugatory

by its Chairman.
64. In view of
Section 12
of the Act, the Chairman of the Tribunal

can only exercise financial and administrative powers over the

Benches as may be vested under the Rules. The Chairman may

thus constitute Benches, shift members from one Bench to

another, constitute Single Benches, Division Benches and even

larger Benches, allocate business to the Benches and even transfer

cases from one Bench to the other, but having done so he cannot

interfere with the functioning of the Benches or tinker with its

orders by passing interim orders in a transfer petition.
65. In any case, judicial decorum and propriety demands that a

judicial order, ad interim, interim or final be vacated, varied,

modified, recalled or reviewed by a Bench of coordinate strength or

larger strength or a higher forum, but not a smaller Bench of lesser

strength, except in cases where such authority to a lower forum

and/or smaller Bench is expressly conferred or implicit in the order
24
sought to be vacated, varied, modified, recalled or reviewed.
66.
In
Union of India and Anr. vs. K. S. Subramanian
11 ,

       the Supreme Court observed that the proper course for a High

       Court was to try to find out and follow the opinion expressed by

       larger benches of this Court in preference to those expressed

       by smaller Benches of the Supreme Court and that was the

       practice also to be followed by the Supreme Court itself. The

       practice has now crystallized into a rule of law declared by the

       Supreme Court.
A similar view was taken by the Supreme

       Court in
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. vs. Mumbai

       Shramik Sangha & Ors.12
.         A five Judge Constitution Bench

       of the Supreme Court observed that the decision of a

       Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court would bind a Bench of

       two judges of the Supreme Court and that judicial discipline

       obliged them to follow it, regardless of their doubts about its

       correctness.
67. It is true that the interim order passed by a Court does not

       operate as a precedent and the law declared by the Supreme

       Court with regard to the precedential value of judgments of

       Benches of larger strength may not        operate as a binding

       precedent      in the facts and circumstances of this case.   The

       judgments referred to in the preceding paragraphs lay down

       the norms of judicial decorum and propriety which give


11 (1976) 3 SCC 677
12 (2001) 4 SCC 448
25
precedence to Benches of higher strength. There is no reason

at all why the same principles should not apply even to interim

orders in pending proceedings.
68. An interim order passed by a court, on consideration of the

prima facie case made out by an applicant, should ordinarily

have been vacated by a Bench of coordinate strength after

giving open notice to the applicant. If the Chairman was of the

considered opinion that there was urgency in the application for

vacating the interim order, the Chairman ought to have

assigned the application for vacating and/or vacation of the

interim order to a Bench of two or more Members to consider

whether the interim order should continue or be vacated. The

Chairman could also have exercised his power to suo motu

transfer the proceedings to another Bench without prior notice.

The order of stay of the proceedings before the Nainital Bench

is without jurisdiction and unsustainable in law.
69. Neither the judgment of the Constitution Bench of this

Court in
L. Chandra Kumar
(supra) nor the judgment of the

Division Bench of this Court in
Dr. Mahabal Ram vs. Indian

Council of Agricultural Research and Others
is an

authority for the proposition that the Chairman of CAT, sitting

singly to decide on application for transfer under
Section 25
of

the Act, can stay the proceeding before a two Member Bench or

interfere with the orders of a two Member Bench.
26
70.
In
L. Chandra Kumar
(supra), cited on behalf of the

appellant, a Constitution Bench of seven Judges of the Supreme

Court held that the power of judicial review vested in the High

Court under
Article 226
and in the Supreme Court under
Article

32
of the Constitution was an integral and essential feature of

the Constitution constituting part of its basic structure.

Ordinarily, therefore, the power of the High Courts and the

Supreme Court to test the constitutional validity of legislations

could never be ousted or excluded. The power vested in the

High Court to exercise judicial superintendence over the

decision of all Courts and Tribunals within their respective

jurisdictions was also part of the basic structure of the

Constitution.
Further, in
L. Chandra Kumar
(supra), this Court

upheld the vires of
Section 5(6)
of the Act observing that
Section 5(6)
could harmoniously operate with
Section 5(2)
in

view of the proviso to
Section 5(6)
.   This Court also held that

the Tribunals are even competent to hear matters where vires

of statutory provisions are questioned, except where the vires

of their parent statute is in question, following the settled

principle that a Tribunal which is the creature of a statute

cannot declare that very statute to be unconstitutional. In such

cases alone, the High Court might be approached directly.

However, in discharging the duty of deciding vires of statutory

provisions, Tribunals cannot act as substitute for the High

Courts   and   the   Supreme     Court.     Their   function   is
27
supplementary and all such decision of the Tribunals would be

        subject to scrutiny before the Division Bench of the respective

        High Courts.
71.
In
L. Chandra Kumar
(supra) this Court held that

        whenever any question involving the interpretation of          a

        statutory provision or rule in relation to Constitution arose for

        consideration of a Single Bench of the Administrative Tribunal,

        the provision to
Section 5(6)
would automatically apply and the

        Chairman or the member concerned would be obliged to refer

        the matter to a Bench consisting of at least two members one

        of whom must be a judicial member. This would ensure that

        questions involving vires of statutory provisions or rules would

        never arise for adjudication before a Single Member Bench or a

        Bench which does not consist of a judicial member. So

        construed,
Section 5(6)
would no longer be susceptible to

        charges of unconstitutionality      and, therefore, valid and

        constitutional.
72.
In
Dr. Mahabal Ram vs. Indian Council of Agricultural

        Research and Others13
, the Supreme Court held that sub-

        sections (2) and (6) appearing as limbs of the same
Section 5
of the Act, have to be harmoniously construed.             While

        allocating work to a single Member, whether Judicial or

        Administrative in terms of sub-section (6), the Chairman should

        keep in view the nature of the litigation and where questions of
13 . (1994) 2 SCC 401
28
law or interpretation of constitutional provisions are involved,

they should not be assigned to a single Member. It would be

open to either party appearing before the single Member to

suggest to that Member hearing the matter that it should go to

a Bench of two Members. The Member should ordinarily allow

the matter to go to a Bench of two Members when so

requested.    However, the contention that the single Member

contemplated under sub-section (6) had to mean a Judicial

Member only, was not accepted.
In
Dr. Mahabal Ram
(supra),

the question was whether a Bench consisting of a single

Member under
Section 5(6)
necessarily had to be a Bench

comprising of a judicial member.
73. In our considered view, the Division Bench rightly allowed

the writ petition.    The Chairman, like the Chief Justice of the

Higher Courts or the Chief Judge of subordinate courts, may be

higher   in   order   of   protocol   and   may      have   additional

administrative   duties    and   responsibilities.    However,    the

Chairman, acting judicially, is equal to any other Member. The

Chairman, being one amongst equals, could not have stayed

proceedings pending before a larger Bench. We find no grounds

to interfere with the reasoning of the High Court. The High

Court rightly allowed the writ petition with costs.         Since we

have upheld the order of the Division Bench of the HighCourt

under appeal and held that the order of the Chairman of CAT

staying proceedings before the two member Bench was without
29
jurisdiction and unsustainable in law, we need not go into the

various other contentions raised on behalf of the respondent

no.1.
74. The   appeal   is   dismissed   with   costs,     quantified      at

Rs.25,000/-, to be deposited with the Supreme Court Legal

Services Committee within four weeks from the date.
.................................J.
                                                 (R. BANUMATHI)




                                      .................................J.
                                             (INDIRA BANERJEE)
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY 01, 2019