[Cites
5
, Cited by
22
]
Supreme Court of India
Federation Haj Ptos Of India vs Union Of India on 4 February, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2566
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
A.K. Sikri
REPORTABLE


                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                  CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                              WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 4 OF 2019

                         FEDERATION HAJ PTOS OF INDIA                             .....PETITIONER

                                                        VERSUS

                         UNION OF INDIA                                      .....RESPONDENT(S)

                                                                      WITH

                                             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 26 OF 2019

                                             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 33 OF 2019

                                                                      AND

                                             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 93 OF 2019



                                                           JUDGMENT
A.K. SIKRI, J.
Petitioners in Writ Petition (Civil) Nos. 4 and 33 of 2019 are

                                 the Federation/Association of the Private Tour Operators (PTOs)/
Signature Not Verified
Haj Group Organisers (HGOs) who have taken up the cause on
Digitally signed by
behalf of their members, namely, various PTOs/HGOs. Other two
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.02.04
16:31:37 IST
Reason:
writ petitions are filed by the PTOs themselves. The issue raised
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                         Page 1 of 22
in all these petitions is common. For this reason these petitions

        were clubbed together and counsel for all the parties were heard.

        We now proceed to decide the controversy by this common

        judgment.
2)      For Muslims, place of birth of Hazrat Muhammed, i.e. Saudi

        Arabia, is the most sacred place. Visiting that place is pilgrimage

        for Muslim community, which is known as performing ‘Haj’. It is

        the desire of every person of Muslim faith, living anywhere in this

        world, to visit Saudi Arabia for performing Haj, which is normally

        during the last month of the Islamic calendar being eleven days

        shorter than the Gregorian calendar since the dates cannot be

        fixed in the latter. As the number of pilgrims during this period is

        unbounded, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has regulated and

        restricted, in public interest and for the safety of the pilgrims

        themselves, the number of persons who can visit Saudi Arabia

        and perform Haj, from time to time. In the process, number of

        persons from each country to visit Saudi Arabia has also been

        restricted.      Towards this end, a bilateral agreement is signed

        between the Government of India and the Kingdom of Saudi

        Arabia whereby the latter Government assigns a fixed number of

        pilgrims that are permitted to visit and perform Haj. Since the
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                        Page 2 of 22
share of Indian pilgrims is limited by numbers, based on such a

        bilateral agreement, the Government of India also formulates its

        Haj Policy for smooth operations, particularly keeping in mind the

        interest of these pilgrims (who are known as Hajjis). This Haj

        Policy, inter alia, provides for eligibility and registrations of PTOs

        and HGOs as well who act as tour operators for these pilgrims.
Purpose is to ensure complete package from the start of journey

        from defined places in India to Saudi Arabia, their arrangements

        for stay and performance of Haj and their smooth and safe return

        back to India. Out of the overall number of pilgrims, relatively

        small portion is assigned for PTOs and the rest of the pilgrims are

        taken care of by the Haj Committee of India.
3)      The Haj Policy, which is formulated by the Government of India

        from time to time, lays down various eligibility conditions for

        registration for ferrying pilgrims for Haj. It has, however, been

        noticed that PTOs/HGOs normally feel aggrieved by one or the

        other conditions for registrations in such Haj Policies.      Similar

        kind of dispute has now arisen in respect of HGOs Policy 2019-

        2023 dated December 20, 2018 (hereinafter referred to as ‘Haj

        Policy’) captioned as ‘Policy for Haj Group Organisers for Haj
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                         Page 3 of 22
2019-23 – Registration and allocation of Haj quota for Haj –

        2019’.
4)      We may mention at this stage that before formulating a particular

        Haj Policy the Government of India normally invites suggestions/

        improvements from the PTOs/HGOs. In respect of the aforesaid

        Haj Policy as well, such suggestions were invited which were

        given by the Federation and Association of these PTOs/HGOs.

        However, the petitioners still felt aggrieved by some of the

        eligibility conditions and other provisions contained in this Haj

        Policy.
5)      It may also be mentioned at this very stage that the earlier policy

        for PTOs for Haj 2013-17 was framed after a lengthy process of

        discussion on which detailed arguments were heard by this Court

        and it was ultimately approved vide judgment dated April 16, 2013

        which is reported as
Union of India and Others v. Rafique

        Shaikh Bhikan and Another1
. It remained valid for five years

        and thereafter the PTO Policy was reviewed by a Haj Policy

        Review Committee constituted for the purpose and they

        suggested new framework for Haj 2018-22. Meanwhile, during

        the pendency of the finalisation of the recommendation for next


1    (2013) 4 SCC 699
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                       Page 4 of 22
five year Policy, previous Haj Policy for PTOs was extended for

        Haj 2018 as well.                The Government assigned the work of

        formulation of next five year Policy to Indian Institute of

        Technology (IIT), Delhi. Accordingly, IIT Delhi suggested a new

        Policy for PTOs/HGOs and the draft Policy was placed in public

        domain vide Press Release dated November 16, 2018 on the

        website of the Ministry of Minority Affairs (MoMA) for any

        suggestions/comments for improvement of the draft Policy to be

        submitted by November 30, 2018 to the Ministry. In the draft

        Policy for PTOs for Haj 2019-23, several simplifications and

        modifications were made over the previous Policy. The following

        nine eligibility conditions required in the previous Policy have

        been removed in the new Policy:
(i)    To simplify the financial criteria for assessment, reduce the

        requirements and to remove any discretion due to varying

        accounting definitions.                Requirement of Minimum Capital

        employed was removed.
(ii)   To     reduce       the       documentation   for   filing   application,

        requirement for assessing eligibility and to simplify the application

        process.         Requirement of furnishing proof of payment for

        accommodation/air travel (for the registered HGOs of 2013-17)

        was removed.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                                    Page 5 of 22
For reducing the requirements for assessing eligibility, less

        documentation and simplified application process and also to

        reduce the chances of error in the application process leading to

        rejection, following criteria has been removed:
(iii)   Requirement of giving employees details.
(iv)    Requirement of giving details of Maktab No. and service

        provider.
(v)     Requirement of giving details of arrival/departure of

        pilgrims.
(vi)    Requirement of furnishing details of transport arrangement

        in KSA.
(vii) Requirement of furnishing details of orientation/training of

        pilgrims.
(viii) Requirement of furnishing details of local correspondent

        company in KSA.
(ix)    To remove ambiguity and duplicity in the HGO policy and to

        make the application process simple. Annexure of application

        format was removed.
6)      Further, following seven provisions of the Terms and Conditions

        have been simplified/clarified at the stage of draft Policy:
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                         Page 6 of 22
(i)     To give relief to the PTOs and to save them from

        unnecessary harassment, the provision for PTOs involved in

        court cases/adverse police report has been simplified. Now only

        PTOs involved in heinous crimes and Haj related court cases will

        be barred.
(ii)    To give relief given to the small PTOs, the requirement of

        office area has been lowered. This has also reduced financial

        burden on the HGOs for purchasing/hiring large offices.
(iii)   The requirement of layout plan has been simplified. Now

        the PTOs need not run around State/District authorities for

        validating the layout plan of offices.
(iv)    Provision for the new entrants and the documentary

        requirements were given in detail to remove ambiguity and

        improved transparency. Uniform system of assessment for new

        PTOs.
(v)     The Annexures of the HGO Policy have been simplified to

        simplify the application process (only one Annexure describing

        the eligibility conditions and another Annexure regarding

        important instructions and guidelines).
(vi)    To remove ambiguity, the requirement of agreement/receipt

        of accommodation clarified.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                        Page 7 of 22
(vii) To remove ambiguity, requirement of Affidavit/declaration

        clarified wherever mentioned in the previous policy were clarified

        in the draft policy.
7)      Comments were received from more than 180 individual PTOs

        and the PTO Associations, including Indian Federation Haj PTOs

        of India and jointly by other PTO Associations. All the issues

        raised by the PTOs and their Associations were examined in the

        Ministry. These suggestions/comments were considered in the

        Ministry in consultation with the IIT Delhi.           Taking into

        consideration the suggestions/comments received on the draft

        Policy, twelve changes/modifications were made in the draft

        Policy and final Policy was circulated on December 20, 2018.
The changes/modifications in the final Policy vis-a-vis draft Policy

        are as under:
(i)    HGOs renamed as Haj Group Organisers (HGO) – This has

        given a separate identity to the Haj PTOs and distinguished them

        from general tour operators.
(ii)   Amount of security deposit reduced to Rs.30 lakhs for

        Category-I HGOs and Rs.35 lakhs for Category-I* HGOs –

        reduced financial burden on the HGOs by Rs. 5 lakh for

        Category-I HGOs and Rs. 10 lakhs for Category-I* HGOs.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                        Page 8 of 22
(iii)   Distribution formula modified to ensure allocation of

        minimum number of seats during each year of the Policy period to

        Category-I*, Category-I and Category-II HGOs – this gives

        allocation of minimum assured seats to each category during

        each of the years of the Policy period. PTOs may plan for the

        long term arrangements in Saudi Arabia on the basis of minimum

        assured allocation of seats.
(iv)    It has been ensured that higher category HGO gets more

        quota than a lower category HGO – this is to ensure that a

        reasonable difference is maintained among different category of

        PTOs. To safeguard minimum allocation of seats to Category-I*,

        Category-I and Category-II HGOs, the following proviso was

        added below Stage-I:
"In case of non-allocation of minimum 70, 60 and 50 seats
                to any of the Cat-1*, Cat-1 and Cat-2 HGOs, the surplus
                seats will first be distributed among the HGOs in that
                category. If there is shortfall in more than one category,
                surplus seats will first be distributed to Cat-1*, Cat-1 and
                Cat-2 HGOs in order of priority. Only after fulfilling the
                minimum earmarked seats in all categories, to the extent
                possible, the surplus seats, if any, will be distributed as per
                stage-II.”
(v)     In case of surplus seats generated after allocation of

        Category-II HGOs, the available seats will be allocated to

        Category-I* and Category-I respectively subject to their upper

        limits – this will enable higher category PTOs to get more quota.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                                Page 9 of 22
(vi)   Mid-term review of the policy after two years – this will

        provide an opportunity to review the policy mid way instead of

        after completion of five years and make mid term corrections

        within the broad policy framework.
(vii) Requirement of submission of proof of payment for

        accommodation/air travel clarified for the registered HGOs of

        2013 to 2017.            The HGOs registered during previous policy

        period are dispensed with submission of these documents –

        simplified the documents and application process.
(viii) Annual turnover criteria clarified. Only one year documents

        are required now – removed ambiguity and reduced the

        documentation.
(ix)   The time for reporting of HGOs to CGI Jeddah after their

        arrival in Saudi Arabia has been increased to 48 hours – relief to

        HGOs. The time of reporting has been doubled from 24 hours to

        48 hours.
(x)    The year for which the new entrants are required to submit

        details of umrah pilgrims has been clarified – removed ambiguity

        and confusion and HGOs.
(xi)   Director of a company has been added as Munazzim of the

        HGO – expanded the ambit of Munazzim of HGOs to include

        Director of a company.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                       Page 10 of 22
(xii) Disclosure statement under point 3 of Annexure-II made

        elaborate with provision for furnishing details of arrangements

        made in Saudi Arabia, package cost and the agreement signed

        with the pilgrims – this will improve transparency in the HGO

        business.
8)      It is only after due examination of the issues raised/suggestions

        made on the PTO Policy, that the final Policy for HGOs was

        approved by the competent authority in the Ministry and

        circulated on December 20, 2018. Thereafter, final Policy was

        announced, as mentioned above.
9)      Grievance of the petitioners is that some of their vital

        suggestions, though quite reasonable and justified, have not been

        incorporated while finalising the Haj Policy.
10)     In the first three writ petitions, notice was issued on January 11,

        2019, returnable on January 16, 2019. On January 16, 2019, the

        following order was passed:
"Mr. A.N.S. Nadkarni, learned Additional Solicitor General
               of India, has very fairly stated that the Government is open
               to the suggestions which can be made by the petitioner-
               Federation. For this purpose, the Hon’ble Minister is ready
               to give hearing to the representation(s) of the Federation
               on 17.01.2019 at 11:00 a.m.

                     We are happy to note that the parties are
               maintaining that it shall not be treated as an adversarial
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                           Page 11 of 22
litigation and if some suitable formula is devised, which is
               acceptable to all the parties, that would be an ideal thing.
List on 23.01.2019.”
11)     Pursuant to the said order, representatives of the Federation and

        Association met the Hon’ble Minister on January 17, 2019

        bringing to his notice their grievances which are raised in these

        writ petitions.        During the course of hearing, this Court was

        informed that the representative of the HGO associations

        submitted before the Hon’ble Minister that they have devised a

        new formula for distribution of seats.                Three petitioner

        associations submitted their written representations to the Chair.
The representations contained eight proposals/suggestions. After

        deliberations, the representatives of HGO associations prioritised

        their three proposals/suggestions as under:
(i)    The total quota of 50,000 seats allocated to HGOs may be

        distributed without any condition, i.e. without imposing the

        condition to charge additional seats over and above 45,000 seats

        at the rate of HcoI.
(ii)   The HGOs may be divided in two categories on the basis of

        their experience with turnover of Rs.1 crore and Rs.2 crore for

        Category-II and Category-I HGOs respectively. 50 seats may be

        distributed to each eligible HGO and the remaining seats may be
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                           Page 12 of 22
distributed to Category-I HGOs on pro-rata basis on the basis of

        number of years of experience.
(iii)   IBAN receipts may be accepted as valid document for

        receipt of accommodation.
After due examination of the feasibility of the aforesaid

        proposal, the respondent has agreed with suggestions (i) and (iii).

        However, it did not find suggestion (ii) to be feasible.
12)     In view of the above, very limited controversy pertaining to

        suggestion (ii) above now remains to be resolved.
13)     Mr. Salman Khurshid, learned senior counsel appearing in one of

        these petitions, insisted that suggestion (ii) mentioned above

        should have been accepted. According to him, Category-I* and

        Category I, eligibility for which is turnover of Rs.5 crores and Rs.3

        crores respectively, is unreasonable. Instead, there should be

        only two categories with turnover of Rs.2 crores and Rs.1 crore

        respectively.       It was emphasised by him, which was also the

        argument of the other counsel who represented the petitioners in

        the other writ petitions, that fixation of turnover of Rs. 5 crores/Rs.

        3 crores is exceptionally high. It is contended that for achieving

        such a turnover, HGOs may fix very high rates of package for

        pilgrims which may not be in the interest of the pilgrims. They
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                         Page 13 of 22
relied upon the following discussion contained in
Union of India

        and Others v. Rafique Shaikh Bhikan and Another2
wherein

        this Court emphasised that the main purpose of Haj Policy was to

        ensure that pilgrims may be able to perform their pilgrimage duty

        without undertaking any difficulty, harassment or suffering:
"11. The pilgrim is actually the person behind all this
               arrangement. For many of the pilgrims Haj is once in a
               lifetime pilgrimage and they undertake the pilgrimage by
               taking out the savings made over a lifetime, in many cases
               especially for this purpose. Haj consists of a number of
               parts and each one of them has to be performed in a rigid,
               tight and time-bound schedule. In case due to any
               mismanagement in the arrangements regarding the
               journey to Saudi Arabia or stay or travelling inside Saudi
               Arabia any of the parts is not performed or performed
               improperly then the pilgrim loses not only his life savings
               but more importantly he loses the Haj. It is not unknown
               that on landing in Saudi Arabia a pilgrim finds himself
               abandoned and completely stranded.
12. It is, thus, clear that in making selection for the
               registration of PTOs the primary object and purpose of the
               exercise cannot be lost sight of. The object of registering
               PTOs is not to distribute the Haj seats to them for making
               business profits but to ensure that the pilgrim may be able
               to perform his religious duty without undergoing any
               difficulty, harassment or suffering. A reasonable profit to
               the PTO is only incidental to the main object.”
14)     They also referred to the following passages from that judgment,

        as per which annual turnover of Rs. 1 crore only was fixed:
"Annual turnover of Rs. 1 crore
25. Many objections were raised against the requirement
               to furnish documents showing minimum annual turnover of
               Rs. 1 crore for the years 2009-2010 or 2010-11.

2   (2012) 6 SCC 265
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                          Page 14 of 22
26. Mr. N. Rao, Senior Advocate appearing for a group of
               private operators/travel agents, in the course of his
               submissions, admitted that the turnover on the basis of a
               quota of 50 Haj pilgrims alone would not be less than
               Rs.75 lakhs. This means that if a private operator/travel
               agent is asking for a readymade business package worth
               Rs.75 lakhs in turnover he/she should at least show a
               turnover of rupees one crore from his own business.
               Seen, thus, the turnover fixed in the Government policy
               appears to be a modest figure.”
15)     It was submitted that in the instant Policy, while fixing the criteria

        of experience-cum-financial strength, the respondent had given

        more emphasis on the financial aspects thereby sidelining the

        aspect of experience. It was pointed out that many members of

        these Federation/Association had experience of fourteen to

        seventeen Haj operations.            However, they were not given

        Category-I* as their turnover was less than Rs.5 crores. It was

        further argued that this Court in its aforesaid judgment, as can be

        seen from paragraphs 25 and 26 cited above, had applied the

        doctrine of proportionality, which was given a go-by.          It was

        emphasised that since the quota is in the hands of the

        Government and only limited seats are allotted to each PTOs/

        HGOs, it is difficult to have a turnover of Rs.5 crores without

        hiking the cost for pilgrims.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                         Page 15 of 22
16)     From the events mentioned above, particularly those that led to

        formulating the Haj Policy for 2019-23, it is apparent that the

        Policy is based on data collected and compiled in the study by IIT

        Delhi, an expert body.               Further, views of the stakeholders,

        including the petitioners, were invited and duly considered. The

        respondent has categorically submitted that the aforesaid

        demand of the petitioners is not based on any factual data,

        whereas the decision taken by the Ministry is based on data

        collected and compiled in the study by IIT Delhi. Secondly, the

        petitioners’ suggestion is only to take experience into account,

        whereas the Ministry has considered both experience and

        financial strength, as recommended in the IIT Delhi study itself. It

        is submitted that where 1,75,000 people embark upon a

        pilgrimage, financial strength of the PTO is of utmost importance

        and cannot be overlooked.                Financial strength is important

        because when the pilgrims travel to Saudi Arabia, the PTOs are

        required to make all arrangements for transportation, air travel,

        boarding and lodging, local transportation and provision of guide,

        etc. It is submitted that the Ministry cannot afford to take any

        chance on this aspect as the lack of adequate financial strength

        of the PTOs may result in the pilgrims becoming stranded in a

        foreign country or facing other hardships.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                            Page 16 of 22
17)     Additionally, it is submitted by the respondent that if the

        suggestion of the petitioners is accepted, there would be eleven

        sub-categories amongst Category-I, inasmuch as what is sought

        by them is allocation of seats on a pro-rata basis depending on

        the number of years of experience. This would result in major

        structural changes, which is not advisable and cannot be

        accepted.
18)     Going by the aforesaid considerations, the respondent has

        carved out the categories of HGOs on the parameters of

        experience as well as financial strength of HGOs.           Such a

        decision is based on policy considerations. It cannot be said that

        this decision is manifestly arbitrary or unreasonable.
It is settled

        law that policy decisions of the Executive are best left to it and a

        court cannot be propelled into the unchartered ocean of

        Government policy {See
Benett Coleman & Co. v. Union of

        India3
}.       Public authorities must have liberty and freedom in

        framing the policies. It is well accepted principle that in complex

        social, economic and commercial matters, decisions have to be

        taken by governmental authorities keeping in view several factors

        and it is not possible for the courts to consider competing claims


3   (1972) 2 SCC 788
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                       Page 17 of 22
and to conclude which way the balance tilts.            Courts are ill-
equipped to substitute their decisions. It is not within the realm of

        the courts to go into the issue as to whether there could have

        been a better policy and on that parameters direct the Executive

        to formulate, change, vary and/or modify the policy which appears

        better to the court. Such an exercise is impermissible in policy

        matters. In Bennett Coleman’s case, the Court explained this

        principle in the following manner:
"The argument of the petitioners that Government should
               have accorded greater priority to the import of newsprint to
               supply the need of all newspaper proprietor to the
               maximum extent is a matter relating to the policy of import
               and this Court cannot be propelled into the unchartered
               ocean of governmental policy.”
19)     The scope of judicial review is very limited in such matters. It is

        only when a particular policy decision is found to be against a

        statute or it offends any of the provisions of the Constitution or it

        is manifestly arbitrary, capricious or mala fide, the court would

        interfere with such policy decisions. No such case is made out.
On the contrary, views of the petitioners have not only been

        considered but accommodated to the extent possible and

        permissible.         We may, at this junction, recall the following

        observations from the judgment in
Maharashtra State Board of
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                           Page 18 of 22
Secondary & Higher Secondary Education v. Paritosh

        Bhupeshkumar Sheth4
:
"16... The Court cannot sit in judgment over the wisdom of
               the policy evolved by the Legislature and the subordinate
               regulation-making body. It may be a wise policy which will
               fully effectuate the purpose of the enactment or it may be
               lacking in effectiveness and hence calling for revision and
               improvement. But any drawbacks in the policy
               incorporated in a rule or regulation will not render it ultra
               vires and the Court cannot strike it down on the ground
               that in its opinion, it is not a wise or prudent policy, but is
               even a foolish one, and that it will not really serve to
               effectuate the purposes of the Act. The Legislature and its
               delegate are the sole repositories of the power to decide
               what policy should be pursued in relation to matters
               covered by the Act and there is no scope for interference
               by the Court unless the particular provision impugned
               before it can be said to suffer from any legal infirmity, in
               the sense of its being wholly beyond the scope of the
               regulation-making power or its being inconsistent with any
               of the provisions of the parent enactment or in violation of
               any of the limitation imposed by the Constitution.”
20)     We may also usefully refer to the judgment in
State of Madhya

        Pradesh v. Nandlan Jaiswal5
. In this judgment, licence to run a

        liquor shop granted in favour of A was challenged as arbitrary and

        unreasonable.           The Supreme Court held that there was no

        fundamental right in a citizen to carry on trade or business in

        liquor. However, the State was bound to act in accordance with

        law and not according to its sweet will or in an arbitrary manner

        and it could not escape the rigour of
Article 14.
Therefore, the

        contention that
Article 14
would have no application in a case
4   (1984) 4 SCC 27
5   (1986) 4 SCC 566
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                              Page 19 of 22
where the licence to manufacture or sell liquor was to be granted

        by the State Government was negatived by the Supreme Court.

        The Court, however, observed:
"But, while considering the applicability of
Article 14
in
               such a case, we must bear in mind that, having regard to
               the nature of the trade or business, the Court would be
               slow to interfere with the policy
laid down by
the State
               Government for grant of licences for manufacture and sale
               of liquor. The Court would, in view of the inherently
               pernicious nature of the commodity allow a large measure
               of latitude to the State Government in determining its
               policy of regulating, manufacture and trade in liquor.
               Moreover, the grant of licences for manufacture and sale
               of liquor would essentially be a matter of economic policy
               where the Court would hesitate to intervene and strike
               down what the State Government had done, unless it
               appears to be plainly arbitrary, irrational or mala fide.”
21)     It is not necessary to multiply the cases as the aforesaid principle

        can be said to be cast in stone. It is, therefore, difficult to agree

        to the aforesaid argument of the petitioners.
22)     In Writ Petition (Civil) No. 93 of 2019, the petitioner has made an

        alternate submission as well, which is based on the facts of its

        case. It is pointed out that in 2017-18 this petitioner was fully

        capable and, in a position, to earn turnover of more than Rs.3

        crores but was prevented from operating any Haj services on

        account of respondent’s willful neglect in registering the petitioner

        as Category-I PTO for that year. The petitioner filed Writ Petition
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                         Page 20 of 22
(Civil) No. 508 of 2017, which was allowed by this Court vide

        orders dated May 08, 2018 in the following manner:
"We have heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf
               of the parties.
Respondent sought to dispute the receipt of the
               application sent by the petitioner by post for Category I
               registration. However, with the rejoinder the petitioner has
               filed the proof of having sent such an application by courier
               service. To this aspect, despite time taken, there is no
               rebuttal.
Result of the aforesaid is that the petitioner has to
               be treated as having been duly applied for registration
               under Category I in 2017 which was wrongfully denied to
               him on account of the application not being taken up. For
               any further consideration of Registration in Category I, this
               period has, thus, to be counted in favour of the petitioner.
Insofar as year 2018 is concerned, the petitioner has
               already applied and learned counsel for the respondent
               states that the application of the petitioner shall be duly
               considered as he meets the requirement of number of
               years of providing service for consideration under
               Category I.

                       His statement is taken on record.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.”
23)     It is argued that this direction was meant to ensure that for future

        years, the petitioner is deemed to have completed the Haj 2017.
However, since it was prevented from any Haj turnover for the

        year 2017, because of the fault of the respondent, the petitioner

        would not be able to meet the requirement of turnover for the year

        2017. It is further mentioned that for the Financial Year 2018, the
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                              Page 21 of 22
petitioner has already come close to crossing the turnover

        threshold of Rs.3 crores despite the Financial Year not having

        expired. Therefore, turnover of Financial Year 2018 be taken into

        consideration for assigning category to the petitioner.
24)     Insofar as this prayer of the petitioner is concerned, we find that

        there is a merit in the contention of the petitioner that as far as

        turnover for the year 2017 is concerned, the petitioner should not

        be made to suffer. Therefore, the petitioner’s case be considered

        by the competent authority having regard to the aforesaid peculiar

        facts and circumstances and necessary orders passed thereon

        within a period of one week.
25)     All the writ petitions are disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
.............................................J.
                                                                         (A.K. SIKRI)



                                             .............................................J.
                                                          (S. ABDUL NAZEER)



                                             .............................................J.
                                                                        (M.R. SHAH)
NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 04, 2019.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2019 & Ors.                                 Page 22 of 22