[Cites
12
, Cited by
14
]
Supreme Court of India
Siraj Ahmad vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 13 December, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1771, (2019) 17 SCALE 626
Author:
Chief Justice
Bench:
Surya Kant
,
B.R. Gavai
,
S.A. Bobde
1


                                                                        REPORTABLE



                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL No.9412        OF 2019
                                 (Arising out of SLP(C) No. 30061 of 2017)


                         SIRAJ AHMAD                                ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                   VERSUS


                         STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.             .... RESPONDENT(S)



                                              JUDGMENT
Leave granted.
2.    Heard the learned Counsels for the parties.
3.    The appeal challenges the Judgment and Order dated

                          11.09.2017, passed by the division bench of Allahabad

                          High Court in W.P.(Service Bench) No. 1020 of 2015,

                          thereby dismissing the Writ Petition filed by appellant.
4.    The facts giving rise to the present appeal are as
Signature Not Verified
under:
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.12.13
16:47:53 IST
The appellant was appointed on ad­hoc basis on the
Reason:
post of Junior Engineer in the pay scale of Rs. 485­860/­
2
by order dated 30.03.1987, issued by Respondent No. 1. It

is not in dispute that the said Order was issued with prior

approval of the Governor of Uttar Pradesh. It is also not in

dispute, that the said appointment was made after the post

was advertised and after the appellant underwent the

selection process conducted by the State under the

provisions of U.P. Development Authorities Centralized

Services Rules, 1985 (hereinafter referred as “the said

Rules”). Pursuant to the selection and appointment, the

appellant joined with the Agra Development Authority on

08.04.1987. While in service the appellant obtained the

degree   in   B.Sc.­Engineering    from    Aligarh   Muslim

University, Aligarh on 08.06.1987. The appellant thereafter

through proper channel communicated the respondents the

fact regarding obtaining of requisite qualification and being

eligible for consideration for promotion, to the post of

Assistant Engineer (Civil), in the Centralised Services under

Sub Rule (3) of Rule 24 of the said Rules. It is the case of

the appellant, that the State Government had sought

information from all the Development Authorities vide

communication dated 25.09.1987 with regard to the
3
number of Junior Engineers possessing the degree of

Bachelor of Engineering / A.M.I.E. In compliance to the

said    communication      the   Vice­Chairman     of   Agra

Development Authority informed the State Government that

in Agra Development Authority appellant was the only

Junior Engineer, who was possessing the degree of

Bachelor of Engineering.
5.     Since the appellant was not promoted, he made

various representations to the State seeking promotion. The

appellant had claimed the promotion from 18.01.1995, i.e.

the date on which the juniors to the appellant were

promoted. The appellant’s claim for promotion came to be

rejected on 16.04.2015. Hence the appellant approached

the division bench of the High Court by way of Writ

Petition. The petition came to be rejected. Hence, the

present appeal.
6.     Shri P.S. Patwalia, learned Senior Counsel appearing

on behalf of appellant submits, that the appellant’s services

already stood regularised from 23.11.2002 and as such in

view of the law laid down by the Constitution Bench of this
4
Court in the case of Direct Recruit Class –
II Engineering

   Officers Association vs. State of Maharashtra
and

   others1, the appellant was entitled for promotion by

   treating his continuous service from the date of initial

   appointment.
7.        The learned Senior Counsel further submits that, as

   a matter of fact the Allahabad High Court itself, in the case

   of
Rajendra Prasad Dwivedi vs. State of U.P.
and

   others2, vide judgment and order dated 19.08.2011, had

   directed the State Government to consider the case of said

   Shri Dwivedi for promotion to the post of Assistant

   Engineer after completion of 10 years of service as Junior

   Engineer, provided they had a B.E./A.M.I.E. degree.
8.        It is further submitted, that vide subsequent Order

   dated 09.11.2011, the Allahabad High Court had modified

   its Order in view of the Judgment of the Constitution Bench

   of this Court in Direct Recruitment of Class –
II

   Engineering Officers Association
(supra), wherein it is

   observed, that the petitioner therein, i.e. Rajendra Prasad

11990 (2) SCC 715
2Writ Petition No. 3421 of 1996
5
Dwivedi, became eligible for promotion to the post of

Assistant Engineer as soon as he obtained qualification of

A.M.I.E. in 1993. He submits, that vide said Order, it was

held that if the promotion was given to any other Junior

Engineer, junior to the petitioner therein, the petitioner

therein was also eligible for promotion from the said date

along with consequential benefits. The learned Senior

Counsel submits that the learned Single Judge who passed

the Order in the case of Rajendra Prasad Dwivedi was the

same learned Judge heading the bench in the case of

present appellant and, as such, there was no reason as to

why the appellant ought not to have been given the same

benefit.
9.     Per contra, Mr. V. Shekhar, learned Senior Counsel,

appearing on behalf of the State submits that, under the

rules it was necessary that the appointment was made with

concurrence       of    U.P.   Public   Service   Commission.     He

submits, undisputedly the appellant’s appointment was not

made       with   the    concurrence     of   U.P.   Public   Service

Commission. It is therefore submitted, that as such the

appellant’s appointment will have to be termed as illegal.
6
He therefore submits, that the High Court has rightly

   refused to take into consideration the services of the

   appellant, prior to the date on which his services came to

   be regularised.
10.      The facts in the present case are not in dispute.

   Undisputedly the appellant’s initial appointment in the year

   1987 was after the advertisement was issued for the posts

   in Centralised Services constituted under the said Rules. It

   is also not in dispute, that the appellant was selected after

   he underwent the entire selection process by competing

   with other persons, who had also applied for the said post.

   The only issue that the learned Judges of the division

   bench have found against the appellant is that the

   appellant’s selection was not made in due consultation with

   the U.P. Public Service Commission.
11.      This court in the case of State of M.P. and ors. vs.

   Lalit Kumar Verma3, after considering the Judgment of

   Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of
Secy.,

   State of Karnataka vs. Uma Devi
(3)4, observed thus :
3(2007)1 SCC 575
4 (2006) 4 SCC 1
7
“12. The    question    which,    thus,  arises   for
      consideration, would be: Is there any distinction
      between “irregular appointment” and “illegal
      appointment”? The distinction between the two terms
      is apparent. In the event the appointment is made in
      total disregard of the constitutional scheme as also
      the recruitment rules framed by the employer, which
      is “State” within the meaning of
Article 12
of the
      Constitution of India, the recruitment would be an
      illegal one; whereas there may be cases where,
      although,     substantial   compliance    with   the
      constitutional scheme as also the rules have been
      made, the appointment may be irregular in the sense
      that some provisions of some rules might not have
      been strictly adhered to.”
12.   It can thus be seen that this court has held that the

distinction between irregular appointment and illegal

appointment is clear. It has been held that in the event

appointment is made in total disregard to the constitutional

scheme and the recruitment rules framed by the employer,

where the employer is a “State” within the meaning of
Article 12
of the Constitution of India, the recruitment will

be illegal one. It has however been held, that where

although, substantial compliance with the constitutional

scheme, as also the rules have been made, the appointment

would become irregular in as much as the some provisions

of some rules have been adhered to.
8
13.      Subsequently another bench of this Court in the case

   of
State of Karnataka and Others vs. M. L. Kesari and

   Others5
also had an occasion to consider the issue. The

   Court observed thus :
“7. It is evident from the above that there is an
            exception to the general principles against
            “regularisation” enunciated in Umadevi (3) [(2006) 4
            SCC 1] , if the following conditions are fulfilled:
(i) The employee concerned should have worked
            for 10 years or more in duly sanctioned post without
            the benefit or protection of the interim order of any
            court or tribunal. In other words, the State
            Government or its instrumentality should have
            employed the employee and continued him in service
            voluntarily and continuously for more than ten
            years.
(ii) The appointment of such employee should not
            be illegal, even if irregular. Where the appointments
            are not made or continued against sanctioned posts
            or where the persons appointed do not possess the
            prescribed       minimum        qualifications,   the
            appointments will be considered to be illegal. But
            where the person employed possessed the prescribed
            qualifications and was working against sanctioned
            posts, but had been selected without undergoing the
            process of open competitive selection, such
            appointments are considered to be irregular.”
14.      This court held, that where the appointment are not

   made or continued against sanctioned posts or where the

5(2010) 9 SCC 247
9
persons appointed do not possess the prescribed minimum

qualifications, the appointment will be considered to be

illegal. However, when the person employed possessed the

prescribed qualifications and is working against the

sanctioned     posts,   but        had    been       selected     without

undergoing the process of open competitive selection, such

appointments are considered to be irregular.
15.     As already discussed herein above, the appellant had

applied in pursuance to the advertisement issued by State

for the post in the Centralised Services under the

provisions of the said rules. The appellant had participated

in the selection process along with the other competitors.

The appellant was possessing the requisite qualification

and was selected after competing with others and was

appointed against the sanctioned posts for a period of One

year.    Undisputedly        the       appellant       thereafter        has

continuously      rendered    his      services,     till   the   date    of

regularisation of his services i.e. on 23.11.2002 and even

thereafter till date. As such appellant’s case would be on a

much     better   pedestal    that       the   one      which     fall   for

consideration in the case of
M.L. Kesari
(Supra).
10
16.    It can thus be seen that the only issue which is

found against the appellant is that prior to appointment

there was no concurrence of the U.P. Public Service

Commission. It can thus be seen that the appointment of

the appellant at the most can be termed as irregular and

not illegal.
17.    It   will   be   apposite    to   refer   to   the   following

observations of the constitution bench judgment of this

Court in the case of
Direct Recruit Class II Engineering

Officers Association
(supra), the constitution bench has

observed thus
      “13.
When the cases were taken up for hearing
       before us, it was faintly suggested that the principle
laid down in
Patwardhan case [(1977) 3 SCC 399:
1977 SCC (L&S) 391: (1977) 3 SCR 775] was
       unsound and fit to be overruled, but no attempt was
       made to substantiate the plea. We were taken
       through the judgment by the learned counsel for the
       parties more than once and we are in complete
       agreement with the ratio decidendi, that the period of
       continuous officiation by a government servant, after
       his appointment by following the rules applicable for
       substantive appointments, has to be taken into
       account for determining his seniority; and seniority
       cannot be determined on the sole test of
       confirmation, for, as was pointed out, confirmation is
       one of the inglorious uncertainties of government
       service depending neither on efficiency of the
       incumbent nor on the availability of substantive
       vacancies. The principle for deciding inter se
11
seniority has to conform to the principles of equality
       spelt out by
Articles 14
and
16.
In
Baleshwar
       Dass v. State of U.P.
[(1980) 4 SCC 226: 1980 SCC
       (L&S) 531: (
1981) 1 SCR 449] and Delhi Water
       Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee v. R.K.
       Kashyap
[1989 Supp (1) SCC 194: 1989 SCC (L&S)
       253: (1989) 9 ATC 784] , with which we are in
       agreement.
In
Narender      Chadha v. Union     of
       India
[(1986) 2 SCC 157: 1986 SCC (L&S) 226:
(1986) 1 SCR 211] the officers were promoted
       although without following the procedure prescribed
       under the rules, but they continuously worked for
       long periods of nearly 15­20 years on the posts
       without being reverted. The period of their
       continuous officiation was directed to be counted for
       seniority as it was held that any other view would be
       arbitrary and violative of
Articles 14
and
16.
There is
       considerable force in this view also. We, therefore,
       confirm the principle of counting towards seniority
       the period of continuous officiation following an
       appointment made in accordance with the rules
       prescribed for regular substantive appointments in
       the service.”
18.    The constitution bench in unequivocal terms holds

that, if an appointment is made by way of stopgap

arrangement without considering the claims of all the

eligible   persons   and   without    following   the   rules    of

appointment, the experience of such appointment cannot

be equated with the experience of a regular appointee,

because of qualitative difference in the appointment. It

however holds, that if the appointment is made after

considering the claims of all eligible candidates and the
12
appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly till the

regularisation of his service in accordance with the rules

made for regular substantive appointments, there is no

reason to exclude the officiating service for purpose of

seniority.
19.   The constitution bench concludes thus :
“47. To sum up, we hold that:
A)     Once an incumbent is appointed to a post
      according to rule, his seniority has to be counted
      from the date of his appointment and not
      according to the date of his confirmation.
The corollary of the above rule is that
      where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and
      not according to rules and made as a stop­gap
      arrangement, the officiation in such post cannot
      be taken into account for considering the
      seniority.
B)       If the initial appointment is not made by
      following the procedure
laid down by
the rules
      but the appointee continues in the post
      uninterruptedly till the regularisation of his
      service in accordance with the rules, the period
      of officiating service will be counted.
      …….”
20.   It can thus clearly be seen, that the Constitution

Bench in unequivocal terms holds that, if the initial

appointment is not made by following the procedure
laid

down by
the rules, but the appointee continues in the post
13
uninterruptedly till the regularisation of his service in

accordance with the rules, the period of officiating service

will be counted.
21.   It is not in dispute, that except the concurrence of

the U.P. Public Service Commission the appointment of the

appellant has been made after following the procedure

prescribed under the said Rules. The appellant has

uninterruptedly served till the regularisation of his service

which was made in accordance with the rules. It can thus

be seen that the case of present appellant is squarely

covered by the judgment of the Constitution Bench in the

case of
Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers

Association
(supra).
22.   It is further to be noted that the Respondent had

issued an office memorandum dated 11.03.1994 thereby,

providing for relaxation of the condition which prescribed

minimum 10 years service in the post of Junior Engineer.

Schedule­3 to the said Rules provided, that for being

eligible to the promotion of Assistant Engineer along with

the educational qualification a candidate must possess 10
14
years service, in the post of Junior Engineer on 01 st July of

the selection year. By the said office memorandum, the

Government provided that 5% of the posts out of 50%

promotional    quota     are to       be reserved by            extending

relaxation to such of the Junior Engineers, who have

passed B.E. or A.M.I.E. examination. It further provided,

that   in   case   candidates     possessing     B.E.       /    A.M.I.E.

examination were not available, the post should be filled in

from non Graduate Junior Engineers. As discussed herein

above, it is to be noted that the Government had also

sought information from the Development Authorities with

regard to the number of persons possessing the requisite

B.E.   /    A.M.I.E.   degree.        In   response    to       the   said

communication      the   Agra     Development         Authority       had

intimated the respondent state the name of the appellant

being the only person possessing the said qualification.
23.    We further fail to appreciate as to how the same High

Court could have considered the case of two employees

differently when they were similarly circumstanced. It is not

in dispute that the present appellant as well as Rajendra

Prasad Dwivedi were selected through the same selection
15
process though their orders of appointment differs. It will

be appropriate to refer to the observation made by the

Allahabad High Court in Writ Petition No. 3421 of 1996 in

the case of
Rajendra Prasad Dwivedi vs. State of U.P.
which reads thus:
“Upon perusal of the Government Orders dated 26th
      of August, 1992 as well as 11th of March, 1994, I
      find force in the submission of the petitioner,
      therefore, I am of the view that as soon as the
      petitioner obtained the qualification of AMIE in 1993,
      he became eligible for promotion to the post of
      Assistant Engineer. Though only gaining the
      qualification does not create right of promotion, but I
      am of the view that if thereafter any promotion has
      been given to others particularly junior to the
      petitioner, the petitioner is liable to be considered for
      promotion      from     the     said    date   alongwith
      consequential benefits.
In light of the law
laid down by
the Hon'ble
      Supreme Court, in the case referred to here­in­
      above, I hereby also observe that the fact that the
      petitioner was not confirmed in the service, shall not
      come in the way of the petitioner's promotion as an
      impediment and the petitioners services even on ad
      hoc basis on the post of Junior Engineer shall be
      taken into consideration for the purpose of
      promotion to the higher post. Accordingly a direction
      is issued to the respondents to consider the
      petitioner's case for promotion to the higher post
      from the date of promotion of his junior within two
      months, after receipt of a certified copy of this order”
                                           (emphasis supplied)
24.   The above judgment of the learned Single Judge

dated 09.11.2011 was carried in appeal before the division
16
bench of the said court. The division bench of the

Allahabad High Court in Special Appeal No. 75 of 2012 in
State of U.P. Vs. R. P. Dwivedi
in its Order dated

13.02.2014 observed thus:
“On due consideration of rival submissions, we find
      considerable force in the arguments of respondent.
      The condition of length of ten years' service was
      relaxed. The respondent, though appointed on ad­
      hoc basis as Junior Engineer on 24.02.1987, had
      obtained the degree of AMIE on 10.10.1993 before
      Sri Sunil Dutt Sharma and Sri Sajid Hasan who
      passed the examination in 1994. As the vacancies
      were available and the private respondent was
      qualified to be considered for promotion in 1993, he
      should have been considered even prior to the
      aforesaid persons. ....”
                                        (emphasis supplied)
25.   The State had also carried the said matter by way of

Special Leave Petition Civil (CC) No. 13830­31 of 2014

before this court. The SLP also came to be dismissed on

12.01.2015.   The   state     thereafter   preferred   a   Review

Petition, seeking review of the Judgment of division bench

in the case of
State of U.P. vs. Rajendra Prasad Dwivedi
by way of Review Petition No. 188 of 2015. The said Review

Petition is also dismissed.
26.   The only ground on which the High Court has

refused to consider the case of the appellant is that in the
17
case of Rajendra Prasad Dwivedi, the court had not

considered the issue with regard to non­concurrence of the

U.P. Public Service Commission. At the cost of repetition as

discussed herein above the appointment of the appellant at

the most can be considered as irregular and not illegal.
27.     It is to be noted that the appellant has obtained

the Bachelor of Science (Engineering) degree in the year

1987 and though Rajendra Prasad Dwivedi had obtained

the A.M.I.E. in 1993, taking into consideration that Sunil

Dutt Sharma and Sajid Hasan had obtained the degree of

A.M.I.E. in 1994, the said Rajendra Prasad Dwivedi was

held to be entitled for promotion on 18.01.1995 i.e. the date

on which the said Sajid Hasan and Sunil Dutt Sharma were

promoted as Assistant Engineer from Junior Engineer. We

fail to appreciate the approach of the High Court in denying

the promotion to the appellant when all the other three i.e.

namely Rajendra Prasad Dwivedi, Sajid Hasan and Sunil

Dutt Sharma were appointed in the year 1987 through the

same selection process and though Rajendra Prasad

Dwivedi had obtained the degree in 1993 and Sajid Hasan
18
and Sunil Dutt Sharma had obtained the same in 1994

whereas the appellant had obtained the said degree in

1987.
28.       It could thus be seen that, in view of the office

memorandum dated 11.03.1994, the appellant was entitled

to be promoted immediately after the issuance of the said

office memorandum as he possessed the requisite degree

when the said office memorandum was issued. In any case

the appellant is entitled to be promoted with effect from

18.01.1995 i.e. the date on which the juniors to him were

promoted.
29.     As already discussed, the non­concurrence with the

U.P. Public Service Commission, at the most would make

the appointment of the appellant irregular and not illegal.
We are therefore of the considered view that the High Court

erred in dismissing the petition of the appellant. The appeal

deserves to succeed on more than one ground.
30.     Hence, the following order:
(i) The appeal is allowed;
19
(ii)    The Judgment and Order passed by the High

              Court dated 11.09.2017 is quashed and set

              aside;
(iii)   The Order passed by the Respondent No. 1,

              dated 16.04.2015 is quashed and set aside.
(iv)    It is held and declared that the petitioner is

              entitled to promotion to the post of Assistant

              Engineer (Civil) from the date on which his

              junior possessing the Bachelor of Engineering /

              A.M.I.E.   has    been   promoted       with      all

              consequential benefit.
(v)     In the facts and circumstances, there shall be

              no order as to costs.
…....................CJI.
[S.A. BOBDE]


                                            ......................J.
                                                  [B.R. GAVAI]



                                            ......................J.
                                               [SURYA KANT]

NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 13, 2019.