[Cites
40
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Harbhajan Singh . vs State Of Punjab . on 4 December, 2019
Author:
Sanjiv Khanna
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
Sanjiv Khanna
,
N. V. Ramana
REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3674 OF 2009


                         HARBHAJAN SINGH ETC.                              .....   APPELLANT(S)

                                                         VERSUS

                         STATE OF PUNJAB AND OTHERS                        ..... RESPONDENT(S)




                                                         JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
The afore-captioned Civil Appeal impugns the judgment

                                dated 6th July 2006 passed by the High Court of Punjab and

                                Haryana which dismissed five writ petitions challenging the vires

                                of the
Punjab Religious Premises and Land (Eviction and Rent

                                Recovery) Act, 1997
(‘Religious Premises Act’, for short).
2.     The appellants before us are tenants in occupation of shops

                                located in Gurudwara Singh Sabha, a gurudwara at Kukar Majra,

                                G.T. Road, Mandi Gobindgarh, District Fatehgarh Sahib, Punjab.
Signature Not Verified          The appellants claim that they were inducted as tenants during the
Digitally signed by
SATISH KUMAR YADAV
Date: 2019.12.04
period 1965-69 by Gurudwara Singh Sabha. However, no formal
16:42:22 IST
Reason:
lease or agreements were executed and albeit, over a period of
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                       Page 1 of 29
time, rents were progressively increased. The appellants further

       claim that they are small businessmen carrying on trade primarily

       connected with steel industry, while one of the appellants runs a

       dhaba. By the letter dated 2nd March 1978, the appellants were

       informed that the affairs of the gurudwara had come under the

       control of Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (‘SGPC’

       for short) and they should, therefore, pay the rent to SGPC. It is

       alleged that the appellants have been paying rent to SGPC or the

       manager of the gurudwara but receipts have not been regularly

       issued.
3.     In the year 1997, SGPC had filed an eviction petition against one

       of the appellants, Harbhajan Singh, under
Section 13
of the East

       Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949 (‘East Punjab Rent Act’,

       for short) on two grounds, viz., (i) failure to pay rent, and (ii) SGPC

       needed the property for construction of shops. Harbhajan Singh

       had, thereafter, deposited arrears of rent on the first date of

       hearing.       The eviction proceedings, however, had remained

       pending and were not decided.
4.     On 29th January 1998, the Religious Premises Act was enforced,

       and thereby introduced a summary procedure for evicting

       unauthorised occupants from the premises/property belonging to

       the religious institutions. Thereafter, SGPC had filed ejectment
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                       Page 2 of 29
petitions under the Religious Premises Act before the Collector for

       eviction of the appellants stating that the appellants were in

       unauthorised occupation. The appellants, on receipt of notices

       from the Collector under Section 4 of the Religious Premises Act,

       had filed the writ petitions challenging the vires of the enactment

       before the High Court, which by the impugned judgment have

       been dismissed. The primary challenge before the High Court

       was to the explanation to clause (a) to Section 3 of the Religious

       Premises Act on the ground that the provision creates an

       unintelligible classification to the disadvantage of the tenants who

       are otherwise entitled to equal protection as other tenants under

       the East Punjab Rent Act.
5.     The pleas raised by the appellants were rejected by the Division

       Bench of the High Court after referring to the object and purpose

       behind the impugned enactment, that is, to preserve the property

       of religious institutions, by observing that public at large has an

       inherent interest in the “religious institutions” which were prone to

       maladministration and mismanagement. Referring to the definition

       of “unauthorised occupants”, it was observed that a person who is

       in occupation of the premises belonging to a “religious institution”

       on a valid allotment, lease or grant is not to be treated as an

       “unauthorised occupant” for the period of allotment, lease or grant.
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                     Page 3 of 29
The explanation states that mere payment of rent by the tenant

       who is in unauthorised occupation shall not raise any presumption

       that such person had entered into possession as an allottee,

       lessee or under a grant.         Referring to the detailed and

       comprehensive procedure for eviction under Sections 4 and 5 of

       the Religious Premises Act, it was held that the Collector has to be

       satisfied that the opposite party was in “unauthorised occupation”

       and only thereupon an eviction order can be passed after

       following the due procedure.     A person aggrieved against the

       order passed by the Collector can file an appeal before the

       Commissioner under
Section 8
of the Act. Referring to the factual

       matrix, the High Court has observed that all contentions on merits

       should be raised before the authorities under the Religious

       Premises Act, in accordance with law.
6.     The primary contention raised by the appellants before us is that

       as tenants they are entitled to protection against eviction under

       the East Punjab Rent Act, which protection it is submitted cannot

       be withdrawn and taken away under the Religious Premises Act.

       Further, the definition of “unauthorised occupants”, as a result of

       explanation to clause (a) of
Section 3
, is highly unjust and unfair

       as a tenant who has been paying rent over a long period is

       deemed to be in “unauthorised occupation” because of the
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                    Page 4 of 29
termination of the lease, licence or grant, or the time stipulated in

       the lease, license or grant has come to an end.           This it is

       submitted is unjust and unfair. The Religious Premises Act creates

       an artificial classification as tenants of land and buildings

       belonging to or owned by “religious institutions” are no longer

       entitled to protection under the East Punjab Rent Act though such

       protection continues to be available to other tenants. Expansion

       or construction of a new building by a religious institution as was

       pleaded by SGPC in their eviction petition under the East Punjab

       Rent Act would not justify eviction. There is no public purpose or

       objective in enacting the law, that is, the Religious Premises Act,

       which has become a calculable device and means to increase

       income of the religious institutions. This Court in
Ashoka

       Marketing Ltd. and Another v. Punjab National Bank and

       Others1
had examined and rejected the challenge to the vires of

       the
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act,

       1971
(‘Public Premises Act’, for short) after recording that the

       property belonging to the government would fall under a separate

       class and that the government, while dealing with the citizens in

       respect of the property belonging to it, would not act for its own

       purpose as a private landlord but would act in public interest. This

       is a crucial distinction between the government and private
1
(1990) 4 SCC 406
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                     Page 5 of 29
landlords and, therefore, for the same reasoning in inverse, the

       present appeal should be allowed as the Religious Premises Act

       creates an artificial distinction and discriminates against the

       tenants of “religious institutions”, though “religious institutions” as

       landlords are not a separate class. Thus, the Religious Premises

       Act should be declared unconstitutional and illegal as it violates
Article 14
of the Constitution.
7.     The respondents, namely, the State of Punjab and also SGPC,

       have contested the said submissions and contentions.             Their

       submissions and contentions would be noticed in the subsequent

       portion and in our reasoning below.
8.     The East Punjab Rent Act was enacted in the year 1949, soon

       after the Partition, with a view to protect tenants and to curtail the

       right of the landlords to seek eviction notwithstanding the contract

       under the provisions of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
,

       (“
Transfer of Property Act
”, for short) which is a general enactment

       regulating landlord and tenant relationships. There cannot be any

       doubt that the State legislature, that is, the Legislative Assembly of

       the State of Punjab is entitled to enact the Religious Premises Act,

       despite the fact that they had enacted the East Punjab Rent Act.

       We must accept and take judicial notice by acknowledging that the

       State legislature while enacting the Religious Premises Act was
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                       Page 6 of 29
aware that it has enacted East Punjab Rent Act, an existing

       statute governing landlord and tenant relationship. However, the

       State legislature in its wisdom has deemed it appropriate to enact

       a law in respect of land and buildings belonging to “religious

       institutions”. The vires of the Religious Premises Act, a special

       enactment concerning landlord and tenant relationships, cannot

       be challenged on the ground that there are already two other

       enactments governing general landlord and tenant relationships

       (Transfer of Property Act and East Punjab Rent Act). The

       Constitution confers the power and authority on the State to enact

       two separate enactments on a similar subject if they seek to

       achieve different objectives and protect and preserve different

       sets of rights and make necessary classification to serve such

       varied ends. The Religious Premises Act, unlike the East Punjab

       Rent Act and the Public Premises Act, concerns itself with the

       administration of premises belonging to religious institutions and

       seeks to regulate their rights as landlords vis-à-vis the tenants in

       occupation. In this regard, reference can be made to the object

       and purpose behind enacting the Religious Premises Act, which is

       as follows:
“Since long various religious institutions have been
                 representing to the Government for vacation of their
                 premises under unauthorised occupation. On careful
                 thought being given by the Government, the State
                 Government is of the opinion that the religious
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                     Page 7 of 29
institutions are facing a lot of difficulties in this behalf. It
                 is, therefore, expedient for the State Government to help
                 the religious institutions in getting their premises which
                 are under unauthorised occupation vacated through
                 summary proceedings. Hence, the Punjab Religious
                 Premises and Land (Eviction and Rent Recovery) Bill,
                 1996.”
9.     Section 2(d) of the Religious Premises Act defines “religious

       institution”.
Section 2(e)
defines ‘religious premises’ and
Section 3
defines “unauthorised occupation of religious premises by a

       person”. These provisions read as under:
“(d) "Religious Institution' means any gurudwara,
                 temple, church, mosque, temple of Jains or Budhas -
                 which is registered under the provisions of the
Societies Registration Act, 1860
(Central Act No. XXI of
                 1860) or is established under any statute and includes
                 any other place of worship by whatever name, it may
                 be called, which is registered as aforesaid or is
                 established under any statute;
(e) "religious premises", means any land whether used
                 for agricultural or non-agricultural purposes, or any
                 building or part of a building belonging to a Religious
                 Institution and includes, -
(i) the garden, grounds and out-houses, if any,
                      appertaining to such building or part of a building;
                      and
(ii) any fittings affixed to such building or part of a
                      building for the more beneficial enjoyment thereof;”

                                             xxx
3. Unauthorised occupation of religious premises. - For
                 the purposes of this Act, a person shall be deemed to
                 be in unauthorised occupation of any religious
                 premises-
(a) where he has, whether before or after the
                 commencement of this Act, entered into possession
                 thereof otherwise than under and in pursuance of any
                 allotment, lease or grant; or
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                                Page 8 of 29
(b) where he, being an allottee, lessee or grantee has,
                 by reason of the determination or cancellation of his
                 allotment, lease or grant in accordance with the terms
                 in that behalf therein contained, ceased, whether
                 before or after the commencement of this Act, to be
                 entitled to occupy or hold such religious premises; or
(c) where any person authorised to occupy any
                 religious premises has, whether before or after the
                 commencement of this Act, -
(i) sub-let, in contravention of the terms of allotment,
                 lease or grant, without the permission of the Religious
                 Institution, the whole or any part of such religious
                 premises; or
(ii) otherwise acted in contravention of any of the
                 terms, express or implied, under which he is authorised
                 to occupy such religious premises.
Explanation. - For the purpose of clause (a), a person
                 shall not merely by reason of the fact that he has paid
                 any rent be deemed to have entered into possession
                 as allottee, lessee or grantee.”

       “Religious institution” means any gurudwara, temple, church,

       mosque or temple of Jains or Buddhists which is registered under

       the provisions of the
Societies Registration Act
or established

       under any statute.       It also includes any place of worship by

       whatever name called which is registered as aforesaid or

       established under any statute.        The definition is clear and no

       contention or issue is raised that the definition of the term

       “religious institution” is vague or incomprehensible. Similarly, the

       expression “religious premises” has been defined in clear terms to

       mean land used for agricultural or non-agricultural purposes or

       any building or part of the building belonging to a religious

       institution. The definition clarifies that the expression “religious

       premises” would include garden, ground and out-house or any
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                         Page 9 of 29
fittings in the building or part of the building for more beneficial

       enjoyment. The expression “unauthorised occupation” is of some

       importance in view of the challenge and the contentions raised. A

       person is deemed to be in unauthorised occupation of any

       religious premises if he has, before or after commencement of the

       Religious Premises Act, entered into possession of a land or

       building belonging to a religious institution otherwise than under or

       pursuant to any allotment, lease or grant. A person who enters

       into possession of the land or building belonging to or owned by a

       religious institution and has valid and subsisting allotment, lease

       or grant is clearly not an unauthorised occupant. Such allottees,

       lessees or persons in whose favour there is a grant, allotment or

       lease that entitles the person to retain possession are fully

       protected and cannot be evicted. In other words, primacy to the

       terms of allotment, lease or grant is not interfered, and is duly

       accorded. The terms of the allotment, lease or grant would be

       binding. Clause (b) states that if the allotment, lease or grant has

       been determined or cancelled whether before or after the

       commencement of the Religious Premises Act, occupation of the

       person would be treated as unauthorised occupation.       Clause (c)

       states that where a person is authorised to occupy any religious

       premises, before or after commencement of the Religious

       Premises Act, has sublet the religious premises in contravention of
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                    Page 10 of 29
the terms of allotment, lease or grant, or otherwise acted in

       contravention of the terms, express or implied, he shall be treated

       as an “unauthorised occupant”. No contention, issue or objection

       has been raised viz. clause (c) to
Section 3
.        Explanation to
Section 3
states that for the purpose of clause (a), which makes

       the term of allotment, lease or grant as a basis for determining

       whether a person is in authorised or unauthorised occupation,

       shall not be affected by the mere reason or the fact that such

       person has paid rent and, therefore, is deemed to have entered

       into possession as an allottee, lessee or guarantee. In other

       words, payment of rent would not be a determinative and relevant

       factor in deciding the issue and question of “unauthorised

       occupation”. The tenure of allotment, lease or the grant and terms

       and conditions as agreed or stated, and not mere payment of rent

       would be the crucial and determinative criterion.
10.    Under Section 4 of the Religious Premises Act, a religious

       institution can make an application before the Collector if it is of

       the opinion that any person is in unauthorised occupation of any

       religious premises, situated within the Collector’s jurisdiction. The

       Collector thereupon is required to issue notice in writing calling

       upon the person to show-cause why the eviction order should not

       be made. Sub-section (2) prescribes the requirement of a notice
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                    Page 11 of 29
and sub-section (3) to
Section 4
prescribes the manner in which

       the notice is to be served.        Under
Section 5
, the Collector is

       authorised and is competent to pass an order of eviction after

       considering the cause, if any, shown by the person to whom notice

       under
Section 4
has been issued and after examining the

       evidence that may be produced by such person. The person in

       occupation has to be given reasonable opportunity of being heard.

       The statutory requirement is that the Collector should be satisfied

       that the religious premises are in unauthorised occupation before

       he can make the order of eviction. The Collector must also record

       reasons.       The Collector is required to pass an order within a

       period of 45 days from the date of receipt of the application under
Section 4
and the order passed has to be affixed on the outer door

       or on some other conspicuous part of the religious premises. If a

       person fails to comply with the order of eviction within 30 days

       from the date of the order, the Collector, or any other officer duly

       authorised by him, can evict the person and deliver possession of

       the religious premises to the religious institution. He is entitled to

       use force as may be necessary. The tenant, if aggrieved, can file

       an appeal against the Collector’s order before the Commissioner.

       Thereafter, the tenant is entitled to also invoke the writ jurisdiction

       of the High Court under
Articles 227
and
226
of the Constitution of

       India if the grievance still persists.
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                      Page 12 of 29
11.    The issue of whether the properties of the religious institutions for

       the purpose of rent control legislations can be treated as a

       separate category is no longer res integra as this aspect was

       examined in several decisions where this Court has held that

       separate classification of properties of religious institutions for rent

       legislations will pass a challenge under
Article 14
of the

       Constitution.
In
State of Andhra Pradesh and Others v.

       Nallamilli Rami Reddi and Others
2, this Court was faced with a

       challenge to the validity of
Section 82
of the Andhra Pradesh

       Charitable and Hindu Religious Institutions and Endowments Act,

       1987 which had cancelled the leases of tenants of properties

       belonging to or given or endowed for the purpose of any charitable

       or any religious institution or endowment falling under the

       enactment, notwithstanding the prevailing tenancy laws in the

       State of Andhra Pradesh, in order to augment the rents payable

       for such properties which stood frozen on account of the tenancy

       laws and since sale of such lands was not feasible. While

       examining the question of religious institutions as a separate and

       distinguishable class, this Court had expounded on the scope of
Article 14
of the Constitution and the kind of classification that

       would stand the test of
Article 14
of the Constitution, as under:
2
AIR 2001 SC 3616
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                       Page 13 of 29
“8. What
Article 14
of the Constitution prohibits is
                 “class legislation” and not “classification for purpose of
                 legislation”. If the legislature reasonably classifies
                 persons for legislative purposes so as to bring them
                 under a well-defined class, it is not open to challenge
                 on the ground of denial of equal treatment that the law
                 does not apply to other persons. The test of
                 permissible classification is twofold: (i) that the
                 classification must be founded on intelligible differentia
                 which distinguishes persons grouped together from
                 others who are left out of the group, and (ii) that
                 differentia must have a rational connection to the object
                 sought to be achieved.
Article 14
does not insist upon
                 classification, which is scientifically perfect or logically
                 complete. A classification would be justified unless it is
                 patently arbitrary. If there is equality and uniformity in
                 each group, the law will not become discriminatory,
                 though due to some fortuitous circumstance arising out
                 of peculiar situation some included in a class get an
                 advantage over others so long as they are not singled
                 out for special treatment.
In substance, the differentia
                 required is that it must be real and substantial, bearing
                 some just and reasonable relation to the object of the
                 legislation.”

       Holding the above, this Court in
Nallamilli Rami Reddi
(supra)

       had reversed the decision of the Division Bench of the Andhra

       Pradesh High Court observing that religious institutions fall into a

       separate category and land or property held by them have a

       special character. Clearly, the tenants under a religious institution

       would      form     a    separate   class   by   themselves      and     such

       classification, if made, would achieve the object of promoting the

       interests of the religious institutions. Therefore, classification of

       properties of “religious institutions” as a separate and distinctive

       class of properties would not fall foul or be violative of
Article 14
of
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                            Page 14 of 29
the Constitution. It was elucidated that whether a tenancy act

       should be applicable to religious institutions or should be kept out

       is not an aspect which the Court would decide. It is instead for the

       legislature to determine the extent of applicability of such tenancy

       laws to religious institutions and the extent of protection that

       should be made available. This Court has, therefore, rejected the

       argument that religious institutions as landlords or tenants of

       religious institutions cannot be treated and regarded as a separate

       category in respect of whom protection as available to other

       tenants under the rent law would not be available. Such

       classification cannot be a ground or the basis to interfere with the

       validity of an act or provision. However, the Courts can interfere

       when the policy is irrational.
Summing up the ratio, this court in
Nallamilli Rami Reddi
(supra) had held:
“15. We may sum up the upshot of our discussion:
1. That charitable or religious institutions or
                     endowments fall into a separate category and form
                     a class by themselves. If that is so, tenants coming
                     under them also form a separate class. Therefore,
                     they can be treated differently from others.
2. In operation of the Act it is possible that it may
                     result in hardship to some of the tenants but that by
                     itself will not be a consideration to condemn the
                     Act.
3. The manner in which the charitable or religious
                     institution or endowment would deal with the
                     properties that are resumed after the provisions of
Section 82
of the Act come into force by cancelling
                     the existing leases, is in the region of speculation.
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                         Page 15 of 29
4. Fresh tenancy can be entered into and there is no
                     material before the court as to what was the rent
                     paid by tenants at the time when the Act came into
                     force, in terms of
Section 18(2)
of the Act or as
                     provided under the Andhra Act or under the
Telangana Act
. In the absence of such a material, it
                     would be hazardous for the court to reach any
                     conclusion, one way or the other, to state that the
                     tenants would be frozen and, therefore, there is no
                     likelihood of charitable or religious institution or
                     endowment getting higher rents. If there is no
                     material one way or the other, the presumption that
                     the Act is good should prevail.
5. It is a matter of policy with the legislature as to
                     whether all provisions of the Tenancy Acts should
                     be exempt in its application to the charitable or
                     religious institution or endowment in their entirety.
6. The identification of “landless poor persons” and
                     protection given to them is justified as enunciated
                     earlier.
7. It will be very difficult to predict at this stage that the
                     result of
Section 82
of the Act would be so
                     hazardous as not to achieve the object for which it
                     was enacted. It would not only result in displacing
                     the old tenants by new tenants, it may also achieve
                     other social objectives in another manner. If
                     appropriate provisions are made under the Rules
                     and if the leases are given to small holders of land,
                     another social objective could be achieved.
8. In what manner charitable or religious institution or
                     endowment would deal with matters of this nature
                     is mere guesswork at this stage. On some
                     hypothetical approach the High Court could not
                     have declared a law to be invalid.”


               Therefore, it was clearly held that tenants of religious

       institutions fall in a separate class which is identifiable. Further,

       on the question, whether cancellation of a “lease” in their favour

       would achieve the objectives of the act in question, it was
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                               Page 16 of 29
observed, that there was no material before the Court to show that

       such cancellation would not carry out the purposes of the

       “religious institutions”.
12.    There have been number of central and state legislations wherein

       religious institutions with or without other charitable organisations

       have been treated as a separate and distinct class and accorded

       legal treatment concomitant to such distinctiveness within the

       scope of the same enactment or other enactments. {See –
Sections 11
and
115BBC
, the Income Tax Act, 1961;
Karnataka

       Rent Act, 1999
and
Karnataka Hindu Religious Institutions and

       Charitable Endowments Act, 1997
;
Orissa Hindu Religious

       Endowments Act, 1951
; Himachal Pradesh Hindu Public Religious

       Institutions and Charitable Endowments Act, 1984 as amended in

       2018;
Uttar Pradesh Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent

       and Eviction) Act, 1972
and
Goa, Daman and Diu Buildings

       (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1968
, among others}.
13.    We would like to refer to a decision of this Court in
S.

       Kandaswamy Chettiar v. State of Tamil Nadu and Another
3

       wherein challenge was made to the exemption granted to

       buildings owned by Hindu, Christian and Muslim religious public

       trusts and public charitable trusts from the provisions of the Tamil
3
AIR 1985 SC 257
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                    Page 17 of 29
Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960
, by delegated

       legislation, in the form of an exemption notification issued under
Section 29
of the above Act.
A three Judge Bench of this Court in
S. Kandaswamy Chettiar
(supra) referred to the judgment of a

       five Judge Bench of this Court in
P.J. Irani v. State of Madras4
wherein identical provisions contained in earlier enactment,

       namely, the Madras Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1959

       were upheld in the context of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India

       on the basis that the Preamble and operative provisions of that Act

       gave sufficient guidance for exercise of discretionary power

       vested with the State Government.           Whether a notification

       granting exemption to buildings belonging to charities, religious or

       secular institutions would violate the equal protection mandate of
Article 14
, it was observed, that
Article 14
requires that the

       classification must be based on rational grounds, that is, grounds

       germane to carrying out the policy or the purpose of the Act and

       by way of illustration it was stated that if such exemptions were

       granted in favour of all the buildings belonging to charities,

       religious or secular institutions, such classification would be

       reasonable and proper being based on intelligible differentia

       having nexus to the object sought to be achieved.
Rent Act
, it was

       observed, would unquestionably be a piece of beneficial
4
AIR 1961 SC 1731
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                    Page 18 of 29
legislation intended to remedy the two evils, that is, rack-rentingꟷ

       extraction of exorbitant rents and unreasonable eviction orders

       generated by a largescale influx of population to big cities and

       urban areas post the Second World War creating acute shortage

       of accommodation in such areas. Rent enactments overtly protect

       the rights of the tenants in occupation of buildings in such areas

       from being charged unreasonable rents and from                 being

       unreasonably evicted. Therefore, such enactments even protect

       tenancy after determination or end of their contractual periods by

       enlarging the definition of the term ‘tenant’. At the same time, the

       rent enactments often contain other significant provisions which

       indicate that the legislature itself felt that there may be areas and

       cases where these two evils were neither prevalent nor

       apprehended, and as such landlords’ freedom need not be

       curtailed at all. It is in this context that several enactments give

       wider latitude to the landlords of religious, charitable, educational

       and other public institutions if the possession is required for

       purposes of such institutions. In other words, the legislature is

       entitled and can make rational classification of buildings belonging

       to government and those belonging to religious, charitable,

       educational and other public institutions which are accorded

       different treatment on the well-founded assumption that such

       landlords are not expected to and would not indulge in rack-
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                    Page 19 of 29
renting or unreasonable eviction.
Relying upon the observations

       in
P.J. Irani
(supra), it was held that constitutional validity of

       granting exemption to buildings belonging to charities, religious or

       secular institutions, from rent control legislation, would not offend

       the equal protection clause of
Article 14
of the Constitution as it is

       a reasonable classification based on intelligible differentia and

       also satisfies the test of nexus as such institutions not only serve

       public purpose but disbursement of their income is governed by

       the objects for which they are created. The income and activities

       are not for private benefit. Reference in this regard was made to

       the counter affidavit wherein the government had explained that

       they were satisfied that the rents received by exempted religious

       institutions were very low, meagre and that the provisions of

       fixation of fair rent under the rent act would not meet the ends of

       justice and would in fact result in the tenant exploiting the

       situation. Consequently, withdrawal of protection to the tenants of

       such buildings was justified.
It was observed in
S. Kandaswamy

       Chettiar
(supra) as under:
“11... In our view, the aforesaid material clearly shows
                 that buildings belonging to such public religious and
                 charitable endowments or trusts clearly fell into a class
                 where undue hardship and injustice resulting to them
                 from the uniform application of the beneficial provisions
                 of the Act needed to be relieved and the exemption
                 granted will have to be regarded as being germane to
                 the policy and purposes of the Act. In other words the
                 classification made has a clear nexus with the object
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                         Page 20 of 29
with which the power to grant exemption has been
                 conferred upon the State Government under
S.29
of
                 the Act.
xx               xx                 xx
14... It is obvious that if the trustees of the public
                 religious trusts and public charities are to be given
                 freedom to charge the normal market rent then to make
                 that freedom effective it will be necessary to arm the
                 trustees with the right to evict the tenants for non-
payment of such market rent. The State Government
                 on materials before it came to the conclusion that the
                 ‘fair rent’ fixed under the Act was unjust in case of such
                 buildings and it was necessary to permit the trustees of
                 such buildings to recover from their tenants reasonable
                 market rent and if that be so non-eviction when
                 reasonable market rent is not paid would be
                 unreasonable and if the market rent is paid by the
                 tenants no trustee is going to evict them. It is,
                 therefore, clear that granting total exemption cannot be
                 regarded as excessive or unwarranted.
15.    Apart from this aspect of the matter it is
                 conceivable that trustees of buildings belonging to such
                 public religious institutions or public charities may
                 desire eviction of their tenants for the purpose of
                 carrying out major or substantial repairs or for the
                 purpose of demolition and reconstruction and the State
                 Government may have felt that the trustees of such
                 buildings should be able to effect evictions without
                 being required to fulfil other onerous conditions which
                 must be complied with by private landlords when they
                 seek evictions for such purposes.          In our view,
                 therefore, the total exemption granted to such buildings
                 under the impugned notification is perfectly justified.”
14.    These two judgments were followed by the two Judge Bench

       decision of this Court in
Christ the King Cathedral v. John

       Ancheril and Another5
wherein similar exemption notification
5
(2001) 6 SCC 170
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                          Page 21 of 29
under the
Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965
granting exemption in public interest to the buildings of all

       churches/mosques of all minority religions and of all Dioceses,

       Archdioceses, Monasteries, etc. was challenged.
One of the

       contentions raised was that no data or material was produced by

       the State and hence the decision and ratio in
S. Kandaswamy

       Chettiar
(supra) would not be applicable.             Rejecting the said

       contention, it was observed:
“6. The law had been stated by this Court to the effect
                 that public religious or charitable endowments or trusts
                 constitute a well-recognised group which serves not
                 only public purposes, but disbursement of their income
                 is governed by the objects with which they are created
                 and buildings belonging to such endowments or trusts
                 clearly fall into a class distinct from the buildings owned
                 by private landlords. It is in respect of three areas a
                 regulation would be made under the Act, as has been
                 done in other similar enactments and these areas are:
(i) with respect to regulation of lease of buildings
                 (residential or non-residential); (ii) control of rent of
                 such buildings; and (iii) control of eviction of tenants
                 from such buildings. A public trust, as has been held in
S. Kandaswamy Chettiar
case is not likely to act
                 unreasonably either in the matter of enhancement of
                 rent or eviction of tenants being institutions of religion
                 or charity. On that basis, this Court upheld the validity
                 of the exemption granted under the Tamil Nadu Act in
                 favour of such trust or endowment.
In the present case,
                 the contention has been specifically put forth that the
                 appellants fall into that very category which came up
                 for consideration before this Court in
S. Kandaswamy
                 Chettiar
case. Therefore, no distinction can be made
                 between that class of owners of the buildings
in that
                 case
and in the present case. We do not understand as
                 to what other material was required by the Court in a
                 matter of this nature if the contention put forth before
                 this Court is not that churches or mosques, dioceses,
                 archdioceses, monasteries, convents, wakfs and
                 madarsas are not religious and charitable in nature.
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                           Page 22 of 29
7. Shri Nageswara Rao, the learned counsel
                 appearing for the contesting respondents submitted
                 that there is total non-application of mind by the
                 Government in the matter of grant of exemption and
                 the guidelines indicated in
S. Kandaswamy Chettiar
case have not been followed in the present case and,
                 therefore, the exemption should not have been granted
                 in the present case.
In
S. Kandaswamy Chettiar
case
                 an affidavit had been filed as to the lower rents that
                 were being paid and that the tenants were exploiting
                 the situation and had brought the charitable institutions
                 to a situation of helplessness and that position not
                 having been challenged the Court made those orders.
                 If we bear in mind the fact that the purpose of the Act is
                 apparently to prevent unreasonable eviction and also
                 to control rent and if the trustees of religious and public
                 charities are given freedom to charge normal market
                 rent with the further freedom to evict the tenants for not
                 paying such market rent, the result would be unjust and
                 cause hardship to them. But apprehension, by itself, is
                 not sufficient. There is no material on record to show
                 that in any of these cases the landlords would resort to
                 such a course of action. On the other hand, if the
                 building belonging to such public trust or religious
                 institution is exempt from the Act, the purpose of the
                 trust could be carried out much better, is quite clear. If
                 that is the object with which the Government has
                 granted exemption, we do not think there is any reason
                 to quash the notifications impugned before the High
                 Court.
xx               xx                  xx
9. An argument is sought to be raised on the basis of
                 ownership of property that there should not have been
                 a distinction as is being made in the present case. That
                 was the very basis of distinction made in case of
                 statutory bodies like the Housing Board, local
                 authorities which was noticed in Jayakaran v. Kerala
                 Health R & W Society case or registered wakfs which
                 was considered in Lakshmanan v. Mohamood. When
                 such bodies or institutions fall into a distinct class by
                 themselves and exemption granted to them would
                 serve a public purpose, namely, to carry out the objects
                 of the trust or the endowment or religious activity in a
                 broad sense, we do not think that the fine distinction
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                           Page 23 of 29
sought to be made by the High Court in this regard is
                 justified.
15.    Appropriate at this stage would also be reference to two earlier

       decisions of this Court which had examined the provisions of the

       rent control legislations, namely,
Kewal Singh v. Smt. Lajwanti6
and
Ravi Dutt Sharma v. Ratan Lal Bhargava7
.
16.
In
Kewal Singh
(supra), the challenge made was to the provisions

       of summary eviction in case of bona fide requirement under the
Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958
. It was observed that the rent control

       legislations are a piece of social legislations and are meant mainly

       to protect tenants from frivolous evictions but, at the same time,

       they must do justice to the landlord and to this extent the

       enactment should avoid placing such restrictions on their right to

       evict the tenants so as to destroy the legal right to property.

       Therefore, the landlords have been given certain statutory rights

       under the rent enactments to seek eviction and these provisions

       provide relief. In the absence of such rent control legislations, a

       landlord has the right in law to evict the tenant either on the

       termination of tenancy by efflux of time or other grounds after

       giving notice under the
Transfer of Property Act
. Such rights have

       been curtailed by the rent control legislations to give protection to
6
AIR 1980 SC 161
7
AIR 1984 SC 967
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                      Page 24 of 29
tenants having regard to the genuine and dire needs but these

       should not be construed to destroy the rights which have been

       given to the landlords. It was observed:
“21. There is yet another important aspect of the matter
                 which may be mentioned here. Prior to the enactment
                 of the rent control legislation in our country, the
                 relationship of landlord and tenant was governed by
                 our common law viz. the
Transfer of Property Act
(Sections 107 to
111
). The tenant was inducted with
                 his tacit agreement to be regulated by the conditions
                 embodied in the contract and could not be allowed to
                 repudiate the agreement reached between him and the
                 landlord during that period. The tenant was, therefore,
                 bound in law to vacate the premises either voluntarily
                 or through a suit after he was given a notice as
                 required by the
Transfer of Property Act
under the
                 terms and conditions of the lease. However, as a piece
                 of social reform in order to protect the tenants from
                 capricious and frivolous eviction, the legislature
                 stepped in and afforded special protection to the tenant
                 by conferring on him the status of a statutory tenant
                 who could not be evicted except under the conditions
                 specified and the procedure prescribed by the Rent
                 Control Acts. Thus to this extent, the agreement of
                 lease and the provisions of the
Transfer of Property Act
stood superseded. At the same time, the Rent Control
                 Acts provided the facilities of eviction to the landlord on
                 certain specified grounds like bona fide personal
                 necessity or default in payment of rent, etc. Thus any
                 right that the tenant possessed after the expiry of the
                 lease was conferred on him only by virtue of the
Rent
                 Control Act
. It is, therefore, manifest that if the
                 legislature considered in its wisdom to confer certain
                 rights or facilities on the tenants, it could due to
                 changed circumstances curtail, modify, alter or even
                 take away such rights or the procedure enacted for the
                 purpose of eviction and leave the tenants to seek their
                 remedy under the common law.
22. Thus, we do not see how can the tenant challenge
                 the validity of such a provision enacted by the
                 legislature from which the tenant itself derived such
                 rights.”
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                           Page 25 of 29
17.    Similar are the observations of this Court in
Ravi Dutt Sharma
(supra) which had quoted several passages from
Kewal Singh
(supra) to observe that it is open to the legislature to pick out one

       class of landlords out of several covered under a specific provision

       of a rent enactment so long as they form a class by themselves

       and the legislature was free to provide benefit of a special

       procedure to them in the matter of eviction against the tenants as

       long as the legislation had the object to achieve and a special

       procedure has reasonable nexus to the object to be achieved.
18.
In
Ashoka Marketing Ltd.
(supra), the five Judge Constitution

       Bench of this Court had upheld applicability of the Public Premises

       Act to a corporation established by a Central Act that is owned

       and controlled by the Central Government, therein a nationalised

       bank.      After referring to several judgments, this Court had

       explained the effect of
Article 14
of the Constitution observing that

       the two statutes, namely, the Rent Control Act and the Public

       Premises Act were enacted by the same legislature, that is, the

       Parliament, in exercise of powers for matters enumerated in the

       Concurrent List. The Public Premises Act being a later enactment

       would prevail over the provisions of the
Rent Control Act
in

       respect of public premises. Referring to the provisions of the
Rent

       Control Act
, it was observed:
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                    Page 26 of 29
“55.
The Rent Control Act
makes a departure from the
                 general law regulating the relationship of landlord and
                 tenant contained in the
Transfer of Property Act
inasmuch as it makes provision for determination of
                 standard rent, it specifies the grounds on which a
                 landlord can seek the eviction of a tenant, it prescribes
                 the forum for adjudication of disputes between landlords
                 and tenants and the procedure which has to be followed
                 in such proceedings.
The Rent Control Act
can,
                 therefore, be said to be a special statute regulating the
                 relationship of landlord and tenant in the Union territory
                 of Delhi. The Public Premises Act makes provision for a
                 speedy machinery to secure eviction of unauthorised
                 occupants from public premises. As opposed to the
                 general law which provides for filing of a regular suit for
                 recovery of possession of property in a competent court
                 and for trial of such a suit in accordance with the
                 procedure
laid down in
the Code of Civil Procedure
, the
                 Public Premises Act confers the power to pass an order
                 of eviction of an unauthorised occupant in a public
                 premises on a designated officer and prescribes the
                 procedure to be followed by the said officer before
                 passing such an order. Therefore, the Public Premises
                 Act is also a special statute relating to eviction of
                 unauthorised occupants from public premises. In other
                 words, both the enactments, namely, the Rent Control
                 Act and the Public Premises Act, are special statutes in
                 relation to the matters dealt with therein. Since, the
                 Public Premises Act is a special statute and not a
                 general enactment the exception contained in the
                 principle that a subsequent general law cannot derogate
                 from an earlier special law cannot be invoked and in
                 accordance with the principle that the later laws
                 abrogate earlier contrary laws, the Public Premises Act
                 must prevail over the
Rent Control Act
.”
19.    What has been said about the Public Premises Act would be

       equally applicable to the legislations made by the State legislature

       of the State of Punjab in respect of the two enactments under

       consideration, that is, the East Punjab Rent Act and the Religious

       Premises Act. No doubt, in this decision it has been observed that

       the underlying reason for exclusion of property belonging to the
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                          Page 27 of 29
government from the ambit of the
Rent Control Act
is that the

       government while dealing with the citizens in respect of property

       belonging to it would not act as a private landlord but would act in

       public interest, albeit this reasoning would equally apply to

       “religious institutions” as defined. The religious institutions as held

       are meant to carry out public purpose and the legislature can

       proceed accordingly that the religious institutions would act in

       public interest for which they were established. {See above
S.

       Kandaswamy Chettiar
(supra) and
Christ the King Cathedral
(supra)}
20.    As noticed above, valid grants, leases and allotments are not

       construed and treated as unauthorised occupation. It is only when

       the terms of the grant, lease or allotment are not adhered to or

       have been determined or the period of allotment, lease or grant as

       fixed has come to an end, that the person in occupation is treated

       to be in unauthorised occupation. This is a pre-condition which

       confers the right on the religious institution to seek eviction of a

       person in unauthorised occupation of the religious premises.

       Further, an order passed by the Collector is appealable before the

       Commissioner and if still aggrieved, a tenant can invoke the writ

       jurisdiction of the High Court, as mentioned above. Therefore,
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                      Page 28 of 29
power of judicial review is always available and can be exercised

       by the High Court when required and necessary.
21.    Accordingly, we do not find any merit in the present appeal and

       the same is dismissed. However, in the facts of this case, there

       would be no order as to costs.
......................................J.
                                                            (N. V. RAMANA)


                                              ......................................J.
                                                       (SANJIV KHANNA)


                                              ......................................J.
                                                     (KRISHNA MURARI)


NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 04, 2019.
Civil Appeal No. 3674 of 2009                                         Page 29 of 29