[Cites
19
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Bombay Dyeing & Mfg Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner Of Central Excise on 9 December, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1865, (2019) 17 SCALE 263
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
Dinesh Maheshwari
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
1




                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5297 OF 2008

         M/s. The Bombay Dyeing & Mfg. Co. Ltd.                 ..…Appellant(s)

                                                Versus


         The Commissioner of Central Excise                     ….Respondent(s)




                                            JUDGMENT
A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
1.              This appeal is directed against the judgment and order

         dated 13.9.2007 passed by the High Court of Judicature at

         Bombay in Central Excise Appeal No. 237 of 2006.                Briefly

         stated, the appellant is engaged in manufacture of cotton and

         man­made fabrics.               According to the appellant, the fabric

         manufactured by the appellant was not amenable to excise duty
Signature Not Verified
since it was for captive consumption and not to be removed for
Digitally signed by
CHARANJEET KAUR
Date: 2019.12.09
16:37:32 IST
Reason:
the purposes of sale or for consumption as envisaged under Rule
2
9 read with Rule 49 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 (for short,

‘the Rules’). On this assertion and relying on the decision of the

High Court of Delhi in
J.K. Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills

Co. Ltd. & Ors. vs. Union of India & Ors.
1, the appellant filed

two writ petitions under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India

before the High Court of Delhi being Civil Writ Petition Nos.

1234/1981 and 1235/1981. The reliefs claimed in both petitions

are identical except that they pertain to separate periods.                We

may     reproduce      the   reliefs   claimed     in   Writ    Petition   No.

1235/1981, for the sake of convenience. The same read thus: ­

          “(a) Issue a suitable writ, order or direction declaring that
          duty of excise is not payable in respect of yarn (Cotton and
          man made) processed further in the petitioner’s composite
          mills in the manufacture of fabrics:
(b) Issue writ of certiorari or any other suitable writ, order
          or direction in the nature thereof quashing and setting
          aside the decisions and directives of the Central Board of
          Excise, respondent No.2, contained in circular letters dated
          6.10.1976 (Annexure A), 24.9.1980 (Annexure B) and to
          quash the notices dated 23.4.1981 (Annexure C) and all
          similar notices referred to in the statement (Annexure D),
          dated 7.1.1981 (Annexure G) and dated 9.3.1981
          (Annexure H):
(c) Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ,
          order or direction in the nature thereof, restraining the
          respondents from levying or collecting duty of excise in
          respect of yarn obtained by the petitioner at an
          intermediary stage in its composite mill for further
          processing in the manufacture of fabrics and to direct the

1 1981 (8) ELT 887 (Del.)
3
Board, respondent No.2, to cancel and/or withdraw the
decisions and directives contained in circular letters dated
6.10.76 (Annexure A) and 24.9.80 (Annexure B) and to
direct respondent 3 and 4 to cancel and/or withdraw the
notice dated 23.4.1981 (Annexure C), 23.2.81 (Annexure G)
and all similar notices referred to in the statement
(Annexure D), dated 7.1.1981 (Annexure G) and 9.3.1981
(Annexure H) and to restrain defendants 3 and 4 from
taking any steps or/proceedings pursuant to and in
accordance with the aforesaid directives and notices.
(d) Issue a writ of prohibition or any other appropriate writ,
order or direction in the nature therefore, restraining the
respondent from collecting duty of excise on yarn obtained
by the petitioner in its composite mill which is further
processed in the manufacture of fabrics.
(e) Issue appropriate writ, order or direction directing the
respondent to refund the amount of duty illegally recovered
from the petitioner in respect of yarn obtained in the
petitioner’s composite mills and further processed in the
manufacture of fabrics for the period commencing from
15.7.1977 in respect of cellulosic spun yarn and non­
cellulosic spun yarn and from 17.3.1972 and in respect of
cotton yarn and from 15.7.77 upto the date of disposal of
the present writ petition and in particular the amounts
referred to in statement (annexure E) together with interest
at the rate of 12% p.a. and in the alternative to direct
Respondents No.3 and 4 to grant the refund as per refund
claims dated 13.5.1981 (colly.);
(f) In the alternative and without prejudice to the aforesaid
prayers, to issue a writ of mandamus or any other writ,
order or direction in the nature thereof direction the
respondent not to collect duty of excise in respect of yarn
upon sizing thereof processed in the manufacture of
fabrics.
(g) In the alternative and without prejudice to the aforesaid
prayers, issue writ of prohibition or any other writ, order or
direction in the nature thereof, restraining the respondents
from levying or collecting duty of excise in respect of yarn
processed within the petitioner’s composite mills on the
basis of the weight of yarn after sizing thereof.
(h) To pass such other and further orders as may be
deemed just and proper in the facts and circumstances of
this case; and
4
(i) Award costs of the writ petition in favour of the
        petitioner.”
2.   During the pendency of the aforementioned writ petitions,

the appellant filed Civil Miscellaneous Petition Nos. 1698/1981

and 1699/1981 in the concerned writ petitions, praying for

interim reliefs. For the sake of convenience, the reliefs claimed in

Civil Miscellaneous Petition No. 1699/1981 filed in Writ Petition

No. 1235/1981 are reproduced below: ­




        “(a) grant order of stay permitting the petitioners forthwith
        to further process and use cellulose and non­cellulosic
        spun yarn, man­made filament yarn and cotton yarn in its
        composite mill in the manufacture of man­made fabric,
        cotton fabric and woollen fabric at nil rate of duty and to
        clear cotton fabrics forthwith upon payment of duty in
        respect of cotton fabric only (without payment of duty on
        cotton yarn) upon the petitioners undertaking to furnish
        the requisite bond in Form B­13 Rule 9B supported by a
        bank guarantee for an amount equivalent to 25% of the
        differential duty in respect of such yarn within three weeks
        hereof and to restrain the respondent 3 to 4 from taking
        any action or proceedings pursuit to the directives of the
        Board, respondent No.2 (Annexures A and B to the writ
        petition) and notices dated 23.4.1981 (Annexure C to the
        writ petition), and all similar notices referred to in the
        Statement (Annexure D), dated 7.1.1981 (Annexure G to
        the Writ Petition) and 9.3.1981 (Annexure H to the Writ
        Petition):
(b) grant exparte ad interim stay in terms of prayer (a)
        hereinabove : and
(c) pass such other and further orders as may be deemed
        just and proper.”
5
3.    The High Court of Delhi vide order dated 25.5.1981, while

issuing notice on the said miscellaneous petitions, granted

interim relief in terms of Prayer clause (a) reproduced above. In

furtherance of the said interim relief, the appellant furnished an

undertaking dated 2/10.3.1983 in order to secure the payment

of differential tax to the Department of Revenue, Ministry of

Finance (for short, ‘the Department’) in the event of dismissal of

its writ petitions.     The format of that undertaking was in

conformity with the prescribed undertaking in Form B­13

referable to Rule 9B of the Rules, submitted by the assessee in

the case of provisional assessment.         Later on, the High Court

modified the interim relief on 14.5.1985. The relevant portion of

the modified interim relief reads thus: ­

        “…there will be no stay with regard to future payments.
        During the pendency of the Writ Petition, where will be stay
        in respect of 50% of the disputed amount of duties claimed
        by the respondents as arrears on the condition that the
        applicant furnish Bank Guarantees or renew the Bank
        Guarantees already furnished and keep it in force till the
        disposal of the writ petition. With regard to the balance of
        50% of the arrears of duty which is disputed, 25% of it shall
        be paid within 3 months from today. With regard to the
        remaining 25%, the parties will pay the same in two equal
        installments of 12½% each in every succeeding quarter. The
        25% payment which is the first payment shall be made on
        or before 14th August, 1985, the second installment shall be
        made on or before 14th November, 1985 and the third and
6
the last installment to complete the 50% will be paid on or
        before 20th February, 1986.
There arrears of disputed duty which are required to be
        paid is only in respect of unsized yarn. Any duty claimed on
        sized yarn will not be paid by virtue of this order.

           There will be no duty payable on the sized yarn even for
        future till disposal of the writ petition.
If any payments have been made through disputed, the
        same would be adjusted in accordance with what is
        provided in the order passed by us today……”
4.   Pursuant to the modified interim relief, the appellant

deposited 50% of its liability towards central excise duty in

installments and continued to make future payments. The writ

petitions were eventually disposed of on 10/12.3.1993 in the

following terms: ­


            “Counsel for the parties are agreed that this case is
        covered by the orders and directions issued by the Supreme
        Court in Civil Miscellaneous Petitions No.8869 of 1988 and
        others in Civil Appeals Nos.323 of 1984 and others in
Rohit
        Mills Ltd. v. Union of India
, dated 28th April, 1988 and it will
        be open to the petitioner to raise such other contention
        available to it before the adjudicating authority in response
        to the show­cause notices.
Accordingly, we dispose of the writ petition in terms of
        the aforesaid orders of the Supreme Court, which should be
        read as part of our order. No order as to costs.”
5.   Consequent to the disposal of the writ petitions, the

Assistant Collector of Central Excise vide letter dated 26.3.1993

addressed to the appellant, informed the appellant that
Section
7
11A
of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (for short, ‘the Act’) was not

applicable to the facts of the present case. For, the amount was

secured by the bank guarantee furnished by the assessee in

terms of the interim order passed by the High Court of Delhi. Yet

an opportunity was offered to the appellant to send its response.

The said letter of the Assistant Collector reads as follows: ­

        “OFFICE OF THE ASSTT. COLLECTOR OF CENTRAL
        EXCISE: DIVISION F­I 2ND FLOOR, MADHU INDUS ESTATE:
P.B. MARG, WORLI, BOMBAY­13
        F.No.FI/FI/V(18)­3/81/1735      Bombay, the 26th March, 1993

        M/s. Bombay Dyeing & Manufacturing Co. Ltd.,
        (spring Mills),
        G.D. Ambedkar Road,
        Bombay­14.
Gentlemen,

           Sub   Delhi High Court CW.P. No.1235/81
                 M/s. Bombay Dyeing & Mfg. Co. Ltd.
Versus
                 Union of India and OTHERS

           Please refer to various correspondences exchanged on
        the above said state subject.
I have been directed to inform you that the aforesaid
        case was listed on 12.3.93 before Hon’ble the Chief Justice
        and Hon’ble Mr. Justice Anil Dev Singh, Delhi High Court,
        New Delhi.
The aforesaid case is decided in view of the orders passed
        by the Supreme Court of India in the case of M/s. Rohit
        Mills Ltd. (copy attached herewith for your information and
        for further action please).
Before complying the aforesaid orders of the Supreme
        Court of India in case of M/s. Rohit Mills Ltd., on which
8
case the Delhi High Court has disposed of the instant writ
petition, this office would like to bring to your notice as
under:
‘As regards applicability of Section 11A and encashment
of Bank Guarantee, it is pertinent to refer to the Hon’ble
Supreme Court’s order in Writ Petition No.848 of 1984 filed
by M/s. Bhilwara Processor Ltd. and others, wherein the
issue was in dispute i.e., whether department can enforce
Bank Guarantees executed in terms of Court’s order
without issuing Show Cause cum Demand Notice under
section 11A. In
the above case
, also, an interim order was
passed on 20.2.84 by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India
restraining the department from levying and recovering the
disputed portion of the duty of excise on the condition that
petitioners of the case shall furnish the bank guarantee.
The Bank guarantee was furnished and the writ petition
was dismissed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India on
4.11.88. Thereafter the department asked the petitioners to
take steps to enforce the Bank guarantee. Aggrieved with
this action, they filed a Miscellaneous Writ Petition before
Supreme Court of India stating that since no Show Cause
cum Demand Notice was issued under Section 11A, no
recovery beyond the period of 6 months can be effected. The
above petition of M/s. Bhilwara Processors Ltd. was
dismissed by Hon’ble Supreme Court of India by its order
dated 29.11.88 (reported in Judgment Today Vol. (4)
November Part 1988 (83) 330).
The similar order was passed by Rajasthan High Court
vide order dt. 9.12.1988 in C.W.P. No.4441/88. In this case
under similar circumstances, M/s. Modern Suitings also
made the same grievances before Rajasthan High Court.
The Hon’ble Rajasthan High Court placing reliance on the
order dt. 29.11.1988 passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court
of India in the case of M/s. Bhilwara Processors Ltd.
observed as under:­

   “Be that as it may, we are of the opinion that once orders
   of a Court, stay order is sought in respect of recovery of
   Excise Duty or any other duty for that matter and the
   stay order is conditional, on furnishing Bank Guarantee,
   if ultimately the writ petition is dismissed and stay order
   is vacated, the Bank guarantee can become encashable
   immediately. Therefore, we need not go into this question
   as to whether Section 11A is or is not attracted, we are of
   the opinion that because the petitioner furnished the
9
Bank guarantee, makes secured a stay order which was
          conditional as a result of which levy and recovery was
          stayed once writ petition has been dismissed and the
          stay order has been dismissed ……. The Bank guarantee
          has become encashable, neither it will be proper nor
          equitable for this Court to say or make an order that the
          Bank guarantee should not be encashed…………..”

                 With the above observation, we dismiss the writ
          petition with no order as to cost.”

                In view of the facts of the case discussed above,
          the Section 11A is not applicable in the instant case
          since the amount was secured by the Bank guarantee
          furnished by the assessee in terms of the stay order of
          Hon’ble Delhi High Court.”

           However, complying the orders given by the Supreme
       Court of India in case of M/s. Rohit Mills Ltd., this office
       would like to know whether petitioner desires Show Cause
       cum Demand Notice to be issued by the respondent i.e.,
       Union of India, for the recovery of outstanding dues. If yes,
       the same may be confirmed by 31.3.93 so as to enable this
       office to take the action as directed by the Hon’ble Supreme
       Court of India in case of M/s. Rohit Mills Ltd. However, it
       will be nothing but the postponement of payment of Central
       Excise Duty, which is legitimate right of the Union of India,
       which was deprived by you by filing the instant writ
       petition, since 1981. If no, the consent letter should be
       submitted to this office for encashment of Bank guarantees,
       as early as possible.
Your early reply is awaited in this matter.
Yours faithfully,
                                                       Sd/­ Illegible
                                                (C.K. NIRBHAVANE)
                                           ASSISTANT COLLECTOR
                                           CENTRAL EXCISE DN. FI
                                                         BOMBAY­I”
6.   The appellant in its response sent on 11.5.1993, asserted

that the Show Cause Notice under
Section 11A
of the Act was

mandatory and moreso in light of the decision of this Court dated
10
28.4.1988 in
Rohit Mills Ltd. & Ors. vs. Union of India &

Ors.2 The
said communication reads thus: ­


         “OUR RE. NO. SM/E­1                             11th May, 1993

         The Assistant Collector of Central Excise,
         Division F­1, IInd Floor,
         Madhu Industrial Estate,
         P.B. Marg, Worli,
         Bombay­400013.
Dear Sir,

            Your Ref. F.No.IV/CL­VI/30­84/FI/93/2295
                        Dated 2nd April, 1993.
Sub: Delhi High Court
Writ Petition No.1235/1981
Bombay Dyeing & Mfg. Co. Ltd.
(
Spring Mill Unit) Vs. UOI & Ors
.
1. This has reference to your above letter whereby you have
         intimated the date of hearing for finalizing the classification
         list in respect of cotton yarn and man made Yarn. Your
         attention   is   also   drawn to       your earlier       letter
         F.No.FI/PI/V(18)­3/81/1705 dated 26.3.1993, whereby you
         desired us to intimate whether your would like a show
         cause notice to be issued
u/s 11A
of the Act.
2. We would draw your kind attention to the order passed
         by the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi dated 10.3.1993 whereby
         the above writ petition was disposed of on the basis of the
         order passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of
         Rohit Mills Ltd. For your ready reference, we enclose
         herewith a copy of the aforesaid order passed in the case of
         Rohit Mills.
3. The directions issued by the Hon’ble High Court in the
         above matter on the basis of the directions issued as in the
         case of Rohit Mills contemplate that adjudication has now
         to be done pursuant to a Notice under
Section 11A
of the
         Act. It is specifically directed that in cases where such
         notice has been not issued, the Assistant Collector may
         issue such notice which should not go beyond 6 months. In

2 1988 (18) ECR 17 SC
11
the present case, no show cause notice under Section 11A
has been issued and as such, as per the direction of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Rohit Mills Ltd.,
which direction also forms part of the order of the Hon’ble
High Court disposing also forms part of the order of the
Hon’ble High Court disposing of the above writ petition,
your are now required to issue a Notice under
Section 11A
of the Act. On receiving such a notice, we shall raise our
objections thereto and we reserve our right to do so.
4. You have kindly intimated that the hearing in the above
matter is now fixed for 11.5.1993. We may mention here
that before any hearing is taken up a show cause notice
under Section 11A will have to be first issued and an
opportunity be given to us to reply to the Notice. In this
connection we may also mention that as per the orders of
the Hon’ble High Court dated 10.3.1993, we have been
given specific liberty to raise such other contentions as are
available, before the adjudicating authority in respect to the
show cause notice. We reserve our right to raise such
contention as may be advised, in reply to the said show
cause notice.
5. Although our contentions would be raised after the show
cause notice under Section 11A is issued, we may clarify
here that, in any event, no duty of excise is payable in
respect of yarn after it is sized. In other words, duty of
excise is not payable on the basis of the weight of the sized
yarn. This has been clearly held in several decisions
including the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the
case of
J.K. Cotton Spg. & Wvg. Mills Co. Ltd. and another
vs. UOI
(1987 (32) ELT 234). The attempt earlier made to
levy duty of excise at the stage after yarn is sized, is
patently illegal in view of the aforesaid decisions. The
reference in your letter to provisional assessment is wholly
irrelevant. In the first place, as per the directions of the
Hon’ble High Court, adjudication has now to be done on the
basis of show cause notice under
Section 11A
of the Act.
Secondly for the reason that the provisionally if any, was in
relation to dutiablity of yarn at the stage and the condition
after sizing and did not relate to unsized yarn. In any event,
the assessment has now to be done in terms of the
directions of the Hon’ble High Court, after issuing a show
cause notice under
Section 11A
of the Act.                The
adjudication can only be gone in accordance with the
directions of the Hon’ble High Court.
12
6. We may mention here that although our contentions
        would be raised as and when a show cause notice is
        received, we may indicate that in any event, no duty of
        excise is payable in respect of the yarn obtained at the
        intermediate stage which is further processed within the
        factory, since it is not obtained at that stage in a marketable
        condition. We have already paid certain amounts towards
        duty of excise in respect of such yarn under protest during
        the pendency of the writ petition and upon decision of this
        issue, we would be entitled to claim refund thereof.
7. Further contentions would be taken in reply to the show
        cause notice, which may be issued as per the directions of
        the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Under these circumstances, we
        would request you to first issue a show cause notice under
Section 11A
of the Act and then give us an opportunity to
        file a reply thereto and a hearing in that respect. The
        hearing already fixed for 11th May, 1993 may kindly be
        adjourned since the matter cannot be adjudicated without
        issuing a show cause notice under
Section 11A
of the Act as
        per the directions of the Hon’ble High Court.
Yours faithfully,
                                                       Sd/­ Illegible
                                                        [K.R. NAYAK]
                                                         MANAGER”
7.   The Assistant Collector of Excise vide order­in­original

dated 19.8.1993 noted that the appellant had filed classified lists

for its products which had been approved provisionally and the

appellant had been directed to pay excise duty. He also noted

the objection of the appellant about non­issue of a Show Cause

Notice under
Section 11A
of the Act. However, he proceeded to

finalize the classification lists by noting that the classification

lists filed earlier by the assessee were treated as provisional.
13
8.   In furtherance of the said order of the Assistant Collector,

the Range Superintendent sent a letter dated 27.9.1993 to the

appellant stating that all the RT­12 returns for the period of May,

1981 to May, 1985 for the items 18A, 18­III and 18E which had

been assessed provisionally by the then Range Superintendent

are assessed finally.   By the same communication, he called

upon the appellant to pay an amount of Rs.35,92,234.67 (Rupees

thirty five lakhs ninety two thousand two hundred thirty four

and sixty seven paise only) pursuant to the order dated

14.5.1985 passed by the High Court of Delhi. This was followed

by a notice dated 7.10.1993 from the Assistant Collector of

Central Excise addressed to the appellant reiterating the position

that pursuant to the interim order passed by the High Court of

Delhi, provisional assessments had been made and necessary

endorsements to that effect were made on the classification lists,

monthly RT­12 returns, etc. Further, the appellant was obliged

to make good the arrears of disputed duty amounting to

Rs.35,96,235/­ (Rupees thirty five lakhs ninety six thousand two

hundred thirty five only) for the period starting from 25.5.1981 to
14
13.5.1985, which had become payable. The appellant was called

upon to pay the said amount within ten days, failing which the

Department would take necessary steps to enforce the bank

guarantees and recover the dues from the appellant.
9.   Subsequent to the above notice, an opportunity of personal

hearing was also given to the appellant on 19/20.10.1993 with

respect to the recovery of dues.           It appears that during the

hearing, the appellant reiterated its stand that the Show Cause

Notice under
Section 11A
of the Act was essential, including in

terms   of   the   order   of   the   High    Court   of   Delhi,   dated

10/12.3.1993. The Assistant Collector of Excise, however, vide

order­in­original dated 7/15.12.1993, confirmed the demand of

excise duty. He held that in the present case, the duty liability

itself was in dispute and the assessment could be made final

only when the question of duty liability was decided by the High

Court of Delhi, and once that issue was resolved, the question of

issuing notice under
Section 11A
of the Act does not arise,

especially when the appellant itself had voluntarily executed B­

13 bonds and the assessments were treated as provisional, as
15
evinced from the endorsements on monthly RT­12 returns in that

behalf.
10. The appellant carried the matter in appeal before the

Commissioner of Central Excise (Appeals), who in turn, rejected

the   appeal     vide   order­in­appeal   dated   31.5.2000.      The

Commissioner of Central Excise (Appeals) also upheld the

demand for excise duty and rejected the plea taken by the

appellant regarding the necessity to issue a Show Cause Notice

under
Section 11A
of the Act.
11. The appellant then unsuccessfully carried the matter in

appeal being Appeal No. E/2747/2000 before the Customs,

Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal (for short, ‘the

CESTAT’).      That appeal was dismissed on 22.2.2006.         Against

that decision, the appellant filed Central Excise Appeal No.

237/2006 before the High Court of Judicature at Bombay under
Section 35
­
G of the Act
, which was eventually dismissed on

13.9.2007 following the decision of the Division Bench of the

same High Court dated 7.9.2007 in First Appeal No. 2597/2005
16
titled as
The Jam Shri Ranjitsinghji Spg. & Wvg. Mills Co.

Ltd. & Anr. vs. Union of India & Ors.3
.
12. To complete the narration of facts, it is relevant to mention

that the relied upon decision was assailed before this Court in

Civil Appeal No. 1551/2008 by the assessee therein, which was

summarily dismissed on 7.3.2008, presumably at the admission

stage.
13. The sum and substance of the view taken in the relied upon

judgment, which involved similar facts, is that in a case such as

this where B­13 bonds have been executed by the assessee and

clear endorsement is made on the monthly RT­12 returns that it

is a case of provisional assessment, the question of issuing a

Show Cause Notice under
Section 11A
of the Act does not arise.

The assessee
in that case
had relied on the decisions of this

Court, which have been distinguished as inapplicable to the fact

situation of the case under consideration. We shall advert to the

detailed reasons noted in this decision a little later.




3 2007 (109) Bom LR 2167
17
14. We may now advert to the issues raised by the appellant in

the present appeal.      According to the appellant, primarily two

questions arise for consideration, which are as follows: ­

        “1) Whether the demand for Central Excise for the period
        25.05.1981 to 14.05.1985, as raised by the department, is
        barred by limitation?
This question in turn is dependent upon the issue whether
        the assessment in this case could be said to be provisional
        assessment.
2) Could the respondent authorities have ignored the
        binding directions of the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi vide its
        Order dated 12.03.1993 to hold that no Show Cause Notice
        (SCN) was required in the present case as the assessments
        in question were provisional?”
15. It is urged that the purport of the order dated 10/12.3.1993

passed by the High Court of Delhi, while disposing of the writ

petitions filed by the appellant clearly obliged the Department to

issue a Show Cause Notice under
Section 11A
of the Act and to

proceed against the appellant only in the manner permissible

under the said provision in light of the dictum of this Court in
Rohit Mills Ltd.
(supra).
It is urged that the dictum in
Rohit

Mills Ltd.
(supra) formed part of the subject order of the High

Court of Delhi and for which reason, it was not open to the

Department to take a contrary stand.              The approach of the

authorities in not complying with the said obligation cannot
18
stand the test of judicial scrutiny.     On the other hand, if the

authorities were to follow the direction given by the High Court of

Delhi, the demand for central excise duty for the period starting

from 25.5.1981 to 13/14.5.1985 would be clearly barred by

limitation. It is then urged that had the authorities adopted the

route of provisional assessment, they were obliged to expressly

state that position by passing an order. In the present case, no

such order has been passed by the authorities. To buttress the

argument that it is incumbent upon the authorities to pass

formal specific order directing provisional assessment, reliance is

placed on the circular issued by the Ministry of Finance

(Department    of   Revenue)   bearing   number   26/1989    dated

24.4.1989.    It is urged that the fact that the appellant had

executed B­13 bonds or the monthly RT­12 returns purportedly

treated as provisional assessment, can never be held against the

appellant especially in light of the observation of the High Court

of Delhi that a formal notice be issued to the appellant, which

was the basis for disposing of the writ petitions.
In support of

the above arguments, the appellant would rely on decisions of

this Court in
Rohit Mills Ltd.
(supra);
The Bhopal Sugar
19
Industries Ltd. vs. The Income Tax Officer, Bhopal
4;
R.B.F.

Rig Corporation, Mumbai vs. Commissioner of Customs

(Imports), Mumbai5
;
Metal Forgings & Anr. vs. Union of India

& Ors.6
;
J.K. Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. vs.

Collector of Central Excise7
;
Commissioner of Central

Excise, Calcutta vs. Hindustan National Glass & Industries

Ltd.8
;
Kalabharati   Advertising    vs.   Hemant   Vimalnath

Narichania & Ors.9
;
Jagmittar Sain Bhagat & Ors. vs.

Director, Health Services, Haryana & Ors.10
; and
Coastal

Gases and Chemicals Pvt. Ltd. vs. Assistant Collector of

Central Excise, Visakhapatnam & Ors.11
.
16. The respondent, on the other hand, supported the reasons

recorded by the authorities/Tribunal and would contend that

being a case of provisional assessment, the question of issuing a

4 1961 (1) SCR 474
5 (2011) 3 SCC 573
6 (2003) 2 SCC 36
7 (1998) 3 SCC 540
8 (2005) 3 SCC 489
9 (2010) 9 SCC 437
10 (2013) 10 SCC 136
11 (1997) 7 SCC 223
20
Show Cause Notice to the appellant under
Section 11A
of the Act

does not arise.    Whereas, the authorities acted as per the

mandate of law and proceeded to pass final assessment orders

after the disposal of writ petitions by the High Court of Delhi,

and before passing such orders, opportunity of hearing was given

to the appellant. According to the respondent, the order dated

10/12.3.1993 of the High Court of Delhi did not create any

impediment for the authorities to proceed against the appellant

in accordance with law.   At best, the tenor of the order would

suggest that if a Show Cause Notice is required to be issued and

has not been so issued, authorities were free to issue such a

notice and take decision thereon, after giving opportunity of

hearing to the assessee. No more and no less.
The High Court of

Delhi could not have issued any other direction against the

respondent, which would be in the nature of prohibiting the

statutory functionary from discharging its statutory functions

and obligations nor to absolve the appellant of its statutory

obligation to pay excise duty, which otherwise was payable by the

appellant but for filing of the writ petitions.   Admittedly, the

interim protection given to the appellant was conditional and the
21
appellant, acting upon the same, had submitted B­13 bonds,

which pre­supposes that it was a case of provisional assessment

and could be proceeded further as per law, after the disposal of

the writ petitions. In that, it was not a case referable to
Section

11A
of the Act. The respondent is placing heavy reliance on the

decision of the Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at

Bombay in the case of
The Jam Shri Ranjitsinghji
(supra),

which has been upheld by this Court by dismissing Civil Appeal

No. 1551/2008 on 7.3.2008.      It is urged that the facts of the

relied upon case and the present case are almost similar, if not

identical. According to the respondent, the appeal is devoid of

merits and the same be dismissed.
17. We have heard Mr. Kavin Gulati, learned senior counsel for

the appellant and Mr. A.K. Sanghi, learned senior counsel for the

respondent.
18. After cogitating over the rival submissions, the core issue

that requires to be immediately addressed is about the purport of

the order passed by the High Court of Delhi dated 10/12.3.1993,

while disposing of the writ petitions filed by the appellant. The

said order will have to be understood in the context of the stand
22
taken by the appellant before the High Court. In the said writ

petitions,   the     appellant   had        asserted   that    the     fabric

manufactured by the appellant was not amenable to excise duty

as it was not removed from the premises within the meaning of

Rules 9 and 49 of the Rules.
Indisputably, the purport of the

stated Rules has been finally answered by this Court in M/s.
J.K.

Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mills Ltd. & Anr. vs. Union of

India & Ors.12
after resolving the conflicting opinions of different

High Courts including of the High Court of Delhi.                  The stand

taken by the appellant in the writ petition has been negatived by

this Court, in
the said decision
. Thus, the question relating to

liability to pay excise duty was not and could not have been

disputed     by    the   appellant   at     least   after   this    decision.
Concededly, the appellant had filed writ petitions taking clue

from the exposition of the High Court of Delhi in
J.K. Cotton

Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. & Ors.
(supra @ F.N.1).
That view has been finally dealt with by this Court in M/s.
J.K.

Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mills Ltd.
(supra @ F.N.12),

fastening liability on the assessee to pay excise duty.

12 1987 (Supp) SCC 350
23
19. Additionally, it may be apposite to underscore the purport

of the interim conditional stay granted by the High Court of Delhi

whilst entertaining the writ petitions filed by the appellant.

Initially, vide order dated 25.5.1981, interim relief was granted in

terms of the Prayer clause (a) of Civil Miscellaneous Petition No.

1699/1981, reproduced hitherto.         By this Prayer clause, the

appellant had expressed its willingness to file undertaking/bond

in Form B­13 referable to Rule 9B supported by bank guarantee

for an amount equivalent to specified differential duty in respect

of the yarn in question. The said interim relief was then modified

on 14.5.1985.    The fact remains that the appellant voluntarily

furnished requisite bonds in Form B­13 referable to Rule 9B

supported by bank guarantee for equivalent amount of the

differential duty. It is not an undertaking filed pursuant to the

order of the Court.
Concededly, the order disposing of the writ

petitions does not absolve the appellant from the said bonds; nor

the endorsements made thereon and on the monthly RT­12

returns, indicating that it was a provisional assessment have

been ordered to be effaced. Suffice it to observe that the order

dated 10/12.3.1993 passed by the High Court of Delhi, disposing
24
of the writ petitions filed by the appellant in no way extricate the

appellant from the process to which the appellant had voluntarily

submitted itself at its own volition, namely, under Rule 9B of the

Rules. Thus, it was not a case of duty not levied or not paid or

short­levied or short­paid. The understanding of the parties was

absolutely clear that the appellant was liable to pay excise duty,

but for the exposition of the High Court of Delhi in
J.K. Cotton

Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. & Ors.
(supra @ F.N.1).

Understood thus, the appellant is obliged to fulfill its statutory

obligations including those arising from the undertaking/bonds

in Form B­13 and cannot resile from the process to which it had

submitted itself without any demur, namely under Rule 9B of the

Rules.
20.
Indeed, the High Court of Delhi while disposing of the writ

petitions vide order dated 10/12.3.1993, had adverted to the

decision of this Court in
Rohit Mills Ltd.
(supra).       On a fair

reading of that decision, it is obvious that the Court dealt with

two situations referred to therein.     First, where Show Cause

Notices under
Section 11A
of the Act have been served and the

claim does not cover any period beyond six months from the date
25
of receipt of the notices. Second, where there is dispute as to

whether the notice under Section 11A had been issued or not.
In

the present case, none of the above is attracted; and for the same

reason the exposition in paragraphs 30 to 33 of M/s.
J.K. Cotton

Spinning and Weaving Mills Ltd.
(supra @ F.N.12), on which

reliance has been placed by the appellant, would be of no avail to

the appellant.
21.
Section 11A
of the Act as applicable at the relevant time,

would apply to cases of recovery of duties not levied or not paid

or short­levied or short­paid etc. The Section, as applicable at

the relevant time, read thus: ­
        “11A.     Recovery of duties not levied or not paid or short­
        levied or short­paid or erroneously refunded. ­

        (1)      When any duty of excise has not been levied or
        paid or has been short­levied or short­paid or erroneously
        refunded, whether or not such non­levy or non­payment,
        short­levy or short payment or erroneous refund, as the
        case may be, was on the basis of any approval, acceptance
        or assessment relating to the rate of duty on or valuation of
        excisable goods under any other provisions of this Act or the
        rules made thereunder, a Central Excise Officer may,
        within one year from the relevant date, serve notice on the
        person chargeable with the duty which has not been levied
        or paid or which has been short­levied or short­paid or to
        whom the refund has erroneously been made, requiring him
        to show cause why he should not pay the amount specified
        in the notice:
Provided that where any duty of excise has not
        been levied or paid or has been short­levied or short­paid or
        erroneously refunded by reason of fraud, collusion or any
        wilful mis­statement or suppression of facts, or
26
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of the
rules made thereunder with intent to evade payment of
duty, by such person or his agent, the provisions of this
sub­section shall have effect, as if for the words one year,
the words “five years” were substituted:
Explanation .—Where the service of the notice is stayed by
an order of a Court, the period of such stay shall be
excluded in computing the aforesaid period of one year or
five years, as the case may be.
(1A)      When any duty of excise has not been levied or
paid or has been short­levied or short paid or erroneously
refunded, by reason of fraud, collusion or any wilful
misstatement or suppression of facts, or contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder with intent to evade payment of duty, by such
person or his agent, to whom a notice is served under the
proviso to sub­section (1) by the Central Excise Officer, may
pay duty in full or in part as may be accepted by him, and
the interest payable thereon under section 11AB and
penalty equal to twenty­five per cent. of the duty specified in
the notice or the duty so accepted by such person within
thirty days of the receipt of the notice.
(2)       Central Excise Officer shall, after considering the
representation, if any, made by the person on whom notice
is served under sub­section (1), determine the amount of
duty of excise due from such person (not being in excess of
the amount specified in the notice) and thereupon such
person shall pay the amount so determined:
Provided that if such person has paid the duty in
full together with, interest and penalty under sub­section
(1A), the proceedings in respect of such person and other
persons to whom notice is served under sub­section (1)
shall, without prejudice to the provisions of
sections 9
, 9A
and 9AA, be deemed to be conclusive as to the matters
stated therein:
Provided further that, if such person has paid
duty in part, interest and penalty under sub­section (1A),
the Central Excise Officer, shall determine the amount of
duty or interest not being in excess of the amount partly
due from such person.
(2A)    Where any notice has been served on a person
under sub­section (1), the Central Excise Officer,—
27
(a)            in case any duty of excise has not been
levied or paid or has been short­levied or short­paid or
erroneously refunded, by reason of fraud, collusion or any
wilful misstatement or suppression of facts, or
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of the
rules made thereunder with intent to evade payment of
duty, where it is possible to do so, shall determine the
amount of such duty, within a period of one year; and
(b)       in any other case, where it is possible to do so,
shall determine the amount of duty of excise which has not
been levied or paid or has been short­levied or short­paid or
erroneously refunded, within a period of six months, from
the date of service of the notice on the person under sub­
section (1).
(2B)      Where any duty or excise has not been levied or
paid or has been short­levied or short­paid or erroneously
refunded, the person, chargeable with the duty, may pay
the amount of duty on the basis of his own ascertainment of
such duty or on the basis of duty ascertained by a Central
Excise Officer before service of notice on him under sub­
section (1) in respect of the duty, and inform the Central
Excise Officer of such payment in writing, who, on receipt of
such information shall not serve any notice under sub­
section (1) in respect of the duty so paid:
Provided that the Central Excise Officer may
determine the amount of short payment of duty, if any,
which in his opinion has not been paid by such person and
then, the Central Excise Officer shall proceed to recover
such amount in the manner specified in this section, and
the period of “one year” referred to in sub­ section (1) shall
be counted from the date of receipt of such information of
payment.
Explanation 1. —Nothing contained in this sub­
section shall apply in a case where the duty was not levied
or was not paid or was short­levied or was short­paid or was
erroneously refunded by reason of fraud, collusion or any
wilful mis­statement or suppression of facts, or
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of the
rules made thereunder with intent to evade payment of
duty.
28
Explanation 2. —For the removal of doubts, it is
hereby declared that the interest under section 11AB shall
be payable on the amount paid by the person under this
sub­section and also on the amount of short­payment of
duty, if any, as may be determined by the Central Excise
Officer, but for this sub­section.
Explanation 3 .—For the removal of doubts, it is
hereby declared that no penalty under any of the provisions
of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be imposed in
respect of payment of duty under this sub­section and
interest thereon.
(2C)     The provisions of sub­section (2B) shall not apply
to any case where the duty had become payable or ought to
have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill,
2001 receives the assent of the President.
(3)        For the purposes of this section—
(i) “refund” includes rebate of duty of excise on excisable
goods exported out of India or on excisable materials used
in the manufacture of goods which are exported out of
India;
(ii) “relevant date” means,—
(a)    in the case of excisable goods on which duty of
      excise has not been levied or paid or has been short­
      levied or short­paid—

           (A)    where under the rules made under this Act a
           periodical return, showing particulars of the duty
           paid on the excisable goods removed during the
           period to which the said return relates, is to be
           filed by a manufacturer or a producer or a licensee
           of a warehouse, as the case may be, the date on
           which such return is so filed;
(B)    where no periodical return as aforesaid is
           filed, the last date on which such return is to be
           filed under the said rules;
(C)   in any other case, the date on which the
           duty is to be paid under this Act or the rules made
           thereunder;
29
(b)   in a case where duty of excise is provisionally
          assessed under this Act or the rules made thereunder,
          the date of adjustment of duty after the final assessment
          thereof;
(c)   in the case of excisable goods on which duty of
          excise has been erroneously refunded, the date of such
          refund.”
22. The case at hand, however, would come within the

dispensation predicated by Rule 9B of the Rules, which deals

with provisional assessment to duty. The same reads thus:­


       “Rule 9B. Provisional assessment to duty.­                (1)
       Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules,­
(a) where the proper officer is satisfied that an assessee is
       unable to produce any document or furnish any information
       necessary for the assessment of duty on any excisable
       goods; or
(b) where the proper officer deems it necessary to subject
       the excisable goods to any chemical or any other test for the
       purpose of assessment of duty thereon; or
(c) where an assessee has produced all the necessary
       documents and furnished full information for the
       assessment of duty, but the proper officer deems it
       necessary to make further inquiry (including the inquiry to
       satisfy himself about the due observance of the conditions
       imposed in respect of the goods after their removal) for
       assessing the duty;
the proper officer may, either on a written request made by
       the assessee or on his own accord, direct that the duty
       leviable on such goods shall, pending the production of
       such documents or furnishing of such information or
       completion of such test or enquiry, be assessed
       provisionally at such rate or such value (which may not
       necessarily be the rate or price declared by the assessee) as
       may be indicated by him, if such assessee executes a bond
       in the proper form with such surety or sufficient security in
30
such amount, or under such conditions as the proper officer
       deems fit, binding himself for payment of the difference
       between the amount of duty as provisionally assessed and
       as finally assessed.
(2)      xxx                xxx                xxx

       (3) The Collector may permit the assessee to enter into a
       general bond in the proper form with such surety or
       sufficient security in such amount or under such conditions
       as the Collector approves for assessment of any goods
       provisionally from time to time:
Provided that, in the event of death, insolvency or
       insufficiency of the surety or where the amount of the bond
       is inadequate, the Collector may in his discretion demand a
       fresh bond and may, if the security furnished for a bond is
       not adequate, demand additional security.
(4) The goods provisionally assessed under sub­rule (1) may
       be cleared for home consumption or export in the same
       manner as the goods which are not so assessed.
(5) When the duty leviable on the goods is assessed finally in
       accordance with the provisions of these rules, the duty
       provisionally assessed shall be adjusted against the duty
       finally assessed, and if the duty provisionally assessed falls
       short of, or is in excess of the duty finally assessed, the
       assessee, shall pay the deficiency or be entitled to a refund
       as the case may be.”
23. Indisputably, the appellant voluntarily executed bonds in

Form B­13 referable to Rule 9B of the Rules and also furnished

bank guarantee for an amount equivalent to the differential

amount of duty in respect of the fabric in question.                    The

authorities have made endorsements on the bonds and on the

monthly RT­12 returns filed by the assessee, indicating that it

was a case of provisional assessment. Having submitted to that
31
process, it is not open to the appellant to urge that an express

order of provisional assessment has not been passed by the

authorities.
24.     Be that as it may, the stand taken by the parties as

recorded in the order dated 10/12.3.1993, is limited to accepting

the fact that if notice is required to be given, the same will be

given and
in that case
it will be open to the appellant to file

response thereto and further, the authorities would take decision

after giving opportunity to the assessee.   Nothing more can be

read into the order dated 10/12.3.1993 passed by the High

Court of Delhi. It is certainly not an order to undo the obligation

accepted by the assessee by voluntarily executing the bonds in

the prescribed format, namely, Form B­13 referable to Rule 9B of

the Rules ­ to treat the process as provisional assessment until

the disposal of the writ petitions.    It is also noticed that the

authorities have later on passed the final order after the disposal

of the writ petitions.
25. A priori, the authorities have not violated any stipulation or

direction contained in the order dated 10/12.3.1993 passed by
32
the High Court of Delhi and for having proceeded in accordance

with law for the period between 25.5.1981 to 13/14.5.1985.
26. Reverting to the decision of the Division Bench of the High

Court of Judicature at Bombay in
The Jam Shri Ranjitsinghji
(supra), similar argument was considered and the High Court,

after detailed analysis, concluded that in a case such as the

present one, it is not open to the assessee to insist for a notice

under
Section 11A
of the Act, which has no bearing in cases of

provisional assessment.        The High Court of Judicature at

Bombay, while dealing with similar arguments, observed thus:­

       “33.     The question, therefore, to be considered is, firstly,
       whether circumstances for making provisional assessment
       existed in the present case and secondly, whether a
       provisional assessment order was made before clearance of
       the yarn for captive consumption?
34.       With reference to the first contention, the
       argument of the appellant is that none of the circumstances
       for making provisional assessment set out in Rule 9B
       existed in the present case. Moreover, classification list and
       the price list were already approved, and therefore, there
       was no scope for making provisional assessment. There is
       no merit in this contention because under Rule 9­B(1)(c) of
       the 1944 Rules, even after the assessee has produced all the
       necessary documents and furnished full information for the
       assessment of duty it was open to the assessing officer to
       make provisional assessment either on a written request
       made by the assessee or if the proper officer deemed it
       necessary to make further inquiry. In the present case,
       admittedly there was a dispute pending before the Delhi
       High Court regarding the excisability of the yarn cleared for
33
captive consumption. Pending final decision of the Delhi
       High Court, it was open to the appellant to seek and to the
       proper officer to allow clearance of yarn for captive
       consumption on provisional assessment basis. In fact, in
       the B­13 Bond it is recorded that the appellant had sought
       provisional assessment. Even if the contention of the
       appellant that the B­13 Bond was executed at the instance
       of the excise authorities, is accepted, in view of the fact that
       a dispute was pending before the Delhi High Court, it was
       open to the proper officer to insist on clearing the yarn for
       captive consumption on provisional assessment basis.
35.       The next question to be considered is, whether a
       provisional assessment order was in fact made before
       clearance of yarn for captive consumption on provisional
       assessment basis? It is not in dispute that during the period
       from May, 1981 to May, 1984 the appellant had cleared the
       yarn for captive consumption by executing B­13 Bond
       which is applicable to provisionally assessed goods. It is
       pertinent to note that the Delhi High Court by its interim
       order had not directed the appellant to execute B­13 Bond.
       Apart from B­13 Bond, there are various types of Bonds
       specified in Appendix I to the 1944 Rules, which could be
       executed by the appellant. The fact that the appellant
       claims to have executed the B­13 Bond at the instance of
       the revenue clearly shows that as per the directions given by
       the proper officer, the clearances have been effected on
       provisional assessment basis by executing B­13 Bond.
36.       It is not the case of the appellant that B­13 bond
       was executed inadvertently or by mistake. Therefore, having
       consciously cleared the yarn for captive consumption on
       provisional assessment basis by executing B­13 Bond as
       directed by the excise authorities, it is not open to the
       appellant to contend that there was no order/directions to
       clear the yarn on provisional assessment basis.”
27. The decisions of this Court, to which our attention has been

invited by the learned counsel for the appellant, have been

considered by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay.                     The

High Court rightly observed that the said decisions have no
34
application to case of provisional assessment followed by a final

assessment.     While dealing with those decisions, the Court

observed thus:­

       “39.       At the outset, it may be noted that the
       observations made by the Apex Court in all the above cases
       regarding the issuance of notice under
Section 11
­A of the
       1944 Act was in the context of the excise duty that became
       payable on account of the Apex Court upholding the validity
       of the amendment to Rule 9 and 49 of the 1944 Rules with
       retrospective effect from 28.2.1944. Obviously, the said
       observations were meant to apply to cases where the final
       assessments were already made and not in respect of cases
       where the assessments were provisional, because duty
       liability is determined only at the time of final assessment.
       In other words, what is held in all the above cases is that, in
       spite of the retrospective amendment to Rule 9 and 49 is
       upheld, where the assessments are already finalised the
       duty under the amended Rule 9 and 49 can be recovered
       only by issuing notice under Section 11A of the 1944 Act.
40.       This is evident from the fact that in the case of
J.K.
       Cotton Mills
(supra) in respect of the clearances effected
       during the pendency of the dispute, there was no direction
       to clear the goods on provisional assessment basis. In that
       case, neither the goods were cleared by executing B­13
       Bond nor there were any endorsements made on the RT­12
       returns to the effect that the assessments were provisional.
       Moreover, in the show cause notice issued by the revenue it
       was not even averred that the goods were cleared on
       provisional assessment basis. In fact, Assistant Collector
in
       that case
treated the assessments as provisional solely on
       the premise that the matter was subjudice and the basic
       argument of the revenue was that the stay granted by the
       Delhi High Court virtually amounted to stay of service of
       notice under
Section 11
­
A of the Excise Act
. In the facts of
       that case, where the assessments had attained finality and
       where there was no evidence whatsoever to establish that
       the clearances were effected on provisional assessment
       basis, the Apex Court held that in the absence of an express
       order of provisional assessment made under Rule 9B, the
       assessments cannot be treated as provisional.”
35
28. As noticed earlier, this decision of the High Court of

Judicature at Bombay was assailed by the assessee before this

Court by way of Civil Appeal No. 1551/2008, which came to be

summarily dismissed on 7.3.2008. We are conscious of the fact

that this Court had summarily dismissed the said appeal.

Nevertheless, the view expressed by the High Court of Judicature

at Bombay, as reproduced above, commends to us.
29. The appellant had placed emphasis on the decision in
The

Bhopal   Sugar    Industries   Ltd.
(supra)   and
R.B.F.   Rig

Corporation, Mumbai
(supra) to contend that the Department

cannot be permitted to take contrary position than the direction

given by the High Court of Delhi.      For the reasons indicated

hitherto, in our opinion, the basis of this submission is ill­

founded. The authorities have not been nor could be prohibited

by the High Court of Delhi from proceeding with the matter in

accordance with law. In the present case, all that the authorities

have done is to follow the procedure consequent to provisional

assessment, by passing a final order and raising demand on the
36
basis of that order. The appellant, as a matter of fact, in terms of

the conditional interim order is obliged to discharge its obligation

in terms of the bonds executed in Form B­13 and the monthly

RT­12 returns filed from time to time for the relevant period.
30. It is not necessary for this Court to dilate on the other

observations in the decision of the High Court of Judicature at

Bombay in
The Jam Shri Ranjitsinghji
(supra).
For the same

reason, it is not necessary for us to deal with the exposition in
Metal Forgings
(supra).     That decision has been pressed into

service to assail the finding of the Commissioner of Central

Excise (Appeals), who had observed that the order passed to

finalize the assessment based on the RT­12 returns itself be

treated as Show Cause Notice.       It is not necessary to dilate

further on this aspect.
31. Similarly, the exposition of this Court in
Metal Forgings
(supra) and
Hindustan National Glass & Industries Ltd.
(supra) to urge that specific order was required to be passed

before an assessment is treated as a provisional assessment, will

be of no avail considering the execution of bonds in Form B­13

by the appellant­assessee at its own volition, which is referable to
37
provisional assessment procedure under Rule 9B of the Rules.

Once the appellant submitted itself to that procedure without

any demur pending disposal of the writ petitions, it is not open to

later on resile therefrom. Permitting the assessee to do so, would

inevitably result in giving undue advantage and favour to the

assessee, who had invoked the remedy under
Article 226
of the

Constitution of India and sought interim protection on offering to

execute bonds in Form B­13 as is noted in the Prayer clause (a)

of the civil miscellaneous petition(s). For the same reason, the

circular issued by the Government of India pressed into service

will be of no avail to the appellant.
Further, the decisions in
Kalabharati Advertising
(supra) and
Jagmittar Sain Bhagat
(supra) will also be of no avail to the appellant.        For, the

appellant had voluntarily executed the bonds and also filed

monthly RT­12 returns, on which endorsement had been made

indicative of being a provisional assessment.
32. Taking overall view of the matter, we are of the considered

opinion that the appellant cannot be allowed to approbate and

reprobate ­ for inviting the High Court of Delhi to pass interim

order stipulating that the appellant would execute bonds in Form
38
B­13 referable to Rule 9B of the Rules and continue to file

monthly    RT­12    returns   from        time    to   time,   on   which

endorsements have been made indicating that it is a case of

provisional assessment. The appellant cannot now be permitted

to urge that it had not submitted to the process of provisional

assessment as such for lack of a specific order of the concerned

authority in that behalf. The order passed by the High Court of

Delhi on 10/12.3.1993, will have to be understood in proper

perspective and not to give undue advantage to or bestow favour

on the appellant and thereby deprive the legitimate State

exchequer.
33. Resultantly, this appeal deserves to be dismissed and the

same is accordingly dismissed with no order as to costs. Pending

interlocutory applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
…………………………..J
                                                 (A.M. Khanwilkar)



                                                 …………………………..J
                                                 (Dinesh Maheshwari)
New Delhi;
December 9, 2019.