[Cites
22
, Cited by
18
]
Supreme Court of India
Raj Kumari vs Surinder Pal Sharma on 17 December, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2143, (2020) 1 RECCIVR 729, (2020) 2 MAD LJ 55, (2020) 2 SCALE 549
Author:
S. Abdul Nazeer
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
S. Abdul Nazeer
REPORTABLE


                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.9683 OF 2019
                              (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 26957 OF 2018)

                         RAJ KUMARI AND OTHERS                                      .....   APPELLANTS

                                                        VERSUS

                         SURINDER PAL SHARMA                                        .....   RESPONDENT




                                                          JUDGMENT
Leave granted.
2.      On account of migration to Delhi on partition, Harbans Lal being a

                                 displaced person had vide application dated 13.04.1958, marked

                                 as Exhibit DW-1/P-3, applied for a two room accommodation at

                                 Gur Mandi, Civil Lines, Delhi with the Municipal Corporation of

                                 Delhi. This application records that Harbans Lal was a

                                 shopkeeper, Suhagwanti was his wife and Madan Lal, Puran

                                 Kumari, Surinder Kumar and Baby were his children. Madan Lal

                                 was described as being in service and all other children were
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
RAJNI MUKHI
Date: 2020.01.15
17:05:19 IST
described as dependants.
Reason:
3.      Harbans Lal died in 1965.
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018               Page 1 of 29
4.     On 15.03.1972, Suhagwanti Devi, being the wife of late Harbans

       Lal, was issued allotment letter for duplex type tenement under

       the Redevelopment Scheme at Gur-ki-Mandi for Rs. 14,325/-,

       which amount was payable in 20 equal annual instalments with

       interest at the rate of 5% per annum and on default, penal interest

       at the rate of 8% per annum. Collection charges at the rate of 24%

       were also payable. The allotment letter had a stipulation that the

       allottee would have to surrender vacant possession of Quarter No.

       27 New Padam Chand Land within 3 days. The allotment letter

       though not a marked Exhibit is an undisputed document.
5.     Suhagwanti Devi expired on 10.10.1999.
6.     Raj Kumari daughter of Harbans Lal, who by then was married, on

       or about 15.10.2004 filed a suit for partition of the tenement and

       decree of declaration that she and the defendants namely

       Surinder Pal Sharma, Puran Devi née Kumari, and Santosh Rani

       (widow of Madan Lal who had by then expired), were owners of

       1/4th unspecified and undivided share in the tenement. A decree

       for rendition of accounts and permanent injunction was also

       prayed for.
7.     The suit was contested by Surinder Pal Sharma, who in his written

       statement had propounded a registered Will dated 02.01.1992,
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018         Page 2 of 29
purportedly executed by Suhagwanti wherein the tenement had

       been bequeathed solely and absolutely to him. It was stated that

       husband of Raj Kumari namely Ramesh Kumar was an attesting

       witness to the Will. Puran Devi and Santosh Rani despite service

       did not file their written statements. Santosh Rani during the

       pendency of the suit expired and was represented by her daughter

       Veena Malhotra. Puran Devi has also expired and is now

       represented by her daughter Meenakshi Sharma.
8.     The trial court vide judgment dated 17.01.2018 passed a

       preliminary decree of partition inter alia holding that the four

       siblings were entitled to 1/4th share each in the tenement after

       recording that Surinder Pal Sharma had failed to prove the

       purported registered Will of Suhagwanti dated 02.01.1992. The

       judgment held that Surinder Pal Sharma had failed to examine

       any of the attesting witnesses to the Will as required vide
Section

       68
of the Evidence Act and therefore, could not prove that

       Suhagwanti had signed the Will at her free will in a sound

       disposing state of mind after having understood its contents. It

       was also held that as per the testimony of Surinder Pal Sharma

       the Will marked Exhibit DW-1/2 was attested by one witness only

       and therefore, mandatory requirement of clause (c) to
Section 63
of the Indian Succession Act was not satisfied. The trial court
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018         Page 3 of 29
having perused the Will held that Mr. M.N. Sharma, Advocate had

       signed as a draftsman and counsel and not as an attesting

       witness. It was observed that mere registration of the Will, as

       proved by Parveen Kumar Rana, UDC working in the office of

       Sub-Registrar, Kashmere Gate, who has deposed as DW-3, would

       not prove the Will.
9.     Aggrieved, Surinder Pal Sharma had filed an appeal before the

       Delhi High Court, bearing RFA No. 234 of 2018, and by the

       impugned          judgment         dated      09.03.2018   has   succeeded.

       Consequently, the judgment of the trial court dated 17.01.2018

       has been set aside and the suit has been dismissed.
10.    The High Court held that the Will was attested by two witnesses

       namely Ramesh Kumar and Mr. M.N. Sharma, Advocate and thus,

       satisfies the requirement of clause (c) to
Section 63
of the Indian

       Succession Act. It was also observed that Surinder Pal Sharma

       had made all efforts to summon the attesting witness Mr. M.N.

       Sharma, Advocate, through court notices, but he did not appear. In

       light of
Section 71
of the Evidence Act, the Will should be treated

       as proved as the same was registered and the presumption under
Section 114
of the Evidence Act would apply. Accordingly, it

       should be presumed that the Sub-Registrar, who was holding a

       public office, had validly carried out the registration after
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018                  Page 4 of 29
ascertaining that the Will was attested by the two witnesses

       including Mr. M.N Sharma, Advocate. Reliance was placed on the

       judgment of this Court in M.B. Ramesh (Dead) by LRs. v. K.M.

       Veeraje Urs (Dead) by LRs. and Others 1 which we shall

       subsequently advert to. The contention of the first appellant before

       us, namely Raj Kumari, that Surinder Pal Sharma had forged her

       signature for obtaining mutation in the Municipal Corporation

       record was brushed aside observing that at best it would show

       that the mutation was illegal but this would have no bearing on the

       question of attestation and validity of the Will.
11.    Raj Kumari, Meenakshi Sharma and Veena Malhotra have

       preferred the present appeal before this Court with a prayer that

       the preliminary decree of partition passed by the trial court should

       be restored and the impugned judgment of the High Court dated

       09.03.2018 passed in RFA No. 234 of 2018 should be set aside.
12.    We would first expound the law relating to the execution and proof

       of Wills under the Indian Succession Act and the Evidence Act.

       Clause (c) of
Section 63
of the Indian Succession Act reads as

       follows:
“63. Execution of unprivileged wills.––Every testator,
                  not being a soldier employed in an expedition or
                  engaged in actual warfare, or an airman so employed
1
(2013) 7 SCC 490
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018              Page 5 of 29
or engaged, or a mariner at sea, shall execute his will
                  according to the following rules––
(a)-(b)      *               *           *
(c) The will shall be attested by two or more witnesses,
                  each of whom has seen the testator sign or affix his
                  mark to the will or has seen some other person sign
                  the will, in the presence and by the direction of the
                  testator, or has received from the testator a personal
                  acknowledgment of his signature or mark, or of the
                  signature of such other person; and each of the
                  witnesses shall sign the will in the presence of the
                  testator, but it shall not be necessary that more than
                  one witness be present at the same time, and no
                  particular form of attestation shall be necessary.”

               As per the mandate of clause (c), a Will is required to be

       attested by two or more witnesses each of whom should have

       seen the testator sign or put his mark on the Will or should have

       seen some other person sign the Will in his presence and by the

       direction of the testator or should have received from the testator

       a personal acknowledgment of his signature or mark, or of the

       signature of such other person. The Will must be signed by the

       witness in the presence of the testator, but it is not necessary that

       more than one witness should be present at the same time. No

       particular form of attestation is necessary. Thus, there is no

       prescription in the statute that the testator must necessarily sign

       the Will in the presence of the attesting witnesses only or that the

       attesting witnesses must put their signatures on the Will
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018               Page 6 of 29
simultaneously, that is, at the same time, in the presence of each

       other and the testator.
13.    The need and necessity for stringent requirements of clause (c) to
Section 63
of the Indian Succession Act has been elucidated and

       explained in several decisions.
In
H. Venkatachala Iyengar v.

       B.N. Thimmajamma and Others.2
dilating on the statutory and

       mandatory requisites for validating the execution of the Will, this

       Court had highlighted the dissimilarities between the Will which is

       a     testamentary         instrument       vis-à-vis   other   documents    of

       conveyancing, by emphasising that the Will is produced before the

       court after the testator who has departed from the world, cannot

       say that the Will is his own or it is not the same. This factum

       introduces an element of solemnity to the decision on the question

       where the Will propounded is proved as the last Will or testament

       of the departed testator. Therefore, the propounder to succeed

       and prove the Will is required to prove by satisfactory evidence

       that (i) the Will was signed by the testator; (ii) the testator at the

       time was in a sound and disposing state of mind; (iii) the testator

       understood the nature and effect of the dispositions; and (iv) that

       the testator had put his signature on the document of his own free

       will. Ordinarily, when the evidence adduced in support of the Will

       is disinterested, satisfactory and sufficient to prove the sound and
2
AIR 1959 SC 443
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018                    Page 7 of 29
disposing state of mind of the testator and his signature as

       required by law, courts would be justified in making a finding in

       favour of the propounder. Such evidence would discharge the

       onus on the propounder to prove the essential facts. At the same

       time, this Court observed that it is necessary to remove suspicious

       circumstances surrounding the execution of the Will and therefore

       no hard and fast or inflexible rules can be laid down for the

       appreciation of the evidence to this effect.
14.
In
Jaswant Kaur v. Amrit Kaur and Others3
, it was held that

       suspicion generated by disinheritance is not removed by mere

       assertion of the propounder that the Will bears the signature of the

       testator or that the testator was in sound and disposing state of

       mind when the Will disinherits those like the wife and children of

       the testator who would have normally received their due share in

       the estate. At the same time, the testator may have his own

       reasons for excluding them. Therefore, it is obligatory for the

       propounder to remove all the legitimate suspicions before a Will is

       accepted as a valid last Will of the testator. Earlier, in Surendra

       Pal and Others. v. Dr. (Mrs.) Saraswati Arora and Another 4, this

       Court had observed that the propounder should demonstrate that

       the Will was signed by the testator and at the relevant time, the
3
(1977) 1 SCC 369
4
(1974) 2 SCC 600
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018         Page 8 of 29
testator was in a sound and disposing state of mind and had

       understood the nature and effect of the dispositions, that he had

       put his signature on the testimony of his own free will and at least

       two witnesses have attested the Will in his presence. However,

       suspicion may arise where the signature is doubtful or when the

       testator is of feeble mind or is overawed by powerful minds

       interested in getting his property or where the disposition appears

       to be unnatural, improbable and unfair or where there are other

       reasons to doubt the testator’s free will and mind. The nature and

       quality of proof must commensurate with such essentiality so as to

       remove any suspicion which a reasonable or prudent man may, in

       the prevailing circumstances, entertain. Where coercion and fraud

       are alleged by an objector, the onus is on him to prove the same

       and on his failure, probate of the Will must necessarily be granted

       when it is established that the testator had full testamentary

       capacity and had in fact executed the Will with a free will and

       mind.
In
Rabindra Nath Mukherjee and Another v. Panchanan

       Banerjee (Dead) by LRs
. and Others 5, this Court had observed

       that the doubt would be less significant if the Will is registered and

       the Sub-Registrar certifies that the same was read over to the

       executor who, on doing so, had admitted the contents. In each

       case, the court must be satisfied as to the mandate and
5
(1995) 4 SCC 459
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018           Page 9 of 29
requirements of clause (c) to
Section 63
of the Indian Succession

       Act.
15.
In
Jagdish Chand Sharma v. Narain Singh Saini (Dead)

       Through LRs
. and Others6, this Court referring to
Section 63
of

       the Indian Succession Act had illustrated that the provisions

       contemplate that in order to validly execute the Will, the testator

       would have to sign or affix his mark to it or the same has to be

       signed by some other person in his presence and on his direction.

       Further, the signature or mark of the testator or signature of the

       person signing for him has to be so placed that it was intended to

       give effect to the writing as a Will.
Section 63
mandates that the

       Will should be attested by two or more witnesses each of whom

       has seen the testator sign or affix his mark to it or has seen some

       other person sign it in the presence and on the direction of the

       testator,      or    has     received       from    the   testator   a    personal

       acknowledgement of his signature or mark, or the signature of

       such other person and each of the witnesses has signed the Will

       in the presence of the testator, though it is not necessary that

       more than one witness be present at the same time and that no

       particular form of attestation is necessary. The execution and

       attestation of the Will are mandatory in nature and any failure and
6
(2015) 8 SCC 615
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018                        Page 10 of 29
deficiency in adhering to the essential requirements would result

       in invalidation of the instrument of disposition of the property.
16.
Sections 68
and
71
of the Evidence Act, which relate to proof of

       documents required by law to be attested, read as under:
“68. Proof of execution of document required by
                  law to be attested.—If a document is required by law
                  to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until
                  one attesting witness at least has been called for the
                  purpose of proving its execution, if there be an
                  attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of
                  the Court and capable of giving evidence:
Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an
                  attesting witness in proof of the execution of any
                  document, not being a will, which has been registered
                  in accordance with the provisions of the
Indian
                  Registration Act, 1908
(16 of 1908), unless its
                  execution by the person by whom it purports to have
                  been executed is specifically denied.
*            *           *
71. Proof when attesting witness denies the
                  execution.—If the attesting witness denies or does not
                  recollect the execution of the document, its execution
                  may be proved by other evidence.”
17.
In
Jagdish Chand Sharma
(supra) referring to
Sections 68
and
71
of the Evidence Act, it was observed:
“22.2. These statutory provisions, thus, make it
                  incumbent for a document required by law to be
                  attested to have its execution proved by at least one of
                  the attesting witnesses, if alive, and is subject to the
                  process of the court conducting the proceedings
                  involved and is capable of giving evidence. This rigour
                  is, however, eased in case of a document also required
                  to be attested but not a will, if the same has been
                  registered in accordance with the provisions of the
Registration Act, 1908
unless the execution of this
                  document by the person said to have executed it
                  denies the same. In any view of the matter, however,
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018              Page 11 of 29
the relaxation extended by the proviso is of no avail
                  qua a will. The proof of a will to be admissible in
                  evidence with probative potential, being a document
                  required by law to be attested by two witnesses, would
                  necessarily need proof of its execution through at least
                  one of the attesting witnesses, if alive, and subject to
                  the process of the court concerned and is capable of
                  giving evidence.
22.3.
Section 71
provides, however, that if the attesting
                  witness denies or does not recollect the execution of
                  the document, its execution may be proved by the
                  other evidence. The interplay of the above statutory
                  provisions and the underlying legislative objective
                  would be of formidable relevance in evaluating the
                  materials on record and recording the penultimate
                  conclusions. With this backdrop, expedient it would be,
                  to scrutinise the evidence adduced by the parties.
xxx      xxx    xxx

                  57.1. Viewed in premise,
Section 71
of the 1872 Act
                  has to be necessarily accorded a strict interpretation.
The two contingencies permitting the play of this
                  provision, namely, denial or failure to recollect the
                  execution by the attesting witness produced, thus a
                  fortiori has to be extended a meaning to ensure that
                  the limited liberty granted by
Section 71
of the 1872 Act
                  does not in any manner efface or emasculate the
                  essence and efficacy of
Section 63
of the Act and
Section 68
of the 1872 Act. The distinction between
                  failure on the part of an attesting witness to prove the
                  execution and attestation of a will and his or her denial
                  of the said event or failure to recollect the same, has to
                  be      essentially   maintained.     Any     unwarranted
                  indulgence, permitting extra liberal flexibility to these
                  two stipulations, would render the predication of
Section 63
of the Act and
Section 68
of the 1872 Act,
                  otiose. The propounder can be initiated to the benefit of
Section 71
of the 1872 Act only if the attesting
                  witness/witnesses, who is/are alive and is/are
                  produced and in clear terms either denies/deny the
                  execution of the document or cannot recollect the said
                  incident. Not only, this witness/witnesses has/have to
                  be credible and impartial, the evidence adduced ought
                  to demonstrate unhesitant denial of the execution of
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018                Page 12 of 29
the document or authenticate real forgetfulness of such
                  fact. If the testimony evinces a casual account of the
                  execution and attestation of the document disregardful
                  of truth, and thereby fails to prove these two essentials
                  as per law, the propounder cannot be permitted to
                  adduce other evidence under cover of
Section 71
of
                  the 1872 Act. Such a sanction would not only be
                  incompatible with the scheme of
Section 63
of the Act
                  read with
Section 68
of the 1872 Act but also would be
                  extinctive of the paramountcy and sacrosanctity
                  thereof, a consequence, not legislatively intended. If
                  the evidence of the witnesses produced by the
                  propounder is inherently worthless and lacking in
                  credibility,
Section 71
of the 1872 Act cannot be
                  invoked to bail him (the propounder) out of the situation
                  to facilitate a roving pursuit. In absence of any touch of
                  truthfulness and genuineness in the overall approach,
                  this provision, which is not a substitute of
Section 63(c)
of the Act and
Section 68
of the 1872 Act, cannot be
                  invoked to supplement such failed speculative
                  endeavour.
57.2.
Section 71
of the 1872 Act, even if assumed to be
                  akin to a proviso to the mandate contained in
Section
                  63
of the Act and
Section 68
of the 1872 Act, it has to
                  be assuredly construed harmoniously therewith and not
                  divorced therefrom with a mutilative bearing. This
                  underlying principle is inter alia embedded in the
                  decision of this Court in
CIT v. Ajax Products Ltd.”

               After
referring to
H. Venkatachala Iyengar
(supra), this

       Court in
Jaswant Kaur
(supra) had laid down the following

       propositions of law:
“(1) Stated generally, a will has to be proved like any
                  other document, the test to be applied being the usual
                  test of the satisfaction of the prudent mind in such
                  matters. As in the case of proof of other documents, so
                  in the case of proof of wills, one cannot insist on proof
                  with mathematical certainty.
(2) Since
Section 63
of the Succession Act requires a
                  will to be attested, it cannot be used as evidence until,
                  as required by
Section 68
of the Evidence Act, one
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018                Page 13 of 29
attesting witness at least has been called for the
                  purpose of proving its execution, if there be an
                  attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of
                  the court and capable of giving evidence.
(3) Unlike other documents, the will speaks from the
                  death of the testator and therefore the maker of the will
                  is never available for deposing as to the circumstances
                  in which the will came to be executed. This aspect
                  introduces an element of solemnity in the decision of
                  the question whether the document propounded is
                  proved to be the last will and testament of the testator.
Normally, the onus which lies on the propounder can
                  be taken to be discharged on proof of the essential
                  facts which go into the making of the will.
(4) Cases in which the execution of the will is
                  surrounded by suspicious circumstances stand on a
                  different footing. A shaky signature, a feeble mind, an
                  unfair and unjust disposition of property, the
                  propounder himself taking a leading part in the making
                  of the will under which he receives a substantial benefit
                  and such other circumstances raise suspicion about
                  the execution of the will. That suspicion cannot be
                  removed by the mere assertion of the propounder that
                  the will bears the signature of the testator or that the
                  testator was in a sound and disposing state of mind
                  and memory at the time when the will was made, or
                  that those like the wife and children of the testator who
                  would normally receive their due share in his estate
                  were disinherited because the testator might have had
                  his own reasons for excluding them. The presence of
                  suspicious circumstances makes the initial onus
                  heavier and therefore, in cases where the
                  circumstances attendant upon the execution of the will
                  excite the suspicion of the court, the propounder must
                  remove all legitimate suspicions before the document
                  can be accepted as the last will of the testator.

                  (5) It is in connection with wills, the execution of which
                  is surrounded by suspicious circumstances that the test
                  of satisfaction of the judicial conscience has been
                  evolved. That test emphasises that in determining the
                  question as to whether an instrument produced before
                  the court is the last will of the testator, the court is
                  called upon to decide a solemn question and by reason
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018                Page 14 of 29
of suspicious circumstances the court has to be
                  satisfied fully that the will has been validly executed by
                  the testator.
(6) If a caveator alleges fraud, undue influence,
                  coercion, etc. in regard to the execution of the will,
                  such pleas have to be proved by him, but even in the
                  absence of such pleas, the very circumstances
                  surrounding the execution of the will may raise a doubt
                  as to whether the testator was acting of his own free
                  will. And then it is a part of the initial onus of the
                  propounder to remove all reasonable doubts in the
                  matter.”
18.
In
M.B. Ramesh
(supra) reference was made to the view

       expressed by the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in
Vishnu Ramkrishna v. Nathu Vithal and Others
7 wherein it was

       observed:
“27. […] We are dealing with the case of a will and we
                  must approach the problem as a court of conscience. It
                  is for us to be satisfied whether the document put
                  forward is the last will and testament of Gangabai. If
                  we find that the wishes of the testatrix are likely to be
                  defeated or thwarted merely by reason of want of
                  some technicality, we as a court of conscience would
                  not permit such a thing to happen. We have not heard
                  Mr Dharap on the other point; but assuming that
                  Gangabai had a sound and disposing mind and that
                  she wanted to dispose of her property as she in fact
                  has done, the mere fact that the propounders of the will
                  were negligent—and grossly negligent—in not
                  complying with the requirements of
Section 63
and
                  proving the will as they ought to have, should not deter
                  us from calling for the necessary evidence in order to
                  satisfy ourselves whether the will was duly executed or
                  not.”
                                                      (emphasis supplied)
7
AIR 1949 BOM 266
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018                Page 15 of 29
The judgment in
M.B. Ramesh
(supra) also refers to
Janki

       Narayan Bhoir v. Narayan Namdeo Kadam8
in which with

       reference to
Sections 68
and
71
of the Evidence Act, it was

       observed:
“22. […] 6. … It is true that although a will is required to
                  be attested by two witnesses it could be proved by
                  examining one of the attesting witnesses as per
Section 68
of the Evidence Act.
xxx        xxx      xxx
11. … Aid of
Section 71
can be taken only when the
                  attesting witnesses, who have been called, deny or fail
                  to recollect the execution of the document to prove it by
                  other evidence. …
12. …
Section 71
has no application when the one
                  attesting witness, who alone has been summoned, has
                  failed to prove the execution of the will and the other
                  attesting witness though available has not been
                  examined.”

               Highlighting the aforesaid aspects in
M.B. Ramesh
(supra),

       it was held that:
“28. As stated by this Court also in H. Venkatachala
                  Iyengar and Jaswant Kaur, while arriving at the finding
                  as to whether the will was duly executed, the Court
                  must satisfy its conscience having regard to the totality
                  of circumstances. The Court's role in matters
                  concerning wills is limited to examining whether the
                  instrument propounded as the last will of the deceased
                  is or is not that by the testator, and whether it is the
                  product of the free and sound disposing mind [as
                  observed by this Court in para 77 of
Gurdev Kaur v.
                  Kaki
]. In the present matter, there is no dispute about
                  these factors.”
8
(2003) 2 SCC 91
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018                  Page 16 of 29
19.
In
Jagdish Chand Sharma
(supra) reference was made to the

       facts of the case in
M.B. Ramesh
(supra) to observe that on

       consideration of the totality of circumstances emerging from the

       narration given by the attesting witness, the omission on the part

       of this witness to specifically state about the signature by the other

       attesting witness on the Will in the presence of the testatrix would

       amount to failure to recollect the fact which deficiency could be

       replenished with the aid of
Section 71
of the Evidence Act.
It was

       observed that the validity of the Will in
M.B. Ramesh
(supra) was

       upheld in the context of the attendant singular facts.
20.    On the question of need to examine the second attesting

       witnesses when one attesting witness falters, way back in 1921 in
Dhira Singh v. Moti Lal and Others9
, two judges of the Patna

       High Court had held that where the attesting witness was neither

       summoned nor examined under the provisions of
Section 68
of

       the Evidence Act, recourse to
Section 71
is impermissible. Under

       the provisions of
Section 68
of the Evidence Act, it is incumbent

       on the plaintiff/propounder to call the attesting witness even

       though he may be the defendant/opposite side. It was observed:
1. […]
Section 68
requires that a document which is
                  required by law to be attested shall not be used as
                  evidence until one attesting witness at least has been
                  called for the purpose of proving its execution, and
Section 71
enacts that if the attesting witness denies or
9
63 Ind. Cas. 266
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018               Page 17 of 29
does not recollect the execution of the document, its
                  execution may be proved by other evidence.
2. A case on all fours with the present case is that of
                  Tula Singh v. Gopal Singh 38 Ind. Cas. 604 : 1 P.L.J.
                  389 : 2 P.L.W. 353. In that case the learned Judges
                  decided that
Section 68
of the Evidence Act was
                  imperative and so long as there was a witness alive
                  and subject to the process of the Court, no document
                  which is required by law to be attested can be used in
                  evidence until such witness has been called. The fact
                  that, when sailed (sic – assailed), he will prove hostile,
                  does not excuse the party producing the document
                  from this duty. The learned Subordinate Judge was,
                  therefore, wrong in thinking that it was not necessary to
                  call the defendant No. 2.
21.    Majority of earlier judgments like
Vishnu Ramkrishna
(supra)

       follow the ratio in
Dhira Singh
(supra), with a few exceptions like

       Mt. Manki Kaur v. Hansraj Singh and Others10.
The issue was

       resolved beyond controversy and debate in
Janki Narayan Bhoir
(supra) wherein it has been held that clause (c) of
Section 63
of

       the Indian Succession Act requires and mandates attestation of a

       Will by two or more persons as witnesses, albeit
Section 68
of the

       Evidence Act gives concession to those who want to prove and

       establish a Will in the court of law by examining at least one

       attesting witness who could prove the execution of the Will viz.,

       attestation by the two witnesses and its execution in the manner

       contemplated by clause (c) to
Section 63
of the Indian Succession

       Act. However, where one attesting witness examined fails to prove
10
AIR 1938 Pat 301
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018                Page 18 of 29
due execution of the Will, then the other available attesting

       witness must be called to supplement his evidence to make it

       complete in all respects to comply with the requirement of proof as

       mandated by
Section 68
of the Evidence Act. It was held:
“11.
Section 71
of the Evidence Act is in the nature of a
                  safeguard to the mandatory provisions of
Section 68
of
                  the Evidence Act, to meet a situation where it is not
                  possible to prove the execution of the will by calling the
                  attesting witnesses, though alive. This section provides
                  that if an attesting witness denies or does not recollect
                  the execution of the will, its execution may be proved
                  by other evidence. Aid of
Section 71
can be taken only
                  when the attesting witnesses, who have been called,
                  deny or fail to recollect the execution of the document
                  to prove it by other evidence.
Section 71
has no
                  application to a case where one attesting witness, who
                  alone had been summoned, has failed to prove the
                  execution of the will and other attesting witnesses
                  though are available to prove the execution of the
                  same, for reasons best known, have not been
                  summoned before the court. It is clear from the
                  language of
Section 71
that if an attesting witness
                  denies or does not recollect execution of the document,
                  its execution may be proved by other evidence.
                  However, in a case where an attesting witness
                  examined fails to prove the due execution of will as
                  required under clause (c) of
Section 63
of the
                  Succession Act, it cannot be said that the will is proved
                  as per
Section 68
of the Evidence Act. It cannot be said
                  that if one attesting witness denies or does not
                  recollect the execution of the document, the execution
                  of will can be proved by other evidence dispensing with
                  the evidence of other attesting witnesses though
                  available to be examined to prove the execution of the
                  will. Yet another reason as to why other available
                  attesting witnesses should be called when the one
                  attesting witness examined fails to prove due execution
                  of the will is to avert the claim of drawing adverse
                  inference under
Section 114
Illustration (g) of the
Evidence Act
. Placing the best possible evidence, in
                  the given circumstances, before the Court for
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018                Page 19 of 29
consideration, is one of the cardinal principles of the
Indian Evidence Act
.
Section 71
is permissive and an
                  enabling section permitting a party to lead other
                  evidence in certain circumstances.
But
Section 68
is
                  not merely an enabling section. It lays down the
                  necessary requirements, which the court has to
                  observe before holding that a document is proved.
Section 71
is meant to lend assistance and come to the
                  rescue of a party who had done his best, but driven to
                  a state of helplessness and impossibility, cannot be let
                  down without any other means of proving due
                  execution by “other evidence” as well. At the same time
Section 71
cannot be read so as to absolve a party of
                  his obligation under
Section 68
read with
Section 63
of
                  the Act and liberally allow him, at his will or choice to
                  make available or not a necessary witness otherwise
                  available and amenable to the jurisdiction of the court
                  concerned and confer a premium upon his omission or
                  lapse, to enable him to give a go-by to the mandate of
                  law relating to the proof of execution of a will.”


               This judgment overruled the judgment of Manki Kaur

       (supra) and approved the ratio of
Vishnu Ramakrishna
(supra) to

       the effect that
Section 71
of the Evidence Act can be requisitioned

       when the attesting witnesses who were being called have failed to

       prove the execution of the Will by reason of either denying their

       own signatures, denying the signature of the testator or due to bad

       recollection as to the execution of the document.
Section 71
has

       no application when only one attesting witness who was called

       and examined has failed to prove the execution of the Will and the

       other available attesting witness was not summoned.
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018               Page 20 of 29
22.    The ratio in Janki was reiterated in
Benga Behera and Another

       v. Braja Kishore Nanda and Others
11. This judgment also

       examines the issue and question whether a Sub-Registrar in the

       matter of registration of documents under the provisions of
Indian

       Registration Act, 1908
can possibly be treated as a witness.

       Reference was made to
Sections 52
and
58
of the Registration

       Act to observe that the duty of the Registering Officer is to

       endorse the signature of every person presenting the document

       for registration and to make an endorsement to that effect, that is,

       to endorse only the admission or execution by the person who

       presented the document for registration. The Registering Officer

       can also endorse and certify the payment of money or delivery of

       goods made in the presence of the Registering Officer in

       reference to the execution of the document. The expression

       ‘attesting witness’ within the meaning of
Section 3
of the Transfer

       of Property Act and
Section 63
of the Indian Succession Act

       means “bearing witness to a fact”. The two valid conditions of

       attestation of documents are – (i) two or more attesting witnesses

       have seen the executant sign the instrument; (ii) each of them has

       signed the instrument in the presence of the executant. Further

       and importantly, attestation requires animus attestandi, that is, a

       person puts his signature on a document with the intent to attest it
11
(2007) 9 SCC 728
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018         Page 21 of 29
as a witness.
If a person puts his signature on a document only in

       discharge of a statutory duty, he may not be considered as an

       attesting witness as was held in
Dharam Singh v. Aso and

       Another12
.
Similarly, a scribe or an advocate who has drafted the

       document may not be the attesting witness as was held by this

       Court in
Jagdish Chand Sharma
(supra), for attestation requires

       that the witness should have put his signature animus attestandi,

       that is, for the purpose of attesting that he has seen the executant

       sign or has received from him a personal acknowledgement of his

       signature.
23.    Returning to the facts of the present case, it is submitted by

       Surinder        Pal     Sharma,        the     respondent   before   us,    that

       summons/notice were issued to Mr. M.N. Sharma, Advocate to

       appear as a witness but he could not be served and hence was

       not examined. Ramesh Kumar, it is submitted, was not summoned

       or examined as he was none other than the husband of Raj

       Kumari and would not have supported execution of the Will. The

       High Court has accordingly held that the Will being registered was

       proved in terms of
section 71
of the Evidence Act. This finding of

       the High Court is unacceptable, for recourse to
Section 71
of the

       Evidence Act is impermissible without examination of Ramesh

       Kumar. It would not matter if Ramesh Kumar is husband of Raj
12
1990 Suppl SCC 684
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018                    Page 22 of 29
Kumari.
Section 71
of the Evidence Act would come into

       operation, once and if all the attesting witnesses deny or do not

       recollect the execution of the document, that is, the Will. In that

       event, the execution can be proved by other evidence. The

       respondent accepts that Ramesh Kumar though a witness was not

       summoned and asked to depose as a witness and therefore, it

       cannot be said that Ramesh Kumar as an attesting witness had

       denied or did not recollect execution of the Will.
24.    Even on the question of “other evidence” we have grave and

       serious reservations. It is apparent that late father of Raj Kumari

       and Surinder Pal Sharma and grandfather of appellants

       Meenakshi Sharma and Veena Malhotra being a displaced person

       had applied for a two-room accommodation which was allotted to

       his wife Suhagwanti on 15.03.1972 as by then he had expired.

       One of the terms and conditions of the allotment was that the

       possession of the tenement would be issued on the payment of

       the first instalment and on giving an undertaking that she would

       vacate the quarter at Padam Chand Land within three days from

       the allotment letter. It has also come on record that Madan Lal, the

       eldest sibling was earning and in service at the time of allotment.

       There is also evidence that Madan Lal had contributed and
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018         Page 23 of 29
financially helped at the time of marriage of his sisters namely Raj

       Kumari and Puran Devi.
25.    There is no doubt that the Will was registered but there are

       several circumstances which cast doubt on the Will. Raj Kumari in

       her cross-examination with reference to the disputed Will of

       Suhagwanti has stated:
“Q. I put to you that mother namely Smt. Suhagwanti
                  had executed a Will in favour of your brother Mr.
                  Surender Pal and it was attested by your husband Sh.
                  Ramesh Kumar as attesting witness?
My mother had obtained signature of my husband who
                  is totally illiterate on a document on the pretext that she
                  intend to disowned my niece Ms. Veena Malhotra, who
                  had married at her own. My mother had told this fact to
                  me on the same day when she returned from the Office
                  of Sub Registrar.
It is correct that my husband has signed in the office of
                  Sub Registrar. Vol. But his signatures were obtained
                  under the pretext as I have above stated.
It is correct that photo of my mother is pasted on Mark
                  A. I cannot identify signature of my husband on Mark A.
                  I have never seen my husband signing any document.
                  It is wrong to suggest that my husband has signed at
                  point B on Mark A. It is wrong to suggest that my
                  husband has signed at point B on Mark A. It is wrong to
                  suggest that instalments of suit property were paid by
                  my brother Sh. Surender Pal Sharma. Vol. My mother
                  used to pay instalment and after her death Surender
                  Pal has paid 1 or 2 instalments. Again said, I used to
                  accompany my mother to Town Hall for making the
                  payment of instalments.”
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018                 Page 24 of 29
26.    Before filing the civil suit, Raj Kumari had issued a legal notice

       dated 25.09.2000 (Exhibit P-1/1) in which she had stated that

       Suhagwanti has died intestate leaving behind four children, that is,

       Raj Kumari, Surinder Pal Sharma, Madan Lal, represented

       through his wife Santosh Rani, and Puran Devi. Further, after the

       death of Suhagwanti, she had repeatedly requested Surinder Pal

       Sharma to partition the property with metes and bounds and give

       her due share. Surinder Pal Sharma had thereafter responded to

       the legal notice vide undated letter marked Exhibit PW-1/2

       accepting that Raj Kumari was his sister and that the tenement

       was allotted to their mother. He, however, had claimed that the

       tenement belongs to him as an absolute owner and therefore,

       there was no question of partition. The relevant portion of the said

       reply reads as under:
“For the reason that the said property is absolutely
                  belong to me, during the life time of my respected
                  mother Smt. Suhagwanti and the said property is
                  belong to me being the absolute ownership, thus no
                  question is arisen of partition of the said property. It is
                  in my possession during the life time of my mother and
                  is totally stands in all Govt. records in my name.
Thus it is not compulsory to me to give the reply of your
                  client’s further notice or any letter and she is fully
                  known about it. If you wish to approach the higher
                  authority it is the responsibility of your client to bear all
                  costs, legal expenses, whatsoever and also bear my
                  expenditure whatever may be suffer or gone to me in
                  this connection.”
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018                   Page 25 of 29
Clearly, Surinder Pal Sharma had not propounded and

       referred to the Will in his reply, which defence was taken by him

       for the first time in his written statement. This is also clear from the

       cross-examination of Surinder Pal Sharma wherein he had

       accepted as correct that the Will was not challenged by Raj

       Kumari in the court of law as she had come to know about the Will

       during the pendency of the present case (please refer page 97 of

       the paper book). Surinder Pal Sharma thus accepts that bestowal

       in his favour vide a written Will, was not known or within the

       knowledge of Raj Kumari, a surprising statement as Ramesh

       Kumar is husband of Raj Kumari. Equally intriguing is the

       statement of Surinder Pal Sharma in his cross-examination that he

       had not informed his lawyer while drafting the reply (to the legal

       notice) that he was in possession of the Will executed by his

       mother. Surinder Pal Sharma in his cross examination had

       accepted that in 1972, he was studying in Class VI and was hardly

       11 to 12 years of age (This statement is at variance with the age

       of Surinder Pal Sharma in Exhibit DW-1/P-3 but we would accept

       the statement in the oral testimony). Surinder Pal Sharma had

       claimed that he would repair cycles and had contributed to the

       payments towards instalments of the quarter. It is in this aforesaid

       factual background that we would examine the Will, its wordings

       and contents.
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018            Page 26 of 29
27.    The purported Will dated 02.01.1992 is a rather short and an odd

       one. For the sake of completeness, we would like to reproduce the

       same in its entirety.
“                            WILL DEED

                      THIS “WILL DEED” is executed on this 2 nd day of
                  Jan. 1992 at Delhi by Shrimati Suhag Wanti aged
                  about 65 year w/o Late Shri Harbans Lal R/o H. No. 26,
                  Duplex Flat, Gur Mandi, Delhi – 7 hereinafter called the
                  Testator.
IN FAVOUR OF

                      Shri Surinder Lal Sharma S/o Late Shri Harbans
                  Lal R/o H.No. 26, Duplex Flat, Gur Mandi, Delhi-7,
                  hereinafter called the Testimony.
LIFE IS BUT SHORT AND UNCERTAIN, God know
                  when it may come to end. Hence I with my free will and
                  consent and without any force or compulsion from
                  others and in my sound estate of mind to make this will
                  as under:-
Whereas I the Testator is the owner and in the
                  possession of built up property bearing No.26, built on
                  a piece of land area measuring 80 Ft. situated in the
                  abadi known as Duplex Flat, Gur Mandi, Delhi-7, and
                  bounded as under:-
East…………..Other property
                            West………….Other property
                            North………… Road
                            South………… Road

                  Whereas I the Testator hereby bequeath that after my
                  death the aforesaid property shall got and devolve to
                  the aforesaid testimony, shall be the sole and absolute
                  owner of the above mentioned property.
Witnesses:-                                TESTATOR
                  Sd/-                                           Sd/-
                  Shri Ramesh Kumar                        Smt. Suhagwati
                  S/o Shri Ram Lal Sharma
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018                    Page 27 of 29
R/o H.N. 10/4, Gandhi Nagar, Geeta Colony,
                  Delhi.                                          ”
28.    The Will which purportedly makes the bequest, is oddly described

       as a Will Deed. This possibly explains why Surinder Pal Sharma

       had claimed in his reply, that he was the owner of the tenement

       even during the lifetime of the mother Suhagwanti. It is in this

       context that we have read the different portions of the testimony of

       Raj Kumari and Surinder Pal Sharma; the notice and the reply to

       hold that there exists grave doubt whether the “Will Deed” was

       executed and is a “Will” as it purports to be. The marriage of

       Veena Malhotra as per her wish is not challenged. The testator

       was an illiterate lady. Even if we are to accept signatures of the

       testator and the witnesses, we cannot ignore “other evidence” that

       Suhagwanti and her family members did not understand the true

       nature of the document executed. There are substantial and good

       reasons to legitimately suspect and question execution of the Will,

       which Surinder Pal Sharma, as the propounder of the Will, has not

       been able to repel and remove so as to satisfy this Court that the

       Will was validly executed. For these reasons, we would hold that

       execution of the Will has not been proved by “other evidence” in

       terms of
Section 71
of the Evidence Act.
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018         Page 28 of 29
29.    Looked and examined from all angles, we are satisfied that the

       present appeal should be allowed and the judgment of the High

       Court should be set aside. Accordingly, we restore the judgment

       and decree dated 17.01.2018 passed by the court of Additional

       District Judge-03, North District, Rohini District Courts, New Delhi.

       There would no order as to costs.
......................................J.
                                                                 (S. ABDUL NAZEER)


                                                           ......................................J.
                                                                   (SANJIV KHANNA)
       NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 17, 2019
Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 26957 of 2018                           Page 29 of 29