[Cites
0
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Wing Commander ( 24734 Ae )L) ... on 11 December, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1748
Author:
Deepak Gupta
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
Deepak Gupta
1

                                                             REPORTABLE
                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.10870 OF 2018



UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                               ..   Appellant (s)

                         Versus

WING COMMANDER S.P.RATHORE                          ..    Respondent(s)


                           J U D G M E N T
DEEPAK GUPTA, J.
1.   The short question involved in this appeal filed by

the Union of India is whether disability pension is at all

payable in case of a Air Force Officer who superannuated

from service in the natural course and whose disability is

less than 20%.
2.   We     may   make   reference    to     the   Defence     Service

Regulations Pension Regulations for the Air Force, 1961.

Regulations 37(a) and (b) under the heading “Disability

Pension – when admissible” read as follows :
“37(a) An officer who is retired from air force
          service on account of a disability which is
          attributable to or aggravated by such service
          and is assessed at 20 percent or over may, on
          retirement    be  awarded   disability   pension
          consisting of a service element and a disability
          element in accordance with the regulations in
          this section.
2
(b)    The question whether a disability is
         attributable to or aggravated by air force
         service   shall   be    determined under the
         regulations in Appendix II.”
3.   A bare reading of the aforesaid provision makes it

clear that an officer of the Air Force who retires on

attaining    the   age   of   superannuation    is   entitled   to

disability pension only if disability is assessed at 20% or

above.     Furthermore, this disability must be attributable

or aggravated by service rendered in the Air Force.
4.   So far as the second part is concerned, we are not

going into that issue since in this case, it is admitted

that the    disability was aggravated due to service rendered

in the Air Force.    The only issue is whether the Appellant

not having 20% disability is at all entitled to disability

pension.
5.   Both learned senior counsel appearing for the Union of

India and learned counsel appearing for the Respondent rely

upon Paras 7.2 and 8.2 of Circular dated 31.1.2001 issued

by Ministry of Defence which read as follows :
“7.2 Where an Armed Forced personnel is invalided
     out under circumstances mentioned in Para 4.1
     above, the extent of disability or functional
     incapacity shall be determined in the following
     manner for    the purposes    of computing    the
     disability element:-
Percentage of disability as         Percentage to be reckoned
    assessed by invaliding          for computing of disability
         medical board                        element
Less than 50                                     50
3
Between 50 and 75                                   75
Between 76 and 100                                 100
“8.2 For disabilities less than 100% but not less
       than 20% the above rates shall be proportionately
       reduced. No disability element shall be payable
       for disabilities less than 20%. Provisions
       contained in Para 7.2 above shall not be
       applicable for computing disability element.
       Disability actually assessed by the duly approved
       Release Medical Board/Invaliding Medical Board as
       accepted by the Pension Sanctioning Authority,
       shall reckon for computing disability element.”
6.     Para 8.2 falls under the heading of Disability Element

on Disability/Discharge.          A bare reading of Para 8.2       shows

that     where the disability is more than 20% but less than

80%, the rates prescribed earlier would be proportionately

reduced.            Again, it is made clear that no disability

element shall be payable for disabilities less than 20%.

Para 8.2 also provides that the provisions contained in

Para 7.2 shall not be applicable for computing disability

element in such cases.        Para 7.2 which deals with officials

of Armed Forces invalided out under circumstances mentioned

in     Para   4.1    would   be    entitled   to   rounding   of    the

disability.         Therefore, if the disability was less than

50%, it would be rounded off to 50%.          If the disability was

between 50 and 75% it would be rounded off to 75%.             If the

disability was between 76 and 100% it would be rounded off

to 100%.
7.     Reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for
4
the Respondent on the Order dated 10.12.2014 of this Court

in “Union of India and Ors. Versus Ram Avtar” (Civil Appeal

No.418 of 2012 etc.) and subsequent letter dated 18.4.2016

sent by the Ministry of Defence to the Chief of all the

Armed Forces.
8.    This Court in Ram Avtar (supra), while approving the

judgment of the Armed Forces Tribunal             only held that the

principle of rounding off as envisaged in Para 7.2 referred

to    herein   above   would   be   applicable   even   to   those   who

superannuated under Para 8.2.            The Court did not deal with

the issue of entitlement to disability pension under the

Regulations of Para 8.2.
9.    As pointed out above, both Regulation 37(a) and Para

8.2   clearly provide     that the        disability element      is not

admissible if the disability is less than 20%.                 In that

view of the matter, the question of rounding off would not

apply if the disability is less than 20%. If a person is

not entitled to the disability pension, there would be no

question of rounding off.
10. The Armed Forces Tribunal (‘AFT’), in our opinion, put

the cart before the house.           It applied the principles of

rounding       off      without         determining     whether      the

petitioner/applicant before it would entitled to disability

pension at all.
11. In view of the provisions referred to above, we are
5
clearly of the view that the original petitioner/applicant

before   the   AFT   is   not   entitled   to    disability   pension.

Therefore, the question of applying the provisions of Para

7.2 would not arise in his case.                In this view of the

matter, we set aside the order of the AFT and consequently,

the original application filed by the Respondent before the

AFT shall stand dismissed.
The appeal is allowed accordingly.
.............................J.
                                    ( DEEPAK GUPTA )



                                  .............................J.
                                      ( SANJIV KHANNA )
New Delhi,
Dated:December 11, 2019