[Cites
6
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Jagjeet Singh Lyallpuri (Dead) Through ... vs M/S Unitop Apartments And Builders Ltd. on 3 December, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1954, 2020 (2) SCC 279, (2019) 17 SCALE 127, (2020) 1 RECCIVR 568
Author:
A.S. Bopanna
Bench:
R. Banumathi
,
A.S. Bopanna
,
Hrishikesh Roy
REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 692 OF 2016


                         Jagjeet Singh Lyallpuri (dead) Through     .… Appellant(s)
                         Lrs. & Ors.

                                                   Versus


                         M/s Unitop Apartments & Builders         …. Respondent(s)
                         Ltd.



                                             JUDGMENT
A.S. Bopanna,J.
1.    The appellants are before this Court assailing the

                         order dated 31.07.2015 passed by the High Court of Punjab

                         and Haryana at Chandigarh in FAO No. 5704 of 2012

                         (O&M). Through the said order, the High Court has
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
remanded the matter to the sole Arbitrator Mr. Justice
Date: 2019.12.03
17:47:00 IST
Reason:
Kuldip Singh, retired Judge, Supreme Court of India for
Page 1 of 27
providing opportunity of leading evidence to both the

    parties and also grant opportunity to cross­examine the

    witnesses and thereafter decide each and every claim and

    counter claim separately on merits.            The said order is

    passed in an appeal filed by the respondent herein under
Section 37
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996

    (‘Act 1996’ for short).        The appellant herein who was the

    respondent in the said appeal is therefore before this Court

    claiming to be aggrieved by the said order.
2.         The brief facts leading to the present situation is that

    the appellants herein are joint owners of the land

    measuring 14 Kanals and 3 Marlas (8560 Sq. yards) situate

    at village Sunet, Tehsil and District Ludhiana, State of

    Punjab.           The     respondent    company      through    its

    representatives claiming to be well­versed with construction

    and development of properties approached the appellants

    for   joint     venture   in    constructing   a   residential­cum­

    commercial complex on the subject land. Accordingly, an

    agreement dated 14.12.1996 was entered into and among

    other terms agreed therein, the respondent had undertaken
Page 2 of 27
to complete the construction of the building consisting of at

    least six floors within three years from the date of obtaining

    the    sanctioned     plan   from   the   Ludhiana   Municipal

    Corporation. The project was required to be funded by the

    respondent and a sum of Rs. 45,00,000/­ (Rupees Forty­

    Five Lakhs only) was to be deposited with the appellant as

    a guarantee for completion of the project. In that view, the

    appellants were expected to retain the same if the building

    is not completed within the period of three years. The sale

    proceeds from the constructed building was to be shared in

    the ratio of 48:52 % between the appellants and the

    respondent.
3.         Pursuant to such agreement the respondent secured

    the sanction of the building plan from the Municipal

    Corporation on 04.07.1997. The period of three years was

    to be computed from that point as per the agreement.

    Hence the construction ought to have been completed by

    03.07.2000.       According to the appellant, the respondent

    though commenced the construction during August, 1997,

    the activity was undertaken until 31.03.1999 and the
Page 3 of 27
project was abandoned by them thereafter.                 Since the

    construction was not completed by 03.07.2000 and no

    further progress was made despite the appellant having

    waited beyond the said period, the appellants got issued a

    legal      notice   dated     01.11.2001    and    terminated    the

    agreement dated 14.12.1996.               The respondent though

    issued reply dated 28.11.2001 did not proceed further to

    make progress in the construction.
4.         The   appellants     further    claim   that   in    such

    circumstance the appellant and the respondent entered

    into a compromise and a cancellation agreement dated

    26.10.2004 was executed due to which an amount of Rs.

    40,00,000/­ (Rupees Forty Lakhs only) from the amount

    which was received as security deposit was returned.

    Notwithstanding the same, since there was change of guard

    in the composition of the management, the respondent filed

    an application under
Section 9
of the Act, 1996 seeking to

    restrain the appellants from damaging or demolishing the

    construction which had been raised by the respondents.

    Immediately thereafter a notice dated 23.11.2004 was
Page 4 of 27
issued by the respondent invoking the arbitration clause for

    referring the matter to arbitration.      The Arbitration Case

    No. 124 of 2006 under
Section 11
of the Act, 1996 filed by

    the respondent was allowed on 03.07.2009 and Mr. Justice

    Kuldip Singh, retired Judge, Supreme Court of India was

    appointed as the sole arbitrator to resolve the dispute

    between the parties.
5.         In that view the parties appeared before the learned

    Arbitrator and filed their respective claim, counter­claim

    and objection thereto. The evidence by way of affidavit and

    the documents of respective parties was also filed, where

    after the learned Arbitrator on hearing the learned counsel

    for the parties passed the award dated 13.01.2010 through

    which both the claim as well as the counter claim was

    dismissed. The respondent herein claiming to be aggrieved

    by the same filed a petition under
Section 34
of the Act,

    1996 in the Court of the Additional District Judge,

    Ludhiana which was registered in Arbitration Case No. 3

    dated 29.01.2010.        The learned Additional District Judge

    through the order dated 13.09.2012 affirmed the award by
Page 5 of 27
dismissing the petition. It is in that view the respondent

    herein filed an appeal under
Section 37
of the Act, 1996

    before the High Court.      The learned Single Judge of the

    High Court has arrived at the conclusion that the parties

    have not been granted appropriate opportunity by the

    learned arbitrator to tender evidence by examining witness

    and to cross­examine the witnesses, whose affidavits were

    filed. It is further held by the High Court that the learned

    Arbitrator has not considered the aspect relating to the

    extent to which the construction was put up and the

    amount that was expended by the respondent herein and

    no determination, in that regard has been made. The said

    observation was made after holding, though the time was

    not the essence of the contract but yet the long delay would

    not be justified. It was held, even in that circumstance the

    other aspects required consideration. In that background

    the matter was remanded to the learned Arbitrator for fresh

    consideration.
6.         Mr. Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel for the

    appellant while assailing such conclusion by the High
Page 6 of 27
Court has taken us through the appeal papers and has

    referred to the agreement dated 14.12.1996 and the

    clauses governing the parties. It is contended that when a

    dispute is referred to the learned Arbitrator,
Section 19
of

    the Act, 1996 provides that the Arbitrator can determine

    the rules of procedure. In that regard it is pointed out that

    in the hearing held on 28.11.2009 the learned Arbitrator

    has in the course of the proceedings finalised the procedure

    and recorded the same in the order. It is pointed out that

    the respondent was represented by a senior advocate in the

    arbitration proceedings wherein it has been agreed that the

    parties would rely upon the affidavits and documents that

    were filed and the procedure of cross­examination could be

    dispensed. In that background the learned arbitrator has

    referred to the materials on record in the background of the

    claim put forth and the affidavits filed in support thereof

    while arriving at the conclusion. Hence, he contends that

    the procedural lapse as attempted to be made out at this

    stage is not justified.
Page 7 of 27
7.         It is further contended by Mr. Shyam Divan that in a

    proceedings where the consideration ought to be limited to

    the extent provided under
Section 34
of the Act, 1996 and

    when the learned Additional District Judge has in that light

    examined and confirmed the award, the consideration

    ought not to have been expanded by the learned Single

    Judge in a proceedings under
Section 37
of the Act, 1996

    wherein also the scope is limited. On the factual aspect it

    is contended that despite the terms agreed in the

    agreement dated 14.12.1996, no progress was made in the

    construction even until the point when the proceedings

    were initiated before the learned Arbitrator after it was

    abandoned in March 1999. In that circumstance when the

    learned Arbitrator has taken into consideration these

    aspects and arrived at the conclusion, the learned single

    judge could not have interfered with the award.            The

    learned senior counsel in that regard has taken us through

    the award to point out that a detailed consideration has

    been made by the learned Arbitrator on all aspects

    including the fact that the cancellation of the agreement

    was agreed between the parties. On the contention urged
Page 8 of 27
relating to the construction incurring an amount of

    Rs.1,22,00,000/­ (Rupees One Crore Twenty­Two Lakhs

    only) said to have been made by the respondent also a

    consideration has been made. In that circumstance when

    the contention was adverted to and a view was taken by the

    learned Arbitrator based on a finding of fact, the learned

    Single Judge was not justified in commenting that the said

    aspect had not been adverted to by the learned Arbitrator.

    It is therefore contended that the award is liable to be

    sustained and the order passed by the learned Single Judge

    be set aside.
8.         Mr. Shibo Shankar Misra, learned counsel for the

    respondent in his attempt to sustain the order passed by

    the learned Single Judge contends that the respondent had

    raised twelve claims before the learned Arbitrator and each

    claim should have been decided separately. It is his case

    that the learned Arbitrator has proceeded to reject the

    claim only on the conclusion that time is the essence of the

    contract. Though the terms as contained in the agreement

    dated 14.12.1996 is not disputed, the learned counsel
Page 9 of 27
contends that the delay caused resulting in non­completion

    of the project is solely attributable to the appellant.       The

    appellants had not parted with the title documents relating

    to the land in question due to which the respondent was

    not in a position to raise the funds from the bank by

    creating mortgage.   Apart from the security amount the

    respondent   has   suffered   loss   to   the   extent   of   Rs.

    1,22,00,000/­ (Rupees One Crore Twenty­Two Lakhs only)

    being the cost of construction which was put up. Specific

    claim was raised under different heads before the learned

    Arbitrator.
Despite such contentions and claims being put

    forth the learned Arbitrator has not considered the same.

    In that regard it is contended that clause 11 of the

    agreement which provides relating to the expenditure

    incurred has not been properly appreciated. The learned

    counsel contended that the learned Additional District

    Judge in the proceedings under
Section 34
of the Act, 1996

    has also not adverted to these aspects of the matter.

    However, the learned Single Judge taking note of these

    aspects and also keeping in view the decision in the case of
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. vs. SAW Pipes
Page 10 of 27
Limited
2003 (5) SCC 705 has arrived at the conclusion

    that an award of the present nature cannot be sustained

    and has accordingly remanded the matter to the learned

    Arbitrator to provide opportunity to the parties and take a

    fresh decision. It is contended that in such circumstance

    when        both   parties   would   have   an   opportunity,   the

    appellant herein cannot make out any grievance.                 He

    therefore contends that the above appeal be dismissed.
9.      In the light of the contentions put forth we have

    perused the appeal papers and made reference to the

    material on record.          With regard to the agreement dated

    14.12.1996 and the clauses contained therein to regulate

    the parties there is no serious dispute between the parties.

    The very fact that a contention has been raised by the

    respondent seeking to attribute the delay and the non­

    completion of the project to the appellant by contending

    that the non­furnishing of the title documents had

    prevented the respondent from raising loan would by itself

    indicate that no progress was made except putting up the

    initial construction and the project was not completed
Page 11 of 27
within the period of three years or thereafter, though the

    building plan was sanctioned on 04.07.1997. In that light

    the appellant had issued a notice dated 01.11.2001 and

    terminated the agreement, which had resulted in a dispute

    between the parties.      In that background the matter was

    placed      before the   learned Arbitrator   who had   been

    appointed in a proceeding under
Section 11
of the Act,

    1996. A perusal of the award dated 30.01.2010 available

    at Annexure P­12 to the appeal papers would indicate that

    a detailed consideration has been made by the learned

    Arbitrator on all aspects of the matter. In that background

    when the petition under
Section 34
of the Act, 1996 was

    filed before the learned Additional District Judge, the

    learned Additional District Judge in fact has also adverted

    to all aspects of the matter and since no ground for

    interference as contemplated under
Section 34
of the Act,

    1996 was made out, the learned Additional District Judge

    through his order dated 13.09.2012 has upheld the award.
10.     In that backdrop when the learned Arbitrator and the

    learned Additional District Judge have arrived at a
Page 12 of 27
concurrent opinion, it is necessary for us to take note as to

    whether the learned Single Judge in an appeal filed under
Section 37
of the Act, 1996 could have adverted into the

    merits of the contention beyond the scope available under
Section 34 (2)
of the Act, 1996 so as to set aside the award

    and remand the matter.                In that regard whether the

    contentions which were put forth to assail the award by

    picking holes in the procedure adopted by the learned

    Arbitrator      is    to   be   accepted      or   not   also   requires

    examination, keeping in view the scope of
Section 34 (2)
of

    the Act, 1996 and determine as to whether such ground is

    made out.
11.     Since        the   learned   Single    Judge     has    presently

    accepted the contention raised on behalf of the respondent

    herein that the procedure followed by the learned Arbitrator

    is contrary to law and has prejudiced the respondent herein

    since the witnesses were not cross­examined, this aspect of

    the matter is required to be noticed at the outset.                   As

    rightly pointed out by the learned senior counsel for the

    appellant, the rules of procedure to be followed by an
Page 13 of 27
Arbitral Tribunal is flexible and can be agreed upon by the

    parties as provided under
Section 19
of the Act, 1996

    which reads as hereunder;
19. Determination of rules of procedure – (1) The
                arbitral tribunal shall not be bound by
the Code of Civil
                Procedure
, 1908 (5 of 1908) or the
Indian Evidence Act,
                1872
(1 of 1872).
(2) Subject to this Part, the parties are free to agree on the
                procedure to be followed by the arbitral tribunal in
                conducting its proceedings.
(3) Failing any agreement referred to in sub­section (2), the
                arbitral tribunal may, subject to this Part, conduct the
                proceedings in the manner it considers appropriate.
                (4) The power of the arbitral tribunal under sub­section (3)
                includes the power to determine the admissibility,
                relevance, materiality and weight of any evidence.
12.       Further, keeping in view that the contention put

      forth before the High Court by the respondent herein to

      assail the award was in the manner as noticed above with

      regard to the appropriate procedure not being followed

      and there being denial of opportunity and in that view the

      respondent         not    being     able     to   put     forth    the     case

      appropriately before the learned Arbitrator, the effect of

      the same is required to be examined. When a challenge is

      raised on that ground, in our opinion it would at best fall

      under Section 34 (2) (a) (iii) which reads as follows;
Page 14 of 27
“34. Application for setting aside arbitral award – (1) Recourse to
               a Court against an arbitral award may be made only by an
               application for setting aside such award in accordance with
               sub­section (2) and sub­section (3).
(2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the Court only if—
(a) the party making the application furnishes proof that—
(i) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
(ii) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
(iii) the party making the application was not given
                proper notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or of the
                arbitral proceedings or was otherwise unable to present
                his case; or”
                                                      (emphasis supplied)

      Therefore, in order to consider whether the challenge is

      sustainable on the ground available in law, at the outset it

      is necessary to examine whether the procedural lapse if

      any is committed by the learned Arbitrator in unilaterally

      denying the opportunity to the parties so as to make the

      award invalid and to set aside the same exercising the

      power under Section 34 or in an appeal under
Section 37
of the Act, 1996. In this regard as noticed,
Section 19
of

      the Act, 1996 provides that the Arbitral Tribunal is not

      bound by
the Code of Civil Procedure
or the
Indian

      Evidence Act
. Further, it provides that the parties are free

      to agree on the procedure to be followed by the Arbitral

      Tribunal. In this back drop it is noticed that in the case

      on hand, in the proceedings dated 28.11.2009 (Annexure
Page 15 of 27
P­15) before the learned Arbitrator, the procedure to be

      followed has been discussed and recorded, which reads as

      hereunder;
“The parties and their learned counsel have been heard.
                Whatever further pleadings, documents and list of
                witnesses were to be filed by the parties in terms of the
                proceedings dated 10.10.2009, have been done.           The
                evidence of the claimant as well as of the respondents was
                to be recorded today. Mr. Ram Lal, whom the respondents
                want to cross­examine, is present before the Arbitrator.
                The learned counsel for the parties have, however, agreed
                and consented before me they do not wish to cross­
                examine any of the witnesses whose affidavits have been
                filed by the parties concerned. In view of the consent of
                the learned counsel of the parties and parties themselves
                who are present, I close the evidence. The parties will rely
                on the affidavits already filed and the documents and other
                pleadings already placed on the record.”
                                                       (emphasis supplied)

      That apart by the very proceedings dated 28.11.2009 the

      points on which arguments would be addressed were also

      treated as the issues for consideration and has been

      formulated and recorded in the order sheet.
13.   From a perusal of the proceedings dated 28.11.2009

      it would be clear that both contentions raised by the

      learned counsel for the respondent herein and which were

      accepted by the learned Single Judge to ultimately remand

      the matter, would not be justified. Firstly, in the presence

      of the parties and their learned counsel it has been
Page 16 of 27
recorded that they do not wish to cross­examine any of the

      witnesses whose affidavits have been filed by the parties

      concerned and one of the witness who was present was

      discharged     without     being   cross   examined   and   no

      grievance was made either by the parties or their learned

      counsel who were present. It is in that view the evidence

      was taken as closed on 28.11.2009 and the issues for

      consideration was settled for arguments on the same day.

      In that circumstance having consented to the said

      procedure, it would not be open for the respondent herein

      to approbate and reprobate so as to raise a different

      contention at this point.          Having accepted the said

      procedure the respondent is estopped from raising such

      contention before the learned Single Judge that the

      arbitrator misconducted himself by not permitting the

      parties to cross­examine the witness and also that the

      learned Arbitrator being more than 70 years of age and

      suffering    from   knee    problem    has   pressurized    the

      respondent to speed up the matter and the evidence was

      closed.     It is rather intriguing for us to note that such

      contention has not only been permitted to be raised, but
Page 17 of 27
also accepted by the learned Single Judge to remand the

      matter, which is wholly unjustified.
14.   We are of such opinion for the reason that the

      procedure to be followed in arbitration proceedings was

      settled by a separate order dated 28.11.2009 during the

      course of the proceedings before the learned Arbitrator.

      Thereafter the award was passed only on 13.01.2010.

      Though the respondent was represented by their learned

      counsel and the order dated 28.11.2009 was passed while

      recording the proceedings of that day, neither any

      application had been filed before the learned Arbitrator to

      recall the said order and provide opportunity to tender

      evidence or cross examine, nor was a challenge raised by

      initiating any other proceedings, before the award was

      passed. It is only subsequent to the award being passed

      such contention is being raised as an afterthought, which

      in such event cannot be accepted.         That apart, the

      agreement being entered into on 14.12.1996 and the work

      not having progressed subsequent to March,1999 was not

      seriously in dispute and in that circumstance based on
Page 18 of 27
the affidavit, the admitted documents have been taken

      note by the learned Arbitrator due to which the non­cross­

      examination    in   any   event   has   not   prejudiced   the

      respondent herein.    One aspect of the matter no doubt

      was with regard to the claim that was put forth by the

      appellant herein that a cancellation agreement dated

      26.10.2004 was entered into and the security deposit of

      Rs. 40 Lakhs and the advance of Rs. 23 Lakhs has been

      re­paid to Mr. S. Surinder Singh which was disputed by

      the respondent. On that aspect the learned Arbitrator in

      any event has concluded that the said payment if any

      cannot be considered as a payment made to                  the

      respondent company but has been received by Mr.

      Surinder Singh who had made gain unto himself. In such

      event since the respondent has not filed the affidavit of Mr.

      Surinder Singh disputing the same, it is an inter­se matter

      to claim from Mr. Surinder Singh and therefore, the non­

      cross­examination on that aspect also has not resulted in

      any prejudice. Be that as it may, as already taken note,

      the procedure to be followed in the arbitral proceedings
Page 19 of 27
has been agreed to by the parties.   Hence the respondent

      cannot be heard to complain as and when it suits them.
15.       Further, since through the very order dated

      28.11.2009 the issues for consideration on which the

      arguments would be addressed was settled and the matter

      was proceeded on that understanding without raising any

      objection, the grievance put forth by the respondent and

      accepted by the learned Single Judge that the learned

      Arbitrator has not answered each of the claims separately

      in the award, cannot also be accepted. A perusal of the

      award would indicate that the learned Arbitrator has

      adverted to all aspects in a sequential manner and has

      recorded his conclusion in answer to the contentions that

      were put forth.
16.   One other aspect which has been recorded by the

      learned Single Judge as the reason for which the matter

      requires reconsideration by the learned Arbitrator is that

      the claim put forth by the respondent that the sum of Rs.

      1,22,00,000/­ spent by them has not been considered by

      the learned Arbitrator. In that regard the learned Single
Page 20 of 27
Judge has held that though the respondent herein would

      not be entitled to continue the project due to lapse of time

      the learned Arbitrator has not considered the right of the

      parties relating to the extent of the cost incurred for the

      existing construction and the manner in which it is to be

      dealt with. On this aspect, a perusal of the award passed

      by the learned Arbitrator would indicate that after having

      arrived at the conclusion that the respondent has

      committed the breach, the learned Arbitrator has also

      adverted to the said contention relating to the cost

      incurred for the extent of construction made, as claimed

      and has rejected the same.         The consideration as made is

      as hereunder;
“I may examine, at this stage the claimant’s contention that
          construction worth about Rs. 1 crore 20 lacs has been done on
          the project. The claimant has primarily relied on the balance
          sheet of the Company for the relevant year in support of this
          argument. The balance sheet is Annexure­K at page 118­126 of
          the statement of Claim. In the schedule forming part of the
          accounts for the year ending 31 st March, 1999, the balance
          sheet shows an expenditure of about 1 crore 20 lacs on the
          project in process. This includes Rs. 44 lacs as advance given
          to the respondents (land owners) as guarantee money.
          Expenditure incurred has been shown under various headings
          such as advertisement and publicity, salary, entertainment, iron
          and steel, cement, GC sheets, stand, bricks, marble, crusher,
          electrical, GI pipes, gate, professional charges, telephone
          expenses, electricity expenses, labour and construction charges.
          An amount of Rs. 56,58,530/­ has been shown under the
          heading purchase.       It is not indicted so as to what was
          purchased. All the items required for the construction of the
Page 21 of 27
project have been shown separately but it is not clear on what
            purchase/purchase this amount was spent. No explanation is
            forthcoming from the claimant in this respect. Mr. Mahajan
            while controverting the argument of Mr. Lekhi has stated that
            Local Commissioner’s report Annexure­W makes it clear that
            the amount which may have been spent on the construction
            was much less. Be that as it may there is no expert evidence on
            the record to show as to how much money was spent on the
            construction. The claimant company did receive some money
            as advance against flats and offices to be constructed. It is in
            the evidence that Rs. 23 lacs was received by the Company in
            this respect. The balance sheet as on 31 st March, 1999 at page
            121 shows that the Company received Rs. 19,79,488/­ as
            advance against flats and offices. In the absence of reliable
            evidence on the record, it is not possible to accept the argument
            of the learned counsel for the claimant.”
17.       In that circumstance when the learned Arbitrator

      has noticed the contention and recorded a finding of fact it

      cannot be accepted that the learned Arbitrator has not

      adverted to the same so as to require reconsideration. To

      be fair to the learned Arbitrator, it has in fact been noticed

      by the learned Arbitrator relating to the change of

      Directors and shareholders of the company in 2007 as

      against the shareholders who existed as on 30.09.2005

      and also that the erstwhile Directors/shareholders who

      had personal knowledge have not been examined by filing

      their affidavits and even though an application dated

      12.09.2009 for summoning them as witnesses was filed,

      the same was not pressed and the evidence was closed on
Page 22 of 27
28.11.2009 with the consent of the parties. The learned

      Arbitrator has in fact recorded that none of them have

      come forward to render assistance in the proceedings. In

      such circumstance when the respondent herein, who were

      themselves the claimants before the learned Arbitrator

      have not conducted the matter in an appropriate manner

      by securing affidavit evidence of the erstwhile directors /

      shareholders, they cannot at this stage turn around and

      contend that the learned Arbitrator has misconducted

      himself. In any event the challenge to the award does not

      fall under any of the clauses of
Section 34
of Act, 1996. In

      such circumstance the reliance placed by the learned

      Single Judge on a decision in the case of ONGC (supra) is

      highly misplaced. Therefore, the order dated 31.07.2015

      passed by the learned Single Judges is not sustainable

      and the same is liable to be set aside.
18.   During the course of hearing we had also made an

      endeavour to see that the parties amicably settle the

      matter by enabling the respondent herein to receive some

      amount towards the expended portion, also by not
Page 23 of 27
ignoring the loss suffered by the appellants due to delay.
From the photographs produced before us we have noticed

      that except raising some columns, there is no major

      construction that is put up. In so far as the expense as

      claimed by the respondent, as indicated by the learned

      Arbitrator as extracted above, there is no conclusive

      evidence to that effect. Though such columns are raised,

      admittedly construction activity has not taken place

      beyond March, 1999 and already two decades have

      elapsed. In view of the breach and the respondent herein

      failing in the present lis there would be no absolute right

      in their favour since the inevitable loss suffered by the

      appellants by not being able to enjoy the property for the

      last more than two decades also cannot be lost sight. The

      appellant herein who is the owner of the property will have

      to enter into a fresh contract and the need and manner of

      development   may not be the same at this point and in

      such event the appellant herein also would be put to some

      loss to undertake the demolition process themselves or

      there would be reduction that would be made by the

      alternate developers who would undertake the project.
Page 24 of 27
Further, the actual quantum in any event cannot be

      determined and also when a breach has been committed

      through the predecessor directors / shareholders of the

      respondent company and when the present directors /

      shareholders have entered the scene in the midst of the

      breach they would have to bear the loss, if any, to that

      extent.   Therefore, without reference to the actual loss

      suffered by the parties, while putting an end to the

      litigation between the parties, in the peculiar circumstance

      and in the interest of justice, notwithstanding the fact that

      we have held the order of the learned Single as not

      sustainable, in exercise of our power under
Article 142
of

      the Constitution of India the appellant is directed to pay

      the sum of Rs. 45,00,000/­ (Rupees Forty­Five Lakhs only)

      to the respondent whereupon they would be entitled to

      assume possession of the subject land and proceed to

      enjoy the same in accordance with law.
19.   In the result the appeal is disposed of with the

      following order:
Page 25 of 27
(i)     The order dated 31.07.2015 passed by the High

      Court of Punjab and Haryana in FAO No. 5704 of 2012

      (O&M) is set aside.         Consequently, the award dated

      13.01.2010 passed by the learned Arbitrator is restored.
(ii)    The appellant is directed to pay the sum of Rs.

      45,00,000/­ (Rupees Forty­Five Lakhs only) in full quit of

      all claims, to the respondent within three months.
(iii)   Immediately on payment of the said amount the

      appellant shall be entitled to resume possession of the

      subject land in the status as it exists and enjoy the same

      in accordance with law.
(iv)    Parties to bear their own costs.




                                          ….……………………….J.
                                          (R. BANUMATHI)




                                          ….……………………….J.
                                           (A.S. BOPANNA)



                                          ….……………………….J.
Page 26 of 27
(HRISHIKESH ROY)
    New Delhi,
    December 03, 2019
Page 27 of 27