[Cites
40
, Cited by
107
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Unicorn Industries vs Union Of India on 6 December, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1685, (2019) 17 SCALE 193
Author:
Arun Mishra
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
,
M.R. Shah
,
Arun Mishra
1


                                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                         SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9237 OF 2019
                            [ARISING OUT OF S.L.P. (CIVIL) NO.21622 OF 2012]

         M/S. UNICORN INDUSTRIES                                                 …APPELLANT

                                                    VERSUS

         UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS                                                 …RESPONDENTS

                                                 WITH
                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9238 OF 2019
                            [ARISING OUT OF S.L.P. (CIVIL) NO. 28966 OF 2012]

                                                  JUDGMENT
Arun Mishra, J.
1.              Leave granted.
2.              The question involved in the appeals is with respect to the levy of

         education cess, higher education cess, and National Calamity Contingent

         Duty (NCCD) on it. The appeals arise out of common judgment. The

         High Court has held that duties in question are not part of the exemption

         notification. The writ petitions have been dismissed. Hence, the appeals
Signature Not Verified
have been preferred.
Digitally signed by
JAYANT KUMAR ARORA
Date: 2019.12.06
16:05:24 IST
Reason:
3.              The   Government    of   India       in   order   to   promote   industrial
2
development in the North Eastern Region, announced vide Office

Memorandum dated 24.12.1997, specific fiscal incentives including total

exemption from tax to the new industrial units and substantial

expansion of existing unit in the North Eastern Region for a period of 10

years from the date of commencement of production.          Government of

Sikkim vide Notification dated 17.2.2003, notified new industrial policy

whereby all fiscal incentives available to the industries in the North

Eastern Region would be available to the units set up in the State of

Sikkim.
4.   The Central Government issued a Notification dated 9.9.2003,

granting exemption from payment of duty of excise for goods specified in

the notification and cleared from a unit located in the Industrial Growth

Centre or other specified areas within the State of Sikkim. Under the

notification, a manufacturer of specified goods was required to pay excise

duty on the goods cleared from its unit. The manufacturer has to first

utilize the Cenvat Credit for discharging duty liability on final products,

and the remaining amount of duties had to be paid through Personal

Ledger Account (PLA) or Current Account, i.e., in cash.          Thus, the

exemption scheme was to discharge the liability on the final product and

then claim or avail the refund or re­credit of the duties paid in cash.
3
5.   The   Unicorn    Industries   established   a   unit   in   2006   for

manufacturing “Indian Mouth Freshener” an excisable commodity

covered under Chapter 21 of the
First Schedule of Central Excise Tariff

Act, 1985
. It was registered under the
Central Excise Act
. In June 2006,

the appellant had started manufacturing its product.
6.   The appellant has submitted that following excise duties were

recovered under diverse names/nomenclature and rates on Indian

Mouth Freshener manufactured and cleared by the appellant:
a. Basic Excise Duty @ 37.5 % ad valorem;
b. National Calamity Contingent Duty (NCCD) @ 23% ad

           Valorem (under
Section 136
of the Finance Act, 2001);
c. Additional Excise Duty (Pan Masala & Tobacco Products) @

           5.5% ad valorem (under
Section 85
of the Finance Act, 2005);
and

        d. Education Cess @ 2% ad valorem (under
Section 91
of the

           Finance Act, 2004) aggregating to 68% ad valorem.
7.   As per Notification No.71/2003­CE dated 9.9.2003, the appellant

was entitled to refund of the abovesaid duties of excise. The respondents
4
extended benefits and used to grant refund to the appellant as per the

abovementioned notification.    The Excise Authorities used to issue a

certificate of re­utilization of excise duty for the particular month. The

appellant used to re­credit the amount of excise duty.
8.    The Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise issued a show cause

notice dated 2.1.2007, requiring the appellant to repay the amount of

NCCD for the period July, 2006 to December, 2006, on the ground that

exemption was not permissible under the notification for the units

located in the State of Sikkim. The appellant filed a writ petition before

the High Court for quashing the abovementioned communication dated

2.1.2007.   The High Court disposed of the same with liberty to show

cause to the said communication.           The appellant filed its reply. On

4.7.2007, the Commissioner, Central Excise issued show cause notice, it

was   submitted    that   grounds      phrased    in   the   response   were

unsustainable.    The appellant was asked to show cause why amount

should not be recovered under Section 11­
A of the Central Excise Act
along with the interest and penalty.
9.    Notification No.71/2003­CE came to be amended on 25.4.2007 by

Notification No.21/2007, excluding Pan Masala falling under Chapter

XXI of the Tariff from the purview of the notification.           Thus, the
5
exemption on Pan Masala came to an end vide Notification No.21/2007

dated 25.4.2007, which was challenged by way of separate Writ Petition

No.22 of 2007. The High Court vide judgment and order dated 11.5.2012

allowed the Writ Petition (C) No.22 of 2007 and held that the appellant

was entitled to exemption from payment of excise duty on manufacture

of Pan Masala for ten years from the date of commencement of

commercial production, i.e., 27.6.2006.
10.   The appellant submitted that 14 separate claims were filed for

refund of additional excise duty and education cess on the ground these

levies are also duties of excise, for which exemption had been granted for

ten years. The appellant filed Writ Petition (C) No.24 of 2007 before the

High Court of Sikkim at Gangtok for quashing Notification No.71/2003­

CE, confining the exemption to "under any of the said Acts” mentioned in

paragraph 1 of the notification. The prayer was made for a declaration

that the exemption notification was applicable to NCCD, additional excise

duty (Pan Masala) and education cess and the Notification No.71/2003­

CE was repugnant to the Industrial Policy decision declared by Union of

India (respondent no.1) and State of Sikkim (respondent no.4).        The

appellant claimed that excise duty exemption would include all levy in

nature of excise duty, levied and collected on goods manufactured in
6
India.
11.    Vide Notifications dated 27.3.2008 and 10.6.2008, the benefit of

Cenvat Credit was withdrawn. The appellant challenged the notification

through Writ Petition (C) No.11 of 2008. The High Court was pleased to

allow the said petition vide judgment and order dated 15.11.2010.
12.    Akshay Ispat and Ferro Alloys Private Limited, the manufacturer of

Ferro Silicon, an excisable commodity, has filed other appeal.       It had

obtained permanent registration under the Central Excise Rules 2002 on

11.3.2004. The Government of India introduced education cess under

Chapter VI of
Section 91
of the Finance Act, 2004. The appellant did not

claim the benefit of the education cess for the period August 2004 to

March 2006. After that, it started taking the re­credit of the education

cess w.e.f. 1.4.2006. On 12.9.2006, the Superintendent, Central Excise,

sent a communication directing the appellant to pay the education cess

with interest and penalty for August, 2006. The appellant submitted its

reply. After that, show cause notice dated 31.10.2006, was issued to the

appellant regarding default in payment of education cess for August,

2006     and   September,   2006   and   proceedings   were   initiated   for

infringement under
Section 91(3)
of the Finance Act, 2004.                The
7
appellant sent a reply; however, on 6.12.2006, another show cause

notice was issued.     The appellant after that claimed on 19.12.2006

repayment of education cess for the period August, 2004 to March, 2006.

In March 2007, the Government of India introduced secondary and

higher education cess under
Section 126
of the Finance Act, 2007.
Section 128(1)
of the Finance Act, 2007 indicated how the said cess was

to be calculated.    The respondents demanded by issuance of further

notice education cess and secondary and higher education cess.         The

appellant filed a writ application in the High Court. By the impugned

judgment, the same has been dismissed. The High Court dismissed the

Writ Petition (C) No.24 of 2007, and another concerning NCCD and

education cess, secondary and higher education cess and held that they

were not included under exemption Notification No.71/2003­CE and the

appellant had illegally availed the benefits of the exemption in respect to

it. Aggrieved by the dismissal of the writ petitions, the appeals have been

preferred.
13.   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submitted

that NCCD, education cess, and secondary and higher education cess

form part of the excise duty. Hence, the decision of the High Court is

bad in law. Reliance has been placed on
SRD Nutrients Private Limited v.
8
Commissioner of Central Excise, Guwahati
, (2018) 1 SCC 105 and the

decision of this Court in
Bajaj Auto Limited v. Union of India & others
,

2019 SCC OnLine SC 421, decided on 27.3.2019. It is submitted that

the education cess was introduced by
Sections 91
and
93
of the Finance

Act, 2004 and higher education cess by the
Finance Act, 2007
and the

NCCD was imposed under
Section 136
of the Finance Act, 2001. The

imposition is in the nature of a duty of excise and in addition to any

other duty of excise chargeable under the
Central Excise Act, 1944
(‘the

Act of 1944’). It is further provided that the provisions of the Act of 1944

and Rules made thereunder relating to refunds and exemptions from

duties and imposition of penalty, shall, as far as may be, apply with

respect to the abovementioned duties in question.        Reliance has also

been placed on circulars dated 10.8.2004 and 8.4.2011, issued by

Central Board of Excise and Customs, on the subject of education cess

and secondary and higher education cess.
14.   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents has submitted

that the decision of the High Court is appropriate and no case for

interference is made out.      The benefit of exemption granted, w.e.f.

9.9.2003 from payment of excise duty was withdrawn vide notification

dated 25.4.2007.    Tobacco and Tobacco products including cigarettes,
9
cigars and gutkha, were excluded from the benefit of exemption of the

excise duty. The notification dated 25.4.2007 was set aside by the High

Court. The decision of the High Court has been reversed by this Court in
Union of India v. Unicorn Industries (Civil Appeal No.
7432 of 2019),

decided on 19.9.2019.    Apart from that, when exemption notifications

were issued, the NCCD, education cess and secondary and higher

education cess were not even imposed, as such, it could not be said that

they were covered under the exemption notification. The duty described

above had been imposed by separate legislation, which was not covered

under the exemption notification. It was an additional duty imposed in

the nature of excise duty. They were not covered under the exemption

notification.   As such, the High Court has rightly dismissed the writ

application filed by the appellants.       Hence, no case for interference is

made out.
15.   It is not disputed that the Government of India took a policy

decision, Ministry of Industry, Department of Industrial Policy and

Promotion vide Office Memorandum dated 24.12.1997, concerning new

industrial policy and concessions in the North­Eastern region.             The

decision was taken for converting the Growth Centres and IIDCs into

total tax­free zones for the next ten years.       All industrial activities in
10
these zones would be free from income tax and excise duty for ten years

from the commencement of production.
16.   The benefit of the said notification was extended to the State of

Sikkim vide notification dated 17.2.2003.               Following benefits were

extended to the new and the existing industrial units:
“i) New industrial units and existing industrial units on their
         substantial expansion as defined, set up in Growth Center,
         Industrial Infrastructure Development Centers (IIDCs) and other
         locations like Industrial Estates, Export Processing Zones, Food
         Parks, IT Parks, etc., as notified by the Central Government are
         entitled to 100% (hundred percent) income tax and excise duty
         exemption for a period of 10 years from the date of commencement
         of commercial production. Thrust Sector Industries as mentioned
         in Annexure­II are entitled to similar concessions in the entire State
         of Sikkim without area restrictions.”
17.   The Government decided to exempt 100 per cent income tax and

excise duty for ten years. In accordance with the policy decision the

Notification No.71/2003 was issued on 9.9.2003 by the Central

Government in exercise of powers conferred by
Section 5A(1)
of the Act of

1944 read with
Section 3(3)
of the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of

Special Importance) Act, 1957 (‘the Act of 1957’) and
Section 3(3)
of the

Additional Duties of Excise (Textiles and Textiles Articles) Act, 1978 (‘the

Act of 1978’), exempted goods specified in the
First Schedule and the

Second Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
, other than goods

specified in Annexure I in the State of Sikkim.              The exemption from
11
payment of so much of excise duty or additional duty of excise, as the

case may be, leviable thereon under any of the said Act. The relevant

portion is extracted hereunder:
“Notification No.71/2003 – Central Excise
         In exercise of the powers conferred by sub­section (1) of
section 5A
of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944), read with sub­section (3)
         of
section 3
of the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special
         Importance) Act, 1957 (58 of 1957) and sub­section (3) of
Section 3
of the Additional Duties of Excise (Textiles and Textiles Articles) Act,
         1978 (40 of 1978), the Central Government, being satisfied that it is
         necessary in the public interest so to do, hereby exempts the goods
         specified in the
First Schedule and the Second Schedule to the
         Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
(5 of 1986), other than goods
         specified in Annexure I appended hereto, and cleared from a unit
         located in the Industrial Growth Centre or Industrial Infrastructure
         Development Centre or Export Promotion Industrial Park or
         Industrial Estate or Industrial Area or Commercial Estate or
         Scheme Area, as the case may be, in the State of Sikkim, specified
         in Annexure – II appended hereto, from so much of the duty of
         excise or additional duty of excise, as the case may be, leviable
         thereon under any of the said Acts as is equivalent to the amount of
         duty paid by the manufacturer of the said goods, other than the
         amount of duty paid by utilization of CENVAT credit under the
         CENVAT Credit Rules, 2002.”
                                                           (emphasis supplied)
18.
Section 136
of the Finance Act, 2001 provides imposition of the

NCCD. Section 136 is extracted hereunder:
“136. National Calamity Contingent Duty.­(1) In the case of goods
         specified in the Seventh Schedule, being goods manufactured or
         produced, there shall be levied and collected for the purposes of the
         Union, by surcharge, a duty of excise, to be called the National
         Calamity Contingent Duty (hereinafter referred to as the National
         Calamity Duty), at the rates specified in the said schedule.
(2) The National Calamity Duty chargeable on the goods specified in
         the Seventh Schedule shall be in addition to any other duties of
         excise chargeable on such goods under the
Central Excise Act, 1944
(1 of 1944) or any other law for the time being in force.
(3) The provisions of the
Central Excise Act, 1944
(1 of 1944) and
12
the rules made thereunder, including those relating to refunds and
        exemptions from duties and imposition of penalty, shall, as far as
        may be, apply in relation to the levy and collection of the National
        Calamity Duty leviable under this section in respect of the goods
        specified in the Seventh Schedule as they apply in relation to the
        levy and collection of the duties of excise on such goods under that
        Act or those rules, as the case may be.”
                                                          (emphasis supplied)
19.   The education cess came to be imposed vide notification dated

10.9.2004 issued under the
Finance Act, 2004
.
Sections 91
and
93
are

extracted hereunder:
“91. Education Cess­(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub­
        section (11) of
Section 2
, there shall be levied and collected, in
        accordance with the provisions of this Chapter as surcharge for
        purposes of the Union, a cess to be called the Education Cess, to
        fulfil the commitment of the Government to provide and finance
        universalized quality basic education.
(2) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
        Parliament by law in this behalf, utilize, such sums of money of the
        Education Cess levied under sub­section (11) of
Section 2
and this
        Chapter for the purposes specified in sub­section (1), as it may
        consider necessary.
***
93. Education Cess on Excisable Goods­ (1) The Education Cess
        levied under
Section 81
, in the case of goods specified in the
First
        Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
(5 of 1986), being
        goods manufactured or produced, shall be a duty of excise (in this
        section referred to as the Education Cess on excisable goods), at the
        rate of two per cent, calculated on the aggregate of all duties of
        excise (including special duty of excise or any other duty of excise
        but excluding Education Cess on excisable goods) which are levied
        and collected by the Central Government in the Ministry of Finance
        (Department of Revenue) under the provisions of the
Central Excise
        Act, 1944
(1 of 1944) or under any other law for the time being in
        force.
(2) The Education Cess on excisable goods shall be in addition to
        any other duties of excise chargeable on such goods under the
Central Excise Act, 1944
(1 of 1944) or any other law for the time
        being in force.
(3) The provisions of the
Central Excise Act, 1944
(1 of 1944) and
13
the rules made thereunder, including those relating to refunds and
        exemptions from duties and imposition of penalty shall, as far as
        may be, apply in relation to the levy and collection of the Education
        Cess on excisable goods as they apply in relation to the levy and
        collection of the duties of excise on such goods under the
Central
        Excise Act, 1944
or the rules, as the case may be.”
                                                          (emphasis supplied)
20.   The Central Government introduced the secondary and higher

education cess at the rate of 1 per cent of the total excise duty under
Sections 126
and
128
of the Finance Act, 2007, which are reproduced

hereunder:
"126. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub­section (12) of
section 2
, there shall be levied and collected, in accordance with the
        provisions of this Chapter as surcharge for purposes of the Union, a
        cess to be called the Secondary and Higher Education Cess, to fulfil
        the commitment of the Government to provide and finance
        secondary and higher education.
(2) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
        Parliament by law in this behalf, utilize, such sums of money of the
        Secondary and Higher Education Cess levied under sub­section

        (12) of
section 2
and this Chapter for the purposes specified in
        subsection (1) as it may consider necessary.
XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX
128. (1) The Secondary and Higher Education Cess levied under
section 126
, in the case of goods specified in the
First Schedule to
        the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
, being goods manufactured or
        produced, shall be a duty of excise (in this section referred to as the
        Secondary and Higher Education Cess on excisable goods), at the
        rate of one per cent., calculated on the aggregate of all duties of
        excise (including special duty of excise or any other duty of excise
        but excluding Education Cess chargeable under
section 93
of the
        Finance (No. 2) Act, 2004 and Secondary and Higher Education
        Cess on excisable goods) which are levied and collected by the
        Central Government in the Ministry of Finance (Department of
        Revenue), under the provisions of the
Central Excise Act, 1944
or
        under any other law for the time being in force.
14
(2) The Secondary and Higher Education Cess on excisable goods
          shall be in addition to any other duties of excise chargeable on such
          goods, under the
Central Excise Act, 1944
or any other law for the
          time being in force and the Education Cess chargeable under
section 93
of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1944.
(3) The provisions of the
Central Excise Act, 1944
and the rules
          made thereunder, including those relating to refunds and
          exemptions from duties and imposition of penalty shall, as far as
          may be, apply in relation to the levy and collection of the Secondary
          and Higher Education Cess on excisable goods as they apply in
          relation to the levy and collection of the duties of excise on such
          goods under the
Central Excise Act, 1944
or the rules made
          thereunder, as the case may be."
21.   The appellant challenged the exemption Notification No.71/2003

dated 9.9.2003, before the High Court only to the extent that it limits the

exemption only in relation to basic excise duty under the
Excise Act
,

additional duties under the Act of 1957 and the additional duties under

the Act of 1978.       It is submitted that though various Finance Acts

imposed     these    duties,    they    were    recoverable      as   excise      duty,

notwithstanding their nomenclature.            The notification dated 17.2.2003

indicated that 100 per cent income tax and excise duty exemption for ten

years was granted. The exemption should cover the NCCD, education

cess and the secondary and higher education cess imposed by the

notifications issued under Finance Acts of 2001, 2004, and 2007.
22.   The main question arising for consideration is when 100 per cent

exemption had been granted for excise duty for a period of 10 years,
15
whether the exemption notification issued for the State of Sikkim on

9.9.2003 shall be confined to the basic excise duty under the Act of

1944, additional duty under the Act of 1957 and additional duty under

the Act of 1978, which were specifically mentioned in the notification

issued on 9.9.2003, or it also include cess/duty imposed by Finance Acts

of 2001, 2004 and 2007.
23.   The submission raised on behalf of appellant is that the duty and

cess in the nature of excise duty cannot be realized, particularly in view

of the provisions in the Finance Acts of 2001, 2004 and 2007 relating to

refund and exemption, which have made applicable, the provisions of the

Act of 1944 and the Rules made thereunder relating to exemption. As

such, in view of the decisions of Division Bench of this Court in
SRD

Nutrients Private Limited
(supra) and
Bajaj Auto Limited
(supra), the

decision of the High Court deserves to be set aside.
24.   It is not in dispute that when initial exemption notification was

issued in 1997 for the North­Eastern States, which was later on applied

to the State of Sikkim on 9.9.2003. The benefits from payment of excise

duty and additional excise duty were confined to the basic excise duty

payable under the Acts of 1944, 1957 and 1978. There was no reference
16
made to NCCD imposed under the
Finance Act, 2001
. Apart from that,

when the notification came to be issued, the education cess and

secondary and higher education cess, which came to be imposed by

Finance Acts of 2004 and 2007, were not in vogue.
25.   A Division Bench of this Court in
SRD Nutrients Private Limited
(supra) has considered the Finance Acts of 2004 and 2007, by which

education and secondary and higher education cess were imposed.

Under the Industrial Policy dated 1.4.2007 for the North­Eastern States,

the notification dated 25.4.2007, issued by the Central Government,

came up for consideration before this Court.
The said notification and

the industrial policy, have been dealt with in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the
SRD Nutrients Private Limited
(supra), which are extracted hereunder:
“4. Industrial Policy dated 1­4­2007 for the North­Eastern States,
         including the State of Assam, was announced by the Ministry of
         Commerce and Industry (Department of Industrial Policy and
         Promotion), Government of India to set up a special package for the
         North­Eastern States to accelerate industrial development of the
         State. As per this package, new industrial units were entitled to
         100% excise duty exemption for a period of ten years from the date
         of commencement of commercial production. Pursuant to the said
         Industrial Policy, the Central Government issued Notification No.
         20/2007­Ex. Dated 25­4­2007 granting exemption from duties of
         excise levied under the
Central Excise Act, 1944
(hereinafter
         referred to as “the Act”) read with
Section 3(3)
of the Additional
         Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 and
Section 3(3)
of the Additional Duties of Excise (Textiles & Textile
         Articles) Act, 1978 to goods cleared from the notified areas within
         the North­Eastern States. The said Notification provided that the
         assessee would be entitled to refund of duty paid other than the
         duty paid by way of utilisation of CENVAT credit under the CENVAT
         Credit Rules, 2004.
17
5. Reproduction of the first three paragraphs of this Notification
would be sufficient, which are as follows:
“NOTIFICATION No.: 20/2007­CE dated 25­4­2007
     North­East — Exemption to all goods, except as specified,
     cleared from Assam, Tripura, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
     Manipur, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh or Sikkim from
     duty paid other than by utilisation of CENVAT credit.
     In exercise of the powers conferred by sub­section (1) of
Section 5
­
A of the Central Excise Act, 1944
(1 of 1944), the
     Central Government, being satisfied that it is necessary in the
     public interest so to do, hereby exempts the goods specified in
     the
First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
(5 of
     1986) other than those mentioned in the Annexure and cleared
     from a unit located in the States of Assam or Tripura or
     Meghalaya or Mizoram or Manipur or Nagaland or Arunachal
     Pradesh or Sikkim, as the case may be, from so much of the
     duty of excise leviable thereon under the said Act as is
     equivalent to the amount of duty paid by the manufacturer of
     goods other than the amount of duty paid by utilisation of
     CENVAT credit under the CENVAT Credit Rules, 2004.
2. In cases where all goods produced by a manufacturer are
     eligible for exemption under this Notification, the exemption
     contained in this Notification shall be available subject to the
     condition that, the manufacturer first utilises whole of the
     CENVAT credit available to him on the last day of the month
     under consideration for payment of duty on goods cleared
     during such month and pays only the balance amount in cash.
3. The exemption contained in this notification shall be given
     effect to in the following manner, namely—
(a) the manufacturer shall submit a statement of the duty paid
     other than the amount of duty paid by utilisation of CENVAT
     credit under the CENVAT Credit Rules, 2004, to the Assistant
     Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise,
     as the case may be, by the 7th of the next month in which the
     duty has been paid other than the amount of duty paid by
     utilisation of CENVAT credit under the CENVAT Credit Rules,
     2004;
(b) the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or the Deputy
     Commissioner of Central Excise, as the case may be, after
     such verification, as may be deemed necessary, shall refund
     the amount of duty paid other than the amount of duty paid
18
by utilisation of CENVAT credit under the CENVAT Credit
             Rules, 2004, during the month under consideration to the
             manufacturer by the 15th of the next month:
Provided that in cases, where the exemption contained in this
             Notification is not applicable to some of the goods produced by
             a manufacturer, such refund shall not exceed the amount of
             duty paid less the amount of the CENVAT credit availed of, in
             respect of the duty paid on the inputs used in or in relation to
             the manufacture of goods cleared under this Notification;
(c) if there is likely to be any delay in the verification, Assistant
             Commissioner of Central Excise or the Deputy Commissioner
             of Central Excise, as the case may be, shall refund the amount
             on provisional basis by the 15th of the next month to the
             month under consideration and thereafter may adjust the
             amount of refund by such amount as may be necessary in the
             subsequent refunds admissible to the manufacturer.”



     Circulars have also been referred to in the decision of this Court in
SRD Nutrients Private Limited
(supra). The same is extracted hereunder:
“17. It is clear from the arguments of the counsel for the parties that
       divergent views are expressed by the CESTAT as well as High Courts.
       Even one Bench of the same Tribunal has differed from its earlier
       Division Bench decision. In this scenario, it becomes important as to
       how the Department has viewed the position regarding education
       cess and higher education cess which is payable as a surcharge on
       the excise duty, once the excise duty is exempted. Two circulars are
       relevant in this behalf, one is Circular dated 10­8­2004 which
       clarifies that education cess is part of excise duty. In this circular,
       certain clarifications are given by the Ministry of Finance
       (Department of Revenue), Government of India and the relevant
       portion thereof reads as under:
“Subject: Issues relating to imposition of education cess on
               excisable goods and on imported goods, as pointed out by the
               trade and the field formations—Reg.
The undersigned is directed to state that subsequent to Budget
               2004 announcements, a number of representations/references
               have been received from the trade as well as from the field
               formations pertaining to imposition of education cess on
               excisable goods and on imported goods. The points raised and
               the clarifications thereon are as follows:
19
Issue (1): Whether education cess on excisable goods is leviable
              on goods manufactured prior to imposition of cess but cleared
              after imposition of such cess?
Clarification: Education cess on excisable goods is a new levy.
              In similar cases, it has been held by the Supreme Court that if
              a levy is not there at the time the goods are manufactured or
              produced in India, it cannot be levied at the stage of removal of
              the said goods. Thus, education cess is not leviable on
              excisable goods manufactured prior to imposition of cess but
              cleared after imposition of such cess.
Issue (2): Whether goods that are fully exempted from excise
              duty/customs duty or are cleared without payment of excise
              duty/customs duty (such as clearance under bond or
              fulfilment of certain conditions) would be subjected to cess.
              Clarification: The education cess is leviable at the rate of two
              per cent of the aggregate of all duties of excise/customs
              (excluding certain duties of customs like anti­dumping duty,
              safeguard duty, etc.), levied and collected. If goods are fully
              exempted from excise duty or customs duty, are chargeable to
              NIL duty or are cleared without payment of duty under
              specified procedure such as clearance under bond, there is no
              collection of duty. Thus, no education cess would be leviable
              on such clearances. In this regard, letter D.O. No.
              605/54/2004­DBK dated 21­7­2004 issued by Member
              (Customs) may also be referred to.”
                                                        (emphasis in original)”




     In the circular dated 10.8.2004, reference has been made to the

notification issued by Member (Customs), wherein it is stated that there

is no collection of excise duty; hence, no education cess would be leviable

on such clearances.
Circular dated 8.4.2011 had been issued by the Central Board of

Excise and Customs with respect to service tax.               In case service tax

stands exempted, education cess and secondary and higher education

cess shall not be levied.
20
26.   This Court in
SRD Nutrients Private Limited
(supra) has observed

that the circulars bind department. When there is no excise duty, the

education cess and secondary and higher education cess could not have

been demanded. This Court observed thus:
“21. One aspect that clearly emerges from the reading of these two
         circulars is that the Government itself has taken the position that
         where whole of excise duty or service tax is exempted, even the
         education cess as well as secondary and higher education cess
         would not be payable. These circulars are binding on the
         Department.
22. Even otherwise, we are of the opinion that it is more rational to
         accept the aforesaid position as clarified by the Ministry of Finance
         in the aforesaid circulars. Education cess is on excise duty. It
         means that those assessees who are required to pay excise duty
         have to shell out education cess as well. This education cess is
         introduced by
Sections 91
to
93
of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2004. As
         per
Section 91
thereof, education cess is the surcharge which the
         assessee is to pay.
Section 93
makes it clear that this education
         cess is payable on "excisable goods," i.e., in respect of goods
         specified in the
First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act,
         1985
. Further, this education cess is to be levied @ 2% and
         calculated on the aggregate of all duties of excise which are levied
         and collected by the Central Government under the provisions of
         the
Central Excise Act, 1944
or under any other law for the time
         being in force. Sub­section (3) of
Section 93
provides that the
         provisions of the
Central Excise Act, 1944
and the Rules made
         thereunder, including those related to refunds and duties, etc. shall
         as far as may be applied in relation to levy and collection of
         education cess on excisable goods. A conjoint reading of these
         provisions would amply demonstrate that education cess as a
         surcharge is levied @ 2% on the duties of excise, which are payable
         under the Act. It can, therefore, be clearly inferred that when there
         is no excise duty payable, as it is exempted, there would not be any
         education cess as well, inasmuch as education cess @ 2% is to be
         calculated on the aggregate of duties of excise. There cannot be any
         surcharge when basic duty itself is NIL.
***
24. We are in agreement with the aforesaid reasons accorded by the
         Rajasthan High Court since it is in consonance with the legal
         principle enunciated by this Court. For this purpose, we may refer
21
to the judgment in CCE v. TELCO (1997) 5 SCC 275. In that case,
        issue pertained to valuation of cess which was levied @ 1/8 per cent
        of ad valorem “value” of the Central excise duty. The Court held that
        the calculation of 1/8 per cent ad valorem of the motor vehicle for
        the purposes of the levy and collection of the automobile cess must
        be made that was being calculated since automobile cess was to be
        levied and calculated as if it was excise duty. As a fortiori, the
        education cess and higher education cess levied @ 2% of the excise
        duty would partake the character of excise duty itself.”
27.
In
Bajaj Auto Limited
(supra), a Division Bench of this Court

considered the question of liability towards NCCD, education cess and

secondary and higher education cess on manufacturing establishment

which is exempted from payment of central excise duty under the Act of

1944.   The matter arose from the State of Uttarakhand; an Office

Memorandum dated 7.1.2003 was issued, by which 100 per cent

outright excise duty exemption for ten years was granted from the date of

commencement of the commercial production.                     Notification dated

10.6.2003 issued under Section 5A has been reproduced in the decision

mentioned above, the same is extracted hereunder:
“GENERAL EXEMPTION NO. 41
Exemption to goods other than specified goods cleared from units
        located in the Industrial Growth Centre or Industrial Infrastructure
        Development Centre or Export Promotion Industrial Park or
        Industrial Estate or Industrial Area or Commercial Estate or
        Scheme Area of Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh.—In exercise of
        the powers conferred by sub­section (1) of
section 5A
of the Central
        Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) read with sub­section (3) of
section 3
of
        the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act,
        1957 (58 of 1957) and sub­section (3) of
section 3
of the Additional
        Duties of Excise (Textiles and Textiles Articles) Act, 1978 (40 of
        1978), the Central Government, being satisfied that it is necessary
        in the public interest so to do, hereby exempts the goods specified
        in the
First Schedule and the Second Schedule to the Central Excise
        Tariff Act, 1985
(5 of 1986), other than the goods specified in
22
Annexure­I appended hereto, and cleared from a unit located in the
        Industrial Growth Centre or Industrial Infrastructure Development
        Centre or Export Promotion Industrial Park or Industrial Estate or
        Industrial Area or Commercial Estate or Scheme Area, as the case
        may be, specified in [Annexure­II and Annexure III] appended
        hereto, from the whole of the duty of excise or additional duty of
        excise, as the case may be, leviable thereon under any of the said
        Acts.”

     The Division Bench has relied upon the decision of
SRD Nutrients

Private Limited
(supra).
The decision of the Rajasthan High Court in
Banswara Syntex Ltd. v. Union of India
, 2007 SCC OnLine Raj. 365,

which was considered in
SRD Nutrients Private Limited
(supra), was also

referred to, besides the circular of 2004. This Court has observed thus:
“21. We may notice that the primary reasoning contained in the
        impugned order is common for the three cesses, i.e., NCCD;
        Education Cess and Secondary & Higher Education Cess. These
        were in the nature of surcharges levied in other Acts, which have
        not been specifically excluded under the Notification in question.
        That reasoning does not prevail, more so because of the judgment in
        SRD Nutrients Pvt. Ltd. The question, thus, is whether, even though
        the NCCD is in the nature of an excise duty, its incidence being on
        the product, rather than on the value of the excise duty, that itself
        would make any difference to the applicability of the NCCD to excise
        exempt units.
22. On a proper appreciation of the judicial pronouncement in SRD
        Nutrients Pvt. Ltd., we are not inclined to take a different view from
        the one taken for Education Cess and Secondary & Higher
        Education Cess, even while considering the issue of NCCD.
23. We may notice that this Court, in SRD Nutrients Pvt. Ltd. gave
        its imprimatur to the view expressed by the Rajasthan High Court
        in Banswara Syntex Ltd. The rationale is that while there may be
        surcharges under different financial enactments to provide the
        Government with revenue for specified purposes, the same have
        been notified as leviable in the nature of a particular kind of duty.
In the case of NCCD, it is in the nature of an excise duty. It has to
        bear the same character as those respective taxes to which the
        surcharge is appended. NCCD will not cease to be an excise duty,
        but is the same as an excise duty, even if it is levied on the product.
23
Thus, when NCCD, at the time of collection, takes the character of a
         duty on the product, whatever may be the rationale behind it, it is
         also subject to the provisions relating to excise duty, applicable to it
         in the manner of collection as well as the obligation of the taxpayer
         to discharge the duty. Once the excise duty is exempted, NCCD,
         levied as an excise duty, cannot partake a different character and,
         thus, would be entitled to the benefit of the exemption notification.
         The exemption notification also states that the exemption is from
         the “whole of the duty of excise or additional duty of excise.” We
         may also note that the exemption itself is for a period of ten years
         from the date of commercial production of the unit.
24. We are, thus, of the view that the appellant would not be liable
         to pay the NCCD.”
28.   The Division Bench of this Court has rendered both the above

decisions.   The most unfortunate part is that the binding decision of

larger bench consisting of three­Judges of this Court in
Union of India v.

Modi Rubber Limited
, (1986) 4 SCC 66, dealing with the similar issue,

was   not    placed   for   consideration       before    this    Court    when     the

abovementioned decisions came to be rendered.
29.   This Court in
Modi Rubber Limited
(supra) has considered the

similar question in the backdrop of the facts that what is the meaning of

the expression ‘duty of excise’ employed in the notifications dated

1.8.1974 and 1.3.1981, issued by the Government of India under Rule

8(1) of the Central Excise Rules. A question arose whether expression

‘duty of excise’ is limited in its connotation only to basic duty levied

under the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
or it also covers special
24
duties of excise levied under the various Finance Bills and Acts,

additional duty of excise levied under the Act of 1957 and other kind of

duty of excise levied under the Central enactments.
30.
In
Modi Rubber Limited
(supra), the company was the manufacturer

of tyres, which product was subject to a duty of excise under the
Central

Excises and Salt Act, 1944
. The word ‘duty’ under the said Act is defined

in Rule 2(v) to mean “the duty payable under
Section 3
of the Act”. The

exemption is dealt with under Rule 8 of Central Excise Rules, exempting

various categories of excisable goods from the whole or any part of the

duty of excise leviable on such goods.
The notification dated 1.8.1974,

came up for consideration before this Court in
Modi Rubber Limited
(supra), which is extracted hereunder:
“3…..
Notification No. 123/74­C.E. dated August 1, 1974
            In the exercise of the powers conferred by sub­rule (1) of Rule 8
         of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, the Central Government hereby
         exempts tyres for motor vehicles falling under sub­item (1) of
Item
         No.16 of the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act,
         1944
(1 of 1944), from so much of the duty of excise leviable
         thereon as is in excess of fifty­five per cent ad valorem.”
      The notification was confined to the exemption of duty of excise

under the Act of 1944 in excess of 55 per cent ad valorem. Subsequently,

the notification dated 1.3.1981, was issued by the Central Government

exempting specified goods from so much of the duty of excise leviable

thereon as is more than the duty specified in the corresponding entry in
25
column 5.
31.   This Court in
Modi Rubber Limited
(supra) considered the question

that since 1963, the special duty of excise was levied inter alia on the

manufacture of tyres from year to year up to 1971 by various Finance

Acts passed from time to time. It was discontinued from 1972 to 1978,

and the Finance Act, 1978, again revived it. After that, it continued to be

levied from year to year right up to the period.
The special duties of

excise came to be imposed under
Section 32
of the Finance Act, 1979,

which came up for consideration before this Court in
Modi Rubber

Limited
(supra). The same is extracted hereunder:
“32. Special Duties of Excise.— (1) In the case of goods chargeable
         with a duty of excise under the
Central Excises Act
as amended
         from time to time, read with any notification for the time being in
         force issued by the Central Government in relation to the duty so
         chargeable there shall be levied and collected a special duty of
         excise equal to five per cent of the amount so chargeable on such
         goods.
(2) Sub­section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st day of
         March, 1980, except as respects things done or omitted to be done
         before such cesser; and
Section 6
of the General Clauses Act, 1897,
         shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub­section had then
         been repealed by a Central Act.
(3) The Special duties of excise referred to in sub­section (1) shall
         be in addition to any duties of excise chargeable on such goods
         under the
Central Excises Act
or any other law for the time being in
         force.
(4) The provisions of the
Central Excises Act
and the rules made
         thereunder, including those relating to refunds and exemptions
         from duties, shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the levy and
         collection of the special duties of excise leviable under this section
         in respect of any goods as they apply in relation to the levy and
         collection of the duties of excise on such goods under that Act or
         those rules as the case may be.”
26
(emphasis supplied)
32.   The   provisions    of
Section     32
are   pari   materia   to   the

abovementioned provisions of the
Finance Act
(s) in question. The special

duty under
Section 32
of Finance Act, 1979 imposed was in addition to

any duties of excise chargeable on such goods under the provisions of

the
Central Excises Act
and the Rules made thereunder, with respect to

refunds and exemptions from duties, shall, as far as may be, apply to the

levy and collection of special duties of excise leviable under the

provisions of
Section 32
of the Finance Act, 1979.
33.   The assessee
Modi Rubber Limited
(supra) claimed that in view of

the notification dated 1.8.1974, assessee was exempted from payment

not only in respect of basic excise duty levied under the
Central Excises

and Salt Act, 1944
, but also in respect of special duty of excise levied

under the relevant Finance Acts, because the language used in the

notification was not restrictive and it referred generally to ‘duty of excise’

without any qualification, therefore, it covered all duties of excise

whether levied under the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
or under

any other Central enactments. The dispute pertained to the period from

November 1979 to October 1982.
27
34.   The Assistant Collector of Excise, in the case of
Modi Rubber

Limited
(supra), held that exemption granted under the notification dated

1.8.1974, was not available in respect of special duty of excise levied

under the Finance Acts. The assessee thereupon filed a writ petition in

the Delhi High Court, challenging the order of the Assistant Collector of

Excise. The Delhi High Court upheld the claim of the assessee. It took

the view that the expression ‘duty of excise’ included not only basic duty

of excise levied under the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
, but also

the special duty of excise levied under the various Finance Acts and any

other duties of excise levied under Central enactment.        Meanwhile,

Parliament also enacted the
Central Excise Laws (Amendment and

Validation) Act, 1982
laying down statutory rules which should guide the

court in interpreting notifications granting exemption from payment of

duty of excise and prescribing the conditions on which a notification

granting exemption from payment of duty of excise can be construed as

applicable to duty of excise levied under any Central law making the

provisions of the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
and the Rules made

thereunder applicable to the levy and collection of duty of excise under

such Central Law.
35.   The question arose for consideration before this Court as to what is
28
the real import of the expression ‘duty of excise’ in the notifications dated

1.8.1974 and 1.3.1981 and whether it includes the duties of excise

leviable not only under the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
, but also

under any other enactment.
36.   This Court in
Modi Rubber Limited
(supra) has considered the

purport of the notifications and the specific provisions mentioned therein

and held that exemption has to be considered in the light of provisions of

Central Excise Rules, 1944, as envisaged under Rule 2(v) of Central

Excise Rules, 1944. It cannot, in the circumstances, bear an extended

meaning to include special excise duty and auxiliary excise duty. This

Court observed thus:
“6. The first question that arises for consideration on these facts is
         as to what is the true import of the expression "duty of excise" in
         the notifications dated August 1, 1974, and March 1, 1981. It is
         only if this expression is held to include duties of excise leviable not
         only under the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
but also under
         any other enactments that the question would arise whether the
Central Laws (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1982
is
         constitutionally invalid. We, therefore, asked the learned counsel
         appearing on behalf of the parties to confine their arguments only to
         the first question of interpretation of the expression ‘duty of excise’
         in the notifications dated August 1, 1974 and March 1, 1981.
7. Both these notifications, as the opening part shows, are issued
         under Rule 8(1) of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 and since the
         definition of ‘duty’ in Rule 2, clause (v) must necessarily be
         projected in Rule 8(1) and the expression “duty of excise” in Rule
         8(1) must be read in the light of that definition, the same expression
         used in these two notifications issued under Rule 8(1) must also be
         interpreted in the same sense, namely, duty of excise payable under
         the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
and the exemption granted
         under both these notifications must be regarded as limited only to
29
such duty of excise. But the respondents contended that the
expression ‘duty of excise’ was one of large amplitude and in the
absence of any restrictive or limitative words indicating that it was
intended to refer only to duty of excise leviable under the
Central
Excises and Salt Act, 1944
, it must be held to cover all duties of
excise whether leviable under the
Central Excises and Salt Act,
1944
or under any other enactment. The respondents sought to
support this contention by pointing out that whenever the Central
Government wanted to confine the exemption granted under a
notification to the duty of excise leviable under the
Central Excises
and Salt Act, 1944
, the Central Government made its intention
abundantly clear by using appropriate words of limitation such as
“duty of excise leviable ... under
Section 3
of the Central Excises
and Salt Act, 1944” or “duty of excise leviable ... under the
Central
Excises and Salt Act, 1944
” or “duty of excise leviable ... under the
said Act” as in the Notification No. CER­8(2)/55­C.E. dated
September 17, 1955, Notification No. 255/77­C.E. dated July 20,
1977, Notification No. CER­8(1)/55­C.E. dated September 2, 1955,
Notification No. CER­8(9)/55­C.E. dated December 31, 1955,
Notification No. 95/61­C.E. dated April 1, 1961, Notification No.
23/55­C.E. dated April 29, 1955, and similar other notifications.
But, here said the respondents, no such words of limitation are
used in the two notifications in question and the expression “duty of
excise” must, therefore, be read according to its plain natural
meaning as including all duties of excise, including special duty of
excise and auxiliary duty of excise. Now, it is no doubt true that in
these various notifications
referred to above
, the Central
Government has, while granting exemption under Rule 8(1), used
specified language indicating that the exemption, total or partial,
granted under each such notification is in respect of excise duty
leviable under the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
. But, merely
because, as a matter of drafting, the Central Government has in
some notifications specifically referred to the excise duty in respect
of which exemption is granted as “duty of excise” leviable under the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
, it does not follow that in the
absence of such words of specificity, the expression “duty of excise”
standing by itself must be read as referring to all duties of excise. It
is not uncommon to find that the legislature sometimes, with a view
to making its intention clear beyond doubt, uses language ex
abundanti cautela though it may not be strictly necessary and even
without it the same intention can be spelt out as a matter of judicial
construction and this would be more so in case of subordinate
legislation by the executive. The officer drafting a particular piece of
subordinate legislation in the Executive Department may employ
words with a view to leaving no scope for possible doubt as to its
intention or sometimes even for greater completeness, though these
words may not add anything to the meaning and scope of the
subordinate legislation. Here, in the present notifications, the words
duty of excise leviable under the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
’
30
do not find a place as in the other notifications relied upon by the
         respondents. But, that does not necessarily lead to the inference
         that the expression “duty of excise’ in these notifications was
         intended to refer to all duties of excise including special and
         auxiliary duties of excise. The absence of these words does not
         absolve us from the obligation to interpret the expression “duty of
         excise” in these notifications. We have still to construe this
         expression — what is its meaning and import — and that has to be
         done, bearing in mind the context in which it occurs. We have
         already pointed out that these notifications having been issued
         under Rule 8(1), the expression ‘duty of excise’ in these notifications
         must bear the same meaning which it has in Rule 8(1) and that
         meaning clearly is — excise duty payable under the
Central Excises
         and Salt Act, 1944
as envisaged in Rule 2 clause (v). It cannot in the
         circumstances bear an extended meaning so as to include special
         excise duty and auxiliary excise duty.”
37.   This Court in
Modi Rubber Limited
(supra) further considered the

question when the notification was issued on 1.8.1974, there was no

special duty of excise leviable on tyres, it came to be introduced in 1978

under various Finance Acts.         It was held that the notification could not

be read as comprehending the special duty of excise on the date of the

notification and came to be levied four years later. This Court also laid

down that the presumption is that when the Central Government issues

a notification granting exemption from payment of excise duty under

Rule 8(1) of Rules of 1944, the Central Government would have

considered whether exemption should be granted and if so, to what

extent and can only be with reference to the duty of excise which is then

leviable, not a duty to be imposed in future.
This Court in
Modi Rubber

Limited
(supra) strongly repelled the argument that it would cover the
31
duties to be imposed in the future not prevailing at the relevant time

thus:
“8. Moreover, at the date when the first notification was issued,
          namely, August 1, 1974, there was no special duty of excise leviable
          on tyres. It came to be levied on tyres with effect from the financial
          year 1978 under various Finance Acts enacted from year to year. It
          is therefore difficult to understand how the expression “duty of
          excise” in the notification dated August 1, 1974 could possibly be
          read as comprehending special duty of excise which did not exist at
          the date of this notification and came to be levied almost four years
          later. When special duty of excise was not in existence at the date of
          this notification, how could the Central Government, in issuing this
          notification, have intended to grant exemption from payment of
          special excise duty? The presumption is that when a notification
          granting exemption from payment of excise duty is issued by the
          Central Government under Rule 8(1), the Central Government
          would have applied its mind to the question whether exemption
          should be granted and if so, to what extent. And obviously, that can
          only be with reference to the duty of excise, which is then leviable.
          The Central Government could not be presumed to have projected
          its mind into the future and granted exemption in respect of excise
          duty which may be levied in the future, without considering the
          nature and extent of such duty and the object and purpose for
          which such levy may be made and without taking into account the
          situation which may be prevailing then. It is only when a new duty
          of excise is levied, whether special duty of excise or auxiliary duty of
          excise or any other kind of duty of excise, that a question could
          arise whether any particular article should be exempted from
          payment of such duty of excise and the Central Government would
          then have to apply its mind to this question and having regard to
          the nature and extent of such duty of excise and the object and
          purpose for which it is levied and the economic situation including
          supply and demand position then prevailing, decide whether
          exemption from payment of such excise duty should be granted and
          if so, to what extent. It would be absurd to suggest that by issuing
          the notification dated August 1, 1974 the Central Government
          intended to grant exemption not only in respect of excise duty then
          prevailing but also in respect of all future duties of excise which
          may be levied from time to time.”
38.     This Court in
Modi Rubber Limited
(supra) also considered the
32
provisions of
Section 32
of the Finance Act, 1979, levying special duty

making applicable to the provisions of the Act of 1944 and the Rules

made thereunder, relating to refunds and exemptions from duties. They

shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the levy and collection of the

special duty of excise as they apply to the levy and collection of the duty

of excise under the Act of 1944.           It was held that reference to the

provisions under
section 32
of the Finance Act as to the source of power

under which notifications dated 1.8.1974 and 1.3.1981 were issued, it

could not be held that exemption granted under these two notifications

was extendable to
Finance Act, 1979
. It was limited only to the duty of

excise payable under the Act of 1944. The expression 'duty of excise' in

these   two   notifications   could   not    legitimately    be   construed   as

comprehending special duty of excise. Merely reference to the source of

power is not enough to attract the exemption and what exemption has

been granted to be read from the notification issued therein. This Court

has further laid down that in case notification granting exemption issued

under the Central Excise Rules, 1944 without reference to any other

statute, the exemption must be read as limited to the duty of excise

payable under the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
. It cannot cover

such special or another kind of duty of excise.
This Court in
Modi

Rubber Limited
(supra) has discussed the provisions of the Finance Act,
33
1979 thus:
“9. We have already pointed out, and this is one of the principal
        arguments against the contention of the respondents, that by
        reason of the definition of “duty” in clause (v) of Rule 2 which must
        be read in Rule 8(1), the expression “duty of excise” in the
        notifications dated August 1, 1974 and March 1, 1981 must be
        construed as duty of excise payable under the
Central Excises and
        Salt Act, 1944
. The respondents sought to combat this conclusion
        by relying on sub­section (4) of
Section 32
of the Finance Act, 1979
        — there being an identical provision in each
Finance Act
levying
        special duty of excise — which provided that the provisions of the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
and the rules made thereunder
        including those relating to refunds and exemptions from duties
        shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the levy and collection of
        special duty of excise as they apply in relation to the levy and
        collection of the duty of excise under the
Central Excises and Salt
        Act, 1944
. It was urged on behalf of the respondents that by reason
        of this provision, Rule 8(1) relating to exemption from duty of excise
        became applicable in relation to the levy and collection of special
        duty of excise and exemption from payment of special duty of excise
        could therefore be granted by the Central Government under Rule
        8(1) in the same manner in which it could be granted in relation to
        the duty of excise payable under the
Central Excises and Salt Act,
        1944
. The argument of the respondents based on this premise was
        that the reference to Rule 8(1) as the source of the power under
        which the notifications dated August 1, 1974 and March 1, 1981
        were issued could not therefore be relied upon as indicating that the
        duty of excise from which exemption was granted under these two
        notifications was limited only to the duty of excise payable under
        the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
and the expression “duty of
        excise” in these two notifications could legitimately be construed as
        comprehending special duty of excise. This argument is, in our
        opinion, not well­founded and cannot be sustained. It is obvious
        that when a notification granting exemption from duty of excise is
        issued by the Central Government in exercise of the power under
        Rule 8(1) simpliciter, without anything more, it must, by reason of
        the definition of ‘duty’ contained in Rule 2 clause (v) which
        according to the well recognised canons of construction would be
        projected in Rule 8(1), be read as granting exemption only in respect
        of duty of excise payable under the
Central Excises and Salt Act,
        1944
. Undoubtedly, by reason of sub­section (4) of
Section 32
of the
        Finance Act, 1979 and similar provision in the other Finance Acts,
        Rule 8(1) would become applicable empowering the Central
        Government to grant exemption from payment of special duty of
        excise, but when the Central Government exercises this power, it
        would be doing so under Rule 8(1) read with sub­section (4) of
Section 32
or other similar provision. The reference to the source of
34
power in such a case would not be just to Rule 8(1), since it does
not of its own force and on its own language apply to granting of
exemption in respect of special duty of excise, but the reference
would have to be to Rule 8(1) read with sub­section (4) of
Section 32
or other similar provision. It is significant to note that during all
these years, whenever exemption is sought to be granted by the
Central Government from payment of special duty of excise or
additional duty of excise, the recital of the source of power in the
notification granting exemption has invariably been to Rule 8(1)
read with the relevant provision of the statute levying special duty of
excise or additional duty of excise, by which the provisions of the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
and the rules made thereunder
including those relating to exemption from duty are made
applicable. Take for example, the Notification bearing No. 63/78
dated August 1, 1978 where exemption is granted in respect of
certain excisable goods “from the whole of the special duty of excise
leviable thereon under sub­clause (1) of clause 37 of the Finance
Bill, 1978”. The source of the power recited in this notification is
“sub­rule (1) of Rule 8 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 read with
sub­clause (5) of clause 37 of the Finance Bill, 1978”.
So also in the
Notification bearing No. 29/79 dated March 1, 1979 exempting
unmanufactured tobacco “from the whole of the duty of excise
leviable thereon both under the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
and
Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act,
1957
”, the reference to the source of power mentioned in the
opening part of the notification is “sub­rule (1) of Rule 8 of the
Central Excise Rules, 1944 read with sub­section (3) of
Section 3
of
the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act,
1957”. The respondents have in fact produced several notifications
granting exemption in respect of special duty of excise or additional
duty of excise and in each of these notifications, we find that the
source of power is described as sub­rule (1) of Rule 8 of the Central
Excise Rules, 1944 read with the relevant provision of the statute
levying special duty of excise or additional duty of excise by which
the provisions of the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
and the
Rules made thereunder including those relating to exemption from
duty are made applicable. Moreover, the exemption granted under
all these notifications specifically refers to special duty of excise or
additional duty of excise, as the case may be. It is, therefore, clear
that where a notification granting exemption is issued only under
sub­rule (1) of Rule 8 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 without
reference to any other statute making the provisions of the
Central
Excises and Salt Act, 1944
and the Rules made thereunder
applicable to the levy and collection of special, auxiliary or any
other kind of excise duty levied under such statute, the exemption
must be read as limited to the duty of excise payable under the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
and cannot cover such special,
auxiliary or other kind of duty of excise. The notifications in the
present case were issued under sub­rule (1) of Rule 8 of the Central
35
Excise Rules, 1944 simpliciter without reference to any other
         statute and hence the exemption granted under these two
         notifications must be construed as limited only to the duty of excise
         payable under the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
.”



     This Court in
Modi Rubber Limited
(supra) has also considered

when the exemption is granted under the particular provision; it would

not cover any other kind of duty of excise imposed under separate Acts.
This Court observed thus:
“10. We may incidentally mention that in the appeals a question of
         interpretation was also raised in regard to the Notification bearing
         No. 249/67 dated November 8, 1967 exempting tyres for tractors
         from “so much of the duty leviable thereon under item 16 of the
First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
as is in
         excess of 15 per cent”. The argument of the respondents in the
         appeals was that the exemption granted under this notification was
         not limited to the duty of excise payable under the
Central Excises
         and Salt Act, 1944
but it also extended to special duty of excise,
         additional duty of excise and auxiliary duty of excise leviable under
         other enactments. This argument plainly runs counter to the very
         language of this notification. It is obvious that the exemption
         granted under this notification is in respect of “so much of the duty
         leviable thereon under item 16 of the
First Schedule to the Central
         Excises and Salt Act, 1944
as is in excess of 15 per cent” and these
         words describing the nature and extent of the exemption on their
         plain natural construction, clearly indicate that the exemption is in
         respect of duty of excise leviable under the
Central Excises and Salt
         Act, 1944
and does not cover any other kind of duty of excise. No
         more discussion is necessary in regard to this question beyond
         merely referring to the language of this notification.”



     The appeals were allowed, and it was held that exemption was not

available in respect of special duty of excise or additional duty of excise

or auxiliary duty of excise. A three­Judge Bench in
Rita Textiles Private

Limited v. Union of India
, 1986 SCC Supp.
557, has followed the decision
36
of
Modi Rubber Limited
(supra).
The decision in
Modi Rubber Limited
(supra) squarely covers the issue and is rendered by a Co­ordinate

Bench.
39.   Rule 8 of Central Excise Rules, 1944, authorises the Central

Government to grant an exemption to any excisable goods from the whole

or any part of duty leviable on such goods.                Rule 8 is extracted

hereunder:
“8. Power to authorise an exemption from duty in special cases.—(1)
         The Central Government may from time to time, by notification in
         the official Gazette, exempt (subject to such conditions as may be
         specified in the notification) any excisable goods from the whole or
         any part of duty leviable on such goods.
(2) The Central Board of Excise and Customs may by special
         order in each case exempt from the payment of duty, under
         circumstances of an exceptional nature, any excisable goods.”



      The word ‘duty’ is defined under Rule 2(v) to mean the duty as

levied under the Act.
40.   Notification dated 9.9.2003 issued in the present case makes it

clear that exemption was granted under
Section 5A
of the Act of 1944,

concerning additional duties under the Act of 1957 and additional duties

of excise under the Act of 1978. It was questioned on the ground that it

provided for limited exemption only under the Acts referred to therein.

There is no reference to the
Finance Act, 2001
by which NCCD was
37
imposed, and the Finance Acts of 2004 and 2007 were not in vogue. The

notification was questioned on the ground that it should have included

other duties also.   The notification could not have contemplated the

inclusion of education cess and secondary and higher education cess

imposed by the Finance Acts of 2004 and 2007 in the nature of the duty

of excise. The duty on NCCD, education cess and secondary and higher

education cess are in the nature of additional excise duty and it would

not mean that exemption notification dated 9.9.2003 covers them

particularly when there is no reference to the notification issued under

the
Finance Act, 2001
.   There was no question of granting exemption

related to cess was not in vogue at the relevant time imposed later on

vide
Section 91
of the Act of 2004 and
Section 126
of the Act of 2007.
The provisions of Act of 1944 and the Rules made thereunder shall be

applicable to refund, and the exemption is only a reference to the source

of power to exempt the NCCD, education cess, secondary and higher

education cess. A notification has to be issued for providing exemption

under the said source of power. In the absence of a notification

containing an exemption to such additional duties in the nature of

education cess and secondary and higher education cess, they cannot be

said to have been exempted. The High Court was right in relying upon

the decision of three­Judge Bench of this Court in
Modi Rubber Limited
38
(supra), which has been followed by another three­Judge Bench of this

Court in
Rita Textiles Private Limited
(supra).
41.   The Circular of 2004 issued based on the interpretation of the

provisions made by one of the Customs Officers, is of no avail as such

Circular has no force of law and cannot be said to be binding on the

Court.   Similarly, the Circular issued by Central Board of Excise and

Customs in 2011, is of no avail as it relates to service tax and has no

force of law and cannot be said to be binding concerning the

interpretation of the provisions by the courts. The reason employed in
SRD Nutrients Private Limited
(supra) that there was nil excise duty, as

such, additional duty cannot be charged, is also equally unacceptable as

additional duty can always be determined and merely exemption granted

in respect of a particular excise duty, cannot come in the way of

determination of yet another duty based thereupon.       The proposition

urged that simply because one kind of duty is exempted, other kinds of

duties automatically fall, cannot be accepted as there is no difficulty in

making the computation of additional duties, which are payable under

NCCD, education cess, secondary and higher education cess.      Moreover,

statutory notification must cover specifically the duty exempted. When a

particular kind of duty is exempted, other types of duty or cess imposed
39
by different legislation for a different purpose cannot be said to have

been exempted.
42.   The decision of larger bench is binding on the smaller bench has

been held by this Court in several decisions such as
Mahanagar Railway

Vendors’ Union v. Union of India & Ors.
(1994) Suppl.
1
SCC 609, State of

Maharashtra & Ors. v. Mana Adim Jamat Mandal
, AIR 2006 SC 3446 and

State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. v. Ajay Kumar Sharma & Ors. (2016) 15

SCC 289.
The decision rendered in ignorance of a binding precedent

and/or ignorance of a provision has been held to be per incuriam in
Subhash Chandra & Ors. v. Delhi Subordinate Services Selection Board &

Ors.
(
2009) 15 SCC 458, Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod v. State of

Maharashtra
(
2014) 9 SCC 129, and Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra

Community & Ors. v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
(2005) 2 SCC 673. It

was held that a smaller bench could not disagree with the view taken by

a larger bench.
43.   Thus, it is clear that before the Division Bench deciding
SRD

Nutrients Private Limited and Bajaj Auto Limited
(supra), the previous

binding decisions of three­Judge Bench in
Modi Rubber
(supra) and
Rita

Textiles Private Limited
(supra) were not placed for consideration.
Thus,
40
the decisions in
SRD Nutrients Private Limited and Bajaj Auto Limited
(supra) are clearly per incuriam.
The decisions in
Modi Rubber
(supra)

and
Rita Textiles Private Limited
(supra) are binding on us being of Co­

ordinate Bench, and we respectfully follow them. We did not find any

ground to take a different view.
44.   Resultantly, we have no hesitation in dismissing the appeals. The

judgment and order of the High Court are upheld, and the appeals are

dismissed. No costs.
…..………………………J.
                                                (Arun Mishra)



                                                …..………………………J.
                                                (M.R. Shah)




New Delhi;                                      .....………………………J.
December 6, 2019                                (B.R. Gavai)