[Cites
1
, Cited by
23
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Odisha vs Manju Naik on 4 December, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 94, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1670, 2020 LAB IC 682, (2019) 17 SCALE 471, 2020 (1) KLT SN 4.2 (SC), (2020) 1 SCT 261, (2020) 1 SERVLR 333, AIR 2020 SC (CIV) 764, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2677
Author:
Hrishikesh Roy
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
A.S.Bopanna
,
R.Banumathi
[REPORTABLE]

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9204    OF 2019
                                 (Arising out of SLP(C) No.16283 of 2017


                      STATE OF ODISHA & ORS.                        APPELLANT(S)


                                                     VERSUS


                      MANJU NAIK                                    RESPONDENT(S)




                                              J U D G M E N T
Hrishikesh Roy, J.
Leave granted.
2.             This appeal arises out of the judgment and order dated

          29.11.2016 in W.P. (C)No.                  14413 of 2016 whereunder the High
Signature Not Verified
Court of Orissa has dismissed the appellants’ challenge to
Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2019.12.04
13:20:42 IST
Reason:
the            order   dated    3.8.2015    of   the   Odisha   Administrative
Page 1 of 17
Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as “the Tribunal”) under

which the authorities were directed to consider sanction of

invalid pension in favour of late Sagar Naik (husband of the

respondent) and thereafter settle family pension in favour

of the applicant, under the provisions of the Orissa Civil

Services (Pension) Rules- 1992 (hereafter referred to as

“the Pension Rules”).
3.   The respondent filed the OA No. 18(B)/2010 before the

Tribunal praying for fixation of pay of late Sagar Naik and

for disbursal of his accrued financial benefits with effect

from 1.1.1996 until he was retired on 6.7.1996 on being

mentally   incapacitated.   The   applicant   also   prayed   for

sanction of family pension from the date of death of her

husband i.e. 24.7.1996.
4.   The applicant projected before the Tribunal that her

husband on being found incapacitated was made to retire from

service on 6.7.1996 and he died soon thereafter on 24.7.1996

and therefore, the widow is entitled to family pension.       She

also tried to make out a case for grant of invalid pension

in favour of her late husband.
Page 2 of 17
5.   Opposing the prayers, the Government Advocate on behalf

of   the   State   contended    before    the       Tribunal    that    the

applicant’s husband had not rendered the qualifying period

of service so as to make him eligible for pension.               Opposing

the claim for invalid pension for the deceased husband, the

appellants   contended   that    Rule    39    of     the   Pension    Rules

governing invalid pension has to be read together with Rule

47 which specifies the qualifying service of ten years for

grant of pension and accordingly it was argued that the

applicant is disentitled to any relief from the Tribunal.
6.   Notwithstanding     the    State’s       above     contention,     the

Tribunal concluded that the applicant’s husband is entitled

to invalid pension under Rule 39 of the Pension Rules and

accordingly, the authorities were directed to sanction the

invalid pension for the applicant’s husband and after his

death, to settle the family pension for the applicant, after

regularizing the services of the deceased employee.
7.   The above decision was challenged by the appellants

through W.P.(C) No. 14413/2016 where the State projected

that Rule 39 has to be read jointly with Rule 47 of the

Pension Rules and if Rules are applied as it should be,

conjointly, the deceased government employee is ineligible
Page 3 of 17
for   invalid    pension.      However,    without    adverting        to   the

specific contention raised by the appellants, the High Court

observed that a reasoned order was passed by the Tribunal

declaring     entitlement        for     the      invalid     pension       and

accordingly      the     Tribunal’s       impugned        order    was      left

undisturbed and the writ petition came to be dismissed.
8.    Representing the State of Odisha and other appellants,

Ms.   Anindita     Pujari,     learned     counsel    submits        that   the

deceased government employee was unauthorizedly absent from

service from 1.2.1995 to 23.7.1995 and was under suspension

from 24.7.1995 to 6.7.1996 and this period cannot be counted

for   determining      the    qualifying       service.      Thus,     in   his

credit, the deceased employee had net qualifying service of

4 years 6 months and 29 days until he was superannuated on

6.7.1996.          The    learned       counsel    then     refers     to   the

provisions    of   Rule      47(2)(b)    and    47(5)(i)    to    argue     that

without completing the qualifying service of ten years, the

deceased employee is ineligible for pension. Due to such

non-entitlement, the widow was granted the alternate benefit

i.e.,   the     service       gratuity     amount    by     computing        the

entitlement under Rule 47(5)(i)of the Pension Rules.
Page 4 of 17
9.    On account of the short duration of service rendered by

the deceased employee, the State’s counsel then argues that

the respondent’s husband cannot be granted invalid pension

under Rule 39 as the provision has to be conjointly read

with Rule 47 and Rule 56 of the Pension Rules which specify

the     qualifying        service     of        ten     years     and     also     the

consequences for those who do not satisfy the eligibility

criterion for qualifying service.
10. Per-contra, Mr. Kedar Nath Tripathi, learned counsel

for the respondent/applicant, would however argue that the

government employee was allowed to retire from service on

6.7.1996       on   the    ground    of    mental       incapacity        and    since

invalid pension is envisaged under Rule 39 of the Pension

Rules    for    such      prematurely      retiring       employees       suffering

permanent incapacity, the Tribunal and the High Court have

rightly    ordered        for   grant      of    invalid        pension     for    the

respondent’s husband.
11. The     learned        counsel      then      submits       that    since      the

government      servant      died    within       few    days     of    retirement,

firstly he must be paid the invalid pension under Rule 39

and after his death on 24.7.1996, the respondent as the

widow, should be held entitled to family pension.
Page 5 of 17
12. The issue to be considered here is whether the minimum

qualifying service prescribed under the Pension Rules can be

ignored for the purpose of consideration of invalid pension

under Rule 39 of the Pension Rules. As a corollary, whether

the Tribunal or the High Court erred in directing invalid

pension for a government employee who did not have the

qualifying service, prescribed under the Pension Rules.
13. At this stage, the relevant provisions of the Pension

Rules are extracted hereinbelow for ready reference:-
“. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39.    Invalid   Pension  –  (1)  invalid
       pension may be granted if a Government
       servant   retires   from the  service  on
       account of bodily or mental infirmity
       which permanently incapacitates him for
       the service.
(2)     A Government servant applying for
       an invalid pension shall submit a medical
       certificate   of   incapacity   from   the
       following medical authority, namely : -
(a)    Medical Board, in the case of all
       Gazetted and specially declared Gazetted
       Government servants, and
(b)    A Chief District Medical Officer or
       Medical Officer of equivalent status in
       case of other Government servants.
47.   Amount of pension (1)

             ********   ******** ****
Page 6 of 17
2 (a)   **** **** ******** ****
(b)    In the case of Government servant
retiring in accordance with the provisions
of these rules before completing qualifying
service of thirty-three years,    but after
completing qualifying service of ten years,
the    amount   of    pension   shall    be
proportionate to the amount of pension
admissible under clause (a) and in no case
the amount of pension shall be less than
the minimum amount of pension admissible.
******** ******** ****

        ******** ******** ****

(5)(i) In the case of a Government servant
retiring in accordance with the provisions of
these rules before completing qualifying
service of ten years, the amount of service
gratuity shall be paid at a uniform rate on
half month’s emoluments for every completed
six monthly period of service.
56. Family Pension :
**** **** **** **** **** **** ****

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions
contained in Sub-rule (4) where a Government
servant dies-
**** **** **** **** **** **** *****

(c ) After retirement from service and was
on the date of death in receipt of pension,
or compassionate allowance, referred to in
Chapter IV other than the pension referred
to in rules 43 and 44 the family of the
deceased   shall  be   entitled to   family
pension, the amount of which shall be
Page 7 of 17
determined     in    accordance       with    the    table
          below.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .“
14. The respondent’s husband, late Sagar Naik was appointed

on 22.8.1989 under the Rehabilitation Assistance Scheme as

his father late Suri Naik died in harness, while serving in

the M.K.C.G. Medical College and Hospital.                     The appointee

was however found to be suffering from mental incapacity and

accordingly, on the basis of the medical certificate issued

by the HoD of the Psychiatric Department of the S.C.B.

Medical     College,   Cuttack,     the    employee      was   retired       from

service on 6.7.1996 on the ground of mental incapacity. The

case paper reveals that the service of the employee was

erratic, as he remained absent from 1.2.1995 to 23.7.1995

and was under suspension from 24.7.1995 to 6.7.1996. Thus

his   net    qualifying       service    for    the    benefits   under       the

Pension Rules was taken as 4 years 6 months and 29 days

only.
15. For      government       servants    not     completing      ten        years

qualifying     service    prescribed       in    Rule    47(5)(i)       of    the

Pension Rules, the service gratuity is to be paid at a

uniform rate of half month’s emolument for every completed
Page 8 of 17
six months period of service. Such gratuity benefit as also

the    other    terminal        benefits     like    GPF,    unutilized          Earned

Leave,     Death-cum-Retirement             Gratuity        (DCRG),       etc.     were

sanctioned       and        paid    to    the     widow     of     the     employee.

Moreover, respondent was also appointed as a sweeper under

the Rehabilitation Assistance Scheme and she is in regular

government service, since 12.6.2006.
16. The gratuity and other benefits and the compassionate

appointment was accepted by the respondent without raising

any    additional        claim      towards       invalid     pension       for    her

deceased husband, who retired on 6.7.1996.Long after his

death on 24.7.1996, the respondent approached the Tribunal

to belatedly pray for firstly, fixation of pay for her

husband in the revised scale with effect from 1.1.1996 till

his    superannuation         and    also    to     sanction       family     pension

benefits       for    the    applicant,      following       the    death     of    the

government           employee      (on     24.7.1996)        along        with      all

consequential and terminal benefits.                      The respondent never

however    prayed       for     invalid     pension    before       the    Tribunal.

Yet,    the    Tribunal       ordered      for    invalid        pension     for    the

respondent’s husband, under Rule 39 of the Pension Rules.
Page 9 of 17
17. When the Tribunal’s decision was challenged in the High

Court, the State specifically contended that Rule 39 has to

be read together with Rule 47 of the Pension Rules and the

specified   qualifying      service    must   be    satisfied       even    for

claiming    invalid      pension.     But   the    High    Court      without

adverting    to    the     specific     contention        raised      by    the

appellants, dismissed the writ petition with a cryptic order

observing that the Tribunal has passed a reasoned order and

that the husband of the respondent is entitled to invalid

pension under Rule 39 of the Pension Rules.
18. The requirement of completing the qualifying service of

ten years for receipt of pension is prescribed under Rule

47(2)(b)    and   for    those   government       employees   who      retire

before completing the qualifying service, alternate relief

is envisaged under the Pension Rules itself. How the service

gratuity is to be computed, is also prescribed in                          Rule

47(5)(1) of the Pension Rules.
19. The respondent’s husband was retired on the ground of

mental infirmity and hence the service gratuity was paid and

the widow had received the same, without any demur.                         She

never raised any claim for invalid pension either at the

time of retirement on 6.7.1996 or even when she approached
Page 10 of 17
the   Tribunal    i.e.   14   years      later   in    the    year   2010.

Nevertheless, the Tribunal went beyond the prayers in the

O.A. No. 18(B)/2010 and ordered for invalid pension for late

Sagar Naik and then following his death, ordered for family

pension for the widow. In declaring such entitlement the

High Court and the Tribunal however ignored the qualifying

service of ten years as prescribed in the Pension Rules

although the State specifically argued that the qualifying

service criterion has to be satisfied not only for the

regular pension but also for the invalid pension since both

claims are to be considered under the very same Pension

Rules.
20. An employee becomes entitled to pension by stint of his

long service for the employer and, therefore, it should be

seen as a reward for toiling hard and long for the employer.

The Pension Rules provide for a qualifying service of 10

years for such entitlement. When the question arises as to

how   certain    provisions   of   the    Pension     Rules   are    to   be

understood, it would be appropriate to read the provision in

its context which would mean reading the statute as a whole.

In other words, a particular provision of the statute should

be construed with reference to other provisions of the same
Page 11 of 17
statute so as to construe the enactment as a whole. It would

also be necessary to avoid an interpretation which will

involve conflict with two provisions of the same statute and

effort should be made for harmonious construction. In other

words, the provision of a Rule cannot be used to defeat

another        Rule     unless        it    is    impossible         to    effect

reconciliation between them. Pension as already stated is

earned by stint of continuity and longevity of service and

minimum qualifying service should therefore be understood as

the requirement for invalid pension as well.                         The Pension

Rules can be harmoniously construed in this manner and in

that    event,    there       shall    be   no   clash       between   different

provisions in the said Rules.
21. The condition of qualifying service prescribed in the

Pension   Rules       must     be    satisfied    to    become      eligible   for

invalid pension and the arguments made to the contrary that

invalid       pension    can    be    claimed     under      Rule    39   without

satisfying the stipulated qualifying service mentioned in

the    same    Rules,    do    not    appeal     to    us.    The   respondent’s

husband who had served for lesser years then the 10 years

qualifying service, was found entitled by his employers to

service gratuity only, because of his premature retirement
Page 12 of 17
on the ground of mental incapacitation and this is what is

prescribed by the Pension Rules. The dues toward service

gratuity was paid accordingly. The Pension Rules definitely

envisaged that there could be a situation where an employee

may not be eligible for pension benefits for not satisfying

the prescribed qualifying service of 10 years. For those

with less than 10 years’ service, the Pension Rules provide

for gratuity payment and therefore, it is difficult for us

to conclude that for invalid pension, qualifying years of

service, can be ignored.
22. The above view of ours is supported by the ratio in
Union of India and Another Vs. Bashirbhai R. Khiliji
1, where

this Court was considering claim for invalid pension for an

armed constable in the CRPF who suffered from pyrogenic

meningitis and neurosensory deafness (bilateral). In that

case, the CRPF personnel was declared unfit for active duty,

and    he    was   invalidated   from     service.     He   applied    to

authorities for invalid pension but that was rejected on the

ground that he had not completed the qualifying service of

10 years. Instead, he was paid service gratuity. The High

Court
in that case
however, took the view that since the

CRPF    Constable’s    invalidity   was    100   per    cent,   he    was
1(2007) 6 SCC 16
Page 13 of 17
entitled to invalid pension and the stipulation of 10 years

of qualifying service could not be invoked to deny him the

invalid pension. However, Justice A.K. Mathur, speaking for

a two judge Bench of this Court while interpreting similar

provisions in the applicable Rules, negated the High Court’s

view and pronounced on the issue of qualifying service for

invalid pension, in the following manner:-
“. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . .
9.   We   are   presently   concerned   withtwo
       provisions of the Rules i.e., Rule 38 and
49.    Rule    38,   as    reproduced    above,
       contemplates    the   invalid    pension.   The
       procedure has been mentioned therein i.e. in
       case an incumbent retires from service on
       account of bodily or mental infirmity which
       permanently    incapacitated    him   for   the
       service, then a medical certificate of
       incapacity shall be given by the authorities
       concerned and in particular Form 23 the same
       may   be    applied   before   the    competent
       authority. It is true that the qualifying
       service is not mentioned in Rule 38 but Rule
       49 which deals with the amount of pension
       stipulates    that   a    government    servant
       retiring in accordance with the provisions
       of these Rules before completing qualifying
       service of ten years, the amount of service
       gratuity shall be calculated at the rate of
       half month’s emoluments for every completed
       six-monthly period of qualifying service.
Therefore, the minimum qualifying service of
       ten years is mentioned in Rule 49. The word
       “qualifying service” has been defined in
       Rule 3(1)(q) of the Rules which read as
       under:
Page 14 of 17
“3. (1)(q) ‘qualifying service’ means
         service rendered while on duty or otherwise
         which shall be taken into account for the
         purpose    of   pensions    and  gratuities
         admissible under these Rules;”
10.   Therefore,    the  minimum   qualifying
         service which is required for the pension as
         mentioned in Rule 49, is ten years. The
         qualifying service has been explained in
         various memos issued by the Government of
         India from time to time. But Rule 49 read
         with Rule 38 makes it clear that qualifying
         service   of   pension  is   ten  years   and
         therefore, gratuity is determined after
         completion of qualifying service of ten
         years. Therefore, for grant of any kind of
         pension one has to put in the minimum of ten
         years of qualifying service. The respondent
         in the present case, does not have the
         minimum qualifying service. Therefore, the
         authorities   declined to    grant him    the
         invalid pension. But the amount of gratuity
         has been determined and the same was paid to
         him.
. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .”
           (Underlining added)
23. The    above enunciation     of the   law on    requirement of

qualifying service for invalid pension by the bench of two

judges is reiterated and approved by us.
24. In a case like this, the need for compassion and the

compliance of the norms has to be balanced.              As earlier

noted,    the   allowable   gratuity   benefits   were   granted    on
Page 15 of 17
account of the respondent’s husband and after he died, the

widow was appointed (on 12.6.2006) in a government job under

the   Rehabilitation             Assistance    Scheme.      Thus,      the   needed

means of sustenance was provided to the deceased’s family.
25. The respondent’s husband had not served for ten years

and was therefore, he disentitled for regular pension. For

the same reason, he cannot also be held entitled to invalid

pension.       The   different         provisions     of   the    Pension     Rules

cannot     be    read       in     isolation    and        must   be    construed

harmoniously         and     the      requirement     of   qualifying        service

cannot    be    said       to    be   irrelevant    for    claiming     different

service benefits under the same Rules. Here the employee did

not   satisfy        the     requirement       of   qualifying      service     and

therefore the invalid pension could not have been ordered

for him, under Rule 39 of the Pension Rules.
26. In the above context, it will bear emphasis that the

respondent never prayed for invalid pension for her husband

in her O.A. and yet the Tribunal as well as the High Court

granted        her     the        unclaimed     relief.      Such      additional

munificence, in addition to the job provided to the first

respondent under the Rehabilitation Assistance Scheme for
Page 16 of 17
the sustenance of the deceased’s family, in our view, was

unwarranted and the impugned order cannot be sustained.
27. In   view   of    the   foregoing,   the   impugned   orders    of

Tribunal and the High Court are set aside and the Appeal

stands allowed.      The parties to bear their own cost.
………………………………………………J.
                                               [R.BANUMATHI]



                                               ………………………………………………J.
                                               [A.S.BOPANNA]



                                               ………………………………………………J.
                                               [HRISHIKESH ROY]


NEW DELHI
DECEMBER 04, 2019.
Page 17 of 17