[Cites
1
, Cited by
10
]
Supreme Court of India
Dharmendra Prasad vs Sunil Kumar on 6 December, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1785, 2020 (2) SCC 146 (2019) 17 SCALE 564, (2019) 17 SCALE 564, (2019) 17 SCALE 564 2020 (2) SCC 146, 2020 (2) SCC 146
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
L. Nageswara Rao
REPORTABLE

                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9247 OF 2019
            (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 23787 OF 2018)


DHARMENDRA PRASAD & ORS.                                    .....APPELLANT(S)

                                         VERSUS

SUNIL KUMAR & ORS.                                        .....RESPONDENT(S)

                                     WITH

                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9248    OF 2019
            (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 24101 OF 2018)




                                JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.      The order dated 11th July, 2018 passed by the Division Bench of the

        High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital is the subject matter of

        challenge in the present appeals.
2.      The High Court vide impugned order has directed the Uttarakhand

        Pey Jal Nigam1, a creation of the Statute i.e. the Uttar Pradesh

        Water Works and Sewer Arrangement Act, 1975, to determine the

        seniority of the Junior Engineers strictly as per Regulation 23 of the


1    for short, ‘Nigam’
1
Uttar       Pradesh      Jal   Nigam   Subordinate   Engineering   Service

           Regulations, 19782. Regulation 23 contemplates that the seniority

           of a person appointed in any branch of service in any category of

           post shall be made as per the date of substantive appointment.
3.         An advertisement was issued by the Nigam on 29 th November,

           2004 for filling up of vacancies of 241 posts of Junior Engineer

           (Civil). This included 104 posts under General category, 52 posts

           under Other Backward Classes3, 70 posts under Scheduled Castes4

           and 15 posts under Scheduled Tribes 5.           Another 38 posts were

           advertised for Junior Engineer (Mechanical).           The advertisement

           contemplated that the reserved posts shall be filled up as per the

           reservation policy of the Government of Uttaranchal. Further the

           horizontal reservation in each category for females, ex-servicemen,

           handicapped people and dependents of freedom fighters will be

           made as per the order of the Government of Uttaranchal dated 18 th

           July, 2001.
4.         The State Government permitted the Nigam to make appointments

           to the posts of Junior Engineer and Assistant Engineer on 3 rd May,

           2005 (Annexure R3/4) and that the appointment of 34 posts of

           Assistant Engineer and 107 posts of Junior Engineer was to be

           made as per the prescribed roster after making calculations based

           upon the Government order dated 31st August, 2001. Such sanction


2    for   short,   ‘Regulations’
3    for   short,   ‘OBC’
4    for   short,   ‘SC’
5    for   short,   ‘ST’
2
was in respect of 88 posts of Junior Engineer (Civil).
5.      Pursuant to the above said advertisement, the selection process

        was completed and a merit list on the basis of marks obtained in

        the written test and interview was published.            The result was

        declared separately for the candidates belonging to different

        categories i.e. General category, OBC, SC and ST. Thereafter, five

        different sets of appointment orders were issued from May, 2005

        till December, 2005, the first being issued on 13 th May, 2005. The

        appointment orders were given to the candidates in each category

        proportionate to the quota reserved for the reserved category

        candidates. It is pertinent to note that one of the conditions in the

        letter of appointment was that the seniority will be determined

        later.
6.      Thereafter, a tentative seniority list was published on 14th

        September, 2010 based upon the merit list prepared on the basis

        of the marks obtained in the written test and interview. Objections

        were filed to such tentative seniority list. The final seniority list was

        published on 28th November, 2014 on the basis of the merit list

        prepared while declaring the result.
7.      The said seniority list became subject matter of challenge before

        the Uttarakhand Public Services Tribunal 6.      The learned Tribunal

        dismissed the petition vide order dated 10 th October, 2017.

        Thereafter, a review petition was filed which was also dismissed on


6    for short, ‘Tribunal’
3
23rd November, 2017.       The aforementioned orders were made

     subject matter of challenge before the High Court. The High Court

     held that since there is no dispute about the dates of appointment

     of the candidates, the seniority has to be prepared in terms of

     Regulation 23 based upon dates of appointment rather than merit,

     as the rule to determine seniority is from the date of appointment.

     The High Court has allowed the writ petition with the following

     order:
“35.      The up-shot of the above discussion is that the
              writ petitioner is entitled to succeed. Accordingly, the
              writ petition is allowed; the order passed by the Tribunal
              in the Claim Petition, as also the order passed in the
              Review Petition, will stand set-aside; the Claim Petition
              of the petitioner will stand allowed; the final seniority
              list, which impugned before the Tribunal, will stand set-
              aside; and the order dated 03.11.2014 will also stand
              set aside. The fourth respondent will prepare a fresh
              seniority list in accordance with law and the
              observations made in this judgment. We would add
              that, as it is pointed out that petitioner was appointed
              along with several others by a common order, in
              respect of the petitioner also, the same principle will
              apply, namely, that, in respect of those person, they will
              be governed by the approved list.”
8.   Resultantly, the candidates who rank higher in merit have

     approached this Court.
9.   The admitted facts are that the appellants before this Court are

     higher in merit than the writ petitioners before the High Court but

     the writ petitioners were appointed earlier in point of time than the

     appellants who came to be appointed subsequently by the unique

     method of appointment resorted to by the Nigam. The Regulations
4
have been framed by the Nigam under the Statute establishing the

same. Some of the relevant Regulations read as under:
“Regulation 6.       Reservation for the candidates
       belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes &
       Backward Castes and the candidates of other
       categories shall be in accordance with the orders of the
       Government in force at the time of the recruitment.
xx        xx            xx

       Regulation 16 (1) When appointment has to be done on
       availability of vacancies, Appointment Authority shall
       review all the applications received from the candidates
       and will inform the date of written competitive
       examination to such candidate/ candidates who are
       found suitable for recruitment under this Regulation. No
       candidates may be included in the written competitive
       examination unless he has got any authority or Admit
       Card from the Nigam.
(2) Appointment authority shall prepare a list of
       candidates in order of merit, as is evident from the
       written examination, and invite for interview those
       candidates who attains qualification as per standard
       fixed by the Nigam. Marks obtained by each candidate
       in the interview shall be added to the marks obtained in
       the written examination. Final position of a candidate
       shall be determined by the total marks obtained him,
       and thereafter list will be prepared. If two or more
       candidates obtain equal marks, then the candidate
       obtaining more marks in written examination will be
       placed higher in the merit list. If two or more candidates
       obtain equal marks in both written examination and
       interview, then a candidate having more marks in
       diploma examination will be placed higher in the merit
       list.
xx        xx            xx

       Regulation 17 (1) The Appointing Authority shall
       recommend the list of candidates prepared by the
       Selection Committee for appointment. Vacancies, at
       present or likely to arise in future, will be filled by the
       candidates of this list.
(2) If the Appointing Authority is not in agreement with
       the recommendation of Selection Committee, then this
5
matter shall be presented before the Nigam.         The
               decision of the Nigam shall be final in this regard and
               the Appointment Authority will take action as directed
               by the Nigam.
xx         xx           xx

               Regulation 20. On vacancies being created, Appointing
               Authority shall make appointment by taking names of
               candidates in the order in which they stand in the list
               prepared under Regulation 16(2) and 17 or 18.
xx         xx           xx

               Regulation 23 (1) In this Regulation, seniority of person
               appointed in any branch of service in any category of
               post shall be made as per date of substantive
               appointment and where two or more persons are
               appointed on the same date, seniority will be
               determined by such order in which their names are
               arranged in the appointment order.”
10.   It is also an admitted fact that the result was declared by the

      Nigam of each category i.e. General, OBC, SC, ST as per their own

      merit.
11.   Regulation 6 contemplates that the reservation for the candidates

      belonging to SC, ST and Backward Classes and the candidates of

      other categories shall be in accordance with the orders of the

      Government in force at the time of the recruitment.            The State

      Government while permitting the Nigam to make appointments to

      the posts of Junior Engineer on 3rd May, 2005 (Annexure R3/4),

      provided that the appointment of Junior Engineers will be made as

      per the prescribed roster after making calculations based upon the

      Government order dated 31st August, 2001. The relevant extract

      from the Government Order is as hereunder:
6
“(2)   Appointment on total 34 posts of Assistant
               Engineer and total 107 posts of Junior Engineer will be
               made as per the prescribed roster after making
               calculation based on the G.O. no. 1454/Karmik-2-2001
               dated 31.8.01. This will be strictly complied with.”
12.   The Circular dated 31st August, 2001 (Annexure R3/3) has a 100-
point roster. As per the said Circular, the first post is to be filled up

      by a candidate belonging to the SC category and the last post, from

      amongst the 100-point roster, is to be made under the General

      category.   The relevant clause from the said Circular reads as

      under:
“(1) In continuation of the G.O. no. 1144/Karmik-2/
                  2001-53(1) dated 18 July, 2001 regarding imple-
                  menting the reservation policy in Uttaranchal, I am
                  directed to state that 19 per cent reservation for
                  Scheduled Caste, 04 percent for Scheduled Tribe
                  and 14 per cent for OBCs has been provide in direct
                  recruitments.
(2) In order to ensure the aforesaid reservation, the
                  following roster has been prepared…


                  (3) It is requested that the aforesaid Roster shall
                  continuously be implemented in matters of direct
                  requirements.”
13.   The stand of the State is that the Regulations are pari materia with

      the Uttarakhand Government Servant Seniority Service Rules, 2002

      which prescribes that the seniority of persons appointed on the

      basis of the result of any one selection, shall be the same as it is

      shown in the merit list prepared by the Committee.           Reliance is

      placed upon clause (9) of the appointment letter dated 13 th May,

      2005 which is to the effect that the seniority of the candidates to

      the post of Junior Engineer (Civil/Mechanical) will be decided later.
7
14.   On the other hand, the Nigam in its counter affidavit stated that as

      on 29th November, 2004, 241 vacancies of Junior Engineer (Civil)

      were advertised. The written examination was conducted on 26 th

      December, 2004 and the candidates were called for the interview.
The State Government approved 88 posts to be filled up as per the

      roster mentioned in the Circular dated 31st August, 2001 and the

      appointment orders were issued.
15.   Mr. Raju Ramachandran, learned senior counsel for the appellants

      argued that the High Court has erred in law in upsetting the

      seniority list on the basis of Regulation 23 as the stand-alone

      provision. It is argued that Regulation 23 has to be read along with

      other Regulations particularly Regulations 16, 17 and 20.       The

      appointing authority is bound to make appointments by taking the

      name of candidates in the order in which they stand in the list

      prepared under Regulations 16(2) and 17 or 18. All the Regulations

      have to be read harmoniously and one Regulation cannot be read

      in isolation so as to defeat the merit prepared by the Selection

      Committee only on account of the fortuitous circumstance of giving

      appointment to some of the candidates lower in the merit list at an

      early point of time.   Since appointments could be made only in

      terms of the merit list, therefore, Regulation 23 has to be read

      along with       Regulation 20. The mere fact that some juniors

      have been appointed earlier in point of time will not make them

      steal march over the appellants who are higher in merit.
8
16.   On the other hand, Mr. Nidhesh Gupta, learned senior counsel for

      the writ petitioners submits that the writ petitioners were

      appointed admittedly at an early point of time than the appellants.

      The appellants have not raised any grievance at the time of the

      appointment of the candidates lower in merit on the alleged

      violation of Regulations 16, 17 or 20. Therefore, the seniority has

      been rightly fixed from the date of appointment based upon

      Regulation 23 of the Regulations.       It is also argued that the

      Government order dated 31st August, 2001 is an order to determine

      seniority as per the roster fixed in terms of Regulation 6. The letter

      dated 3rd May, 2005 by the State Government while granting

      sanction to fill up 88 posts of Junior Engineer (Civil) specifically

      mentioned that reservation to the posts of Junior Engineer (Civil)

      shall be in accordance with roster in the Government order dated

      31st August, 2001. Therefore, in any case, the seniority has to be

      fixed as per the roster prescribed in the letter dated 31 st August,

      2001.
17.   We find that the method of giving appointment to the senior most

      person of each category is only a fortuitus circumstance as such

      appointments were made dehors the merit.              Regulation 20

      mandates the appointing authority to make the appointments from

      amongst the candidates in order in which they stand in the list

      prepared under Regulations 16(2), 17 or 18.        Any appointment

      made by the Nigam in contravention of the statutory Regulations
9
cannot defeat the rights of the appellants only because they have

      not challenged the appointment of their juniors at an earlier point

      of time. Regulation 23 provides that seniority of persons appointed

      in any branch of service shall be made as per substantive

      appointment. The appointment in Regulation 23 has to be read in

      terms of Regulation 20 mandating the manner of appointment.

      Therefore, irrespective of the date of appointment, the seniority

      has to be fixed as per the merit of the candidates determined by

      the Selection Committee.
18.   However, we find that Regulation 6 itself contemplated that

      reservation of candidates belonging to SC, ST, Backward Classes

      and the candidates of other categories shall be in accordance with

      the orders of the Government in force at the time of recruitment.

      In terms of such Regulations, the Government order dated 31 st

      August, 2001 becomes applicable to determine the extent of

      reservation which includes the method of determining seniority as

      well.   Apart from the statutory Regulation 6, even the approval of

      the State Government to fill up 88 posts specifically mentions that

      the reservation shall be made as per the 100 points roster as

      prescribed in the Circular dated 31 st August, 2001. Admittedly, the

      seniority has not been framed keeping in view the roster circulated

      on 31st August, 2001.
19.   We do not find any merit in the argument raised by the State that

      the seniority has to be fixed as per Rule 5 of the Uttarakhand
10
Government Servant Seniority Service Rules, 2002.         Such Rules

      were not adopted to be applicable to the Nigam. The Rules were

      approved by the Board of the Nigam on 24 th September, 2007

      proposing that the provision shall be made in the proposed service

      regulations but the Rules were made applicable in the year 2011

      only. Such is the finding recorded by the High Court which is not

      disputed by the appellants or by the writ petitioners. Such Rules

      have been framed under the proviso to
Article 309
of the

      Constitution and they are not applicable to a creation under a

      Statute.   These Rules are applicable to government servants in

      respect of whose recruitment and condition of service Rules may

      be or have been made by the Government under the proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution. Since the employees of the Nigam

      are not government servants nor are their service conditions

      governed by Rules framed under the proviso to
Article 309
of the

      Constitution, therefore, such Rules unless adopted by the Nigam

      cannot be extended to the employees of the Nigam.
20.   Therefore, we find that the order of the High Court and that of the

      Tribunal are not sustainable in law as the seniority list has not been

      prepared in accordance with the roster circulated on 31 st August,

      2001 which is required to be mandatorily followed in terms of

      Regulation 6 as well with the approval of the State Government

      dated 3rd May, 2005 to fill up 88 posts.
21.   Consequently, the seniority list finalised on 28 th November, 2014 as
11
also the order of the High Court dated 11 th July, 2018 are set aside.

    Respondent No. 5 is directed to recast seniority of the candidates in

    the order of merit by assigning their seniority as per the roster

    points given in Circular dated 31st August, 2001.            With the said

    directions, the appeals stand disposed of.
.............................................J.
                                                    (L. NAGESWARA RAO)



                                     .............................................J.
                                                          (HEMANT GUPTA)

NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 06, 2019.
12