[Cites
22
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
The Maharashtra State Co-Operative ... vs Babulal Lade on 4 December, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1688, 2020 (2) SCC 310 (2019) 17 SCALE 215, (2019) 17 SCALE 215, AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 2838, (2019) 17 SCALE 215 2020 (2) SCC 310, 2020 (2) SCC 310
Author:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 232 OF 2016

           The Maharashtra State Co-operative Bank Ltd.                    ...Appellant

                                                    Versus

           Babulal Lade & Ors.                                             …Respondents




                                              JUDGMENT
MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.
1.            This appeal arises out of judgment dated 01.12.2015 passed

           by the Nagpur Bench of the High Court of Bombay in W.P. No.

           3879/2012. Vide the impugned judgment, the Hon’ble High Court

           has directed the issuance of a recovery certificate against the

           Appellant herein, thereby modifying the order dated 08.08.2011

           passed by the Bhandara Bench, Industrial Court, Maharashtra.
2.            The brief facts giving rise to this appeal are as follows:
2.1           Registered under the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
GULSHAN KUMAR
ARORA
Date: 2019.12.04
17:16:22 IST
Reason:
Act, 1960 (hereinafter ‘
Societies Act
’), Respondent No. 6 herein,
1
Vainganga    Sahakari    Sakhar         Karkhana      Ltd.    (hereinafter

‘Karkhana’) had obtained credit facilities from the Appellant-Bank

and mortgaged its properties in return. When it defaulted on the

repayment of the loan, the Appellant-Bank initiated recovery

proceedings on 10.02.2005, by issuing a notice under
Section

13(2)
of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets

and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (hereinafter

‘
SARFAESI Act
’). Later, on 13.06.2005, the Appellant-Bank took

physical possession of the mortgaged properties of the Karkhana

as per
Section 13(4)
of the SARFAESI Act.
2.2   Owing to its poor financial condition, on 24.01.2006, the

Karkhana issued a notice to its employees directing them to

proceed on leave without salary w.e.f. 24.02.2006. This was

challenged   by   representatives       of   the   Karkhana    employees

(Respondent Nos. 1 to 3 herein) in ULPA No. 65/2006 filed under
Section 28
read with items 9 and 10 of
Schedule IV of the

Maharashtra Recognition of Trade Unions & Prevention of Unfair

Labour Practices Act, 1971
(hereinafter ‘
MRTU & PULP Act
’). Vide

order dated 24.08.2006, the Industrial Court quashed the notice

and held that it amounted to an unfair labour practice. Further,

noting that Karkhana had not paid salaries to its employees since
2
July 2003, the Industrial Court directed the Karkhana to pay the

unpaid salaries on top priority basis from any funds that may

become available with it.
2.3   On the basis of this order, Respondent Nos. 1 to 3 filed a

miscellaneous application, ULPA No. 5/2007, seeking the issuance

of a recovery certificate against the Karkhana, its Managing

Director (Respondent No. 4 herein), and the Appellant-Bank under
Section 50
of the MRTU & PULP Act. It is to be noted that the

Appellant was arraigned as a party in this proceeding for the first

time. Vide order dated 27.04.2007, the Industrial Court held that

a recovery certificate for unpaid salaries of the Karkhana

employees could not be issued against the Appellant-Bank. It also

refused to issue such a certificate against the Karkhana and its

Managing Director in view of the precarious financial condition of

the Karkhana. However, the Karkhana was directed to pay the

unpaid salaries to the employees on top priority basis, as and when

funds were to become available.
2.4   In the challenge against this order in W.P. No. 4746/2007,

the High Court of Bombay, vide order dated 12.07.2010, held that

recovery could only be made against the Karkhana and not the

Appellant-Bank, as there was no employer-employee relationship
3
between the Bank and the employees. It was further held that the

Industrial Court had erred in relying upon the non-availability of

funds with the Karkhana to refuse the grant of a recovery

certificate, as the relevant consideration for issuance of such a

certificate is the entitlement of the applicants and not the financial

condition of the employer. In view of this, the High Court directed

the issuance of a recovery certificate against the Karkhana and its

Managing Director. Pursuant to this direction, the Industrial

Court, vide order dated 08.08.2011, disposed of ULPA No. 5/2007

by issuing a recovery certificate of Rs.13,89,84,334 against the

Karkhana and its Managing Director. However, the prayer to issue

a recovery certificate against the Appellant-Bank was rejected.

2.5   In the interim period, on 26.08.2010, one of the attached

properties of the Karkhana was auctioned and sold by the

Appellant-Bank to one Purti Power and Sugar Ltd. (Respondent

No. 5 herein). According to the terms and conditions of this sale,

the purchaser had accepted all encumbrances on the property as

agreed upon in the sale letter. It is found that the proceeds from

this sale were appropriated by the Appellant-Bank towards the

amount due to it from the Karkhana.
4
2.6   At the same time, aggrieved by the non-issuance of a

recovery certificate against the Appellant, Respondent Nos. 1 to 3

filed W.P. No. 3879/2012. During the pendency of this petition, on

19.01.2013, an order was passed by the competent authority

under the
Societies Act
directing the liquidation of the Karkhana.
Finally, vide the impugned judgment dated 01.12.2015, the High

Court disposed of W.P. No. 3879/2012. It was observed that in

terms of
Section 50
of the MRTU & PULP Act, the recovery

certificate should have been issued to the Collector for recovering

the amount from the Karkhana and its Managing Director. Thus,

the order of the Industrial Court dated 08.08.2011 was modified

to this extent to clarify that the certificate is to be issued to the

Collector first, who would then proceed to recover the sum as per

the recovery certificate. On the question of whether the Collector

could effectuate such recovery from sale proceeds of the attached

property of the Karkhana, it was held that after the auction sale,

the Appellant-Bank held the proceeds in trust as per
Section 13(7)
of the SARFAESI Act and did not have a first charge over them.

Further, it was found that upon the liquidation of the Karkhana

on 19.01.2013,
Section 529A
of the Companies Act, 1956

(hereinafter ‘
Companies Act
’) came into operation, thereby
5
according employees’ dues priority over all other dues in respect of

the sale proceeds. In light of this, it was held that the Collector

could recover the said amount of Rs.13,89,84,334 from the sale

proceeds held in trust by the Appellant-Bank. It is against this

order that the instant appeal has been filed.
3.   Heard learned Counsel for both the parties.
4.   Learned Senior Counsel for the Appellant argued that the

High Court erred in applying
Section 529A
of the Companies Act,

as
Section 167
of the Societies Act specifically bars the application

of the
Companies Act
to co-operative societies, as is the case with

the Karkhana here. In any case, he submitted that
Section 529A
of the Companies Act was misapplied, as the proviso to
Section

13(9)
of the SARFAESI Act requires the company to be “in

liquidation” at the time of the sale of secured assets for Section

529A to apply. Given that the Karkhana only went into liquidation

on 19.01.2013, i.e. after the sale of its properties in 2010, he

argued that the provision was wrongly applied. In light of this, he

also submitted that there is no other provision that makes

employees’ dues a paramount charge, and the Appellant-Bank,

being a secured creditor, should be given precedence over the

proceeds from the auction sale as per
Section 13(7)
of the
6
SARFAESI Act
. It was also his contention that a claim for unpaid

salaries cannot lie against the Appellant, as there is no employer-

employee relationship between the Appellant-Bank and the said

employees.
5.   On the other hand, learned Senior Counsel for Respondent

Nos. 1 to 3 drew our attention to
Section 50
of the MRTU & PULP

Act, under which the recovery certificate had been issued by the

Industrial Court on 08.08.2011. Noting that this provision makes

employees’ dues recoverable in the same manner as arrears of land

revenue, learned Senior Counsel referred us to Section 169(1) of

the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966 (hereinafter ‘Land

Revenue Code’), which makes arrears of land revenue a paramount

charge on the land. Relying on this, he submitted that the

employees’ dues, recoverable as arrears of land revenue, should be

given primacy over the claim of the Appellant-Bank while dealing

with the proceeds from the auction sale.
6.   In addition to this, learned Counsel for Vainganga Sahakari

Sakhar Karkhana Mazdoor Sangh (Respondent No. 8 herein) relied

on the sale letter dated 08.03.2010, which was issued by the

Appellant-Bank prior to the sale of the properties of the Karkhana.

In this letter, the Appellant-Bank had stated that it would take
7
responsibility for employees’ dues. In light of this, it was argued

that the Appellant cannot be absolved of its liability towards the

payment of employees’ dues. Learned Counsel for the subsequent

purchaser of the property (Respondent No. 5 herein) similarly

relied on this letter to submit that the liability for the payment of

employees’ dues must be placed on the Appellant.
7.   In view of the arguments raised and the material on record,

the issue that arises for our consideration in this appeal is

whether, in the facts of this case, employees’ dues can take

precedence over the claim of the secured creditor in respect of the

proceeds from sale of secured assets of the Karkhana under the
SARFAESI Act
.
8.   At the outset, we find merit in the argument raised by learned

Senior Counsel for the Appellant that the High Court erred in

applying
Section 529A
of the Companies Act to this case. It would

be apposite to refer to
Section 167
of the Societies Act in this

regard:
“167.
Companies Act
not to apply – For the removal
     of doubt, it is hereby declared that the provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956
shall not apply to societies
     registered or deemed to be registered; under this Act.”
     It is clear that
Section 167
creates an express bar on the

applicability of the
Companies Act
to societies registered under the
8
Societies Act
. Given that the Karkhana was a co-operative society

registered under the said Act, we find that
Section 167
is squarely

applicable, and the High Court committed a grave error in relying

upon
Section 529A
of the Companies Act. Thus, the employees

cannot make use of
Section 529A
of the Companies Act to claim

priority over all other debts of the Karkhana.
9.   Against this backdrop, the next question to be considered is

whether the employees’ dues can take priority over other claims by

virtue of being recoverable as arrears of land revenue.
Section 50
of the MRTU & PULP Act and
Section 169
of the Land Revenue

Code are relevant in this regard.
Section 50
of the MRTU & PULP

Act reads as follows:
“50. Recovery of money due from employer – Where
     any money is due to an employee from an employer
     under an order passed by the Court under Chapter VI,
     the employee himself or any other person authorized by
     him in writing in this behalf, or in the case of death of
     the employee, his assignee or heirs may, without
     prejudice to any other mode of recovery, make an
     application to the Court for the recovery of money due
     to him, and if the Court is satisfied that money is so
     due, it shall issue a certificate for the amount to the
     Collector, who shall, proceed to recover the same in the
     same manner as an arrear of land revenue…”
Section 169
of the Land Revenue Code is reproduced hereunder:
9
“169. Claims of State Government to have
     precedence over all others– (1) The arrears of land
     revenue due on account of land shall be a paramount
     charge on the land and on every part thereof and shall
     have precedence over any other debt, demand or claim
     whatsoever, whether in respect of mortgage,
     judgement-decree, execution or attachment, or
     otherwise howsoever, against any land or the holder
     thereof.
(2) The claim of the State Government to any monies
     other than arrears of land revenue, but recoverable as a
     revenue demand under the provisions of this Chapter,
     shall have priority over all unsecured claims against any
     land or holder thereof.”
10. From a reading of these provisions, it is evident that dues of

employees in respect of which an order has been made by a Court

under
Chapter VI of the MRTU & PULP Act
are recoverable in the

same manner as arrears of land revenue. It was argued by learned

Senior Counsel for Respondent Nos. 1 to 3 that such treatment of

employees’ dues as arrears of land revenue makes it a charge

paramount to all other claims in view of
Section 169(1)
of the Land

Revenue Code. In response, learned Senior Counsel for the

Appellant contended that the instant case falls under
Section

169(2)
of the Land Revenue Code, which deals with monies other

than arrears of land revenue but which is recoverable as a revenue

demand. Since
Section 169(2)
only accords priority over unsecured

claims, he submitted that the Appellant’s claim, being that of a
10
secured creditor, would still have priority over employees’ dues

recoverable as arrears of land revenue.
10.1   It is important to appreciate that there is a material

difference between arrears of land revenue due on account of land,

and amounts other than arrears of land revenue but recoverable

in the same manner as arrears of land. On a close reading of sub-

sections (1) and (2) of
Section 169
of the Land Revenue Code, it

becomes clear that
Section 169(1)
deals with the former category

of claims and makes them a paramount charge on the land over

all other claims. On the other hand,
Section 169(2)
deals with the

latter category and gives them priority only over unsecured claims.

10.2   This distinction has also been noted in
SICOM Ltd. v.

State of Maharashtra & Anr.
, (2010) 6 Bom CR 749, where a

division Bench of the High Court of Bombay was called upon to

consider whether sales tax dues of a company in liquidation, which

were recoverable as arrears of land revenue under Section 38-B of

the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, created a first charge.
While

discussing the scheme of
Section 169
of the Land Revenue Code,

the division Bench drew upon the reasoning of the Constitution

Bench of this Court in
Builders Supply Corporation v. Union of

India
, AIR 1965 SC 1061 and observed as follows:
11
“10. Perusal of the above quoted provisions shows that
the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code makes a clear
distinction between the sum which is recoverable as a
land revenue and sum which is recoverable as arrears
of land revenue. What creates paramount charge is the
sum which is the amount of land revenue and not the
sum which is recoverable as land revenue. The
Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in its
judgment in the case of Builders Supply Corporation
,
referred to above
, in our opinion, has made the position
absolutely clear. Following observations in the case of
Builders Supply Corporation, in our opinion, are
relevant. They read as under:-
“We have referred to this decision, because it
     brings out emphatically the real character of
     the provisions prescribed by
s. 46(2)
.
Section
     46(2)
does not deal with the doctrine of the
     priority of Crown debts at all; it merely
     provides for the recovery of the arrears of tax
     due from an assessee as if it were an arrear
     of land revenue. This provisions cannot be
     said to convert arrears of tax into arrears of
     land revenue either, all that it purports to do
     is to indicate that after receiving the
     certificate from the Income-tax Officer, the
     Collector has to proceed to recover the
     arrears in question as if the said arrears were
     arrears of land revenue. We have already
     seen that other alternative remedies for the
     recovery of arrears of land revenue are
     prescribed by sub-sections (3) and (5) of s.
46. In making a provision for the recovery of
     arrears of tax, it cannot be said that s. 46
     deals with or provides for the principle of
     priority of tax dues at all; and so, it is
     impossible to accede to the argument that s.
     46 in terms displaces the application of the
     said doctrine in the present proceedings.”
                                     (emphasis supplied)
12
This difference in the scope of sub-sections (1) and (2) of

Section 169 of the Land Revenue Code was again noted by the High

Court of Bombay in City Co-op Credit & Capital Ltd. & Anr. v.
Official Liquidator of Satwik Electric Controls Pvt Ltd., (2019)

4 Bom CR 274.
10.3    When we look to the facts of the instant case, it is seen that

the recovery certificate issued under
Section 50
of the MRTU &

PULP Act only makes employees’ dues recoverable as arrears of

land revenue. Thus, in view of the foregoing discussion, it is clear

that such employees’ dues would fall under the category of claims

captured by
Section 169(2)
, and can only take priority over

unsecured claims.
10.4    Further, as has been held by this Court in
Central Bank

of India v. State of Kerala
, (2009) 4 SCC 94, only expressly

created statutory first charges under Central and State laws can

take precedence over the claims of secured creditors under the
SARFAESI Act
. It is not enough to merely provide for recovery of

dues as arrears of land revenue. Given that
Section 50
of the MRTU

& PULP Act falls short of expressly making the employees’ dues a

‘first charge’, it cannot be said that such dues have priority over

the claims of the Appellant-Bank, which is a secured creditor.
13
Thus, we find that under the scheme of the Land Revenue Code

and the MRTU & PULP Act, the employees’ dues cannot claim

priority over the claim of the Appellant-Bank.
11. However, this does not mean that the Appellant-Bank

automatically holds a paramount charge over the proceeds from

the sale of the secured assets. Under the scheme of the
SARFAESI

Act
, there is nothing to show that a priority is created in favour of

banks, financial institutions, and other secured creditors as

against a first charge specifically created under any other statute.

This has been captured succinctly by this Court in
Central Bank
(supra) as follows:
“126. While enacting the DRT Act and the Securitisation
     Act, Parliament was aware of the law
laid down by
this
     Court wherein priority of the State dues was recognized.
     If Parliament intended to create first charge in favour of
     banks, financial institutions, or other secured creditors
     on the property of the borrower, then it would have
     incorporated a provision like
Section 529-A
of the
     Companies Act or
Section 11(2)
of the EPF act and
     ensured that notwithstanding series of judicial
     pronouncements, dues of banks, financial institutions
     and other secured creditors should have priority over
     the State’s statutory first charge in the matter of
     recovery of the dues of sales tax, etc. However, the fact
     of the matter is that no such provision has been
     incorporated in either of these enactments despite
     conferment of extraordinary power upon the secured
     creditors to take possession and dispose of the secured
     assets without the intervention of the court or Tribunal.
     The reason for this omission appears to be that the new
14
legal regime envisages transfer of secured assets to
     private companies.”

     Thus, in the absence of a paramount charge created in favour

of the employees’ dues under the
MRTU & PULP Act
, it cannot be

said that the Appellant-Bank automatically gets a first charge

under the
SARFAESI Act
.
12. In this light, what becomes relevant for the instant case is the

scheme of the
SARFAESI Act
in relation to the manner of

distributing the money received by the secured creditor through

the sale of secured assets. The following parts of
Section 13
of the

SARFAESI Act are relevant in this regard:
13. Enforcement of security interest – (4) In case the
     borrower fails to discharge his liability in full within the
     period specified in sub-section (2), the secured creditor
     may take recourse to one or more of the following
     measures to recover his secured debt, namely:— (a) take
     possession of the secured assets of the borrower
     including the right to transfer by way of lease,
     assignment or sale for realising the secured asset…
                                 xxx

     (7) Where any action has been taken against a borrower
     under the provisions of sub-section (4), all costs,
     charges and expenses which, in the opinion of the
     secured creditor, have been properly incurred by him or
     any expenses incidental thereto, shall be recoverable
     from the borrower and the money which is received by
     the secured creditor shall, in the absence of any
     contract to the contrary, be held by him in trust, to be
     applied, firstly, in payment of such costs, charges and
     expenses and secondly, in discharge of the dues of the
15
secured creditor and the residue of the money so
     received shall be paid to the person entitled thereto in
     accordance with his rights and interests.
Section 13(4)
of the SARFAESI Act allows a secured creditor

to take possession of the secured assets of a borrower-in-default,

including the right to transfer them by way of sale. What may be

done with the proceeds from such sale is provided under
Section

13(7)
. In the absence of a contract to the contrary, such proceeds

are held by the secured creditor in trust and are to be applied first

towards payments of costs, charges, and expenses incurred with

respect to the sale; second, towards dues of the secured creditor;

and lastly, towards any person entitled to the residue money.
13. In the facts of the present case, in exercise of its powers under
Section 13(4)(a)
of the SARFAESI Act, the Appellant-Bank had

taken possession of the property of the Karkhana on 13.06.2005.

Later, vide sale letter dated 08.03.2010, the Appellant-Bank had

offered to sell the said property to one M/s Vidarbha Realties Pvt.

Ltd. for a total consideration of Rs. 14.10 crores. Notably, this

letter stated that the Appellant-Bank would take responsibility for

employees’ dues, and all other liabilities including statutory

liabilities would rest solely on the purchaser. This letter was

followed by a sale certificate dated 14.09.2010 recording the sale
16
of the property by the Appellant-Bank in favour of M/s Wainganga

Sugar and Power Ltd. for a consideration of Rs. 14.10 crores.

13.1   Before delving into the applicability of the distribution of

the sale proceeds as per
Section 13(7)
of the SARFAESI Act, we

note that the sale letter dated 08.03.2010 can be relied upon by

this Court. The contention of the learned Senior Counsel for the

Appellant that the sale letter dated 08.03.2010 was addressed to

a different entity than the company mentioned in the sale

certificate dated 14.09.2010 cannot be accepted. It is found that

the addressee in the sale letter dated 08.03.2010, M/s Vidarbha

Realties Private Limited, had been renamed as M/s Wainganga

Sugar and Power Private Limited as notified on 05.04.2010.

Subsequently, on 03.06.2010, M/s Wainganga Sugar and Power

Private Limited was converted to a public limited company and its

name was changed to M/s Wainganga Sugar and Power Limited,

which is also the name of the purchaser indicated on the sale

certificate. These interim developments between March 2010 and

September 2010 explain why the sale letter dated 08.03.2010 and

the final sale certificate issued on 14.09.2010 reflect different

names. However, since it is only a case of change in name of the

company, we find that the two entities are the same and the
17
subsequent purchaser, Respondent No. 5 herein (successor of

Wainganga Sugar and Power Ltd.) would be bound by the terms of

the sale letter dated 08.03.2010.
13.2    Further, it cannot be said that the sale letter dated

08.03.2010 is an external document and cannot be relied upon to

interpret the sale certificate. This is because the sale certificate

specifically references the sale letter by providing that the

purchaser accepts “all the encumbrances presently there on the

property and may arise in future and agreed to to pay the same as

per the sale letter accepted by the purchaser”. In view of such

wording, we find that the parties intended that the sale letter dated

08.03.2010 be read harmoniously with the sale certificate

inasmuch as it appears that the same is a part of the sale

certificate. When a composite reading of the sale certificate dated

14.09.2010 and the sale letter dated 08.03.2010 is undertaken, it

is   revealed   that   though the purchaser       had accepted all

encumbrances on the property, this did not include employees’

dues in view of the specific undertaking by the Appellant-Bank

that it would pay them. Given that the certificate directly

references the prior sale letter, it is essential to give effect to its

terms. Hence, it can be concluded that the parties had agreed to
18
the Bank paying the employees’ dues and the subsequent

purchaser settling other liabilities, including statutory liabilities.

When read in this light, it becomes clear that the sale certificate

and the sale letter constitute a contract.
13.3   This brings us to the scheme of distribution of sale

proceeds under
Section 13(7)
of the SARFAESI Act. As mentioned

supra, this provision prescribes the manner in which money

received by the secured creditor pursuant to its action under
Section 13(4)
should be distributed. However, such manner of

distribution is only applicable in the absence of a contract to the

contrary. In this case, the sale certificate and sale letter form a

contract, the cumulative effect of which is an agreement that only

the employees’ dues would be settled by the Appellant-Bank, and

all other liabilities would be settled by the subsequent purchaser.

Thus, it can be said that the contract between the parties diverges

from the order of distribution stipulated under
Section 13(7)
and

constitutes a contract to the contrary, which must necessarily be

given effect.
13.4   In this regard, we find that the clarification given by the

Appellant-Bank in its counter-affidavit before the High Court that

by the sale letter dated 08.03.2010 it had only accepted liability
19
towards the payment of provident fund of the employees, is

unsustainable. Upon perusing the record, it is clear that this

clarification is only a subsequent attempt by the Appellant to

escape its liability. If the Appellant genuinely intended to restrict

its liability to provident fund, it would have expressly stated so in

the sale letter, which clearly prescribes the terms and conditions

of the sale between the Appellant and the purchaser. It is

important to bear in mind that at the time of entering into this

sale, the Appellant-Bank was well aware of the unpaid salaries due

to the employees of the Karkhana in view of the orders of the

Industrial Court dated 24.08.2006 and 27.04.2007. Hence, it

cannot be said that the Appellant-Bank agreed to use the term

“employees’ dues” in the sale letter despite intending to limit it to

provident fund dues only.
13.5   Thus, on facts, we find that in terms of
Section 13(7)
of the

SARFAESI Act, the distribution of money received by the

Appellant-Bank should be done as per the sale contract with

Respondent No. 5. In other words, the Appellant-Bank is liable to

satisfy the employees’ dues as per its undertaking in the sale letter

dated 08.03.2010. However, in view of the fact that all other

liabilities, including statutory liabilities were agreed to be borne by
20
the subsequent purchaser, statutory liabilities in respect of

employees, such as provident fund, gratuity, bonus etc., would

have to be borne by Respondent No. 5 herein. We reiterate here

that a subsequent attempt by the Appellant-Bank to interpret the

sale contract in a manner that reduces the scope of its liability to

provident fund dues cannot be given effect.
14. In view of the foregoing discussion, we summarize our

findings as follows:
(i)
Section 529A
of the Companies Act, which gives

workers’ dues a priority over all other debts, cannot be applied to

the instant case in view of
Section 167
of the Societies Act.
(ii)    Merely by virtue of being recoverable as arrears of land

revenue, the employees’ dues, in respect of which a recovery

certificate had been issued by the Industrial Court, cannot be

treated as a paramount charge in terms of Section 169(1) of the

Land Revenue Code. Instead, under 169(2) of the Land Revenue

Code, they would take precedence only over unsecured claims.
(iii)   At the same time, the Appellant-Bank does not enjoy

any paramount charge over the sale proceeds either. Instead, as

per
Section 13(7)
of the SARFAESI Act, the sale letter dated

08.03.2010 and the sale certificate dated 14.09.2010 constitute a
21
contract which displaces the order of distribution stipulated under

the said provision.
(iv)   The cumulative effect of these documents is that the

Appellant-Bank must pay the employees’ dues out of the sale

proceeds from the auctioned property. To this extent, the recovery

certificate issued by the Industrial Court on 08.08.2011 may be

executed against the Appellant herein. Further, given the

significant delay in payment of the salaries to the employees, such

recovery shall be made by the Collector within a period of six

months from the date of this order.
(v)    All other dues in respect of the secured property,

including any unpaid statutory dues in relation to employees

(provident fund, gratuity, bonus, etc.) shall be paid by Respondent

No.5 within a period of six months from the date of this order.
15. The instant appeal is disposed of accordingly.
…..…………................................J.
                                 (MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR)



                                 ….…………………………...............J.
                                         (KRISHNA MURARI)

New Delhi;
December 4, 2019
22