[Cites
23
, Cited by
65
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of M.P. & Ors vs Visan Kumar Shivcharan Lal on 5 December, 2008
Equivalent citations: AIR 2009 SUPREME COURT 1999, 2009 AIR SCW 1655, (2009) 1 JCR 156 (SC), (2009) 4 LAB LN 732, 2009 (1) SCALE 187, 2008 (15) SCC 233, (2009) 120 FACLR 313, (2009) 1 SCT 534, (2009) 1 SCALE 187, (2009) 1 CURLR 68, (2009) 3 SERVLR 407
Author:
Arijit Pasayat
Bench:
Mukundakam Sharma
,
Arijit Pasayat
REPORTABLE


                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7134 OF 2008

               (Arising out of SLP(C) No. 1313 of 2007)


State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.                     ....Appellants


                                 Versus


Visan Kumar Shiv Charan Lal                        ....Respondent




                           JUDGMENT
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.
1.   Leave granted.
1
2.    Challenge in this appeal is to the order passed by the Division Bench

of the Madhya Pradesh High Court Jabalpur Bench holding that the Letters

Patent Appeal was not maintainable. Initially, the matter was agitated by

the respondent No.1 (hereinafter referred to as the `employee'), before the

Labour Court under reference made under
Section 10
of the Industrial

Disputes Act, 1947 (in short the `Act'), which was decided in favour of

respondent no.1. Thereafter the writ petition was filed which was dismissed

by learned Single Judge. The Division Bench, as noted above, dismissed

the Letters Patent Appeal on the ground that it was not maintainable as the

order was in terms of
Article 227
of the Constitution of India, 1950 (in short

the `Constitution'). According to the appellant, the nomenclature is of no

consequence. It is the nature of the relief sought for and the controversy

involved which determines the Article which is applicable.
3.    In addition, the High Court seems to have gone by the nomenclature

discription of the writ petition to be one under
Article 227
of the

Constitution. The High Court did not consider the nature of the controversy

and the prayer involved in the Writ petition. As noted above, the prayer was

to quash the order of the Labour Court.
2
4.
Section 2
of the Act reads as follows:
"2(1) An appeal shall lie from a judgment or order
            passed by the one Judge of the High Court in exercise of
            original jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the
            Constitution of India, to a Division bench comprising of
            two judges of the same High Court.
Provided that no such appeal shall lie against an
            interlocutory order or against an order passed in exercise
            of supervisory jurisdiction under
Article 227
of the
            Constitution of India."
5.    This Court in
Hari Vishnu Kamath v. Ahmad Ishaque and Ord
. (AIR

1955 SC 233) held that the High Court while issuing writ of certiorari under
Article 226
of the Constitution can only annul a decision of a Tribunal

whereas under
Article 227
of the Constitution it can issue further directions

as well. As noted above the prayer in the Writ Petition was to set aside the

decision of the Labour Court.
6.
In
Umaji Keshao Meshram v. Radhikabai
[AIR 1986 SC 1272] it was

noted as follows:
"Under
Article 226
an order, direction or writ is to issue to a
      person, authority or the State. In a proceeding under that article
      the person, authority or State against whom the direction, order
      or writ is sought is a necessary party. Under
Article 227
,
3
however, what comes up before the High Court is the order or
judgment of a subordinate court or tribunal for the purpose of
ascertaining whether in giving such judgment or order that
subordinate court or tribunal has acted within its authority and
according to law. Prior to the commencement of the
Constitution, the Chartered High Courts as also the Judicial
Committee had held that the power to issue prerogative writs
possessed by the Chartered High Courts was an exercise of
original jurisdiction (see
Mahomedalli Allabux v. Ismailji
Abdulali
(
AIR 1926 Bom 332), Raghunath Keshav Khadilkar
v. Poona Municipality
,(
AIR 1945 Bom 7) Ryots of
Garabandho v. Zemindar of Parlakimedi
(
AIR 1943 PC 164)
and Moulvi Hamid Hasan Nomani v. Banwarilal Roy
[(1946-
47) 74 Ind App 120,130-131]. In the last mentioned case which
dealt with the nature of a writ of quo warranto, the Judicial
Committee held:
"In Their Lordships' opinion any original civil
      jurisdiction possessed by the High Court and not in
      express terms conferred by the Letters Patent or later
      enactments falls within the description of ordinary
      original civil jurisdiction."
By
Article 226
the power of issuing prerogative writs
possessed by the Chartered High Courts prior to the
commencement of the Constitution has been made wider and
more extensive and conferred upon every High Court. The
nature of the exercise of the power under
Article 226
, however,
remains the same as in the case of the power of issuing
prerogative writs possessed by the Chartered High Courts. A
series of decisions of this Court has firmly established that a
proceeding under
Article 226
is an original proceeding and
when it concerns civil rights, it is an original civil proceeding
(see, for instance,
State of U.P. v. Vijay Anand Maharaj
[(1963) 1 SCR 1,16],
CIT v. Ishwarlal Bhagwandas
[
AIR 1965
SC 1818], Ramesh v. Seth Gendalal Motilal Patni
(
1966 (3)
SCR 198), Arbind Kumar Singh v. Nand Kishore Prasad
[1968
(3) SCR 322] and Ahmedabad Mfg. & Calico Ptg.
Co. Ltd. v.
Ram Tahel Ramnand
(AIR 1972 SC 1598)."
4
7.   In para 106, it was noted as follows:
"106. The non obstante clause in Rule 18, namely,
     "Notwithstanding anything contained in Rules 1, 4 and 17 of
     this chapter", makes it abundantly clear why that rule uses the
     words "finally disposed of". As seen above, under Rules 1 and
     17, applications under
Articles 226
and
227
are required to be
     heard and disposed of by a Division Bench. Rule 4, however,
     gives power to a Single Judge to issue rule nisi on an
     application under
Article 226
but precludes him from passing
     any final order on such application. It is because a Single Judge
     has no power under Rules 1, 4 and 17 to hear and dispose of a
     petition under
Article 226
or 227 that the non obstante clause
     has been introduced in Rule 18. The use of the words "be heard
     and finally disposed of by a Single Judge" in Rule 18 merely
     clarifies the position that in such cases the power of the Single
     Judge is not confined merely to issuing a rule nisi. These words
     were not intended to bar a right of appeal. To say that the
     words "finally disposed of" mean finally disposed of so far as
     the High Court is concerned is illogical because Rules 1, 4 and
     7 use the words "be heard and disposed of by a Divisional
     Bench" and were the reasoning of the Full Bench correct, it
     would mean that so far as the High Court is concerned, when a
     Single Judge hears a matter and disposes it of, it is finally
     disposed of and when a Division Bench disposes it of, it is not
     finally disposed of. The right of appeal against the judgment of
     a Single Judge is given by the Letters Patent which have been
     continued in force by
Article 225
of the Constitution. If under
     the Rules of the High Court, a matter is heard and disposed of
     by a Single Judge, an appeal lies against his judgment unless it
     is barred either under the Letters Patent or some other
     enactment. The word "finally" used in Rule 18 of Chapter XVII
     of the Appellate Side Rules does not and cannot possibly have
     the effect of barring a right of appeal conferred by the Letters
     Patent. As we have seen above, an intra-court appeal against
     the judgment of a Single Judge in a petition under
Article 226
is not barred while clause 15 itself bars an intra-court appeal
     against the judgment of a Single Judge in a petition under
Article 227."
5
8.
In
Sushilabai Laxminarayan Mudliyar v. Nihalchand Waghajibhai

Shaha
[1993 Supp.
(1) SCC 11] this court with reference to an unreported

judgment in
Ratnagiri District Central Co-operative Bank Ltd. v. Dinkar

Kashinath Watve, C.A. No.
520 of 1989 decided on 27.1.1989 held as

follows:
"Even when in the cause title of an application
            both
Article 226
and
Article 227
of the Constitution have
            been mentioned, the learned single Judge is at liberty to
            decide, according to facts of each particular case,
            whether the said application ought to be dealt with only
            under
Article 226
of the Constitution. For determining
            the question of maintainability of an appeal against such
            a judgment of the Single Judge the Division bench has to
            find out whether in substance the judgment has been
            passed by the learned Single Judge in exercise of the
            jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution. In the
            event in passing his judgment on an application which
            had mentioned in its cause title both
Articles 226
and
227
, the Single Judge has in fact invoked only his
            supervisory powers under
Article 227
, the appeal under
            clause 15 would not lie. The clause 15 of the Letters
            Patent expressly bars appeals against orders of Single
            Judges passed under revisional or supervisory powers.
            Even when the learned Single Judge's order has been
            passed under both the articles, for deciding the
            maintainability against such an order what would be
            relevant is the principal or main relief granted by the
            judgment passed by learned Single Judge and not the
            ancillary directions given by him. The expression
            `ancillary' means, in the context, incidental or
            consequential to the main part of the order.
Thus, the determining factor is the real nature of
            principal order passed by the Single Judge which is
            appealed against and neither the mentioning in the cause
6
title of the application of both the articles nor the
            granting of ancillary orders thereupon made by learned
            Single Judge would be relevant. Thus, in each case, the
            Division Bench may consider the substance of the
            judgment under appeal to ascertain whether the Single
            Judge has mainly or principally exercised in the matter
            his jurisdiction under
Article 226
or under
Article 227.
In the event in his judgment the learned Single Judge
            himself had mentioned the particular article of the
            Constitution under which he was passing his judgment,
            in an appeal under clause 15 against such a judgment it
            may not be necessary for the appellate bench to
            elaborately examine the question of its maintainability.
            When without mentioning the particular article the
            learned Single Judge decided on merits the application,
            in order to decide the question of maintainability of an
            appeal, against such a judgment, the Division Bench
            might examine the relief granted by the learned Single
            Judge, for maintainability of an appeal, the determination
            would be the main and not the ancillary relief. When a
            combined application under
Articles 226
and
227
of the
            Constitution is summarily dismissed without reasons, the
            appeal Court may consider whether the facts alleged,
            warranted filing of the application under
Article 226
or
            under
Article 227
of the Constitution."
9.    Thereafter this Court explained the
ratio
laid down in
the case of
Umaji
's case (supra) and expressed thus:
"...In
Umaji
case it was clearly held that where the
            facts justify a party in filing an application either under
Article 226
or 227 of the Constitution of India and the
            party chooses to file his application under both these
            articles in fairness of justice to party and in order not to
            deprive him of valuable right of appeal the Court ought
            to treat the application as being made under
Article 226
,
            and if in deciding the matter, in the final order the Court
7
gives ancillary directions which may pertain to
Article
             227
, this ought not to be held to deprive a party of the
             right of appeal under clause 15 of the Letters Patent
             where the substantial part of the order sought to be
             appealed against is under
Article 226.
Rule 18 of the
             Bombay High Court Appellate Side Rules read with
             clause 15 of the Letters Patent provides for appeal to the
             Division Bench of the High Court from a judgment of
             the learned Single Judge passed on a writ petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution. In the present case the
             Division Bench was clearly wrong in holding that the
             appeal was not maintainable against the order of the
             learned Single Judge."
10.
In
Mangalbhai & Ors. v. Radhyshyam (Dr.
) [AIR 1993 SC 806] it

was, inter alia, observed as follows:
"The learned Single Judge in his impugned judgment dated
      December 11, 1987 nowhere mentioned that he was exercising
      the powers under
Article 227
of the Constitution. The learned
      Single Judge examined the matter on merit and set aside the
      orders of the Rent Controller as well as the Resident Deputy
      Collector on the ground that the aforesaid judgments were
      perverse. The findings of the Rent Controller and Resident
      Deputy Collector were set aside on the question of habitual
      defaulter as well as on the ground of bona fide need. Thus in the
      totality of the facts and circumstances of the case, the pleadings
      of the parties in the writ petition and the judgment of the learned
      Single Judge leaves no manner of doubt that it was an order
      passed under
Article 226
of the Constitution and in that view of
      the matter the Letters Patent Appeal was maintainable before the
      High Court. After taking the aforesaid view one course open was
      to set aside the order of the Division Bench and to remand the
      matter for being disposed of on merits by the Division Bench of
      the High Court. However, taking in view the fact that this
      litigation is going on for nearly a decade and also the fact that
8
even the learned Single Judge in his impugned order dated
      December 11, 1987 had remanded the case to the Rent
      Controller, we considered it proper in the interest of justice to
      hear the appeal on merits against the judgment of the learned
      Single Judge. We have heard learned counsel for the parties at
      length on the merits of the case."
11.
In
Lokmat Newspapers (P) Ltd. v. Shankarprasad
[1999 (6) SCC 275]

it was observed as follows:
"It is, therefore, obvious that the writ petition invoking
      jurisdiction of the High Court both under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution had tried to make out a case for the High
      Court's interference seeking issuance of an appropriate writ of
      certiorari under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. Basic
      averments for invoking such a jurisdiction were already
      pleaded in the writ petition for the High Court's consideration.
      It is true, as submitted by learned counsel for the appellant, that
      the order of the learned Single Judge nowhere stated that the
      Court was considering the writ petition under
Article 226
of the
      Constitution of India. It is equally true that the learned Single
      Judge dismissed the writ petition by observing that the courts
      below had appreciated the contentions and rejected the
      complaint. But the said observation of the learned Single Judge
      did not necessarily mean that the learned Judge was not
      inclined to interfere under
Article 227
of the Constitution of
      India only. The said observation equally supports the
      conclusion that the learned Judge was not inclined to interfere
      under
Articles 226
and
227.
As seen earlier, he was considering
      the aforesaid writ petition moved under
Article 226
as well as
Article 227
of the Constitution of India. Under these
      circumstances, it is not possible to agree with the contention of
      learned counsel for the appellant that the learned Single Judge
      had refused to interfere only under
Article 227
of the
      Constitution of India when he dismissed the writ petition of the
9
respondent.
In this connection, it is profitable to have a look at
the decision of this Court in the case of
Umaji Keshao
Meshram v. Radhikabai
[1986 Supp.SCC 401]. In that case O.
Chinnappa Reddy and D.P. Madon, JJ., considered the very
same question in the light of clause 15 of the Letters Patent of
the Bombay High Court. Madon, J., speaking for the Court in
para 107 of the Report at p.    473, made the following
pertinent observations: (SCC p.         473, para 107)

      "107. Petitions are at times filed both under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution.
The case of
Hari Vishnu
      Kamath v. Syed Ahmad Ishaque
(AIR 1955 SC 233)
      before this Court was of such a type. Rule 18 provides
      that where such petitions are filed against orders of the
      tribunals or authorities specified in Rule 18 of Chapter
      XVII of the Appellate Side Rules or against decrees or
      orders of courts specified in that rule, they shall be heard
      and finally disposed of by a Single Judge. The question
      is whether an appeal would lie from the decision of the
      Single Judge in such a case. In our opinion, where the
      facts justify a party in filing an application either under
Article 226
or 227 of the Constitution, and the party
      chooses to file his application under both these articles,
      in fairness and justice to such party and in order not to
      deprive him of the valuable right of appeal the court
      ought to treat the application as being made under
Article 226
, and if in deciding the matter, in the final
      order the court gives ancillary directions which may
      pertain to
Article 227
, this ought not to be held to
      deprive a party of the right of appeal under clause 15 of
      the Letters Patent where the substantial part of the order
      sought to       be appealed against is under
Article 226.
Such was the view taken by the Allahabad High Court in
Aidal Singh v. Karan Singh
(AIR 1957 All 414) and by
      the Punjab High Court in
Raj Kishan Jain v. Tulsi Dass
(
AIR 1959 Punj 291) and Barham Dutt v. Peoples'
      Coop. Transport Society Ltd.
(AIR 1961 Punj 24) and we
      are in agreement with it."
10
The aforesaid decision squarely gets attracted on the facts of
      the present case. It was open to the respondent to invoke the
      jurisdiction of the High Court both under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution of India. Once such a jurisdiction was
      invoked and when his writ petition was dismissed on merits, it
      cannot be said that the learned Single Judge had exercised his
      jurisdiction only under
Article 226 (sic 227)
of the Constitution
      of India. This conclusion directly flows from the relevant
      averments made in the writ petition and the nature of
      jurisdiction invoked by the respondent as noted by the learned
      Single Judge in his judgment, as seen earlier. Consequently, it
      could not be said that clause 15 of the Letters Patent was not
      attracted for preferring appeal against the judgment of the
      learned Single Judge. It is also necessary to note that the
      appellant being the respondent in letters patent appeal joined
      issues on merits and did not take up the contention that the
      letters patent appeal was not maintainable. For all these
      reasons, therefore, the primary objection to the maintainability
      of the letters patent appeal as canvassed by learned counsel for
      the appellant, has to be repelled. Point 1 is, therefore, answered
      in the affirmative against the appellant and in favour of the
      respondent. It takes us to the consideration of points arising for
      our decision on merits."
12.    In Surya Dev Rai v. Ram Chander Rai & Ors. [AIR 2003 SC 3044]

after referring to decisions in Custodian of Evacuee Property, Bangalore v.
Khan Saheb Abdul Shukoor, etc. [1961 (3) SCR 855] and Nagendra Nath

Bora & Anr. v. Commissioner of Hills Division [AIR 1958 SC 398], T.C.

Basappa v. T. Nagappa [AIR 1954 SC 440] and Rupa Ashok Hurra v.
Ashok Hurra [AIR 2002 SC 1771], this Court held at paragraphs 17, 19 &

25 as follows:
11
"17. From the aforesaid enunciation of law it is quite vivid
and luminescent that the pleadings in the writ petition, nature
of the order passed by the learned Single Judge, character and
the contour of the order, directions issued, nomenclature given
the jurisdictional prospective in the constitutional context are
to be perceived. It cannot be said in a hypertechnical manner
that an order passed in a writ petition, if there is assail to the
order emerging from the inferior tribunal or subordinate Court
has to be treated all the time for all purposes to be under
Article
227
of the Constitution of India. Phraseology used in exercise
of original jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution in
Section 2
of the Act cannot be given a restricted and
constricted meaning because an order passed in a writ petition
can tantamount to an order under
Article 226
or 227 of the
Constitution of India and it would depend upon the real nature
of the order passed by the learned Single Judge. To elaborate;
whether the learned Single Judge has exercised his jurisdiction
under
Article 226
or under
Article 227
or both would depend
upon various aspects and many a facet as has been emphasized
in the afore quoted decisions of the apex Court. The pleadings,
as has been indicated hereinabove, also assume immense
significance. As has been held in the case of Surya Devi Rai
(supra) a writ of certiorari can be issued under
Article 226
of
the Constitution against an order of a Tribunal or an order
passed by the sub ordinate court. In quintessentiality, it cannot
be put in a state jacket formula that any order of the learned
judge that deals with an order arising from an inferior tribunal
or the sub ordinate court is an order under
Article 227
of the
Constitution of India and not an order under
Article 226
of the
Constitution. It would not be an over emphasis to state that an
order in a writ petition can fit into the subtle contour of
Articles
226
and
227
of the Constitution in a composite manner and
they can coincide, co-exit, overlap imbricate. In this context it
is apt to note that there may be cases where the learned single
judge may feel disposed or inclined to issue a writ to do full
and complete justice because it is to be borne in mind that
Article 226
of the Constitutions is fundamentally a repository
and reservoir of justice based on equity and good conscience. It
will depend upon factual matrix of the case.
12
19. Thus, there is no manner of doubt that the orders and
proceedings of a judicial court subordinate to the High Court
are amenable to writ jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution.
25. Upon a review of decided cases and a survey of the
occasions, wherein the High Courts have exercised jurisdiction
to command a writ of certiorari or to exercise supervisory
jurisdiction under
Article 227
in the given facts and
circumstances in a variety of cases, it seems that the distinction
between the two jurisdictions stands almost obliterated in
practice. Probably, this is the reason why it has become
customary with the lawyers labelling their petitions as one
common under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution,
though such practice has been deprecated in some judicial
pronouncement. Without entering into niceties and technicality
of the subject, we venture to state the broad general difference
between the two jurisdictions. Firstly, the writ of certiorari is
an exercise of its original jurisdiction by the High Court;
exercise of supervisory jurisdiction is not an original
jurisdiction and in this sense it is akin to appellate, revisional
or corrective jurisdiction. Secondly, in a writ of certiorari, the
record of the proceedings having been certified and sent up by
the inferior court or tribunal to the High Court, the High Court
if inclined to exercise its jurisdiction, may simply annul or
quash the proceedings and then do no more. In exercise of
supervisory jurisdiction, the High Court may not only quash or
set aside the impugned proceedings, judgment or order but it
may also make such directions as the facts and circumstances
of the case may warrant, maybe, by way of guiding the inferior
court or tribunal as to the manner in which it would now
proceed further or afresh as commended to or guided by the
High Court. In appropriate cases the High Court, while
exercising supervisory jurisdiction, may substitute such a
decision of its own in place of the impugned decision, as the
inferior court or tribunal should have made. Lastly, the
jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution is capable of
being exercised on a prayer made by or on behalf of the party
aggrieved; the supervisory jurisdiction is capable of being
exercised suo motu as well."
13
13.   The above position was highlighted in M/s. MMTC Ltd. v.
Commissioner of Commercial Tax & Ors. [2008 (13) SCALE 682].
14.   In view of what has been stated above, the High Court was not

justified in holding that the Letters Patent Appeal was not maintainable. In

addition, a bare reading of this Court's earlier order shows that the

impugned order is clearly erroneous. The impugned order is set aside. The

writ appeal shall be heard by the Division Bench on merits.
15.   The appeal is allowed.
..........................................J.
                                  (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)


                                  ..........................................J.
                                  (Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
New Delhi,
December 5, 2008
14