[Cites
30
, Cited by
297
]
Supreme Court of India
Avinash Kumar Chauhan vs Vijay Krishna Mishra on 17 December, 2008
Equivalent citations: AIR 2009 SUPREME COURT 1489, 2009 AIR SCW 979, 2009 (3) AIR JHAR R 660, (2009) 1 CLR 752 (SC), (2009) 3 KCCR 91, 2009 (2) SCC 532, 2009 (1) CLR 752, 2009 (1) SCALE 80, (2009) 1 PUN LR 771, (2009) 106 REVDEC 254, (2009) 1 ANDHLD 109, (2009) 1 RECCIVR 615, (2009) 1 CIVILCOURTC 735, (2009) 2 GUJ LR 1202, (2009) 3 MAD LJ 409, (2009) 4 MAH LJ 349, (2009) 3 MPLJ 289, (2009) 1 SCALE 80, (2009) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 562, (2009) 3 MPHT 6, (2009) 74 ALL LR 912, (2009) 2 ALL WC 1272, (2009) 1 CAL HN 222, (2009) 2 CIVLJ 568, (2009) 1 CURCC 129, (2009) 6 BOM CR 334
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
Cyriac Joseph
,
S.B. Sinha
REPORTABLE


                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7350 OF 2008
                 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 8651 of 2007)



Avinash Kumar Chauhan                                           ....
Appellant


            Versus


Vijay Krishna Mishra                                     .... Respondent



                             JUDGMENT
S.B. SINHA, J.
1.    Leave granted.
2.    Interpretation of
Sections 33
and
35
of the Indian Stamp Act 1899

(for short `the Act') calls for our consideration in this appeal which arises

out of a judgment and order dated 27th February, 2007 passed by a learned
1
Single Judge of the High Court of Chattisgarh at Bilaspur dismissing a

petition filed by the appellant herein under
Article 227
of the Constitution

of India against the orders dated 14th November, 2006 and 9th January, 2007

passed in Civil Suit No.1-B/2006 by the Additional District Judge,

Gariaband, Raipur.
3.    The undisputed fact of the matter is that the respondent herein, who is

said to be a member of the Scheduled Tribe intended to transfer a house and

land admeasuring 10150 sq. ft. situated at Village Gariyaband, District

Raipur. A sum of Rs.2,70,000/- fixed by way of consideration towards the

aforementioned transfer was paid to the respondent by the appellant.

Possession of the said property had also been delivered.
4.    Indisputably for the purpose of effecting transfer of the said land,

permission of the Collector was required to be obtained in terms of Section

165 (6) of the C.G. Land Revenue Code, 1959, which was applied for but

rejected.
2
5.    Appellant herein filed a suit for recovery of Rs.2,70,000/-. In support

of his case, the agreement dated 4th August, 2003 which was sought to be

registered as a sale-deed has been relied upon.
The same was directed to be impounded by an order dated 9th January,

2007, stating :-
"      Under the
Section 35(a)
of the Stamp Act
             there is a provision that for any such instrument or
             bill of exchange or promissory note, subject to all
             just exceptions, will be admitted in evidence on
             payment of the duty with which the same is
             chargeable or, in the case of an instrument
             insufficiently stamped, of the amount required to
             make up such duty, together with a penalty of five
             rupees, or, when ten times the amount of the
             proper duty or deficient portion thereof exceeds
             five rupees, of a sum equal to ten times such duty
             or portion.
In the matter the agreement of sell produced
             is valued Rs.2,70,000/- which as per
Article 23
of
Indian Stamp Act
and as per Schedule 5, on the
             said amount stamp duty of 5.6% is leviable and the
             7.5% of Rs.2,70,000/- comes to Rs.20,250/-. In
             the agreement to sell Rs.60/- is mentioned as
             stamp which means reducing the Rs.20,250 -
             Rs.60 = Rs.20,190 is less stamp duty paid, 10
             times penalty of which will be leviable as per
Section 35
of the Stamp Act means Rs.201900/-
             stamp duty will be leviable. In this regard relevant
             case law is `Kapur Constructions vs. Lita Nagraj
             and Ors.,' AIR 2005 Karnataka 032. The plaintiff
3
has paid Rs.20,850/- in the C.C.D. so the rest of
             the amount of Rs.181050 be deposited within the
             next date of hearing and the Opposite Party shall
             also file its counter reply by the next date of
             hearing."
6.    As noticed hereinbefore the High Court by reason of the impugned

judgment refused to interfere with the said order.
7.    Mr. A.K. Bajpai, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant

would submit that having regard to the fact that the said unregistered deed

of sale was sought to be put in evidence not for the purpose of enforcement

of the contract but only for the purpose of recovery of the amount of

consideration, which indisputably has been paid to the respondent and such

a purpose, it was urged, being a collateral one, the provisions of
Sections 33
and
35
of the Act shall not be attracted.
Reliance in this behalf has been placed on the proviso appended to
Section 49
of the Indian Registration Act as also on the decision of this

Court in
Bondar Singh v. Nihal Singh
, [ (2003) 4 SCC 161 ],
4
8.    Mr. Suhail Dutt, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

respondent, on the other hand, would support the impugned judgment.
9.
The Act
was enacted to consolidate and amend the law relating to
Stamps.
"Conveyance" has been defined in
Section 2(10)
to mean :-
"     "conveyance" includes a conveyance on sale
            and every instrument by which property, whether
            moveable or immoveable, is transferred inter vivos
            and which is not otherwise specifically provided
            for by Schedule I ;"
"Receipt" has been defined in
section 2(23)
of the Act to mean :-
"      "receipt" includes any note, memorandum
            or writing-
(a) whereby any money, or any bill of exchange,
            cheque or promissory note is acknowledged to
            have been received, or
(b) whereby any other moveable property is
            acknowledged to have been received in
            satisfaction of a debt, or
(c) whereby any debt or demand, or any part of a
            debt or demand, is acknowledged to have been
5
satisfied or discharged, or
(d) which signifies       or   imports   any   such
            acknowledgement ;
and whether the same is or is not signed with the
            name of any person."
"Stamp" has been defined in
Section 2(26)
to mean :-
"     "Stamp" means any mark, seal or
            endorsement by any agency or person duly
            authorised by the State Government, and includes
            an adhesive or impressed stamp, for the purposes
            of duty chargeable under this Act."
10.
Chapter II of the Act
provides for stamp-duties.
Section 3
, which is the charging Section reads as under :-
"3. Instruments chargeable with duty. - Subject to
            the provisions of this Act and the exemptions
            contained in Schedule I, the following instruments
            shall be chargeable with duty of the amount
            indicated in that Schedule as the proper duty
            therefor, respectively, that is to say-
(a)   every instrument mentioned in that
                  Schedule which, not having been previously
6
executed by any person, is executed in India
      on or after the first day of July, 1899;
(b)   every bill of exchange payable otherwise
      than on demand or promissory note drawn
      or made out of India on or after that day and
      accepted or paid, or resented for acceptance
      or payment, or endorsed, transferred or
      otherwise negotiated, in India; and
(c)   every instrument (other than a bill of
      exchange or promissory note) mentioned in
      that Schedule, which, not having been
      previously executed by any person, is
      executed out of India on or after that day,
      relates to any property situate, or to any
      matter or thing done or to be done, in 8
      [India] and is received in India.
Provided that no duty shall be chargeable in
respect of-
(1) any instrument executed by, or on behalf of,
or in favour of, the Government incases where, but
for this exemption, the Government would be
liable to pay the duty chargeable in respect of such
instrument;
(2) any instrument for the sale, transfer or other
disposition, either absolutely or byway of
mortgage or otherwise, of any ship or vessel, or
any part, interest, share or property of or in any
ship or vessel registered under the
Merchant
Shipping Act
1894, or under Act 19 of 1838, or
the Indian Registration of Ships Act, 1841, as
amended by subsequent Acts.
7
(3) any instrument executed ,by, or , on behalf
             of, or, in favour of, the Developer , or Unit or in
             connection with the carrying out of purposes of
             the Special Economic Zone,

            Explanation- For the purposes of this clause, the
            expressions "Developer", "Special Economic
            Zone" and "Unit" shall have meanings respectively
            assigned to them in clause(g), (za) and (zc) of
Section 2
of the Special Economic Zones Act,
            2005."
The other provisions contained in the said chapter deal with the mode

and manner of payment etc.
Chapter III of the Act
provides for adjudication with regard to proper

stamps; whereas Chapter IV deals with instruments not duly stamped.
Section 33
casts a duty upon every person who has authority to

receive evidence and every person incharge of a public office before whom

the instrument is produced, if it appears to him that the same is not duly

stamped, to impound the same. Sub-section (2) of
Section 33
of the Act

lays down the procedure for undertaking the process of impounding.
Section 35
provides that an instrument shall be inadmissible in evidence if

the same is not duly stamped in the following terms :-
8
"35 - Instruments not duly stamped inadmissible in
evidence, etc.
No instrument chargeable with duty shall be
admitted in evidence for any purpose by any
person having by law or consent of parties
authority to receive evidence, or shall be acted
upon, registered or authenticated by any such
person or by any public officer, unless such
instrument is duly stamped :
Provided that--
(a) any such instrument shall be admitted in
    evidence on payment of the duty with which
    the same is chargeable, or, in the case of an
    instrument insufficiently stamped, of the
    amount required to make up such duty, together
    with a penalty of five rupees, or, when ten
    times the amount of the proper duty or deficient
    portion thereof exceeds five rupees, of a sum
    equal to ten times such duty or portion ;
(b)where any person from whom a stamped receipt
   could have been demanded, has given an
   unstamped receipt and such receipt, if stamped,
   would be admissible in evidence against him,
   then such receipt shall be admitted in evidence
   against him on payment of a penalty of one
   rupee by the person tendering it;
(c)where a contract or agreement of any kind is
   effected by correspondence consisting of two
   or more letters and any one of the letters bears
   the proper stamp, the contract or agreement
   shall be deemed to be duly stamped;
(d)nothing herein contained shall prevent the
   admission of any instrument in evidence in any
9
proceeding in a Criminal Court, other than a
                proceeding under Chapter XII or Chapter
                XXXVI of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
1898;
(e)nothing herein contained shall prevent the
               admission of any instrument in any Court when
               such instrument has been executed by or on
               behalf of the Government or where it bears the
               certificate of the Collector as provided by
section 32
or any other provision of this Act."
11.
Section 36
of the Act provides that where an instrument has been

admitted in evidence, such admission shall not, except as provided in
Section 21
thereof, be called in question at any stage of same suit or

proceeding on the ground that the instrument has not been duly stamped.
Section 38
provides for the mode and manner in which the instrument

impounded is to be dealt with.
12.   The Parliament has, in
Section 35
of the Act, advisedly used the

words "for any purpose whatsoever".        Thus, the purpose for which a

document is sought to be admitted in evidence or the extent thereof would

not be a relevant factor for not invoking the aforementioned provisions.
10
13.   The land in the instant case is situated in a Scheduled Area.

Execution of a deed of conveyance in respect of the land situated in the

scheduled area is statutorily barred. All transactions can be affected only

upon obtaining the permission of the collector in terms of the provisions of

Section 165 (6) of the C.G. Land Revenue Code, 1959. We are, however,

not concerned with the said provisions.
14.   Indisputably an instrument was executed.          By reason of such an

instrument not only the entire amount of consideration was paid but

possession of the property had also been transferred.
Explanation appended to
Article 23
of
Schedule IA of the Stamp Act
as substituted by M.P. Act No. 19 of 1989 reads as under :-
"Explanation.- For the purpose of this Article,
            where in the case of agreement to sell immovable
            property, the possession of any immovable
            property is transferred to the purchaser before
            execution after execution of such agreement
            without executing the conveyance in respect
            thereof, then such agreement to sell shall be
            deemed to be a conveyance and stamp duty
            thereon shall be leviable accordingly:
Provided that the provisions of section 47A shall
            apply mutatis mutandis to such agreement which
11
is deemed to be a conveyance as aforesaid, as they
            apply to a conveyance under that section:
Provided further that where subsequently a
            conveyance is effected in pursuance of such
            agreement of sale, the stamp duty, if any, already
            paid and recovered on the agreement of sale,
            which is deemed to be a conveyance shall be
            adjusted towards the total duty leviable on the
            conveyance subject to a minimum of Rs.10."
15.   The said explanation has been inserted by M.P. Act 19 of 1989 with

effect from 15th November, 1989. By reason of the said provision, thus, a

legal fiction has been created. Although ordinarily an agreement to sell

would not be subject to payment of stamp duty which is payable on a sale

deed, but having regard to the purpose and object it seeks to achieve the

legislature thought it necessary to levy stamp duty on an instrument

whereby possession has been transferred.
The validity of the said provision is not in question.
16.   It is not in dispute that the possession of the property had been

delivered in favour of the appellant. He has, thus, been exercising some

right in or over the land in question.      We are not concerned with the

enforcement of the said agreement. Although the same was not registered,
12
but registration of the document has nothing to do with the validity thereof

as provided for under the provisions of the
Indian Registration Act, 1908
.
17.   We have noticed heretobefore that
Section 33
of the Act casts a

statutory obligation on all the authorities to impound a document. The court

being an authority to receive a document in evidence is bound to give effect

thereto.
18.   The unregistered deed of sale was an instrument which required

payment of the stamp duty applicable to a deed of conveyance. Adequate

stamp duty admittedly was not paid. The court, therefore, was empowered

to pass an order in terms of
Section 35
of the Act.
19.   The contention of learned counsel for the appellant that the document

was admissible for collateral purpose, in our opinion, is not correct.
In
Bondar Singh
(supra) this Court was not concerned with the provisions of

the Act. Only interpretation of the provisions of the
Registration Act, 1908
was in question. It was opined :-
"     The main question, as we have already
             noted, is the question of continuous possession of
13
the plaintiffs over the suit lands. The sale deed
            dated 9-5-1931 by Fakir Chand, father of the
            defendants in favour of Tola Singh, the
            predecessor-in-interest of the plaintiffs, is an
            admitted document in the sense its execution is not
            in dispute. The only defence set up against the said
            document is that it is unstamped and unregistered
            and therefore it cannot convey title to the land in
            favour of the plaintiffs. Under the law a sale deed
            is required to be properly stamped and registered
            before it can convey title to the vendee. However,
            legal position is clear law that a document like the
            sale deed in the present case, even though not
            admissible in evidence, can be looked into for
            collateral purposes. In the present case the
            collateral purpose to be seen is the nature of
            possession of the plaintiffs over the suit land. The
            sale deed in question at least shows that initial
            possession of the plaintiffs over the suit land was
            not illegal or unauthorized..."
In this case, by reason of the statutory interdict, no transfer at all is

permissible. Even transfer of possession is also not permissible. [See
Pandey Oraon v. Ram Chander Sahu
1992
Supp (2) SCC 77 and Amrendra

Pratap Singh v. Tej Bahadur Prajapati and Others
(2004) 10 SCC 65]
20.
The Registration Act, 1908
provides for such a contingency in terms

of the proviso appended to
Section 49
thereof, which reads as under :-
"49.  Effect of non-registration of documents
            required to be registered.-
14
No document required by
section 17
or by any
            provision of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
(4
            of 1882), to be registered shall--
(a) affect any immovable property comprised
            therein, or
(b) confer any power to adopt, or
(c) be received as evidence of any transaction
            affecting such property or conferring such power,


            unless it has been registered:
Provided that an unregistered document affecting
            immovable property and required by this Act or
            the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
(4 of 1882), to
            be registered may be received as evidence of a
            contract in a suit for specific performance under
            Chapter II of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (3 of
            1877) or as evidence of any collateral transaction
            not required to be effected by registered
            instrument."
21.
Section 35
of the Act, however, rules out applicability of such

provision as it is categorically provided therein that a document of this

nature shall not be admitted for any purpose whatsoever. If all purposes for

which the document is sought to be brought in evidence are excluded, we
15
fail to see any reason as to how the document would be admissible for

collateral purposes.
22.   The view we have taken finds support from the decision of the Privy

Council in Ram Rattan v. Parmananad, [AIR 1946 PC 51] wherein it was

held :-
"That the words `for any purpose' in
Section 35
of
             the Stamp Act should be given their natural
             meaning and effect and would include a collateral
             purpose and that an unstamped partition deed
             cannot be used to corroborate the oral evidence for
             the purpose of determining even the factum of
             partition as distinct from its terms."
The said decision has been followed in a large number of decisions by

the said Court.    In Bhaskarabhotla Padmanabhaiah and others       v.    B.

Lakshminarayana and others [ AIR 1962 A.P. 132 ], it has been held :-
"9. In this case, the learned Subordinate Judge
             has observed that what the plaintiff was trying to
             prove was not the division in status but to show
             that the property was divided under the partition
             deed. In any case, the fact that the document is
             inadmissible due to want of being stamped is
             clear. For, in Ram Rattan v. Parmanand, AIR
             1946 PC 51, their Lordships of the Privy Council
16
held that the words `for any purpose' in
S. 35
of
            the Stamp Act should be given their natural
            meaning and effect and would include a collateral
            purpose and that an unstamped partition deed
            cannot be used to corroborate the oral evidence for
            the purpose of determining even the factum of
            partition as distinct from its terms."
It was furthermore held :-
"10. In the result, I agree with the learned
            Munsif-Magistrate that the document is `an
            instrument of partition' under
Sec. 2(15)
of the
            Indian Stamp Act and it is not admissible in
            evidence because it is not stamped. But, I further
            held that if the document becomes duly stamped,
            then it would be admissible to evidence to prove
            the division in status but not the terms of the
            partition."
In
Sanjeeva Reddi v. Johanputra Reddi
, [ AIR 1972 A.P. 373 ], it

has been held :-
"9. While considering the scope of
Section 35
of
            the Indian Stamp Act we cannot bring in the effect
            of non-registration of a document under
Section
            49
of the Indian Registration Act.
Section 17
of
            the Indian Registration Act deals with documents,
            the registration of which is compulsory and
Section 49
is concerned only with the effect of
            such non-registration of the documents which
            require to be registered by
Section 17
or by any
            provision of the
Transfer of Property Act
. The
            effect of non-registration is that such a document
17
shall not affect any immovable property covered
by it or confer any power to adopt and it cannot be
received as evidence of any transaction affecting
such property or conferring such power. But there
is no prohibition under
Section 49
to receive such
a document which requires registration to be used
for a collateral purpose i.e. for an entirely different
and independent matter. There is a total and
absolute bar as to the admission of an unstamped
instrument whatever be the nature of the purpose
or however foreign or independent the purpose
may be for which it is sought to be used, unless
there is compliance with the requirements of the
provisos to
Section 35
. In other words if an
unstamped instrument is admitted for a collateral
purposes. It would amount to receiving such a
document in evidence for a purpose which
Section
35
prohibits. There is nothing in the case of B.
Rangaiah v. B. Rangaswamy, (1970) 2 Andh WR
181 which supports the contention of the
petitioner. That was a case as pointed out by
Kuppuswami, J., where there were two
instruments though contained in one document
one a settlement in favour of the 4th defendant
therein and the other a will. It was therefore held
that part of the instrument which constitutes a will
did not require any stamp and will be admissible
in evidence for proving the bequest contained
therein. It was for that reason that the learned
Judge said that
Sec. 35
of the Stamp Act has no
application to a case where one of the separate
instruments relating to one such matters would not
at all be chargeable under the Act as in the case
before him."
18
In
T. Bhaskar Rao v. T. Gabriel and others
, [ AIR 1981 A.P. 175 ], it

has been held :-
"5.
Section 35
of the Stamp Act mandates that an
            instrument chargeable with duty should be
            stamped so as to make it admissible in evidence.
            Proviso A to
Section 35
of the Stamp Act enables
            a document to be received in evidence on payment
            of stamp duty and penalty if the document is
            chargeable, but not stamped or on payment of
            deficit duty and penalty, if it is insufficiently
            stamped. The bar against the admissibility of an
            instrument which is chargeable with stamp duty
            and is not stamped is of course absolute whatever
            be the nature of the purpose, be it for main or
            collateral purpose, unless the requirements of
            proviso (A) to
Section 35
are complied with. It
            follows that if the requirements of proviso (A) to
Section 35
are satisfied, then the document which
            is chargeable with duty, but not stamped, can be
            received in evidence."
It was further held :-
"7. It is now well settled that there is no
            prohibition under
Section 49
of the Registration
            Act, to receive an unregistered document in
            evidence for collateral purpose. But the document
            so tendered should be duly stamped or should
19
comply with the requirements of
Section 35
of the
             Stamp Act, if not stamped, as a document cannot
             be received in evidence even for collateral purpose
             unless it is duly stamped or duty and penalty are
             paid under
Section 35
of the Stamp Act."
(See also Firm Chuni Lal Tukki Mal v. Firm Mukat Lal Ram Chanda

and others, [ AIR 1965 All.
164 ] and
Chandra Sekhar Misra v. Gobinda

Chandra Das
, [ AIR 1966 Ori. 18 ] ).
23.   For the reasons aforementioned, there is no merit in this appeal which

fails and is dismissed. However, in the facts and circumstances of the case,

there shall be no order as to costs.
.............................J.
                                                      [ S.B. Sinha ]



                                                   .............................J.
                                                      [ Cyriac Joseph ]
New Delhi

December 17, 2008
20