[Cites
20
, Cited by
68
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Haryana & Ors vs Shakuntla Devi on 24 October, 2008
Equivalent citations: AIR 2009 SUPREME COURT 869, 2008 (15) SCC 380, 2008 AIR SCW 8180, 2009 LAB. I. C. 460, 2008 (13) SCALE 621, 2009 (1) SCT 303, 2009 (2) SERVLJ 183 SC, 2009 (2) SERVLJ 467 SC, 2009 (3) LABLN 527, (2009) 2 SERVLJ 183, (2009) 2 SERVLJ 467, (2008) 72 ALLINDCAS 89 (SC), 2008 (72) ALLINDCAS 89, (2008) 119 FACLR 1169, (2009) 2 SERVLR 633
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
Cyriac Joseph
,
S.B. Sinha
REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6271 OF 2008
                 (Arising out of SLP (C) No.1502 of 2006)


State of Haryana & Ors.                               ... Appellants

                                 Versus

Shakuntla Devi                                        ... Respondent

                                 WITH

             CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6272 & 6273 OF 2008
             (Arising out of SLP (C) No.2759/06 and 529/08)




                            JUDGMENT
S.B. Sinha, J.
1.    Leave granted.
2.    Whether the respondents being dependents of the deceased ad hoc

appointees are entitled to grant of `family pension' in terms of the

provisions of Punjab Civil Services Rules (for short, `the Rules') and
2
Family Pension Scheme, 1964 (For short, `the 1964 Scheme) is the question

involved in these appeals, which arise out of judgments and orders dated

4.5.2005 and 24.4.2007 passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at

Chandigarh in CWP Nos.8401 of 2003, 1858 of 2004 and 13112 of 2006.
3.    Respondent Shakuntla Devi is the widow of Late Balwant Singh

Driver; Respondent Rama Devi is the widow of Late Karan Singh; and

Respondent Sohni Devi is the widow of Late Dharam Pal.
4.    All of them were appointed on ad hoc basis for a period of six months

on diverse dates.
Their offers of appointment containing the terms and conditions

thereof, read as under :
(a)    Offer of Appointment of Late Karan Singh
             "The following applicants are appointed as J.B.T.
             on the basis of six months, on pay of Rs.125/- and
             prescribed allowances total grade of Rs.125/250 in
             the Schools mentioned against each. They are
             directed to submit their joining reports to the
             concerned Head Master/Head Mistress, Block
             Education Officer by 11.7.73 (F.N.). If he fails to
             join by this date, other applicants will be
             appointed in their place.
The service is temporary and liable to be
             removed from service at any time without any
             notice.
3
Name of applicant & Registration Place of    Remarks
      address                  No.     Appointment
      Sh. Karan Singh s/o      2879/73 Govt.       Nil
      Deep Chand, Village              Secondary
      Manpur,     The.    Nuh,         School,
      Gurgaon                          Kondal

       Endst. No. even."

(b)    Offer of Appointment o Late Balwant Singh

       "Sub. Ad hoc appointment of Drivers.
On the recommendations of the State Employment
       Exchange, Haryana, you are hereby offered a post
       of temporary Driver in the Pay scale of Rs.1200-
       30-1500-EB-40-2040 plus usual allowances as
       sanctioned by the Haryana Government from time
       to time for a period of six months or till such a
       recommendee of Subordinate Services Selection
       Board, Haryana reports for duty, whichever event
       is earlier.
2.    Your appointment is temporary and your
       services can be terminated without assigning any
       reason and without any notice of discharge."
(c)    Offer of appointment of Late Dharam Pal
       "Subject - Appointment on ad hoc basis
       The Director of Industrial Training & Vocational
       Education Haryana is pleased to appoint you
       to the post of Clerk in the grade of 400-104-
       90/540-15-600-EB-20-660 plus allowance as
       admissible under rule purely on ad hoc basis for a
       period of six months, or till a regular candidate
       duly recommended by the Subordinate Services
       Selection Board, Haryana joins, which ever is
4
earlier, on the terms and conditions mentioned
             below :-
i)    that your services are liable to be terminated at any time
      without notice and without assigning any reasons.
ii)   That conditions of your ad hoc services will be governed
      by the rules and instructions issued by the Haryana
      Government from time to time......."
All the aforementioned offers of appointment, thus, categorically go

to show that the same were ad hoc in nature. Appointments were made for a

period of six months only. The services of the appointees were liable to be

terminated without any notice or without assigning any reason.
5.    Temporary servants may be appointed by the State for satisfying the

needs of a particular contingency. Conditions of service of the temporary

servants may be regulated either by laying down the conditions therefor in

the offer of appointment and/or the rules operating in the field.
If an appointment, it is trite, is made to a temporary post, there can be

no permanent appointment therein. He would be deemed to be in temporary

service only. Even where a temporary post is made permanent, the same by

itself does not render the employment permanent and, thus, temporary

employee continues to remain on temporary service. Until a declaration is

made under the relevant rules, he cannot be deemed to be in a quasi
5
permanent service or absorbed permanently in Government service. [See
Arundhati Ajit Pargaonkar v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
[AIR 1995 SC

962].
6.      The legal position in relation to termination of services of temporary

employees is, thus, to a substantial extent, similar to that of a probationer, as

such an employee has no right to the post except in cases where the same is

arbitrary in nature.
7.      Indisputably, however, despite expiry of a period of six months from

the date of their respective dates of appointment, they were allowed to

continue in service. It is furthermore not disputed that neither their status

had been changed nor their services had been regularized. In fact, so far as

the case of Balwant Singh is concerned, his prayer for regularization of his

services was specifically rejected by the State.
8.      For better appreciation of the factual matrix of the matter, the

respective dates of appointment of the husbands of the respondents, dates of

their death, dates of making demand/legal notice for benefit of family

pension, dates of rejection of such prayers and the dates of filing of the writ

petition may be noticed, which are as under :
6
Name       Date of          Date of        Date of    Date of   Date of
              appointmen         Death          making    Rejection filing the
                   t                           demand/     of such     writ
                                             legal notice  prayer    petition
                                              for Family
                                               Pension
Balwant            5.1.1990    11.12.1994     15.5.2003 6.10.2003 13.12.2003
Singh
Karan              3.7.1973    13.12.1977    01.10.2001    28.5.2002 26.5.2003
Singh
Dharam Pal     24.3.1987       13.7.1989          --      17.11.198   11.5.2006
9
9.     The matter relating to grant of family pension is covered by the

Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II Part I (for short, `the Rules'). In

terms of the Rules, Family Pension Scheme, 1964 was framed.
The Rules which are relevant for this case, are as under :
"2.4. In the following cases no claim to pension is
             admitted:-
(a)      When a Government employee is appointed
                      for a limited time only, or for a specified
                      duty, on the completion of which he is to be
                      discharged.
(b)      When a person is employed temporarily on
                      monthly wages without specified limit of
                      time or duty; but a month's notice of
                      discharge should be given to such a person
                      and his wages must be paid for any period
                      by which such notice falls short of a month.
7
(c)   When a person's whole-time is not retained
      for the public service, but he is merely paid
      for work done, such as Government
      Pleaders and Law Officers not debarred
      from private practice.
(d)   When a public servant holds some other
      pensionable office, he earns no pension in
      respect of an office of the kind mentioned in
      clause (c) or in respect of duties paid for by
      a compensatory allowances.
(e)   When a Government employee serves under
      an agreement which contains no stipulation
      regarding pension, unless the competent
      authority specially authorizes him to count
      such service towards pension.
Note:- The agreements should be so worded as to
preserve the inviolate and indefeasible right of
Government to modify the rules from time to time,
at their discretion, so that no claim may arise to
the benefit of the rules as they stood at the date
when the agreement was executed.
3.12 The service of a Government employee does
not qualify for pension unless it conforms to the
following three conditions :-
First -    The service must be under
                 Government.
      Second - The employment must               be
               substantive and permanent
      Third -    The service must be paid by
                 Government.
These three conditions are fully explained in the
following rules.
8
Note.- The question whether service in a particular
              office or department qualifies for pension or not is
              determined by rules which were in force at the
              time such service was rendered; orders
              subsequently issued declaring the service to be
              non-qualifying, are not applicable with
              retrospective effect.
XXX              XXX                XXX
              3.17. In the case of an officer retiring on or after
              5th January, 1961, if he was holding substantively
              a permanent post on the date of his retirement, his
              temporary or officiating service under the State
              Government, followed without interruption by
              confirmation in the same or another post, shall
              count in full as qualifying service except in respect
              of :-
(i)     Period of temporary or officiating service in
                      non-pensionable establishment.
(ii)    Deleted.
(iii)   Period of service paid from contingencies."
Rule 6.16A(2)(b) of the Rules (as applicable to Haryana) reads as

under :
"Rule 6.16(2)(b) : The family of a pensionable
              employee who dies before completing five years
              of qualifying service shall also be eligible for the
              gratuity equal to six months employments of a
              Government employee at the time of his death
              except in cases in which death occurs in the first
              year of service where the gratuity admissible shall
              be equal to two months emoluments."
9
Rule 12.2 of the C.S.R. Vol.I, Part I is reproduced hereunder :
Rule 12.2 : A service book in the form prescribed
            by the Comptroller and Auditor-General in
Article
            188
of Audit Code (reproduced in Part 11 of
            Appendix 11) must be maintained for every
            employee at the time of First Entry into
            Government service has to get himself medically
            examined. The only exception provided is under
            Rule 3.3.(3) of C.S.R. Vol.No.1, Part I there is no
            requirement of medical certificate for those
            employees who are appointed on six months
            basis."
10.   The 1964 Scheme was formulated to afford further reliefs stipulated

therein to the family of the deceased employees.
The said scheme came into force with effect from 1st July, 1964 and

was applicable to all regular employees on pensionable establishments.
Para 4 and Note 1 of the 1964 Scheme read as under :
"4.    This scheme is administered as below:-
(i)    The family pension is admissible in case of
            death while in service or after retirement on or
            after the 1st July, 1964, if at the time of death, the
            retired officer was in receipt of a compensation,
            invalid, retiring or superannuation pension. The
            Family Pension will not be admissible in case of
10
death after retirement if the retired employee at the
            time of death was in receipt of gratuity only. In
            case of death while in service a Government
            employee should have completed a minimum
            period of one year of continuous service without
            break.
Note 1.-      The term one year continuous service
            used in        para-4(i) above is inclusive of
            permanent/temporary service in a pensionable
            establishment but does not include periods of
            extraordinary leaves, boy service and suspension
            period unless that is regularized by the competent
            authority or before completion of one year
            continuous service provided the deceased
            Government employee concerned immediately
            prior to his recruitment to the service or post was
            examined by the appropriate Medical Authority
            and declared fit by that authority for Government
            service."
11.   The High Court delivered the main judgment in Rama Devi's case.
It noticed the relevant dates, the terms of appointment as also the

relevant rules. It, in its judgment, took into consideration the decision of

this Court in S.K. Mastan Bee. v. The General Manager, South Central

Railway & Anr. [(2003) 1 SCC 184] as also the decisions of the High Court

of Punjab and Haryana including the decision of
Kanta Devi v. State of

Haryana
[2000 (2) SCT 32]. The High Court opined that having regard to

the paragraph 4 of the Scheme (wrongly stated to be Rule 4) as also Note 1

appended thereto, any employee who has completed more than one year's
11
service would become eligible for grant of family pension. In arriving at
the

said decision
, it furthermore took into consideration the fact that for the said

purpose, it was not necessary that the concerned employees should have

been appointed on a permanent or a temporary post.
12.   Mr. Patwalia, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the

appellant, would submit that the High Court committed a serious error in

arriving at the said finding insofar as it failed to take into consideration the

import and purport of the rules vis-`-vis the scheme. It was contended that

in terms of Rule 3.12, for becoming eligible for grant of family pension, it

was necessary that the employment was to be substantive and permanent in

nature as explained in Rule 3.17, which means that the employee should be

holding substantively a permanent post on the date of his retirement,

temporary or officiating service under the State Government, followed

without interruption by confirmation in the same or another post and in

view of the fact that the employees were not appointed on a substantive

basis, the claim for grant of family pension could not have been allowed. It

was furthermore urged that in any event as the concerned employees were

appointed for a limited period as envisaged under clause (a) of Rule 2.4, the

impugned judgments cannot be sustained.
12
13.   Ms. Shikha Roy, Pabbi and Mr. Prem Malhotra, learned counsel

appearing on behalf of Shankuntla Devi and Rama Devi, on the other hand,

would contend that for the purpose of grant of family pension in terms of

the scheme, it was not essential that the appointees should have been

regularized in their respective services.. Drawing our attention to the terms

of appointment, it was contended that as the employees were appointed on

temporary basis and they having been in service admittedly for a period of

more than one year, payment of family pension was legally permissible.
What was only necessary, according to the learned counsel, was one

year's service without break as would appear from paragraph 4 of the

Scheme read with note thereto. It was urged that Rule 3.17 of the Rules

would apply only in a case of retirement and not in a case of death. It was

furthermore contended that as the service records of the concerned

employees were being maintained and they have been asked to file medical

certificate(s) at the time of appointment, they were in effect and substance

appointed against a permanent vacancy on a temporary basis and not on an

ad hoc basis for a period of six months as contended by the appellant


      The Rules, as applicable to the State of Haryana, were framed in

terms of the `Proviso' appended to
Article 309
of the Constitution of India.
13
Volume I, Part I of the said Rules provides for the main rules whereas Part

II thereof contains appendices and forms. Volume II of the Rules relate to

`Pension and Provident Fund'. The said Rules having been framed under

`Proviso' to
Article 309
of the Constitution of India evidently apply to the

Government employees. The Government employees having regard to the

said Constitutional provision enjoy a `status'. Their appointment must be

made in terms of appropriate recruitment rules and upon compliance of the

equality clauses contained in
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution of India.
14.   The provisions contained in Volume II of the Rules apply to those

Government employees to whom the Rules in Volume I thereof apply. Rule

1.2 read as under :
"1.2. Except as otherwise provided in rule 1.4
             Infra or in any other rule or rules, these rules shall
             apply to all Government employees belonging to
             the categories mentioned below, who are under the
             administrative control of the Haryana Government
             and whose pay is debitable to the Consolidated
             Fund of the State of Haryana :-
(1)   Members of State Services, Classes I and II;
(2)   Members of State Services, Class III;
(3)   Members of State Services, Class IV;
(4)   Holders of Special Posts; and
14
(5)     Any other Government employee or lass of Government
        employees to whom the competent authority may, by
        general or special order, make them applicable."
15.     We may, therefore, at the outset, notice the definitions contained in

the Rules.
It is trite that each Government employee should be borne in their

respective cadre, `Cadre' having been defined to mean the strength of a

service or a part of service sanctioned as a separate unit.
`Active service' has been defined in Rule 2.3 to mean:
"2.3. Active Service, for the purpose of pension,
              includes besides time spent on duty in India :-
(i)     Leave of all kinds except extraordinary leave not
        counting towards increment under rule 4.9(b)(ii);
(ii)    Time spent on the voyage to India by a Government
        employee who is recalled to duty before the expiry of
        any recognized leave out of India : provides his return to
        duty is compulsory.
(iii)   The period of absence from India of a Government
        employee deputed or detained out of India on duty."
16.     In terms of Rule 1.3 of Volume II of the Rules, the terms defined in

Chapter II of Volume I of the rules have, unless there is anything repugnant
15
in the subject or context, the same meaning and implications ,when used in

Chapter II Volume I.
17.   Rule 2.1 states that every pension shall be held to have been granted

subject to the conditions contained in Chapter VII of the rules. Clause 2.6

provides for claims of widows or heirs, stating:
"If a Government employee dies before actually
            retiring or being discharged, his heirs have no
            claim to anything in respect of his pension except
            as provided in rules 6.16-A to 6.16-C."
18.   Clause 3.12 occurring in Chapter III provides for `Conditions of

Qualifications' which are; firstly, the service must be under Government;

secondly, the employment must be substantive and permanent; and thirdly,

the service must be paid by the Government.
19.   The second qualification, namely, what would be meant by

substantive and permanent employment has been explained in Rule 3.17

which, as noticed hereinbefore, means that the employee must be holding

substantively a permanent post on the date of his retirement, his temporary

or officiating service under the State Government.
16
20.   Family Pension Scheme was formulated to afford further relief to the

family of the deceased Government employees, i.e. something more than

what was contemplated in the Rules. The same, however, would not mean

that the dependents of those employees who were otherwise not eligible in

terms of the Rules would get the benefit thereunder. In other words, the

eligibility clause must be satisfied so as to enable the dependent of a

Government employee to obtain the said benefit.
The 1964 Scheme is subject to Part II of the Rules. Rules contained

in Part II are subject to Part I, which in turn would be subject to the

constitutional provisions. Thus, before a person can be said to have been

acquired a right to obtain the benefits of 1964 Family Pension Scheme must

satisfy the eligibility as envisaged under the Rules. Family pension can be

granted to the dependent of the deceased Government employee under the

Family Pension Scheme only by way of a further relief and not by

independent of the main Pension Rules. In other words, if a person was not

a Government employee, the question of his dependent becoming entitled to

the benefits of family pension scheme would not arise.
21.   The primary question, therefore, is who would be a Government

employee within the meaning of the said scheme.
17
We will advert to this a little later. The second question would be,

can the scheme be read independent of the Rules.
Answer thereto must be rendered in the negative. We say so because

in terms of the Rules, the following conditions precedent must be fulfilled

before the benefit of family pension can be extended:
1.     The employee must be a Government employee.
2.     He must be employed in a pensionable establishment.
3.     He must have become eligible to derive the benefit thereof.
22.   Chapter II of Volume II of the Rules provides for different provisions

relating to grant of pension.      The distinction between a pensionable

establishment and a provident fund establishment must, therefore, be borne

in mind. Pension although is not a bounty, the entitlement thereto is only

under a statute. Only when the conditions precedent provided for in the

statute are fulfilled, an employee would be entitled thereto.
23.   We would begin our discussions with the status of an employee. A

Government employee enjoying a status indisputably must be recruited in

accordance with Rules. The offers of appointment made in favour of the

employees in no uncertain terms show that they were appointed on an ad

hoc basis. The appointment was not regular, although in relation to the case
18
of Balwant Singh, the names were said to have been called for from the

Employment Exchange. Nothing has been placed on record to show as to

what was the cadre strength in the posts to which they were appointed.
No material has been brought on records to show that the equality

clause contained in
Articles 14
and
16
had been complied with.           Any

recruitment made in violation of the constitutional scheme, as adumbrated

therein as also the recruitment rules framed by the State would render the

same illegal and invalid.
24.    The very fact that a regularization scheme was framed by the State is

a clear pointer to show that the concerned employees were not regularly

employed. They had sought for regularization of their service and at least in

one case, as noticed hereinbefore, for one reason or the other, the said

request was turned down. The validity thereof was not questioned. It

attained finality.
In the case of Rama Devi, a contention was raised in the writ petition

that the offer of appointment in law was not for a period of six months but

for an indefinite period. Such a contention cannot be upheld. If the initial

appointment was for a fixed period and the appointment could be terminated

without any notice and without assigning any reason, such appointment
19
cannot be said to be an appointment on a permanent post or a temporary

sanctioned post.    Unless and until the post itself is a permanent or a

temporary one, the same would not answer the description of a substantive

and permanent employment.        In this case, it had been shown that the

services of Karan Singh was being renewed for a period of six months on

the expiry of the original or extended tenure.
25.   Clause 3.17 of the Rules in no uncertain term explains as to what is

meant by substantive and permanent employment.
The contention of the counsel that it applies only to a person who has

retired is not correct because holding of a substantive permanent post on the

date of retirement is followed by the words his temporary or officiating

service under the State Government.
Confirmation in service, therefore, whether before retirement or

before death must be held to be sine qua non for becoming eligible for grant

of pension.   Only when an employee renders service in a pensionable

service, he would be entitled to pension.
Only by reason of fulfillment of the conditions laid down under the

contract of service and/or the statutory rules governing the same, a person

can become a full fledged Government employee. When the terms and
20
conditions of services are governed by a statute or statutory rules, no doubt

the same would prevail over the contract of employment but then for the

said purpose, the concerned employee must show that the appointment was

regular in nature and on a post which is a cadre post. The Government

employee acquires status only when he becomes entitled thereto by reason

of a statute or by his employer declaring him to be entitled therefor.
26.   When a regularization scheme was framed (assuming that such a

scheme is valid and constitutional) the employee must be regularized. At

least he must acquire a right to be regularized in service.
27.
In
M.P. Vidyut Karamchari Sangh v. M.P. Electricity Board
[(2004) 9

SCC 755], this Court was considering a case where there existed a conflict

between a statutory regulation made under
Section 79(c)
of the Electricity

Supply Act, 1948 and Certified Standing Order or a rule made under the
M.P. Industrial Employment (Standing Order) Act, 1961
, to hold :
"42. It is one thing to say that when there exists a
             conflict between a regulation made under
Section 79(c)
of the Act and a certified standing order or a rule made
             under the 1961 Act, the latter shall prevail; but it is
             another thing to say that in absence of any statutory
             provision governing the age of retirement, the statutory
             regulations framed by the respondent Board shall have
             no application. It is not in dispute that the impugned
             notification dated 26.12.2000 had been issued by the
21
Board in exercise of its power under
Section 79(c)
of
            Electricity Supply Act.
Section 15
of the Act empowers
            the Board to appoint a Secretary and such other officers
            as may be required to enable the Board to carry out its
            functions.
Section 79(c)
empowers the Board to make
            regulations inter alia as regard the duties of officers and
            other employees of the Board, and their salaries,
            allowances and other conditions of service. The Board,
            therefore, was empowered to make regulations which are
            not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act and the
            Rules providing for the duties of officers, their salaries,
            allowances and other conditions of service.
43. The power of the Board, therefore, to lay down the
            conditions of service of its employees either in terms of
            regulation or otherwise would be subject only to any
            valid law to the contrary operating in the field.
            Agreement within the meaning of proviso appended to
            Rule 14A is not a law and, thus, the regulations made by
            the Board shall prevail thereover."
Yet again in
Mahendra L. Jain & Ors. v. Indore Development

Authority & Ors.
[(2005) 1 SCC 639], it was held :
"33. For the purpose of this matter, we would proceed
            on the basis that the 1961 Act is a special statute. vis-`-
            vis the 1973 Act and the rules framed thereunder. But in
            absence of any conflict in the provisions of the said Act,
            the conditions of service including those relating to
            recruitment as provided for in the 1973 Act and the 1987
            Rules would apply. If by reason of the latter, the
            appointment is invalid, the same cannot be validated by
            taking recourse to regularization. For the purpose of
            regularization which would confer on the concerned
            employee a permanent status, there must exist a post.
            However, we may hasten to add that regularization itself
22
does not imply permanency. We have used the term
            keeping in view the provisions of 1963 Rules."
It was also held therein that :
"38. In A Umarani (supra), this Court held that once the
            employees are employed for the purpose of the scheme,
            they do not acquire any vested right to continue after the
            project is over [See paras 41 and 43].
[See also
            Karnataka State Coop. Apex Bank Ltd. Vs. Y.S. Shetty
            and Others, (
2000) 10 SCC 179 and M.D. U.P. Land
            Development Corporation and Another Vs. Amar Singh
            and Others
, (2003) 5 SCC 388]."
In
M.P. Housing Board & Anr. v. Manoj Shrivastava
[(2006) 2 SCC

702] this Court followed the decision in M.P. Electricity Board to hold :
"15. A daily-wager does not hold a post unless he is
            appointed in terms of the Act and the rules framed
            thereunder. He does not derive any legal right in relation
            thereto.
It was furthermore opined :
"19. The appointment made by a person who has no
            authority therefor would be void. A fortiori an
            appointment made in violation of the mandatory
            provisions of the statute or constitutional obligation shall
            also be void. If no appointment could be made in terms
            of the statute, such appointment being not within the
            purview of the provisions of the Act would be void; he
            cannot be brought within the cadre of permanent
23
employees. The definitions of `permanent employee'
             and `temporary employee' as contained in the rules must,
             thus, be construed having regard to the object and
             purport sought to be achieved by the Act."
28.   With the aforementioned legal principles in mind, we may analyse the

provisions of the scheme.
The scheme in terms of paragraph 3 is applicable to all regular

employees in pensionable establishment, temporary or permanent who were

in service. Thus, whether temporary or permanent, the employee must be

regular employee which would mean employee appointed on a regular basis,

i.e., in accordance with Rules. Only because services of ad hoc employees

were continued, the same would not mean that thereby his status has been

changed. It will bear repetition to state that status of an employee can

change either by reason of a contract or by reason of a statute. Nothing has

been shown to us that the concerned employees either under the contracts of

service or under any statute or statutory rules became regular employees of

the State.
If the scheme did not apply to the respondents, the provisions as to

how the scheme would be administered are not of any significance.
24
29.   The contention that the family of an employee would be entitled to

the benefit of family pension in the case of the death of Government

employee, if he had completed a minimum period of one year continuous

service without break cannot be accepted.      As stated hereinbefore, an

employee must be a Government employee at the first instance. He must be

working in a pensionable scheme. He, only in that capacity, should have

completed a minimum period of one year of continuous service without

break which would mean that he must be a temporary or permanent

employee.
30.   It is one thing to say that a person was appointed on a temporary post

on a regular basis but it is another thing to say that an appointment was ad

hoc in nature on a temporary basis.      Whereas in the former case, the

appointment must be carried out in accordance with law, in the later, it may

not be.
From a perusal of the offers of appointment, as noticed hereinbefore,

it is evident that the appointments of the concerned employees were made

for a period of six months or till a regular appointment was made. The very

fact that the posts were to be filled up on regular basis by the competent
25
authority clearly goes to show that the nature of appointment of the said

persons was ad hoc one.
31.   It may be that on the expiry of six months, the services were allowed

to continue but the same would not, in absence of any statutory interdict,

mean that the ad hoc employee ceased to be so and acquired the status of a

permanent or temporary employee.
Reliance placed on Note 1 of paragraph 4 is not apposite. What is

sought to be explained by Note 1 is the exclusion of the periods which shall

not be counted towards one year's continuous service. It by itself does not

create any new right.
In
Punjab State Electricity Board Ltd. v. Zora Singh and Others
[(2005) 6 SCC 776], this Court held:
"22. The administrative circulars as thence existed
            as also the regulations indisputably require supply
            of electrical energy to the agriculturists within a
            period of two months from the date of receipt of
            the amount asked for in terms of the demand
            notice. It may be true that the note appended
            thereto provides that the period specified therein
            shall be subject to availability of requisite material
            but the same does not absolve the appellant from
            performing its statutory duties.
26
23. In A.P. SRTC v. STAT a Full Bench of the
            Andhra Pradesh High Court has noticed thus: (An
            LT p.544, para 31)


            "31[24]. The meaning of `note' as per P.
            Ramanatha Aiyar's Law Lexicon, 1997 Edn. is `a
            brief statement of particulars of some fact', a
            passage or explanation."
24. The note, therefore, was merely explanatory in
            nature and thereby the rigour of the main
            provision was not diluted."
Therefore, reliance on paragraph 4 of the scheme and Note 1

appended thereto by the High Court, in our opinion is misplaced.
32.   Submission of the learned counsel that the names of the concerned

employees were being maintained in the records of the State are not denied

and disputed may now be examined. The same, in our opinion, in the facts

and circumstances of this case, are wholly immaterial. Even assuming for

the sake of argument that they are correct, the same would not confer any

legal right on him thereby, to which he was not otherwise entitled to.
33.   It has categorically been stated that husbands of the respective

respondents were not a regular Government employees till their death and,

thus, the Family Pension Scheme was not applicable in their cases.
27
34.   The question although not directly but to some extent has been

considered in
Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd. & Ors. vs. Surji Devi
[2008 (1) SCALE 570] wherein it was held :
"14. The scheme relating to grant of Family Pension
            was made under a statute. A person would be entitled to
            the benefit thereof subject to the statutory interdicts.
            From a bare perusal of the provisions contained in the
            Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume 2 vis-`-vis the
            Family Pension Scheme, it would be evident that the
            respondent was not entitled to the grant of any family
            pension. Husband of the respondent was a work-charge
            employee. His services had never been regularized. It
            may be unfortunate that he had worked for 11 years. He
            expired before he could get the benefit of the
            regularization scheme but sentiments and sympathy
            alone cannot be a ground for taking a view different from
            what is permissible in law. [See
Maruti Udyod Ltd. v.
            Ram Lal and Others
, (
2005) 2 SCC 638, State of Bihar &
            Ors. v. Amrendra Kumar Mishra
, 2006 (
9) SCALE 549,
            Regional Manager, SBI v. Mahatma Mishra
, 2006 (
11)
            SCALE 258, State of Karnataka v. Ameerbi & Ors.
2006
            (
13) SCALE 319 and State of M.P. and Ors. v. Sanjay
            Kumar Pathak and Ors.
[2007 (12) SCALE 72]
            They statutory provisions, as noticed hereinbefore, debar
            grant of family pension in favour of the family members
            as the deceased employee if was a work-charge
            employee and not a permanent employee or temporary
            employee. The period during which an employee
            worked as a work-charge employee could be taken into
            consideration only when his services are regularized and
            he becomes permanent and not otherwise."
28
The observations made therein apply to the facts of the present case

also.
35.     For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned judgments cannot be

sustained.     The same are set aside accordingly.      Appeals are allowed.

However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order

as to costs.
.....................................J.
                                                     [S.B. Sinha]




                                             .....................................J.
                                                     [Cyriac Joseph]

New Delhi;
October 24, 2008