[Cites
7
, Cited by
43
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Bandaru Mutyalu And Another vs Palli Appalaraju on 1 July, 2013
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2013 AP 120
Author:
M.S.Ramachandra Rao
Bench:
M.S.Ramachandra Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.RAMACHANDRA RAO            

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.5525 of 2011    

01-07-2013 

Bandaru Mutyalu and another....PETITIONERS   

Palli Appalaraju...RESPONDENT   

Counsel for the petitioners: Sri K.Subrahmanyam

Counsel for the respondent: Sri P.Veera Reddy.

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred:


2006 ALD 675  
2 2001(4) CCC 416 (Bom)  
3 AIR 1986 Madras 33  
4 AIR 1988 Orissa 248 
5 AIR 1959 AP 170 = 1958 ALT 792   
6 1988 (1) ALT 353


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.S. RAMACHANDRA RAO            
C.R.P.No.5525 of 2011 

ORDER
This revision petition is filed under
Article 227
of the
Constitution of India challenging the order dt.18-08-2011 in
I.A.No.173 of 2008 in O.S.No.448 of 2004 on the file of the Principal
Junior Civil Judges Court, Srikakulam.
2.        The petitioners are defendants in the suit.  The suit was
filed by the respondent for permanent injunction restraining the
petitioners from interfering with his peaceful possession and
enjoyment of the ABCD marked front yard vacant site.
3.         Pending suit, I.A.No.173 of 2008 was filed by the
respondent under
Order XXVI Rule 9 CPC
praying for appointment 
of an advocate commissioner to take measurements of the property 
mentioned in the registered sale deed dt.28-02-1963 under which he
has purchased the property and to find out whether the ABCD plan
marked vacant site is part and parcel of the property mentioned in the
said registered sale deed or not with the help of a qualified surveyor.
4.        The petitioners opposed the said I.A. They contended
that at their instance I.A.No.968 of 2004 was filed for local
inspection; that it was allowed and an advocate commissioner was
appointed who executed the warrant and filed the report.  It was also
contended that the respondent had not filed any objection at that time
and now he has filed present petition to appoint an advocate
commissioner again to harass the petitioners.
5.        By order dt.18-08-2011, the Court below allowed
I.A.No.173 of 2008 holding that the real question in controversy is
with regard to localization of the ABCD marked site and that it is
necessary to localize it with reference to the sale deed of the
respondent and other title deeds, if any, of both the parties; it also
rejected the objection of the petitioners that the present petition is not
maintainable because of an earlier order appointing advocate
commissioner to note down the physical features.
6.        Aggrieved thereby, the present revision petition is filed.
7.        Heard Sri K.Subrahmanyam, learned counsel for the
petitioners and Sri P.Veera Reddy, learned counsel for the respondent.
8.        The learned counsel for the petitioners contended that
the purpose for which the I.A. was filed by the respondent was to
collect evidence; that the earlier advocate commissioner was
appointed to note down physical features of the property and therefore
another advocate commissioner cannot be appointed to localize the
ABCD site which is subject matter of the dispute between the
parties.  He also relied upon the decision in
Dammalapati
Satyanarayana and Others Vs. Datla Venkata Ramabhadra Raju    
@ D.V.R.Raju and another
and
Sanjay and Others Vs. Sahebrao   
and Others
.
9.        Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent-
plaintiff contended that the order passed by the Court below does not
suffer from any error warranting interference by this Court under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India and that valid reasons have
been given by the Court below for allowing I.A.No.173 of 2008.
10.       I have noted the contentions of the respective parties.
11.       In the present case, the dispute between the parties is
whether the ABCD marked vacant site shown in the plaint plan by
the respondent is part of the property which belongs to the respondent
which had been purchased by his father and uncle under registered
sale deed dt.28-02-1963.  In the written statement, it is contended by
the petitioners that respondents vendor nor respondent have no clear
title, that the vendors under the above sale deed fixed the boundaries
on assumption and there is no basis for the said measurements.  It is
also contended in the written statement that the boundaries and
measurements given by the respondent are false and incorrect and the
plaint plan itself was not valid in the eye of law.
12.       It is not disputed that the respondent and the petitioners
are neighbours and the house of the petitioners is to the north of the
property of the respondent.  When the parties are neighbours and there
is an allegation that the property belonging to the respondent is being
interfered with by petitioner, it is incumbent on the Court to decide
where the disputed portion is located and whether or not it forms part
of the property claimed by the respondent.
13.       It is no doubt true that previously an advocate
commissioner was appointed at the instance of the petitioners but he
only noted down the physical features.  It is not the case of the
petitioners that measurements of the disputed site and its localization
were done by the earlier advocate commissioner.
14.
In
Dammalapati Satyanarayana
(1 supra), this Court
has taken a view that an advocate commissioner can only be 
appointed after the title deeds of both the parties were accepted by the
Court in evidence and that only then, they can be taken as a basis for
identification of the property.  The court held parties therein were
uncertain as to their claim in respect of any definite property and
appointment of an advocate commissioner would amount to an  
exercise to gather evidence. I am unable to agree.
The view expressed
in
Dammalapati Satyanarayana
(1 supra) is against the weight of
the other authorities mentioned below. Also no authority is cited for
laying down the said principle.
15.
In
Ponnusamy Pandaram v. The Salem
Vaiyappamalai Jangamar Sangam
, a dispute had arisen as to  
whether constructions put up by the 3rd defendant in the suit therein
were within his land or whether he had encroached into the land of the
plaintiff. The Court held:
6. The object of local investigation under 0. XXVI, R. 9
of the Code cannot be littled. Its object is to collect
evidence at the instance of the party who relies on the
same and which evidence cannot be taken in court but
could be taken only from its peculiar nature, on the spot.
This evidence will elucidate a point which may otherwise
be left in doubt or ambiguity on record. The
Commissioner, in effect, is a projection of the Court,
appointed for a particular purpose. In this regard, the
implication of  0. XXVI, R. 10 cannot be lost sight of
when it says that the report of the Commissioner and the
evidence taken by him shall be evidence in the suit and
shall form part of the record. We are not very much
concerned with the possessive value of the report of the
Commissioner. But the party has got a right to place
evidence which he could require to substantiate his case
before the Court and, of course, subject to the law of
evidence and the Code, and it is the duty of the Court to
receive such evidence unless there are other justifiable
factors in law to decline to receive such evidence. The
law of evidence enjoins upon the party to prove the fact
which he relies on and in that sense, an obligation is cast
upon the party and if he fails to discharge that obligation,
adverse consequence will follow and he will have to face
the repercussions of the same. This right of the party to
adduce evidence gets adjudicated in the interlocutory
proceedings under 0. XXVI, R. 9. When there is a decline
by the Court to issue the commission asked for to make
local investigation, the purpose behind it being
significant and in stated cases, imperative too, that order
certainly disposes of the right claimed by the party to
place the requisite evidence on his behalf. The question
as to whether a particular order adjudicates some rights
or obligations of the parties in controversy will depend
upon the nature or the right or obligation and it is not
possible to lay down a uniform rule and no decision,
including any of the highest Court in the land, attempted
to do so.
The Court held that a local investigation is the best way to find out the
position and the party, namely, the 3rd defendant therein, intending to
place the evidence before the Court through local investigation by the
Commissioner, cannot be deprived of that right.  It further held that a
misconception had weighed in the mind of the Court below when it
reasoned that there is no dispute about the ownership of S.No.289/1
by the 3rd defendant which was not the point in issue.
16.
In
Mahendranath Parida v. Punanda Parida
, the
Orissa High Court held:
When the controversy is as to identification, location or
measurement of the land or premise or object, local investigation
should be done at an early stage so that the parties are aware of
the report of the Commissioner and go to trial prepared. The party
against whom the report may have gone may choose to adduce   
evidence in rebuttal. Hence, ordinarily in such type of cases local
investigation should not be deferred to a stage after the closure of
evidence. I do not mean thereby that in no circumstances can local
investigation be sought after the evidence is closed. But ordinarily
it should be done before the parties adduced evidence. Hence, I do
not accept the contention of Mr. B. Patnaik that inasmuch as the
party has a right to and can adduce evidence of a survey knowing
person engaged by him privately with reference to identification of
location, it is open to the Court to decline to appoint a
commissioner for local investigation under Order 26, Rule 9. In
this case the controversy can be resolved by locating the wall upon
measurement, that is to say, whether it stood on plot No. 306 or
plot No. 307. So, the local investigation is essential. The learned
Munsif having failed to exercise jurisdiction vested in him, I
interfere and vacate the impugned order. He is directed to appoint
a survey knowing, commissioner.
17.       It has been held that a plaintiff could have a
Commissioner appointed for local investigation even ex-parte on the
date of the suit.  It has been so held by a Division Bench of this Court
in
C.Veeranna Vs. C.Venkatachalam
consisting of P.Chandra  
Reddy, Offg. C.J. (as he then was) and Seshachalapati, J.  It was
argued before the learned judges that Rule 18 of Order 25
contemplates the issue of notices before the appointment of the
Commissioner. This contention was rejected and it was held that Rule
18 contemplated the issue of notices after the appointment of a
Commissioner, but not before such appointment. There was, therefore,
no mandate in the statute that an exparte Commissioner could not be
appointed. The learned judges observed :
Rule 18 contemplates a situation after the
appointment of a Commissioner and not before the commission  
is issued.  There is nothing in Rule 9 of warrant a contention
that a duty is cast on the Court to issue notice before an order
is passed under that rule.  It is open to the Court to issue an
exparte commissioner if it deems that a local investigation is
requisite for the purpose of the suit
18.        This decision of the Division bench was followed in
Savitramma and another v. B. Changa Reddy . In that case, it was
held:
16. The question as to when a Commissioner could be 
appointed should be within the wide discretion of the trial
Court, but it cannot be said that no commissioner could be
appointed before the issues are framed or the evidence is
led
19.        So it has been held that either party to the suit could have
a Commissioner appointed even before the trial.  In view of the above
decisions, I hold that in situations where there is controversy as to
identification, location or measurement of the land, local investigation
should be done at an early stage so that the parties are aware of the
report of the Commissioner and go to trial prepared. The party against
whom the report may have gone may choose to adduce evidence in   
rebuttal.
20.
In
Sanjay
(2 supra), cited by the learned counsel for the
petitioners, the Court held that an advocate commissioner cannot be
appointed to submit a report recording actual possession of the
disputed property.  In the present case, however, the advocate
commissioner is appointed to localize the disputed ABCD portion
with reference to the title deeds of both the parties with the assistance
of a qualified surveyor and not to determine possession of any party.
Therefore
,
the said decision
has no application.
21.        I am of the view that there is no error of jurisdiction
committed by the Court below in the impugned order warranting
interference by this Court under
Article 227
of the Constitution of
India.
22.        The Civil Revision Petition is accordingly dismissed.  No
costs.
___________________________________      
JUSTICE M.S. RAMACHANDRA RAO         
Date : 01-07-2013