[Cites
17
, Cited by
11
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Golla Dharmanna vs Sakari Poshetty And Others on 20 August, 2013
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2013 AP 133, (2013) 5 ANDHLD 490, (2014) 1 CIVILCOURTC 188, (2014) 1 CURCC 13
Author:
M.S. Ramachandra Rao
Bench:
M.S. Ramachandra Rao
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M.S. RAMACHANDRA RAO            

C.R.P.No.3374 of 2013 

dated:20-08-2013 

Golla Dharmanna....Petitioner

Sakari Poshetty and others.....Respondents.

Counsel for the petitioner:Sri K.Ram Subba Rao

Counsel for the respondents:    --

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

?Cases referred
1 AIR 2008 SCW 4829   
2 (2003) 6 SCC 641 
3 2004 (4) ALD 82 
4 (2001) 3 SCC 1 
5 (2003) 8 SCC 752 
6 (2010) 8 SCC 423 

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M.S. RAMACHANDRA RAO            

C.R.P.No.3374 of 2013 


ORDER :
This revision is filed challenging the Docket order dt.07.06.2013 in
OS.No.41 of 2011 on the file of the Senior Civil Judge, Adilabad.
2.      The petitioner is the plaintiff in the suit.  The suit was filed by
petitioner seeking a declaration of his title in respect of an extent of
Acs.7.38 gts. in Sy.No.51/A at Buddikonda Shivar Mandal, Neredigonda District,
Adilabad, for a perpetual injunction restraining the respondents/defendants from
interfering with the alleged peaceful possession and enjoyment of the plaintiff
in respect of the above land; for correction of the entry in Revenue records
relating to the Pattadar column by deleting the name of one Ramulu and
substituting the name of the plaintiff; and costs.
3.      The defendant Nos.1 to 3 filed a written statement opposing the claim of
the plaintiff.  Issues were framed and trial commenced.  The affidavit of PW1 in
lieu of chief-examination was filed; he entered the witness box and confirmed
the said affidavit as true.  He also marked Exs.A.1 to A.33.  He also sought to
mark a document filed as Kharidnama dt.19.07.1974.
4.      The marking of this document was objected to by counsel for respondents on
the ground that the said document is a compulsorily registrable document under
Section 17
of the Indian Registration Act, 1908, as it extinguishes the title of
the executant in respect of property of value more than Rs.100/-.  The
petitioner's counsel requested the Court below to mark the document subject to
objection.
5.      However, by docket order dt.07.06.2013, the Court below held that the said
document required registration and therefore, it cannot be admitted and marked
in evidence.  It followed the decision of the Supreme Court in
K.B. Sana and
Sons Pvt. Ltd. v. Development Consultant Ltd.1
.  It thus sustained the objection
of the respondents and rejected the request of the counsel for petitioner.
6.      Challenging the same this revision is filed.  Heard Sri K. Rama Subba Rao
- counsel for the petitioner at the stage of admission.
7.      The counsel for petitioner contended that the impugned order is contrary
to law; that the document in question is a sale deed dt.19.07.1974 which had
already been impounded by the Trial Court and penalty was collected by it;
therefore, under
Section 35 (a)
of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, it is admissible
in evidence and the Trial Court ought not to have refused to admit/mark the
document; the judgment in
K.B. Sana
(1 supra), relied upon by the counsel for
respondents before the Trial Court is inapplicable as it was a case of non-
registration of a lease deed  and not of case relating to a sale deed or other
conveyance; and that the effect of non-registration of the above document can be
gone into during the course of trial and need not be considered at the stage of
marking the above document in view of
Section 35 (a)
of the Indian Stamp Act,
1899.
The counsel also relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in State,
through Special Cell, New Delhi v. Navjot Sandhu @ Afshan Guru and others2 and
Mulla Alamsabgari Dastigiri, Kurnool v. B. Pullamma
and others3.
8.
Section 17(1) (b)
of the Registration Act,1908 states :
"17.(1)....The followings shall be registered, if the property to which
they relate is situate in a district in which and if they have been executed on
or after the date on which, Act No.XVI of 1864, or the
Indian Registration Act,
1866
(20 of 1866), or the
Indian Registration Act, 1871
(8 of 1871), or the
Indian Registration Act, 1877
(3 of 1877), or this Act came or comes into force,
namely :
(a) Instruments of gift of immovable property ;
(b) other non-testamentary instruments which purport or operate to create,
declare, assign, limit or extinguish whether in present or in future, any right,
title or interest whether vested or contingent, of the value of one hundred
rupees and upwards, to or in immovable property;"
9.      A reading of the document filed by the petitioner dt.19.07.1974 indicates
that it was a sale deed executed on the said date by one Sakari Ramulu in favour
of the petitioner transferring his right, title and interest in the above land
in favour of the petitioner after receiving Rs.3,000/- from the petitioner.
Therefore, since the above document creates in the petitioner, a right, title
and interest in the property and extinguishes the title of the said Ramulu, it
requires to be compulsorily registered in view of
Section 17(1)(b)
of the
Registration Act, 1908.
10.
Section 49
of the Registration Act, 1908, states :
"49.    Effect of non-registration of documents required to be registered:-
No document required by
Section 17
or by any provisions of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
to be registered shall,
(a) affect any immovable property comprised therein, or
(b) confer any power to adopt; or
(c) be received as evidence of any transaction affecting such property or
conferring such power,

unless it has been registered :
Provided that an unregistered document affecting immovable property and
required by this Act, or the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
to be registered may
be received as evidence of a contract in a suit for specific performance under
Chapter II of the Specific Relief Act, 1877, or as evidence of any collateral
transaction not required to be effected by registered instrument."
11.
In
K.B. Sana
(1 supra), the Supreme Court considered the effect of this
provision in the case of a lease and held:
"21.    From the principles
laid down in
the various decisions of this Court and
the High Courts, as referred to hereinabove, it is evident that :-
1.      A document required to be registered is not admissible into evidence under
Section 49
of the Registration Act.
2.      Such unregistered document can however be used as an evidence of  
collateral purpose as provided in the Proviso to
Section 49
of the Registration
Act.
3.      A collateral transaction must be independent of, or divisible from, the
transaction to effect which the law required registration.
4.      A collateral transaction must be a transaction not itself required to be
effected by a registered document, that is, a transaction creating, etc, any
right, title or interest in immoveable property of the value of one hundred
rupees and upwards.
5.      If a document is inadmissible in evidence for want of registration, none
of its terms can be admitted in evidence and that to use a document for the
purpose of proving an important clause would not be using it as a collateral
purpose."
Therefore, I am of the view that the Trial Court has rightly held that the
document in question is not admissible in evidence as it is a document which is
compulsorily registrable under the
Registration Act, 1908
.
12.     I am also unable to accept the contention of the counsel for petitioner
that because the requisite stamp duty and penalty has been paid by petitioner,
in view of
Section 35 (a)
of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, the said document
should have been admitted in evidence by the Trial Court.  This contention of
the petitioner is misconceived because an objection as to the admissibility of a
document on the ground that it is not stamped or not properly stamped in
accordance with provisions of the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899
is different
fundamentally from an objection to the admissibility of a document on the ground
that it is unregistered.  Merely because stamp duty and penalty have been paid
and the provisions of the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899
have been complied with, it
would not automatically make the said document admissible in evidence, if as per
law, the said document is also required to be registered.
13.     The counsel for petitioner also contended that it was open for the Trial
Court to tentatively mark the document and decide about its admissibility at the
stage before delivering judgment.  He relied upon the judgment in
Mulla
Alamsabgari Dastigiri
(3 supra), wherein the judgment in Navjot Sandhu (2 supra)
was followed.
In Navjot Sandhu (2 supra) the Supreme Court was considering the
question of admissibility of copies of transcripts of intercepted conversations
in a case arising under the provisions of
Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002
.
In
the said case, the Supreme Court referred to the observations made by it in
Bipin Shantilal Panchal v. State of Gujarat
and another4 in the context of
NDPS
Act, 1985
and in relation to right of an under trial prisoner for a speedy trial
to the following effect :
"14.    When so recast, the practice which can be a better substitute is this:
Whenever an objection is raised during evidence-taking stage regarding the
admissibility of any material or item of oral evidence the trial court can make
a note of such objection and mark the objected document tentatively as an
exhibit in the case (or record the objected part of the oral evidence) subject
to such objections to be decided at the last stage in the final judgment. If the
court finds at the final stage that the objection so raised is sustainable the
Judge or Magistrate can keep such evidence excluded from consideration. In our
view there is no illegality in adopting such a course. (However, we make it
clear that if the objection relates to deficiency of stamp duty of a document
the court has to decide the objection before proceeding further. For all other
objections the procedure suggested above can be followed.)
15. The above procedure, if followed, will have two advantages. First is that
the time in the trial court, during evidence-taking stage, would not be wasted
on account of raising such objections and the court can continue to examine the
witnesses. The witnesses need not wait for long hours, if not days. Second is
that the superior court, when the same objection is recanvassed and reconsidered
in appeal or revision against the final judgment of the trial court, can
determine the correctness of the view taken by the trial court regarding that
objection, without bothering to remit the case to the trial court again for
fresh disposal. We may also point out that this measure would not cause any
prejudice to the parties to the litigation and would not add to their misery or
expenses.
16.     We, therefore, make the above as a procedure to be followed by the trial
courts whenever an objection is raised regarding the admissibility of any
material or any item of oral evidence."
14.     However, the Supreme Court in
R.V.E. Venkatachala Gounder v. Arulmigu  
Viswesaraswami & V.P. Temple5
observed:
"20. ... The objections as to admissibility of documents in evidence may
be classified into two classes: (i) an objection that the document which is
sought to be proved is itself inadmissible in evidence; and (ii) where the
objection does not dispute the admissibility of the document in evidence but is
directed towards the mode of proof alleging the same to be irregular or
insufficient. In the first case, merely because a document has been marked as
'an exhibit', an objection as to its admissibility is not excluded and is
available to be raised even at a later stage or even in appeal or revision. In
the latter case, the objection should be taken when the evidence is tendered and
once the document has been admitted in evidence and marked as an exhibit, the 
objection that it should not have been admitted in evidence or that the mode
adopted for proving the document is irregular cannot be allowed to be raised at
any stage subsequent to the marking of the document as an exhibit. The latter
proposition is a rule of fair play. The crucial test is whether an objection, if
taken at the appropriate point of time, would have enabled the party tendering
the evidence to cure the defect and resort to such mode of proof as would be
regular. The omission to object becomes fatal because by his failure the party
entitled to object allows the party tendering the evidence to act on an
assumption that the opposite party is not serious about the mode of proof. On
the other hand, a prompt objection does not prejudice the party tendering the
evidence, for two reasons: firstly, it enables the court to apply its mind and
pronounce its decision on the question of admissibility then and there; and
secondly, in the event of finding of the court on the mode of proof sought to be
adopted going against the party tendering the evidence, the opportunity of
seeking indulgence of the court for permitting a regular mode or method of proof
and thereby removing the objection raised by the opposite party, is available to
the party leading the evidence. Such practice and procedure is fair to both the
parties. Out of the two types of objections, referred to hereinabove, in the
latter case, failure to raise a prompt and timely objection amounts to waiver of
the necessity for insisting on formal proof of a document, the document itself
which is sought to be proved being admissible in evidence. In the first case,
acquiescence would be no bar to raising the objection in a superior court."
15.
In
Shalimar Chemical Works Limited v. Surendra Oil and Dal Mills
(Refineries
) and others6 held that the issue of admissibility of documents
cannot be left open and hanging by the Trial Court and should be decided as and
when such objection is raised.  It observed :
"15. On a careful consideration of the whole matter, we feel that serious
mistakes were committed in the case at all stages. The trial court should not
have "marked" as exhibits the xerox copies of the certificates of registration
of trade mark in face of the objection raised by the defendants. It should have
declined to take them on record as evidence and left the plaintiff to support
its case by whatever means it proposed rather than leaving the issue of
admissibility of those copies open and hanging, by marking them as exhibits
subject to objection of proof and admissibility. The appellant, therefore, had a
legitimate grievance in appeal about the way the trial proceeded."
16.     It quoted with approval the judgment of the Supreme Court in
R.V.E.Venkatachal Gounder
(5 supra).
17.     In the present case, I am of the opinion that the Trial Court had rightly
refused to admit the document dt.19.07.1974 filed by plaintiff in evidence on
the ground that it was not registered under the provisions of the
Indian
Registration Act, 1908
.  In fact, the counsel for petitioner has also not
disputed that the said document is a compulsorily registrable document under the
provisions of the
Indian Registration Act, 1908
.  This being so, there was no
necessity for the Trial Court to keep the issue hanging till the final stage of
the suit and decide the issue of admissibility of the document just prior to
delivery of judgment by it.  In view of the judgments of the Supreme Court in
Shalimar Chemical Works
(6 supra) and
R.V.E. Venkatachala Gounder
(5 supra), the  
decision of the Trial Court cannot be found fault with.
I am of the view that
the judgment in Navjot Sandhu                 (2 supra) following the
observations in
Bipin Shantilal Panchal
(4 supra), the Supreme
Court only indicated that there is no illegality if objection as to
admissibility is postponed to a final stage but the Court did hold, as a matter
of law, that in all cases where objections as to admissibility are raised, they
should be decided at the final stage and cannot be decided as and when they are
raised.
18.     Therefore, I find no error of jurisdiction in the order passed by the
court below.  Accordingly, the Civil Revision Petition is dismissed at the stage
of admission.
__________________________________      
JUSTICE M.S. RAMACHANDRA RAO         
Date: 20-08-2013