[Cites
7
, Cited by
6
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Nakka Parthasarathy vs Nakka Krsihnaveni And Another on 2 April, 2013
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2013 AP 132, (2013) 5 ANDHLD 711
Author:
R. Kantha Rao
Bench:
R. Kantha Rao
THE HON'BLE MR JUSTICE R. KANTHA RAO         

A.S. No.760 of 1999 

Dated:02.04.2013 

Nakka Parthasarathy 
                                                                ...Appellant
Vs.

Nakka Krsihnaveni and another 
                                                                ...Respondents 


Counsel for the Appellant: Mr. B.Adinarayana Rao

Counsel for the Respondents:  Sri P.Veera Reddy and Sri K.V.Subramanya Narsu   

<GIST:  

>HEAD NOTE:    

?Cases referred
1 AIR 1973 ORISSA 18 (v 60 c 7) 
2 AIR 1954 TRAVENCORE-COCHIN 348       
3 AIR 2004 SC 1257  
4 (1987)3 SCC 294 

JUDGMENT
This appeal arises out of the decree and judgment dated 31.12.1998 passed
by the Additional Senior Civil Judge, Srikakulam in O.S.No.79 of 1995.
2.      The plaintiff filed the suit for declaration of her title to the plaint
"A, B, C & D" site, for recovery of possession of the said property by evicting
the defendants therefrom.  The learned trial Court decreed the suit with costs,
feeling aggrieved the first defendant filed the instant appeal.
3.      I have heard Sri B.Adinarayana Rao, learned senior counsel appearing for
the appellant and Sri P.Veera Reddy, learned counsel appearing for the
respondents.
4.      For the convenience sake, I would like to refer the parties as 'the
plaintiff and the defendants'.
5.      The plaintiff's case as set out in the plaint is like this:
The plaintiff is the wife of late Narayana Rao and defendants 1 and 2 are
her sons.  The plaint schedule property is the self-acquired property of late
Narayana Rao, who became sick while in service and he executed a registered 
settlement deed in respect of the plaint schedule property on 17.09.1979 in
favour of his sons, defendants 1 and 2 thinking that the defendants would look-
after him properly in his old-age.  Subsequently, as the defendants failed to
discharge their obligations towards their father as per the terms of the
settlement deed, late Narayana Rao revoked the settlement deed on 21.08.1981 by 
means of a registered revocation deed.  According to the plaintiff, even-after
the settlement deed was executed, the property covered by the settlement deed
was not put in possession of the donees i.e. the defendants and the settlement
deed was only a nominal document.  After the revocation deed, late Narayana Rao
was paying the property tax of the house in the schedule property by getting his
name recorded in the municipal records.   Subsequent to the revocation of
settlement deed, late Narayana Rao executed a registered Will on 09.12.1981 in
favour of the plaintiff bequeathing the plaint schedule property to her and
after the death of late Narayana Rao, the plaintiff became absolute owner of the
property and she was in possession and enjoyment of the property, but the
defendants in March, 1990 encroached the "A, B, C, & D" plaint schedule site
belonging to the plaintiff by dispossessing her.  Under these circumstances, the
plaintiff states that she filed the suit for declaration of title and recovery
of possession.
7.      The second defendant remained ex-parte.
8.      The first defendant resisted the suit by filing written statement
contending as under:
The plaint schedule property is not the self-acquired property of his
father late Narayana Rao, but, it is the ancestral property of late Narayana Rao
and defendants 1 and 2.  There was a partition between late Narayana Rao and his
brother Ramanaiah, while the defendants 1 and 2 were minors and the said
partition was effected by a registered partition deed, dated 22.02.1961.  In the
said partition, the plaint schedule property fell to the share of Narayana Rao
and the defendants who are his minor sons and ever-since it became the joint
family property of late Narayana Rao and defendants 1 and 2.  As late Narayana
Rao was only having 1/3rd share in the property which includes the plaint
schedule property executed a registered settlement deed on 17.09.1970 in favour
of the defendants 1 and 2 gifting away his 1/3rd share in the plaint schedule
property and other joint family properties the defendants 1 and 2 became
absolute owner of the same.  Since then, the defendants 1 and 2 were enjoying
the properties jointly till they partitioned their properties in the year 1972
by executing a memory list on 12.07.1976.  In the said partition, according to
the first defendant, "A, B, C, & D" site fell to his share and since then, he
has been in continuous possession and enjoyment of the plaint "A, B, C, & D"
site.
09.     It is contended by the defendant No.1 in the written statement that late
Narayana Rao has no right to revoke the gift deed dated 17.09.1970 and the
registered revocation deed executed by him is null and void.  It is his version
that the plaintiff requested the defendants in the year 1980 to give the plaint
schedule property on lease for which the defendants agreed and executed a lease
deed on 06.02.1980 in favour of the plaintiff wherein the plaintiff agreed to
pay monthly rent of Rs.200/-.  The lease deed was for a period of 15 years.  As
the plaintiff fell in arrears of rent, the defendants filed O.S.No.294 of 1982
on the file of the Principal District Munsif, Srikakulam.  In the said suit, the
plaintiff filed written statement admitting the fact that the plaint schedule
property was leased out to her by the defendants.  Therefore, the first
defendant asserted before the trial Court that by virtue of the said written
statement, the plaintiff admitted that the defendant No.1 was in possession of
the plaint schedule property on the date of lease in his own right and that the
plaintiff is estopped from denying his title to the plaint schedule property.
Subsequently, according to the first defendant, the plaintiff entered into
compromise in the said suit and vacated the premises in the year 1989.  It is
the version of the first defendant that on account of some differences between
him and the second defendant, the second defendant taking advantage of the fact
that the plaintiff was staying with him got the present suit filed by her with
all false averments.   It is further contended by the first defendant that as
the revocation of gift made by late Narayana Rao is null and void, he had no
right to execute the registered will dated 09.12.1981 in respect of the plaint
schedule property and the said Will does not confer any right on the plaintiff
in respect of the plaint schedule property.  It was also contended by him that
he has two major sons, who are necessary parties and the suit is not
maintainable without adding them as parties to the suit.
10.     On the basis of the afore-stated pleadings, the trial Court framed the
following issues:
1) Whether the suit schedule properties are the self-acquired properties of late
Narayana Rao?
2) Whether the settlement deed dated 17.09.1970 is nominal and not acted upon?
3) Whether the revocation of document dated 17.09.1970 by way of registered
document dated 21.08.1981 is valid and whether it is within time?
4) Whether the Will dated 09.12.1981 is valid?
5) Whether the suit is maintainable without adding the two sons of the first
defendant as parties?
6) Whether the plaintiff is the owner of the plaint schedule property and she is
entitled to recover possession of the same?
11.     Before the trial Court, the plaintiff examined PWs.1 and 2 and marked
Exs.A1 to A.56, whereas the first defendant examined himself as DW1 and marked  
Exs.B.1 to B.6.  Upon considering the oral and documentary evidence adduced on 
either side, the learned trial Court answered all the issues in favour of the
plaintiff and against the first defendant and decreed the suit with costs.
12.     The points which fell for consideration before the learned trial Court
would also arise for consideration in this appeal on reassessment of evidence on
record and on the basis of the settled legal position governing the factual
scenario.
13.     One of the issues, which was determined by the trial Court is whether the
suit schedule property is the self acquired property of late Narayana Rao or
whether it is his ancestral property.  This question however, does not assume
greater importance, because the adjudication of the rights of the parties to the
lis is entirely dependant upon two crucial issues viz. whether Ex.A.2-settlement
deed dated 25.06.1970 executed by late Narayanarao in favour of his sons,
defendants 1 and 2 is accepted by them and whether the said gift made by him can
be revoked.
14.     As regards the question whether the suit schedule property is the self
acquired property or whether it is the ancestral property of late Narayanarao,
the learned trial Court laid much emphasis on the admission made by him, who was 
examined as DW1 to the effect that his father mentioned in Ex.A.3, registered
revocation deed dated 20.08.1981 that the said property is his self acquired
property.  The learned trial Court seems to have given undue importance to the
said deed, the reason being Ex.A.3, revocation deed was executed by late
Narayana Rao with a view to will away the suit schedule property to his wife.
Therefore, he must have wantonly made such averment in Ex.A.3.  The averment 
being self-serving statement of late Narayanarao, it cannot be considered to be
crucial in determining the nature of the property.  In Ex.A.2, registered
settlement deed executed by late Narayanarao in favour of the defendants, he
clearly mentioned that suit schedule property is the joint family property and
under the said registered settlement deed he was gifting away his 1/3rd share in
favour of his two sons i.e. defendants 1
and 2.  In the light of the clear recitals made in Ex.A.2, the mention made
about the suit schedule property in Ex.A.3 as his self acquired property is of
no consequence as he executed the revocation deed obviously with a view to will
away the properties covered by Ex.A.2 settlement deed in favour of his wife.
Admittedly, late Narayanarao and his brother Ramaiah partitioned the ancestral
joint family properties which include the suit schedule property under a
registered partition deed dated 22.02.1961, marked as Ex.B.1.  In the said
partition deed late Narayana Rao represented his two minor sons i.e. the
defendants 1 and 2 and since then all the three were enjoying the properties
jointly.  Thereafter, late Narayanarao executed Ex.A.2, registered settlement
deed on 25.06.1970 in favour of the defendants wherein he gifted away his 1/3rd
share in the suit schedule property and some other properties in favour of the
defendants.  Subsequently, the defendants partitioned their properties in the
year 1976 and prepared a memory list on 12.07.1976, marked as Ex.B.2.  As per 
the said partition, the plaint "A, B,C and D" property fell to the share of the
first defendant.  It is the version of the first defendant that since the date
of partition between him and the second defendant, he has been in continuous
possession and enjoyment of the plaint "A, B, C and D" property.
15.     All these facts which are crucial to determine the nature of the property
held by late Narayana Rao whether ancestral or self acquired have been totally
ignored by the learned trial Court.  It is true that there is an admission in
the cross examination of the first defendant that his father and his father's
brother Ramaiah purchased the suit property in the year 1961.  However, since
the purchase made by them, of the said property and other properties obviously
being with the aid of joint family nucleus of the family properties which fell
for partition between late Narayanarao and Ramaiah it has to be necessarily
construed as ancestral properties.
16.     Next question requires consideration is whether the settlement deed dated
25.06.1960, Ex.A2 was accepted by the defendants 1 and 2 and whether it was 
acted upon.  Much reliance has been placed by the plaintiff on Exs.A.7 to A.56,
tax receipts.  The contention of the plaintiff is that even though late Narayana
Rao executed Ex.A.2, settlement deed in favour of the defendants 1 and 2, the
settlement deed was in his possession and he continued to pay the taxes and
therefore, the gift was never accepted by the donees and it was never acted
upon.
17.
In support of his contention that the gift in the instant case was not
accepted, Sri Veera Reddy, learned counsel appearing for the plaintiff relied on
BANCHA BHOL AND OTHERS v SANA BEWA AND OTHERS1
wherein the learned Singe Judge               
of Orissa High Court held that while mere possession by or on behalf of the
donee may amount to acceptance of gift, where the subject matter of the gift was
enjoyed jointly by the donor and the donee, mere possession cannot be treated as
evidence of acceptance.
He further relied on for the same preposition on
LAKSHMI AMMA KALLIYANI AMMA v KUNJI PILLAI AMMA KUTTY AMMA AND OTHERS2
wherein                   
the learned Single Judge held that the question whether the gift was accepted by
the donee will have to be decided, upon the evidence and circumstances of the
case.  One such circumstance is the fact that the original gift deed was
produced in Court by him.  Further the fact that the donee paid the tax for the
property from that year is sufficient to show that he accepted the gift.
18.     The learned counsel submits that since in this case the gift was with the
donor himself and he was paying the property tax till his death, it has to be
construed that the gift was not accepted by the donees.
19.     To appreciate the contention urged by the learned counsel, the entire
evidence forthcoming in this case has to be examined in the factual background,
apart from knowing the correct legal position on the subject.
20.     The contention of the first defendant is that under Ex.A.2 settlement deed
his father relinquished his 1/3rd share in his favour and in favour of the
second defendant, the suit schedule property fell to his share and since then he
has been in exclusive possession and enjoyment of the suit schedule property in
his own right.  It is also his version that in the year1980 his mother, the
plaintiff herein requested him and the second defendant to give the suit
schedule property on lease.  The defendants accordingly, leased out the said
property to her on a monthly rent of Rs.200/-.  The lease period was for a
period of 15 years, subsequently, she fell in arrears of rent and thereafter,
the defendants filed O.S.No.294 of 1982 on the file of Principal District
Munsif, Srikakulam.  In the said suit, the plaintiff filed written statement
specifically admitting therein that she took the suit schedule property on lease
from the defendants.  Therefore, according to the first defendant, from the
admission made by the plaintiff in O.S.No.294 of 1982 alone, the learned trial
Court ought to have given a finding in his favour to the effect that the suit
schedule property was his absolute property.  It is also his version that the
suit ended in compromise and in view of the compromise, the plaintiff vacated
the suit schedule property in the year 1989.  According to the first defendant,
the plaintiff has been living with the second defendant and on his instigation,
she filed the present suit on false grounds.  Therefore, evidently, the learned
trial Court overlooked overwhelming evidence forthcoming in favour of the
defendant No.1 which was to the effect that the defendant No.1 had been enjoying
the suit schedule property in his own right as absolute owner.
21.     Further, when once the gift is voluntarily made without there being any
coercion or undue influence the acceptance of the gift by the donee would be
complete even though the deed of gift is not delivered to the donee and the gift
property continues to be in the donor's possession.
22.     Sri B.Adinarayana Rao, learned senior counsel appearing for the first
defendant, in support of his contention that the title and ownership in the
property can be gifted without possession and right of enjoyment relied on
K.BALAKRISHNAN v K.KAMALAMMA AND OTHERS3
wherein the Supreme Court held that it            
was open to the donor to transfer by gift title and ownership in the property
and at the same time reserve its possession and enjoyment to herself during her
lifetime.  The Supreme Court clarified that there is no prohibition in law that
ownership in property cannot be gifted without its possession and right of
enjoyment.  The view was taken by the Supreme Court having recourse to the
language in
Section 6
of the Transfer of Property Act which lays down that the
property of any kind may be transferred except those mentioned in a to I in
Section 6
of the Transfer of Property Act.
23.     As to the core issue whether the gift Ex.A.2 made by late Narayana Rao in
favourof his two sons, defendants 1 and 2 can be revoked, we have to look into
Section 126
of the Transfer of Property act.  It reads as follows:
Section 126
in
The Transfer Of Property Act
, 1882
126. When gift may be suspended or revoked.- The donor and done may agree that  
on the happening of any specified event which does not depend on the will of the
donor a gift shall be suspended or revoked; but a gift which the parties agree
shall be revocable wholly or in part, at the mere will of the donor, is void
wholly or in part, as the case may be. A gift may also be revoked in any of the
cases (save want or failure of consideration) in which, if it were a contract,
it might be rescinded. Save as aforesaid, a gift cannot be revoked. Nothing
contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the rights of transferees
for consideration without notice. Illustrations
(a) A gives a field to B, reserving to himself, with B' s assent, the right to
take back the field in case B and his descendants die before A. B dies without
descendants in A' s lifetime. A may take back the field.
(b) A gives a lakh of rupees to B, reserving to himself, with B' s assent, the
right to take back at pleasure Rs. 10, 000 out of the lakh. The gift holds good
as to Rs. 90, 000, but is void as to Rs. 10, 000 which continue to belong to A.
24.     From the language of the section, it is clear that there must be
"condition subsequent" attached to the gift on the happening of which the gift
shall determine.  But, such condition shall not depend on the mere will and
pleasure of the donor.  If it is to be understood that if such 'condition
subsequent' is governed by the mere wish of the donor, he can revoke the gift at
any time and in the strict sense there would be no gift at all.  If the legal
position concerning revocation of gift is examined in the context of the present
case, even if late Narayanarao made gift in favour of the defendants 1 and 2
thinking that the defendants 1 and 2, who are his sons would look after him
properly and later they did not take care his welfare, he could not have revoked
the gift on the ground that he was neglected by his sons.  In the absence of any
specific recital that on the happening in a specific event the gift would be
cancelled, it is irrevocable so long as the gift was not made under coercion or
undue influence.  In the instant case, from the evidence there is no doubt as to
the fact that late Narayana Rao voluntarily made gift in favour of his sons,
defendants 1 and 2.   There is no condition of any kind in Ex.A.2, gift deed got
recited by late Narayana Rao, according to which he and the donees, the
defendants 1 and 2 agreed that on the happening of any specific event, the gift
would be suspended or revoked.
25.     The other contention raised by Sri Veera Reddy, learned counsel appearing
for the plaintiff is that late Narayana Rao had no right to gift away his share
in the coparcenary property and therefore, the gift deed is invalid.  I must
say, there is no amount of force in the contention.  In Ex.A.2, gift late
Narayana Rao is the donee and his sons defendants 1 and 2 are the donors.
In
THAMMA VENKATA SUBBAMMA(DEAD) BY LR v THAMMA RATTAMMA AND OTHERS4
the Supreme                        
Court held that the gift by a coparcener in the interest of other coparcener
with the consent of the remaining coparceners is volid.  According to the
Supreme Court where joint Hindu family comprising the donor, his brother and the
brother's sons and daughters, a gift of the donor's undivided coparcenery
interest to his brother reserving his life interest, held, amounts to
renunciation or relinquishment of his share in favour of other coparceners which
is valid.
26.     In the instant case, late Narayana Rao gifted his 1/3rd share in the
ancestral property in favour of the other coparceners viz. his sons defendants 1
and 2, therefore, it is not open to the plaintiff to contend that late Narayana
Rao has no such right.
27.     To sum up the suit schedule property is the joint family property of the
defendants 1 and 2 and his father late Narayana Rao, Late Narayana Rao gifted
his 1/3rd share to defendants 1 and 2 under Ex.A.2 gift deed voluntarily. There
is no condition subsequent in the said gift indicating that the donors and the
donees agreed that on the happening of any specific event the gift shall be
suspended or revoked.  Since the gift was made voluntarily without there being
any coercion or undue influence, it could not have been revoked by late Narayana
Rao on the ground that the defendants 1 and 2 were not looking after him
property.  Therefore, the revocation deed Ex.A.3 as contended by first defendant
is null and void.  The mere fact that the gift deed was in position of late
Narayana Rao is no ground to contend that the gift was not accepted by the
donees.  The evidence on record more particularly the admission of the plaintiff
that she was tenant under the defendants 1 and 2 in the earlier civil
proceedings clearly shows that the defendant 1 and 2 took possession of the
property and leased out the same to the plaintiff.  The findings recorded by the
learned trial Court both legal and factual are not only erroneous but also
misconceived.  The decree and judgment passed by the Additional Senior Civil
Judge, Srikakulam in O.S.No.79 of 1995 on 31.12.1998 is therefore, liable to be
set aside in the present appeal.  The suit filed by the plaintiff deserves for
dismissal.
28.     The appeal therefore, succeeds. The decree and judgment passed by the 
Additional Senior Civil Judge, Srikakulam in O.S.No.79 of 1995 on 31.12.1998 is
set aside and the suit filed by the plaintiff is dismissed.
29.     In the result, the appeal is allowed without any order as to costs.
________________   
R.KANTHA RAO,J    
Date:02.04.2013