[Cites
24
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Keisham Meghachandra Singh vs The Honble Speaker Manipur Legislative ... on 21 January, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 54, (2020) 2 SCALE 329
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Aniruddha Bose
,
R.F. Nariman
REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 547 OF 2020
                           (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO.18659 OF 2019)


                         KEISHAM MEGHACHANDRA SINGH             …APPELLANT

                                               VERSUS


                         THE HON’BLE SPEAKER MANIPUR
                         LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY & ORS.            ...RESPONDENTS

                                                 WITH

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 548 OF 2020
                             (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO.18763 OF 2019)

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 549 OF 2020
                             (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO.23703 OF 2019)

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 550 OF 2020
                             (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO.24146 OF 2019)


                                            JUDGMENT
R.F. Nariman, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. The Appeals in the present case raise important questions

                relating to the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution of India
Signature Not Verified
(hereinafter referred to as “Tenth Schedule”). The election for the
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
Date: 2020.01.21
17:06:55 IST
Reason:
11th Manipur Legislative Assembly was conducted in March, 2017.
1
The said Assembly election produced an inconclusive result as none

of the political parties were able to secure a majority i.e. 31 seats in

a Legislative Assembly of 60 seats in order to form the Government.

The Indian National Congress (hereinafter referred to as “Congress

Party”) emerged as the single largest party with 28 seats, the

Bharatiya Janata Party (hereinafter referred to as “BJP”) coming

second with 21 seats. The Respondent No.3, in the Civil Appeal

arising out of SLP(C) No. 18659 of 2019, contested as a candidate

nominated and set up by the Congress Party and was duly elected

as such. On 12.03.2017, immediately after the declaration of the

results, Respondent No.3 along with various BJP members met the

Governor of the State of Manipur in order to stake a claim for

forming a BJP-led Government. On 15.03.2017, the Governor

invited the group lead by the BJP to form the Government in the

State. On the same day, the Chief Minister-Designate sent a letter to

the Governor for administering oath as Ministers to eight elected

MLAs including Respondent No.3. On the same day, Respondent

No.3 was sworn in as a Minister in the BJP-led government and

continues as such till date.
3. As many as thirteen applications for the disqualification of

Respondent No.3 were filed before the Speaker of the Manipur

Legislative Assembly between April and July, 2017 stating that
2
Respondent No.3 was disqualified under paragraph 2(1)(a) of the

Tenth Schedule. The present petition that was filed by the Appellant,

in the Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(C) No. 18659 of 2019, was

dated 31.07.2017.
4. Since no action was taken on any of these petitions by the

Speaker, one T.N. Haokip filed a writ petition being Writ Petition (C)

No.353 of 2017 before the High Court of Manipur at Imphal, in which

the Petitioner prayed that the High Court direct the Speaker to

decide his disqualification petition within a reasonable time. On

08.09.2017, the High Court stated that as the issue of whether a

High Court can direct a Speaker to decide a disqualification petition

within a certain timeframe is pending before a Bench of 5 Hon’ble

Judges of the Supreme Court the High Court cannot pass any order

in the matter, and the matter was ordered to be listed so as to await

the outcome of the cases pending before the Supreme Court.
5. After waiting till January, 2018, on 29.01.2018, the Appellant, in

the Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(C) No. 18659 of 2019, filed Writ

Petition (C) No.17 of 2018 before the same High Court asking for

the following reliefs:
“i.     Issue Rule Nisi;

   ii.    To issue an appropriate Writ, Order or Direction as
to this Hon’ble Court may deem fit and proper;
3
iii.   To declare that Respondent No. 3 has incurred
  disqualification for being a member of the Manipur
  Legislative Assembly under para 2(1) (a) of the Xth
  Schedule to the Constitution of India in terms of law laid
  down by the Constitution Bench of the Hon’ble Supreme
  Court in Rajendra Singh Rana and Ors. -Vrs- Swami
  Prasad Maurya and Ors. reported in (2007) 4 SCC 270.

  iv.    If the Hon’ble High Court is pleased to consider that
  the prayer made in para no. (ii) and (iii) above deserve
  merit for a favourable order, a writ in the nature of Quo
  Warranto be issued ousting Respondent No. 3 from the
  post/office of Minister.”
6. The writ petition was taken up and heard by the High Court and

disposed of by the impugned judgment dated 23.07.2019. The

questions that the High Court posed before itself, which required

consideration at its hands, were stated as follows:
“(a)    Whether, in the facts and circumstances of the
  present case, the respondent No. 1 can be said to have
  failed to discharge its duties as enjoined in the Tenth
  Schedule to the Constitution of India to decide the
  petitions?
(b)    If the above issue (a) is answered in the affirmative,
  whether the respondent No. 3 has prima facie incurred
  disqualification?
(c)      If the respondent No. 3 is found to have incurred a
  prima facie disqualification, whether this Court can issue an
  order disqualifying the respondent No. 3 from being a
  member of the Manipur Legislative Assembly or
  alternatively, whether this Court has the power and
  jurisdiction to issue a writ of quo warranto declaring the
  holding of the post of a Minister by the respondent No. 3 as
  illegal, as it being without any authority of law?”
4
7. In answer to a preliminary objection taken by the Speaker that

judicial review is shut out in cases like the present, the High Court

held that the Speaker is a quasi-judicial authority who is required to

take a decision within a reasonable time, such reasonable time

obviously being a time which is much less than five years since the

life of the House was five years. The High Court held that the

remedy provided in the Tenth Schedule is in essence an alternative

remedy to be exhausted before approaching the High Court, and

this being the case, if such alternative remedy is found to be

ineffective due to deliberate inaction or indecision on the part of the

Speaker, the Court cannot be denied jurisdiction to issue an

appropriate writ to the Speaker. Consequently, the preliminary

objection was dismissed and the Court went on to hear the writ

petition on merits. On the facts as stated above, following Ravi S.

Naik v. State of Maharashtra 1994 Supp. (2) SCC 641, the Court

found that the voluntary giving up of the membership of a political

party may be express or implied by conduct, and that the

unequivocal conduct of the Respondent No.3 becoming a Minister in

a BJP-led Government after fighting the election by being a member

of the Congress Party would make it clear that the disqualification

contained in paragraph 2(1)(a) of the Tenth Schedule is clearly

attracted. The High Court then cited several judgments on the writ of
5
quo warranto but ultimately came to a finding that since the very

same issue was pending before a Constitution Bench of the

Supreme Court, it would not be appropriate for the High Court to

pass any order for the time being, which would include orders

relating to the inaction or indecision on the part of the Speaker, as

well as the issuing of a writ of quo warranto. The High Court thus

ultimately declined to grant any relief in the writ petition, as a result

of which the Appellant is before us.
8. Shri Kapil Sibal, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of

the Appellant, in the Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(C) No. 18659 of

2017, has argued that the Speaker in the present case has

deliberately refused to decide the disqualification petitions before

him. This is evident from the fact that no decision is forthcoming till

date on petitions that were filed way back in April, 2017. Further, it is

clear that notice in the present disqualification petition was issued by

the Speaker only on 12.09.2018, long after the petition had been

filed, and as correctly stated by the High Court, it cannot be

expected that the Speaker will decide these petitions at all till the life

of the Assembly of 5 years expires. In these circumstances, he has

exhorted us to issue a writ of quo warranto against Respondent

No.3 stating that he has usurped a constitutional office, and to

declare that he cannot do so. For this purpose, he has cited several
6
judgments of this Court. He has also argued that though it is correct

to state that whether a writ petition can at all be filed against inaction

by a Speaker is pending before a Bench of 5 Judges of this Court,

yet, it is clear from a reading of paragraph 110 of
Kihoto Hollohan

v. Zachillhu & Ors.
(1992) Supp. (2) SCC 651, that all that was

interdicted by that judgment was the grant of interlocutory stays

which would prevent a Speaker from making a decision and not the

other way around. For this purpose, he read to us Black’s Law

Dictionary on the meaning of a quia timet action, and argued that the

judgment read as a whole would make it clear that if the

constitutional objective of checking defections is to be achieved,

judicial review in aid of such goal can obviously not be said to be

interdicted.
He also strongly relied upon the observations of this

Court in
Rajendra Singh Rana v. Swami Prasad Maurya
(2007) 4

SCC 270 and exhorted us to uphold the reasoning contained in the

impugned judgment and then issue a writ of quo warranto against

Respondent No.3.
9. Mrs. Madhavi Divan, learned Addl. Solicitor General appearing

for the Hon’ble Speaker of the Manipur Legislative Assembly, has

argued that the reliefs prayed for in the writ petition filed by the

Appellant, in the Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(C) No. 18659 of
7
2017, are diametrically opposed to the relief asked for in Writ

Petition (C) No.353 of 2017, as a result of which, there being

mutually destructive pleas and prayers made in the two writ

petitions, no relief ought to be granted in the present case.
In any

case, the prayers asked for in the present case are directly

interdicted by the judgment of a Constitution Bench of this Court in
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) inasmuch as a writ of quo warranto cannot

possibly be granted without first deciding whether Respondent No.3

stands disqualified, which is within the exclusive jurisdiction of the

Speaker.
She argued that the High Court was wholly incorrect in

holding that the Speaker’s decision under the Tenth Schedule would

be in the nature of an alternative remedy and held that this would be

directly contrary to several judgments of this Court, in particular,

Nabam Rebia and Bamang Felix v. Deputy Speaker, Arunachal

Pradesh Legislative Assembly (2016) 8 SCC 1, which states that

the Speaker has exclusive jurisdiction to decide disqualification

questions that are referred to him. In any case, she argued that a

Three Judge Bench cannot decide the present case and has to

await the judgment of a Five Judge Bench which has been made on

a specific reference made by a Two Judge Bench of this Court.
She

also distinguished the sheet anchor of Shri Sibal’s case i.e. the

judgment in
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra) by stating that the facts
8
there were completely different and that ultimately judicial review

took place only because there was a final decision of the Speaker
in

that case
. Further, because of the fact that the life of the Assembly

was about to end, this Court using its powers under
Article 142
of

the Constitution of India in an extra-ordinary situation decided the

petition for disqualification itself. Both these features are absent in

the present case. Thus, according to her, while the ultimate

conclusion in the High Court judgment is correct, all the findings in

favor of the Appellant fly in the face of judgments of this Court.
10. Having heard learned counsel for both the parties, it is important

to first set out the reference order of this Court dated 08.11.2016 in
S.A. Sampath Kumar v. Kale Yadaiah and Ors. SLP(C) No.
33677/2015.
A Division Bench of this Court after referring to
Speaker, Haryana Vidhan Sabha v. Kuldeep Bishnoi & Ors.
(
2015) 12 SCC 381, and Speaker, Orissa Legislative Assembly v.

Utkal Keshari Parida
(2013) 11 SCC 794, then held:
“We have considered the aforesaid submissions of both the
  learned Attorney General and the learned counsel
  appearing on behalf of the petitioner. We feel that a
  substantial question as to the interpretation of the
  Constitution arises on the facts of the present case. It is
  true that this Court in
Kihoto Hollohan
's case laid down that
  a quia timet action would not be permissible and Shri
  Jayant Bhushan, learned senior counsel appearing on
  behalf of some of the respondents has pointed out to us
9
that in P. Ramanatha Aiyar's Advanced Law Lexicon a quia
  timet action is the right to be protected against anticipated
  future injury that cannot be prevented by the present
  action. Nevertheless, we are of the view that it needs to be
  authoritatively decided by a Bench of five learned Judges
  of this Court, as to whether the High Court, exercising
  power under
Article 226
of the Constitution, can direct a
  Speaker of a legislative assembly (acting in quasi judicial
  capacity under the Tenth Schedule) to decide a
  disqualification petition within a certain time, and whether
  such a direction would not fall foul of the quia timet action
  doctrine mentioned in paragraph 110 of Kihoto Hollohan's
  case.
We cannot be mindful of the fact that just as a
  decision of a Speaker can be corrected by judicial review
  by the High Court exercising jurisdiction under
Article 226
,
  so prima facie should indecision by a Speaker be
  correctable by judicial review so as not to frustrate the
  laudable object and purpose of the Tenth Schedule, which
  has been referred to in both the majority and minority
  judgments in
Kihoto Hollohan
's case. The facts of the
  present case demonstrate that disqualification petitions had
  been referred to the Hon'ble Speaker of the Telangana
  State Legislative Assembly on 23rd August, 2014, and
  despite the hopes and aspirations expressed by the
  impugned judgment, the Speaker has chosen not to render
  any decision on the said petitions till date. We, therefore,
  place the papers before the Hon'ble Chief Justice of India
  to constitute an appropriate Bench to decide this question
  as early as possible.”
11. We would have acceded to Mrs. Madhavi Divan’s plea that in

view of this order of a Division Bench of this Court, the hearing of

this case ought to be deferred until the pronouncement by a Five

Judge Bench of this Court on the issues raised in the present

petition. However, we find that this very issue was addressed by a

Five Judge Bench judgment in
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra) and

has already been answered.
Unfortunately, the decision contained in
10
the aforesaid judgment was not brought to the notice of the Division

Bench which referred the matter to Five Hon’ble Judges of this

Court, though
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra) was sought to be

distinguished in
Kuldeep Bishnoi
(supra), which was brought to the

notice of the Division Bench of this Court.
12. Backtracking a little, it is important to first set out what was

decided in the majority decision in
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra). A

Bench of 3 learned Judges of this Court set out, in paragraph 24 of

the judgment, several questions that required decision
in that case
.

We are directly concerned with questions (E) and (F), which are so

set out and which read as follows:
“24. On the contentions raised and urged at the hearing the
  questions that fall for consideration are the following:
xxx xxx xxx

  (E) That the deeming provision in Paragraph 6(2) of the
  Tenth Schedule attracts the immunity under
Articles 122
and
212.
The Speaker and the Chairman in relation to the
  exercise of the powers under the Tenth Schedule shall not
  be subjected to the jurisdiction of any Court.
The Tenth Schedule seeks to and does create a new and
  non-justiciable area of rights, obligations and remedies to
  be resolved in the exclusive manner envisaged by the
  Constitution and is not amenable to, but constitutionally
  immune from, curial adjudicative processes.

  (F) That even if Paragraph 7 erecting a bar on the
  jurisdiction of Courts is held inoperative, the Courts'
11
jurisdiction is, in any event, barred as Paragraph 6(1) which
  imparts a constitutional ‘finality’ to the decision of the
  Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, and that
  such concept of ‘finality’ bars examination of the matter by
  the Courts.”
13. The majority judgment noticed that before the
Constitution (Fifty

Second Amendment) Act, 1985
inserting the Tenth Schedule into the

Constitution of India, two abortive attempts were made in view of the

recommendations of the Committee on Defections to enact an anti-

defection law. The first was the Constitution (Thirty Second

Amendment) Bill, 1973, which lapsed on account of dissolution of

the House; and the second was the Constitution (Forty Eighth

Amendment) Bill, 1979 which also so lapsed. The Court in

paragraphs 9 and 13 referred to the object of the
Constitution (Fifty

Second Amendment) Act, 1985
as follows:
“9. This brings to the fore the object underlying the
  provisions in the Tenth Schedule. The object is to curb the
  evil of political defections motivated by lure of office or
  other similar considerations which endanger the
  foundations of our democracy. The remedy proposed is to
  disqualify the Member of either House of Parliament or of
  the State Legislature who is found to have defected from
  continuing as a Member of the House. The grounds of
  disqualification are specified in Paragraph 2 of the Tenth
  Schedule.
xxx xxx xxx
13. These provisions in the Tenth Schedule give
  recognition to the role of political parties in the political
  process. A political party goes before the electorate with a
  particular programme and it sets up candidates at the
12
election on the basis of such programme. A person who
  gets elected as a candidate set up by a political party is so
  elected on the basis of the programme of that political
  party. The provisions of Paragraph 2(1)(a) proceed on the
  premise that political propriety and morality demand that if
  such a person, after the election, changes his affiliation and
  leaves the political party which had set him up as a
  candidate at the election, then he should give up his
  membership of the legislature and go back before the
  electorate. The same yardstick is applied to a person who
  is elected as an Independent candidate and wishes to join
  a political party after the election.”
14. The Court dealt with contentions (E) and (F) together as follows:
“95. In the present case, the power to decide disputed
  disqualification under Paragraph 6(1) is pre-eminently of a
  judicial complexion.
96. The fiction in Paragraph 6(2), indeed, places it in the
  first clause of
Article 122
or 212, as the case may be. The
  words “proceedings in Parliament” or “proceedings in the
  legislature of a State” in Paragraph 6(2) have their
  corresponding expression in
Articles 122(1)
and
212(1)
respectively. This attracts an immunity from mere
  irregularities of procedures.
97. That apart, even after 1986 when the Tenth Schedule
  was introduced, the Constitution did not evince any
  intention to invoke
Article 122
or 212 in the conduct of
  resolution of disputes as to the disqualification of members
  under
Articles 191(1)
and
102(1).
The very deeming
  provision implies that the proceedings of disqualification
  are, in fact, not before the House; but only before the
  Speaker as a specially designated authority. The decision
  under Paragraph 6(1) is not the decision of the House, nor
  is it subject to the approval by the House. The decision
  operates independently of the House. A deeming provision
  cannot by its creation transcend its own power. There is,
  therefore, no immunity under
Articles 122
and
212
from
13
judicial scrutiny of the decision of the Speaker or Chairman
exercising power under Paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth
Schedule.
xxx xxx xxx
100. By these well known and accepted tests of what
constitute a Tribunal, the Speaker or the Chairman, acting
under Paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule is a Tribunal.

xxx xxx xxx
109. In the light of the decisions
referred to above
and the
nature of function that is exercised by the
Speaker/Chairman under Paragraph 6, the scope of judicial
review under
Articles 136
, and
226
and
227
of the
Constitution in respect of an order passed by the
Speaker/Chairman under Paragraph 6 would be confined
to jurisdictional errors only viz., infirmities based on
violation of constitutional mandate, mala fides, non-
compliance with rules of natural justice and perversity.
110. In view of the limited scope of judicial review that is
available on account of the finality clause in Paragraph 6
and also having regard to the constitutional intendment and
the status of the repository of the adjudicatory power i.e.
Speaker/Chairman, judicial review cannot be available at a
stage prior to the making of a decision by the
Speaker/Chairman and a quia timet action would not be
permissible. Nor would interference be permissible at an
interlocutory stage of the proceedings. Exception will,
however, have to be made in respect of cases where
disqualification or suspension is imposed during the
pendency of the proceedings and such disqualification or
suspension is likely to have grave, immediate and
irreversible repercussions and consequence.
14
111. In the result, we hold on contentions (E) and (F):
That the Tenth Schedule does not, in providing for an
additional grant (sic ground) for disqualification and for
adjudication of disputed disqualifications, seek to create a
non-justiciable constitutional area. The power to resolve
such disputes vested in the Speaker or Chairman is a
judicial power.
That Paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule, to the extent it
seeks to impart finality to the decision of the
speakers/Chairmen is valid. But the concept of statutory
finality embodied in Paragraph 6(1) does not detract from
or abrogate judicial review under
Articles 136
, 226
and
227
of the Constitution insofar as infirmities based on violations
of constitutional mandates, mala fides, non-compliance
with Rules of Natural Justice and perversity, are concerned.
That the deeming provision in Paragraph 6(2) of the Tenth
Schedule attracts an immunity analogous to that in
Articles
122(1)
and
212(1)
of the Constitution as understood and
explained in
Keshav Singh
case [(1965) 1 SCR 413 : AIR
1965 SC 745] to protect the validity of proceedings from
mere irregularities of procedure. The deeming provision,
having regard to the words ‘be deemed to be proceedings
in Parliament’ or ‘proceedings in the legislature of a State’
confines the scope of the fiction accordingly.
The Speakers/Chairmen while exercising powers and
discharging functions under the Tenth Schedule act as
Tribunal adjudicating rights and obligations under the Tenth
Schedule and their decisions in that capacity are amenable
to judicial review.
However, having regard to the Constitutional Schedule in
the Tenth Schedule, judicial review should not cover any
stage prior to the making of a decision by the
Speakers/Chairmen. Having regard to the constitutional
15
intendment and the status of the repository of the
  adjudicatory power, no quia timet actions are permissible,
  the only exception for any interlocutory interference being
  cases of interlocutory disqualifications or suspensions
  which may have grave, immediate and irreversible
  repercussions and consequence.”
15.
In
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra), this Court dealt with an order

made by the Speaker of the Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly

dated 06.09.2003. On the facts
in that case
, the 14 th Legislative

Assembly Election for the State of U.P. was held in February, 2002

and since none of the political parties secured the requisite majority,

a coalition government was formed headed by Ms. Mayawati, leader

of the Bahujan Samaj Party (hereinafter referred to as “BSP”). On

25.08.2003,    the   Cabinet   took   a   unanimous      decision   for

recommending dissolution of the Assembly, after which, on

27.08.2003, 13 members of the Legislative Assembly elected to the

Assembly on tickets of the BSP met the Governor and requested

him to invite the leader of the Samajwadi Party, namely, Shri

Mulayam Singh Yadav, to form the Government. On 29.08.2003, the

Governor invited the leader of the Samajwadi Party to form the

Government and gave him a time of two weeks to prove his majority

in the Assembly. On 04.09.2003, Mr. S.P. Maurya, leader of the BSP

filed a petition before the Speaker under the Tenth Schedule praying

that the 13 BSP MLAs who had proclaimed support to Shri Mulayam
16
Singh Yadav before the Governor on 27.08.2003 had incurred the

disqualification mentioned in paragraph 2(1)(a) of the Tenth

Schedule. Meanwhile, a group of 37 MLAs, said to be on behalf of

40 MLAs elected on BSP tickets, requested the Speaker to

recognize the split in the BSP on the basis that one-third of the

members of BSP consisting of 109 legislators had separated from

the BSP. On 06.09.2003, therefore, the Speaker did three things –

first, he accepted that 37 out of 109 comprises one-third of the

members of the BSP, which amounted to a split, this group being

known as the Loktantrik Bahujan Dal. This Dal had merged with the

Samajwadi Party which merger was then accepted by the very same

order dated 06.09.2003. Third, the Speaker did not decide the

application seeking disqualification of the 13 MLAs who were part of

the 37 MLAs who appeared before the Speaker, and adjourned the

disqualification petition. Meanwhile, since a writ petition was filed in

the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad before the Lucknow Bench

against this order, the Speaker passed another order on 14.11.2003,

stating that the order adjourning the petition for disqualification

would continue until after the High Court decided the writ petition.
However, on 07.09.2005, even before the writ petition was disposed

of by a Full Bench of the High Court, the Speaker passed an order

rejecting the petition filed for disqualifying of 13 MLAs of the BSP.
17
16. On these facts, the Court noted in paragraph 17 of the judgment

that the order dated 06.09.2003 is the subject matter of challenge in

the writ petition filed before the High Court. In paragraph 30 of the

judgment, this Court made it clear that the order of the Speaker

dated 07.09.2005 would have no independent legs to stand on,

stating as follows:
“30. ...This last order is clearly inconsistent with the
  Speaker's earlier order dated 14-11-2003 and still leaves
  open the question whether the petition seeking
  disqualification should not have been decided first or at
  least simultaneously with the application claiming
  recognition of a split. If the order recognising the split goes,
  obviously this last order also cannot survive. It has perforce
  to go.”
  [Emphasis Supplied]
17. After referring to this Court’s decision in
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) and Ravi S. Naik (supra) in para 22 of the judgment, the

Court held:
“22. …Suffice it to say that the decision of the Speaker
  rendered on 6-9-2003 was not immune from challenge
  before the High Court under
Articles 226
and
227
of the
  Constitution of India.”
18. The Court then went on to hold:
“25. …On the scheme of
Articles 102
and
191
and the
  Tenth Schedule, the determination of the question of split
  or merger cannot be divorced from the motion before the
  Speaker seeking a disqualification of a member or
  members concerned. It is therefore not possible to accede
  to the argument that under the Tenth Schedule to the
  Constitution, the Speaker has an independent power to
  decide that there has been a split or merger of a political
18
party as contemplated by paras 3 and 4 of the Tenth
  Schedule to the Constitution. The power to recognise a
  separate group in Parliament or Assembly may rest with
  the Speaker on the basis of the Rules of Business of the
  House. But that is different from saying that the power is
  available to him under the Tenth Schedule to the
  Constitution independent of a claim being determined by
  him that a member or a number of members had incurred
  disqualification by defection. To that extent, the decision of
  the Speaker in the case on hand cannot be considered to
  be an order in terms of the Tenth Schedule to the
  Constitution. The Speaker has failed to decide the
  question, he was called upon to decide, by postponing a
  decision thereon. There is therefore some merit in the
  contention of the learned counsel for BSP that the order of
  the Speaker may not enjoy the full immunity in terms of
  para 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution and that
  even if it did, the power of judicial review recognised by the
  Court in Kihoto Hollohan [1992 Supp (2) SCC 651 : AIR
  1993 SC 412 : (1992) 1 SCR 686] is sufficient to warrant
  interference with the order in question.”
                                             [Emphasis Supplied]
19. The Court also hastened to add:
“29. In the case on hand, the Speaker had a petition moved
  before him for disqualification of 13 members of BSP.
  When that application was pending before him, certain
  members of BSP had made a claim before him that there
  has been a split in BSP. The Speaker, in the scheme of the
  Tenth Schedule and the rules framed in that behalf, had to
  decide the application for disqualification made and while
  deciding the same, had to decide whether in view of para 3
  of the Tenth Schedule, the claim of disqualification had to
  be rejected. We have no doubt that the Speaker had totally
  misdirected himself in purporting to answer the claim of the
  37 MLAs that there has been a split in the party even while
  leaving open the question of disqualification raised before
19
him by way of an application that was already pending
  before him. This failure on the part of the Speaker to
  decide the application seeking a disqualification cannot be
  said to be merely in the realm of procedure. It goes against
  the     very    constitutional       scheme      of   adjudication
  contemplated by the Tenth Schedule read in the context of
Articles 102
and
191
of the Constitution.
It also goes
  against the rules framed in that behalf and the procedure
  that he was expected to follow. It is therefore not possible
  to accept the argument on behalf of the 37 MLAs that the
  failure of the Speaker to decide the petition for
  disqualification at least simultaneously with the petition for
  recognition of a split filed by them, is a mere procedural
  irregularity. We have no hesitation in finding that the same
  is a jurisdictional illegality, an illegality that goes to the root
  of the so-called decision by the Speaker on the question of
  split put forward before him. Even within the parameters of
  judicial review laid down in Kihoto Hollohan [1992 Supp (2)
  SCC 651 : AIR 1993 SC 412 : (1992) 1 SCR 686] and
  in
Jagjit Singh v. State of Haryana
[(2006) 11 SCC 1 :
(2006) 13 Scale 335] it has to be found that the decision of
  the Speaker impugned is liable to be set aside in exercise
  of the power of judicial review.”
                                                         [Emphasis

  Supplied]
20. The Court then adverted to the scope of judicial review being

limited as decided in
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) as follows:
“39. On the side of the 37 MLAs, the scope of judicial
  review being limited was repeatedly stressed to contend
  that the majority of the High Court had exceeded its
  jurisdiction. Dealing with the ambit of judicial review of an
  order of the Speaker under the Tenth Schedule, it was held
  in Kihoto Hollohan [1992 Supp (2) SCC 651 : AIR 1993 SC
  412 : (1992) 1 SCR 686] : (SCC p. 706, paras 95-97)
20
“95. In the present case, the power to decide disputed
    disqualification under para 6(1) is pre-eminently of a
    judicial complexion.
96. The fiction in para 6(2), indeed, places it in the first
  clause of
Article 122
or 212, as the case may be. The
  words ‘proceedings in Parliament’ or ‘proceedings in the
  legislature of a State’ in para 6(2) have their
  corresponding expression in
Articles 122(1)
and
212(1)
respectively. This attracts an immunity from mere
  irregularities of procedures.
97. That apart, even after 1986 when the Tenth Schedule
  was introduced, the Constitution did not evince any
  intention to invoke
Article 122
or 212 in the conduct of
  resolution of disputes as to the disqualification of
  Members under
Articles 191(1)
and
102(1).
The very
  deeming provision implies that the proceedings of
  disqualification are, in fact, not before the House; but only
  before the Speaker as a specially designated authority.
The decision under para 6(1) is not the decision of the
  House, nor is it subject to the approval by the House. The
  decision operates independently of the House. A deeming
  provision cannot by its creation transcend its own power.
  There is, therefore, no immunity under
Articles 122
and
212
from judicial scrutiny of the decision of the Speaker or
  Chairman exercising power under para 6(1) of the Tenth
  Schedule.”
After referring to the relevant aspects, it was held: (SCC p.
707, para 100)
    “100. By these well known and accepted tests of what
    constitute a Tribunal, the Speaker or the Chairman,
    acting under para 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule is a
    Tribunal.”
It was concluded: (SCC p. 710, para 109)
    “109.
In the light of the decisions
referred to above
and
    the nature of function that is exercised by the
    Speaker/Chairman under para 6, the scope of judicial
    review under
Articles 136
and
226
and
227
of the
    Constitution in respect of an order passed by the
21
Speaker/Chairman under para 6 would be confined to
   jurisdictional errors only viz. infirmities based on violation
   of constitutional mandate, mala fides, non-compliance
   with rules of natural justice and perversity.”
The position was reiterated by the Constitution Bench
in Raja Ram Pal v. Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha [(2007) 3
SCC 184 : JT (2007) 2 SC 1] . We are of the view that
contours of interference have been well drawn by Kihoto
Hollohan [1992 Supp (2) SCC 651 : AIR 1993 SC 412 :
(1992) 1 SCR 686] and what is involved here is only its
application.
40. Coming to the case on hand, it is clear that the
Speaker, in the original order, left the question of
disqualification undecided. Thereby he has failed to
exercise the jurisdiction conferred on him by para 6 of the
Tenth Schedule. Such a failure to exercise jurisdiction
cannot be held to be covered by the shield of para 6 of the
Schedule. He has also proceeded to accept the case of a
split based merely on a claim in that behalf. He has entered
no finding whether a split in the original political party was
prima facie proved or not. This action of his, is apparently
based on his understanding of the ratio of the decision
in Ravi S. Naik case [1994 Supp (2) SCC 641 : (1994) 1
SCR 754] . He has misunderstood the ratio therein.
Now
that we have approved the reasoning and the approach
in
Jagjit Singh
case [(2006) 11 SCC 1 : (2006) 13 Scale
335] and the ratio therein is clear, it has to be held that the
Speaker has committed an error that goes to the root of the
matter or an error that is so fundamental, that even under a
limited judicial review the order of the Speaker has to be
interfered with. We have, therefore, no hesitation in
agreeing with the majority of the High Court in quashing the
decisions of the Speaker.
41. In view of our conclusions as above, nothing turns on
the arguments urged on what were described as significant
facts and on the alleged belatedness of the amendment to
22
the writ petition. It is indisputable that in the order that was
  originally subjected to challenge in the writ petition, the
  Speaker specifically refrained from deciding the petition
  seeking disqualification of the 13 MLAs. On our reasoning
  as above, clearly, there was an error which attracted the
  jurisdiction of the High Court in exercise of its power of
  judicial review.”
                                             [Emphasis Supplied]
21. Finding that the life of the Assembly was about to end and that if

the 13 members were found to be disqualified their continuance in

the Assembly even for a day would be illegal and unconstitutional,

and that their holding of office as Ministers would also be illegal, the

Court stated that it was bound to protect the Constitution and its

values, and the principles of democracy, which is a basic feature of

the Constitution, and then went on to declare that the writ petition

will stand allowed with a declaration that the 13 members who met

the Governor on 27.08.2003 stand disqualified from the U.P

Legislative Assembly w.e.f. 27.08.2003 on the ground contained in

paragraph 2(1)(a) of the Tenth Schedule.
22. It is clear from a reading of the judgment in
Rajendra Singh

Rana
(supra) and, in particular, the underlined portions of

paragraphs 40 and 41 that the very question referred by the Two

Judge Bench in
S.A. Sampath Kumar
(supra) has clearly been

answered stating that a failure to exercise jurisdiction vested in a
23
Speaker cannot be covered by the shield contained in paragraph 6

of the Tenth Schedule, and that when a Speaker refrains from

deciding a petition within a reasonable time, there was clearly an

error which attracted jurisdiction of the High Court in exercise of the

power of judicial review.
23.
Indeed, the same result would ensue on a proper reading of
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra). Paragraphs 110 and 111 of
the said

judgment
when read together would make it clear that what the

finality clause in paragraph 6 of the Tenth Schedule protects is the

exclusive jurisdiction that vests in the Speaker to decide

disqualification petitions so that nothing should come in the way of

deciding such petitions. The exception that is made is also of

importance in that interlocutory interference with decisions of the

Speaker       can   only   be   qua   interlocutory   disqualifications or

suspensions, which may have grave, immediate, and irreversible

repercussions. Indeed, the Court made it clear that judicial review is

not available at a stage prior to the making of a decision by the

Speaker either by a way of quia timet action or by other interlocutory

orders.
24. A quia timet action has been described in Black’s Law Dictionary

as follows:
24
“Quia Timet. Because he fears or apprehends. In equity
  practice, the technical name of a bill filed by a party who
  seeks the aid of a court of equity, because he fears some
  future probable injury to his rights or interests, and relief
  granted must depend on circumstances.”
25. The leading judgment referred to insofar as quia timet actions

are concerned is the judgment in Fletcher v. Bealey (1884) 28 Ch.

D. 688. In this case, a quia timet action was asked for to interdict the

tort of nuisance in order to prevent noxious liquid from flowing into a

river. Pearson, J. after referring to earlier judgments on quia timet

action then held at page 698:
“I do not think, therefore, that I shall be very far wrong if I
  lay it down that there are at least two necessary ingredients
  for a quia timet action. There must, if no actual damage is
  proved, be proof of imminent danger, and there must also
  be proof that the apprehended damage will, if it comes, be
  very substantial. I should almost say it must be proved that
  it will be irreparable, because, if the danger is not proved to
  be so imminent that no one can doubt that, if the remedy is
  delayed, the damage will be suffered, I think it must be
  shewn that, if the damage does occur at any time, it will
  come in such a way and under such circumstances that it
  will be impossible for the Plaintiff to protect himself against
  it if relief is denied to him in a quia timet action.”
26. This statement of the law has subsequently been followed by

recent English decisions reported as London Borough of Islington

v. Margaret Elliott [2012] EWCA Civ. 56 (See paragraph 30) and

Vastint Leeds BV v. Persons Unknown [2018] EWHC 2456 (Ch.)

in which a quia timet injunction was described in the following terms:
25
“26. Gee describes a quia timet injunction in the following
  terms [Gee, Commercial Injunctions, 6th ed (2016) at [2-
  035]]:
“A quia timet (since he fears) injunction is an injunction
  granted where no actionable wrong has been committed, to
  prevent the occurrence of an actionable wrong, or to
  prevent repetition of an actionable wrong.””
The decision in Fletcher (supra) was referred to in approval in

paragraph 30 of the aforesaid judgment.
27. The decision in Fletcher (supra) was also referred to by this

Court in
Kuldip Singh v. Subhash Chander Jain
(2000) 4 SCC

50 as follows:
“6. A quia timet action is a bill in equity. It is an action
  preventive in nature and a specie of precautionary justice
  intended to prevent apprehended wrong or anticipated
  mischief and not to undo a wrong or mischief when it has
  already been done. In such an action the court, if
  convinced, may interfere by appointment of receiver or by
  directing security to be furnished or by issuing an injunction
  or any other remedial process. In Fletcher v. Bealey [(1885)
  28 Ch D 688 : 54 LJ Ch 424 : 52 LT 541] , Mr Justice
  Pearson explained the law as to actions quia timet as
  follows:
“There are at least two necessary ingredients for a quia
  timet action. There must, if no actual damage is proved, be
  proof of imminent danger, and there must also be proof that
  the apprehended damage will, if it comes, be very
  substantial. I should almost say it must be proved that it will
  be irreparable, because, if the danger is not proved to be
  so imminent that no one can doubt that, if the remedy is
  delayed the damage will be suffered, I think it must be
  shown that, if the damage does occur at any time, it will
  come in such a way and under such circumstances that it
  will be impossible for the plaintiff to protect himself against
  it if relief is denied to him in a quia timet action”.”
26
28. A reading of the aforesaid decisions, therefore, shows that what

was meant to be outside the pale of judicial review in paragraph 110

of
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) are quia timet actions in the sense of

injunctions to prevent the Speaker from making a decision on the

ground of imminent apprehended danger which will be irreparable in

the sense that if the Speaker proceeds to decide that the person be

disqualified, he would incur the penalty of forfeiting his membership

of the House for a long period.
Paragraphs 110 and 111 of Kihoto

Hollohan
(supra) do not, therefore, in any manner, interdict judicial

review in aid of the Speaker arriving at a prompt decision as to

disqualification under the provisions of the Tenth Schedule. Indeed,

the Speaker, in acting as a Tribunal under the Tenth Schedule is

bound to decide disqualification petitions within a reasonable period.
What is reasonable will depend on the facts of each case, but

absent exceptional circumstances for which there is good reason, a

period of three months from the date on which the petition is filed is

the outer limit within which disqualification petitions filed before the

Speaker must be decided if the constitutional objective of

disqualifying persons who have infracted the Tenth Schedule is to be

adhered to. This period has been fixed keeping in mind the fact that

ordinarily the life of the Lok Sabha and the Legislative Assembly of

the States is 5 years and the fact that persons who have incurred
27
such disqualification do not deserve to be MPs/MLAs even for a

single day, as found in
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra), if they have

infracted the provisions of the Tenth Schedule.
29.
In the years that have followed the enactment of the Tenth

Schedule in 1985, this Court’s experience of decisions made by

Speakers generally leads us to believe that the fears of the minority

judgment in
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) have actually come home to

roost. Verma, J. had held :
“181. The Speaker being an authority within the House and
  his tenure being dependent on the will of the majority
  therein, likelihood of suspicion of bias could not be ruled
  out. The question as to disqualification of a Member has
  adjudicatory disposition and, therefore, requires the
  decision to be rendered in consonance with the scheme for
  adjudication of disputes. Rule of law has in it firmly
  entrenched, natural justice, of which, rule against bias is a
  necessary concomitant; and basic postulates of rule
  against bias are: nemo judex in causa sua — ‘A Judge is
  disqualified from determining any case in which he may be,
  or may fairly be suspected to be, biased’; and ‘it is of
  fundamental importance that justice should not only be
  done, but should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be
  done.’ This appears to be the underlying principle adopted
  by the framers of the Constitution in not designating the
  Speaker as the authority to decide election disputes and
  questions as to disqualification of members under
Articles
  103
, 192
and
329
and opting for an independent authority
  outside the House. The framers of the Constitution had in
  this manner kept the office of the Speaker away from this
  controversy. There is nothing unusual in this scheme if we
  bear in mind that the final authority for removal of a Judge
  of the Supreme Court and High Court is outside the
28
judiciary in the Parliament under
Article 124(4).
On the
  same principle the authority to decide the question of
  disqualification of a Member of Legislature is outside the
  House as envisaged by
Articles 103
and
192.
182. In the Tenth Schedule, the Speaker is made not only
  the sole but the final arbiter of such dispute with no
  provision for any appeal or revision against the Speaker's
  decision to any independent outside authority. This
  departure in the Tenth Schedule is a reverse trend and
  violates a basic feature of the Constitution since the
  Speaker cannot be treated as an authority contemplated
  for being entrusted with this function by the basic
  postulates of the Constitution, notwithstanding the great
  dignity attaching to that office with the attribute of
  impartiality.”
30. It is time that Parliament have a rethink on whether

disqualification petitions ought to be entrusted to a Speaker as a

quasi-judicial authority when such Speaker continues to belong to a

particular political party either de jure or de facto. Parliament may

seriously consider amending the Constitution to substitute the

Speaker of the Lok Sabha and Legislative Assemblies as arbiter of

disputes concerning disqualification which arise under the Tenth

Schedule with a permanent Tribunal headed by a retired Supreme

Court Judge or a retired Chief Justice of a High Court, or some other

outside independent mechanism to ensure that such disputes are

decided both swiftly and impartially, thus giving real teeth to the

provisions contained in the Tenth Schedule, which are so vital in the

proper functioning of our democracy.
29
31. It is not possible to accede to Shri Sibal’s submission that this

Court issue a writ of quo warranto quashing the appointment of the

Respondent No.3 as a minister of a cabinet led by a BJP

government. Mrs. Madhavi Divan is right in stating that a

disqualification under the Tenth Schedule from being an MLA and

consequently minister must first be decided by the exclusive

authority in this behalf, namely, the Speaker of the Manipur

Legislative Assembly. It is also not possible to accede to the

argument of Shri Sibal that the disqualification petition be decided by

this Court in these appeals given the inaction of the Speaker. It

cannot be said that the facts in the present case are similar to the

facts in
Rajinder Singh Rana
(supra).
In the present case, the life of

the legislative assembly comes to an end only in March, 2022 unlike

in
Rajinder Singh Rana
(supra) where, but for this Court deciding

the disqualification petition in effect, no relief could have been given

to the petitioner
in that case
as the life of the legislative assembly

was about to come to an end. The only relief that can be given in

these appeals is that the Speaker of the Manipur Legislative

Assembly be directed to decide the disqualification petitions pending

before him within a period of four weeks from the date on which this

judgment is intimated to him. In case no decision is forthcoming

even after a period of four weeks, it will be open to any party to the
30
proceedings to apply to this Court for further directions/reliefs in the

matter.
32. The impugned judgment of the High Court dated 23.07.2019 is

set aside. The Civil Appeals arising out of SLP(C) No. 18659 of 2019

and SLP(C) No. 18763 of 2019 are partly allowed and the Civil

Appeals arising out of SLP(C) No. 23703 of 2019 and SLP(C) No.

24146 of 2019 are dismissed in terms of this judgment. No order as

to costs.
.……………………………J.
                                        (R.F. Nariman)


                                        .……………………………J.
                                        (Aniruddha Bose)


                                        ……………………………J.
                                        (V. Ramasubramanian)
New Delhi;
January 21, 2020.
31