[Cites
1
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Ghat Talab Kaulan Wala vs Baba Gopal Dass Chela Surti Dass (Dead) ... on 31 January, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 705, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 82, (2020) 2 ANDHLD 52, (2020) 3 SCALE 15
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
L. Nageswara Rao
REPORTABLE

                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 724 OF 2020
             (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 35520 OF 2016)


GHAT TALAB KAULAN WALA                                              .....APPELLANT(S)

                                               VERSUS

BABA GOPAL DASS CHELA SURTI DASS
(DEAD) BY LR RAM NIWAS                                          .....RESPONDENT(S)




                                 JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.      The plaintiff is in appeal aggrieved against an order passed by the

        High Court of Punjab and Haryana on 18th July, 2016 whereby the

        decree of two courts in its favour were set aside for the reason that

        Charan Dass (PW-1) was not competent to file suit as it could not

        demonstrate        the   nature   of    charities   which   the   Trust   had

        undertaken and that such suit is not maintainable without

        complying with the requirements of
Section 92
of the Code of Civil

        Procedure, 19081. The Court held as under:
“20. For maintaining the suit qua public Trust, the leave
                     of the Court under
Section 92
CPC is mandatory.
1    for short, ‘Code’
1
Pleadings of the plaintiff are conspicuously silent about
              these facts. Secondly for maintaining the suit, plaintiff
              has to show that there was a complete dedication of the
              property in favour of the general public. There has to
              be evidence proving beyond pale of doubt that Trust is a
              public Trust.     Though no instruction in writing is
              required, to dedicate property for religious or charitable
              purposes. Only a clear unequivocal manifestation of
              intention to create a Trust and vesting thereof in the
              donor as a trustee is required. No such manifestation of
              intention to create Trust and trustee thereof have come
              forth on record.”
2.   The appellant had filed a suit for mandatory injunction directing the

     defendant Baba Gopal Dass (since deceased) to vacate the

     management of Mandir, building and other property. The appellant

     has alleged itself to be the owner of the suit property being

     managed by the Manager and Trustees. The defendant was said to

     be a Sevadar. In the said suit, the stand of the defendant was that

     the representatives of the plaintiff Manohar Lal and Charan Dass

     were never appointed as Managers or Trustees of the appellant and

     they fraudulently got their names entered in the revenue record.
The stand of the defendant was that he did everything for the

     welfare of the Mandir and never sought instructions from the

     plaintiff and they have no right to seek rendition of accounts from

     the defendant. On the pleadings of the parties, the learned trial

     court framed the following issues:
“1. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the injunction
              prayed for? OPP.
2. Whether the plaintiff is owner of the suit property as
              alleged in para No. 1 of the plaint? OPP.
2
3. Whether the plaintiff have no locus standi to file the
               suit? OPP.
4. Whether no cause of action has arisen to the plaintiff
               for filing this suit? OPP.
5. Relief.”
3.   On issue Nos. 1 and 2, the learned trial court held that the

     defendant is Sevadar of plaintiff Trust and that the plaintiff does not

     want to keep the defendant as he is not properly watching the

     interest of the Mandir and that he has not rendered the accounts of

     the income of the Temple. The Court also found that the defendant

     is not claiming ownership of the property in question.          The trial

     court considered the statement made by the defendant in the

     previous suit for permanent injunction filed by the plaintiff on 8 th

     April, 1986 restraining the defendant from raising any construction

     in the shape of shops on the property in question. The Appellant

     examined Harban Singh (PW-3) an Advocate of the defendant in

     the previous suit, that the defendant admitted that the suit

     property belongs to the plaintiff and the defendant is working only

     as a Sevadar. The statement (Ex.P/1) reads as under:
“I have instructions from the defendant that the suit
               property belongs to the trust i.e. the plaintiff, where I
               am working only as a Sevadar. Whatever I will do, I will
               do for the welfare of the trust and any instructions
               given by the manager of the trust especially in regard
               to the construction of the shops I shall abide by in
               addition to the instructions pertaining to the manner in
               which shops are to be constructed and rent thereof
               collected.”
3
4.     After returning such finding, the trial court declined to grant

       mandatory injunction to the defendant to vacate the Mandir but

       held the plaintiff was entitled to rendition of accounts.
5.     The plaintiff alone filed first appeal aggrieved against the judgment

       passed by the learned trial court. The learned First Appellate Court

       relied upon a judgment reported as Bhagwan Dass and others v.

       Jairam Dass2, to hold that the Sevadar is liable to be removed

       where Sevadar asserts title hostile and fails to keep regular

       accounts.
6.     The defendant filed second appeal before the High Court aggrieved

       against the decree passed by the First Appellate Court. During the

       pendency of the second appeal, Baba Gopal Dass died and one

       Ram Niwas, claiming to be Chela of Baba Gopal Dass was ordered

       to be impleaded to represent the estate.             Such order was

       challenged by the appellant before this Court in Civil Appeal No.

       9638 of 2003 wherein it was held that Ram Niwas had been

       impleaded to represent the defendant but that will not clothe him

       to be successor in interest in the property and that the status of

       deceased Baba Gopal Dass as well as Ram Niwas have to be

       independently considered as a preliminary issue in the second

       appeal.
7.     In second appeal, the first substantial question of law was framed

       at the time of admission of appeal whereas second substantial


2    AIR 1965 P & H 260
4
question of law was framed after the order passed by this Court.
The same are reproduced hereunder:
“1. Whether the plaintiff Charan Dass could represent
              the Trust known as Ghat Talab Kaulan Wala which is also
              known as Prabhu Wala and whether the suit filed by the
              Charan Dass is maintainable?
2. Whether status of the deceased Baba Gopal Dass as
              well as that of Ram Niwas, when independently
              considered, would make them Legal Representatives
              when Gopal Dass had mentioned himself to be
              ‘Sevadar’ and Ram Niwas as alleged Chela of Baba
              Gopal Dass?”
8.   In respect of the second substantial question of law, the High Court

     held that the defendant was only a Sevadar as admitted in his

     statement in the earlier suit and that Ram Niwas was impleaded as

     his legal representative. He is only a member of public who could

     offer his services in the place of deceased Defendant. The Court

     held as under:
“25. …However, in case of public Trust every individual
              has right to serve. Baba Gopal Dass was also serving in
              the Mandir irrespective of the Mandir as a public Trust
              property or private Trust property. There was nothing to
              inherit like services rendered by Baba Gopal Dass.
              Inheritance of services of Baba Gopal Dass was open to
              all. No special status can be conferred upon Ram Niwas
              so far as inheritance of service/Sevadari is concerned.
26. In view of aforesaid, any person from public can
              offer service to Mandir. Therefore, in view of first part
              of the order passed by the Hon’ble Apex Court Ram
              Niwas was only impleaded for the purposes of
              representation in the present appeal without meaning
              anything on merits i.e. rights of Baba Gopal Dass viz-a-
viz suit property. The second part of the order in the
              context of decision on the individual right of Ram Niwas
              is concerned, the same has to be decided that Ram
              Niwas is none else than any person from public at large,
5
who could offer his service in place of Baba Gopal Dass.
There are no pleadings, nor any evidence on record to
               show that Ram Niwas was ever appointed as Chela by
               Bhek or any other religious ceremonies were performed
               by competent authority or by Sadhu Samaj for
               appointing him in place of Baba Gopal Dass.”
9.    Thus, the second substantial question of law was decided, as

      mentioned above, that Ram Niwas was impleaded for the purpose

      of representation of the deceased in the appeal. The High Court

      found that there was no evidence that Ram Niwas was ever

      appointed by Chela or in any other manner but as any member of

      public, he was offering his services to the Temple.
10.   While deciding first substantial question of law, the suit was found

      to be not maintainable. Learned counsel for the appellant

      vehemently argued that the High Court erred in law in finding that

      the suit is not maintainable in view of
Section 92
of the Code as

      such provision is meant for invocation of jurisdiction against the

      Trust.
Section 92
of the Code has no applicability in respect of a

      suit instituted by a Trust. It is pointed out that the appellant has

      filed suit through the Manager and Trustee as a private Trust.

      However, during the pendency of the proceedings, the Trust has

      been registered as a Society on 29 th June, 2016 when Memorandum

      of Association of Ghat Talab Kaulan Wala Prabhu Lal Wala, Village

      Mundi Kharar, Tehsil Kharar, District S.A.S. Nagar was registered.
11.   Learned counsel for the respondent argued that the appeal is filed

      by one Devinder Gupta who has no concern with the appellant,
6
therefore, appeal itself is filed by incompetent person.     It is also

      argued that the appellant has been paid a sum of Rs.1,48,09,884/-

      on account of acquisition of part of land whereas the respondent

      has apprehension that such amount will be misappropriated by the

      appellant.
12.   We have heard learned counsel for the parties. We find that the

      order passed by the High Court in respect of first substantial

      question of law is not sustainable.
Section 92
of the Code

      contemplates a suit against a Trust either for removing any trustee;

      appointing new trustee; or vesting any property in a trustee etc.

      but the present suit itself is by a Trust against a Sevadar, therefore,

      the procedure prescribed under
Section 92
of the Code would not

      be applicable in a suit by a Trust.
Section 92
of the Code confers

      right on a person in case of any alleged breach of any express or

      constructive trust created for a public purpose of a charitable or

      religious nature. Since the Trust itself was the plaintiff, the finding

      of the High Court is clearly erroneous and not sustainable. The fact

      is that Baba Gopal Dass has been found to be Sevadar as per

      statement (Ex.P/1) given in the previous suit for permanent

      injunction. Therefore, Ram Niwas as legal representative of Baba

      Gopal Dass will not have a larger interest than what was vested in

      the original defendant.   Ram Niwas has been found to be doing

      service to the Temple as member of public.       The High Court has

      affirmed the finding that Ram Niwas could offer his services but he

      has not proved that he was appointed as Chela of Baba Gopal Dass.
7
Still further, the decree for rendition of accounts could be executed

      only against the deceased Baba Gopal Dass, therefore, after his

      demise, such decree cannot be executed.
13.   In view thereof, the finding of the High Court on first substantial

      question of law is set aside and the suit is found to be maintainable

      and was rightly decreed by the First Appellate Court.
14.   We find that the apprehension of the respondent that the amount

      of compensation can be misused is not tenable. The appellant is a

      registered Society.    The appellant as a registered Society has

      statutory   obligations.   We   find   that    such     apprehension         is

      misconceived and beyond the scope of the present suit and the

      appeal arising out of such proceedings.
15.   Consequently, the present appeal is allowed. The order of the High

      Court in respect of first substantial question of law is set aside and

      the suit is decreed.
.............................................J.
                                                      (L. NAGESWARA RAO)



                                       .............................................J.
                                                            (HEMANT GUPTA)

NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 31, 2020.
8