[Cites
7
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
N. Motilal vs Faisal Bin Ali on 30 January, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 662, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 85, (2020) 1 RENCR 283, (2020) 2 SCALE 680
Author:
Ashok Bhushan
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
Ashok Bhushan
REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.710 OF 2020
                          (arising out of SLP (C) No. 28951 of 2019)


          N. MOTILAL & ORS.                                   ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                  VERSUS

          FAISAL BIN ALI & ANR.                               ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                            J U D G M E N T
ASHOK BHUSHAN,J.
This appeal has been filed by the appellants, who

          are              tenants     of     a     non-residential   building,

          challenging the judgment of the High Court for the

          State of Telangana at Hyderabad dated 30.08.2019 by

          which civil revision petition filed by the appellants

          challenging the order dated 30.04.2019 of the Chief

          Judge, City                Small Causes Court, Hyderbad has been

          dismissed.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
2.
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2020.01.30
15:56:44 IST
Brief facts of the case necessary to be noted for
Reason:
deciding the appeal are:
1
The     appellants     are   tenants      of     a    Shop    No.M-1-

938/39    admeasuring      390   sq.    ft.     in       New   Marketing

Complex, Tilak Road, Abids, Hyderabad. The appellants

had entered into a lease agreement dated 27.08.1990

with the landlord by which the premises was let out

for 20 years to the appellants from 21.08.1990 to

31.07.2010.    The    previous       landlord      Osman       Bin   Saleh

transferred    the premises       in question            in favour        of

respondent Nos.1 and 2 by registered sale deed dated

28.03.2008. The appellants were tenants on a monthly

rent of Rs.1840/- excluding electricity charges and

water charges. Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 who purchased

the property on 28.03.2008 filed an application on

29.09.2009 for enhancement of rent. The application

was contested by the appellants. The appellants had

admitted     the     tenancy     at    the      monthly          rate    of

Rs.1840/-. The landlord had claimed that the market

rent of the similar premises is Rs.75/- per sq. ft.
and as per the market rent value the monthly rent of

the shop shall be Rs.29,250/-. The Rent Controller,

Hyderabad     by   order    dated      04.11.2013         allowed        the

application    of the      respondents and           fixed the          fair
2
rent    at    the     rate     of     Rs.60/-         per      sq.    ft   i.e.

Rs.23,400/-.        The tenants           were directed           to pay    the

fair rent from the date of filing of the petition

with future enhancement of 10% for every two years.

Aggrieved by the judgment of the III Additional Rent

Controller      an    appeal        was       filed   by    the      appellants

which appeal was dismissed by the Chief Judge, City

Small   Causes       Court     vide       judgment       and     order     dated

05.06.2017.         Against         the       Appellate        order       dated

05.06.2017 a civil revision petition was allowed by

the    High   Court     on     20.09.2018         and      the    matter    was

remanded      back     to     the     Appellate         Authority.         After

remand,      Chief Judge,       City Small             Causes Court        vide

order    dated       30.04.2019       dismissed         the      R.A.No.5     of

2014.    Aggrieved       by    which          judgment      Civil      Revision

Petition No.1650 of 2019 was filed by the appellants

in the High Court. The High Court after considering

the submissions of the parties dismissed the revision

petition      vide    its     judgment         dated     30.08.2019        which

judgment      has been        challenged by            the appellants        in

this appeal.
3
3.    Shri    Yelamanchili            Shiva       Santosh         Kumar,    learned

counsel for the appellants submits that the contract

of tenancy between the appellants and the landlord

entered      into        on     27.08.1990            was    to     subsist       till

31.07.2010,       hence,            the   respondent-landlord               had      no

authority or jurisdiction to file the application for

enhancement of rent on 29.09.2009. He submits that

Section 4 of the Telangana Building (Lease, Rent and

Eviction) Control Rent, 1960 has no application on

the     contractual            tenancy.          It     is        submitted       that

landlord is bound by the contractual rent and during

subsistence         of        contractual         tenancy          he    cannot      be

allowed to file application for enhancement of rent.

He    submits     that         permitting            the    landlord       to     file

application for enhancement of rent even though he is

bound    by a     contract, will                 be permitting            something

which is against Rent Control Legislation. The Rent

Control      Legislations            have       to    be     interpreted        in   a

manner so as to save tenant from exorbitant rent.
4.    Learned counsel for appellants has placed strong

reliance on minority judgment of this Court delivered

by    Bhagwati,      J.        in    M/s.
Raval       and    Co.    vs.     K.G.
4
Ramachandran
,           1974(1)       SCC      424.       Reliance       has     been

placed      on     paragraphs         25       to    30     of    the     minority

judgment which had taken the view that it is only

when the contract of tenancy is lawfully determined

that    the      landlord      becomes           entitled         to    apply    for

fixation      of    fair       rent    and          during       subsistence      of

contractual tenancy landlord is precluded from making

an   application for            fixation of              fair rent.        Learned

counsel     further       submits          that      the     respondents         have

purchased        the     property          for       a     meagre       amount    of

Rs.5,24,500/- in the year 2008 and looking to the

fair rent fixed by the Rent Controller 20 months of

rent covers the sale price of the property.
5.     Learned counsel for the appellants has further

submitted        that    Model      Rent       Control       Legislation         has

been    circulated        by    the     Central           Government       to    all

States to uniformly amend the State Legislation where

it     is   now     provided          that       during       subsistence         of

contract         landlord      is     precluded            from        making    any

application for fair rent.
6.     Smt. Kiran Suri, learned senior counsel appearing

for the respondents refuting the submission of the
5
counsel for the appellants contends that the reliance

of appellants on a minority judgment of this Court in

M/s.     Raval     and     Co.    is       misplaced.      The        majority

judgment         delivered        by        Alagiriswami,             J.     has

categorically       laid     down      that       in   Section    4    of   the

Tamil Nadu (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act,

1960(Tamil Nadu Act 18 of 1960) which is pari materia

of
Section 4
of Telangana Buildings (Lease, Rent and

Eviction)        Control     Act,          1960    permits       filing       of

application for fixing of fair rent by the landlord

during      subsistence          of    contractual         tenancy.         She

further submits that the judgment of this Court in

M/s. Raval & Co. has been further approved by seven-

Judge judgment in
V. Dhanapal Chettiar vs. Yesodal

Ammal
, 1979(4) SCC 214. It is further submitted that

the appellants cannot be allowed to make submission

in regard to sale consideration of the property, sale

between      the    relatives,             consideration         was       fixed

accordingly.
7.     We   have   considered         the     submissions        of    learned

counsel of the parties and perused the records.
6
8.    The moot question to be answered in this appeal

is    as    to    whether       during        currency     of    contractual

tenancy      i.e.       during      the       currency    of    agreed          rent

between the landlord and the tenant whether landlord

is    precluded          from        making       an     application             for

determination           of    fair        rent.
Section           4
of    the

Telangana        Act,    1960       provides      for    determination            of

fair rent.
Section 4(1)
provides:
“
Section 4(1)
The Controller shall, on
       application by the tenant or landlord of a
       building fix the fair rent for such
       building after holding such inquiry as the
       Controller thinks fit.”
9.    The    above       provision        gives     right       to       both   the

tenant and the landlord of a building to make an

application for fixing fair rent. The provision of
Section 4(1)
cannot be read in a manner that it is

not    applicable            with     regard      to     the     contractual

tenancy. The Rent Control Legislations are enacted to

protect both tenant and the landlord. In the event

the   submission of            the appellants            is accepted            that

during the currency of the contract of tenancy, no

one can file application for fixing of fair rent, the
7
said provision shall operate detrimental to both the

tenant and the landlord. This can be explained by

taking an illustration. A tenant, who is in urgent

need    of    premises,     entered   into      a   contract       with

landlord where he had to agree to pay an unreasonable

higher rent during the force of circumstances, if the

tenant has no right to make an application for fixing

of fair rent during the currency of tenancy, the said

provision will harshly operate against the tenant.

The    concept   of   determination        of   fair   rent    is    to

operate equal for the tenant as well as the landlord.

The object of the Act is that neither the landlord

should charge more than the fair rent of the premises

nor tenant should be forced to pay higher rent than

the fair rent. The statutory scheme brought in the

statute by way of
Section 4
which is a beneficial

both to the tenant as well as the landlord.
10. The      Constitution    Bench    of    this    Court     in    M/s.

Raval & Co. had occasion to consider Section 4 of the

Tamil Nadu Act 18 of 1960.
Section 4
of the said Act

provides for application for fixation of the fair rent
8
for   the   tenant   as   well       as   the   landlord.   In   the

majority judgment speaking through Alagiriswami, J. in

paragraphs 18 and 19 following has been laid down:
“18. The provisions of the Act under
      consideration show that they are to take
      effect notwithstanding any contract even
      during the Subsistence of the contract. We
      have already referred to the definition of
      the terms 'landlord' and 'tenant' which
      applies both to subsisting tenancies as
      well as tenancies which might have come to
      an end. We may also refer to the provision
      in
Section 7(2)
which lays down that where
      the fair rent of a building has not been
      fixed the landlord shall not claim anything
      in addition to the agreed rent, thus
      showing that the fair rent can be fixed
      even where there is an agreed rent. That is
      why we have earlier pointed out that the
      various English decisions which provide for
      fixation of rent only where the contractual
      tenancy has come to an end do not apply
      here. We may also refer to Sub-section (3)
      of
Section 10
which deals with cases where
      a landlord requires a residential or non-
      residential building for his own use.
      Clause (d) of that sub-section provides
      that where the tenancy is for a term the
      landlord cannot get possession before the
      expiry of the term, thus showing that in
      other cases of eviction covered by
Section
      10
eviction is permissible even during the
      continuance of the contractual tenancy if
      the conditions
laid down in
Section 10
are
      satisfied.
19……………A close analysis of the Madras Act
      shows that it has a scheme of its own and
      it is intended to provide a complete code
      in respect of both contractual tenancies as
      well as what are popularly called statutory
9
tenancies.    As    noticed    earlier    the
        definition of the term 'landlord' as well
        as the term 'tenant' shows that the Act
        applies to contractual tenancies as well as
        cases of "statutory tenants" and their
        landlords.   On    some   supposed    general
        principles governing all Rent Acts it
        cannot be argued that such fixation can
        only be for the benefit of the tenants when
        the Act clearly lays down that both
        landlords   and   tenants   can   apply   for
        fixation of fair rent. A close reading of
        the Act shows that the fair rent is fixed
        for the building and it is payable by
        whoever is the tenant whether a contractual
        tenant or statutory tenant. What is fixed
        is not the fair rent payable by the tenant
        or to the landlord who applies for fixation
        of fair rent but fair rent for the
        building, something like an incident of the
        tenure regarding the building.”
11. Learned counsel for the appellants has placed

reliance     on    the   minority       judgment      delivered   by

Bhagwati, J. for himself and K.K. Mathew, J. although

the minority judgment has held that landlord can make

an application for determination of fair rent only

after     the     determination        of   tenancy    and   during

subsistence of contractual rent no application for

fair rent can be given. We are bound by the majority

opinion of the Constitution Bench in M/s. Raval & Co.

We further notice that both the learned counsel have

referred to seven-Judge Bench judgment of this Court
10
in
V. Dhanapal Chettiar vs. Yesodal Ammal
(supra).
Seven-Judge    Bench   had   occasion   to     refer    to   the

Constitution   Bench   judgment   in    M/s.
Raval    &   Co.
(supra) which was quoted with approval. Referring to

majority judgment in M/s. Raval & Co.’s case seven-

Judge Bench made following observation:
“15………Alagiriswami J. at page 635 after
     having made that observation with reference
     to Bhaiya Panjalat's case has said-"Be that
     as it may, we are now concerned with the
     question of fixation of a fair rent." In
     our opinion the majority decision with
     regard to
Section 4
was undoubtedly correct
     and the minority stretched the law, if we
     may say so with respect, too far to hold
     that
Section 4
was not available to the
     landlord. It should be remembered, as we
     have said above, that the field of freedom
     of contract was encroached upon to a very
     large extent by the State Rent Acts. The
     encroachment was not entirely and wholly
     one sided. Same encroachment was envisaged
     in the interest of the landlord also and
     equity and justice demanded a fair play on
     the   part   of   the  legislature  not   to
     completely ignore the helpless situation of
     many landlords who are also compared to
     some big tenants sometimes weaker Section
     of the society. As for example a widow or a
     minor lets out a family house in a helpless
     situation   to   tide   over   the financial
     difficulty and later wants a fair rent to
     be determined. Again suppose for instance
     in a city there is an apprehension of
     external    aggression,     severe  internal
     disturbances or spread of epidemics, A man
     in possession of his house may go to
11
another town letting out his premises to a
     tenant financially strong and of strong,
     nerves at a rate comparatively much lower
     than the prevailing market rates. Later on,
     on the normalization of the situation as
     against   the   agreed  rate   of   rent  be
     approaches the Building Controller for
     fixing a fair rent in accordance with a
     particular State Rent Act. Why should she
     or he be debarred from doing so. The
     statute   gives   him  the   protection  and
     enables the Controller to intervene to fix
     a fair rent as against the term of contract
     between the parties. In a large number of
     cases it is the tenant who gets this
     protection. But in some as in the case of
     Raval the landlord needs and gets the
     protection. But this is not a direct
     authority on the point of notice.”
12. The     above    observation        clearly   indicates       that

majority view of the Constitution Bench expressed by

Alagiriswami,       J.   was   quoted    with   approval   and    the

seven-Judge Bench held that the encroachment on the

freedom of contract between the landlord and tenant

has been envisaged for protecting both the tenant and

landlord.     The example as quoted in paragraph 15 as

extracted    above       clearly    indicates     that   denial    of

landlord in moving application for fixation of rent in

several cases may operate against the interest of the

landlord.
12
13. The Constitution Bench judgment in M/s. Raval &

Co.’s case as well as seven-Judge Bench judgment in V.

Dhanapal     Chettiar’s             case        are      binding          which

categorically      had     laid      down       that    application          for

determination of fair rent can be made both by the

landlord and tenant which can be made even during

currency of contractual tenancy. We, thus, find the

submission    made       by    the      learned        counsel      for      the

appellants in the above regard without any substance.
14. The submission of the counsel for the appellants

that the consideration on which property was purchased

by the landlord in 2008 is equivalent to 20 months’

rent as enhanced by Rent Controller has no bearing on

the issue which has been sought to be raised. The

determination of the fair rent has to be made as per

the   provisions      of      the     1960       Act     and     the      above

submission    in    no     manner     advance          the   case      of    the

appellant.
15. The last submission of the learned counsel for

the   appellants      is      that        the    Central       Government,

Ministry     of    Housing        and      Urban        Development          has

circulated    a    Model      Rent    Control         Legislation       to    be
13
adopted by all the States which precludes the landlord

for   making   application     for    fixation    of   fair   rent

during   the   currency   of   contractual       tenancy   (which

circular has also not been brought on record), suffice

it to say that as per submission of the counsel for

the appellants himself that Model Legislations are

only guidelines, which in no manner, can have any

effect on the statutory provisions of 1960 Act which

are still occupying the field. No other submission has

been advanced by the counsel for the appellants.
16. We do not find any merit in this appeal. The

appeal is dismissed.
......................J.
                                         ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )




                                     ......................J.
New Delhi,                                ( M.R. SHAH )
January 30, 2020.
14