[Cites
18
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Standard Chartered Bank vs Mstc Limited on 21 January, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 99, (2020) 3 SCALE 124
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Rohinton Fali Nariman
1

                                                                               REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 501 OF 2020
                                  (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 20093 OF 2019)

                         STANDARD CHARTERED BANK                      APPELLANT(S)

                                        VERSUS

                         MSTC LIMITED                                 RESPONDENT(S)



                                                   JUDGMENT
R.F. Nariman, J.
1) Leave granted.
2) The present appeal raises interesting questions which arise

                         under the Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 1993 (hereinafter

                         referred to as “the RDB Act” or “the Act”). The brief facts necessary

                         to appreciate the questions raised are as follows:-
(i) On 29.08.2008, a Receivables Purchase Agreement was

                         executed between Standard Chartered Bank, which is the appellant

                         before us and MSTC Limited, which is a Government Company-
respondent herein, whereunder receivables from overseas buyers
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
in respect of invoices raised by the respondent against foreign
NATARAJAN
Date: 2020.01.23
17:03:43 IST
Reason:
buyers were purchased by the appellant. 95% of the amount raised

                         by the invoices was remitted to the respondent.
2
(ii) An Export Insurance Policy was obtained by these parties from

ICICI Lombard General Insurance Company under which the

Insurance Company agreed to indemnify the respondent and the

appellant in the event of default in payment of foreign buyers.
(iii) The appellant had lodged a claim with the said Insurance

Company which, however, was repudiated on 03.03.2011. In this

background, on 13.03.2012, the appellant filed an application under

Section 19 of the RDB Act being O.A. No. 43 of 2012 before the

DRT, Mumbai for recovery of a sum of Rs.191,03,54,070.96.
(iv) An I.A was then filed by the respondent before the DRT

Mumbai, challenging its jurisdiction, which was ultimately disposed

of on 26.09.2013 and an appeal therefrom was dismissed on

03.02.2017, holding that the DRT Mumbai did have territorial

jurisdiction to go ahead with the case.
(v) At this point, an I.A was filed by the appellant stating that given

the admissions contained in the balance sheet of the relevant years

of the respondent-Company, a sum of Rs. 222,51,00,000/- was

owed by the respondent to the appellant. This I.A. was allowed by

the DRT Mumbai on 26.10.2017.
(vi) An appeal was filed by the respondent-Company against the

said order before the DRAT on 14.11.2017. While the appeal was

pending, Review Application No. 1 of 2018 was filed on 18.12.2017
3
before the DRT by the respondent-Company after the appeal that

was lodged earlier in point of time was withdrawn by the

respondent-Company on 02.01.2018.
(vii) In the meanwhile, an application dated 16.02.2018 was made

to condone a 28 day delay in filing the review petition before the

DRT, the period of limitation under Rule 5A of the Debt Recovery

Tribunal (Procedure) Rules, 1993 (hereinafter referred to as “the

Rules”) being 30 days. This review petition was dismissed by the

DRT on 21.04.2018, in which this Court’s judgment reported in
International Asset Reconstruction Company of India Limited vs.

Official Liquidator of Aldrich Pharmaceuticals Limited and Others
,

(2017) 16 SCC 137 was followed, and
Section 5
of the Limitation

Act, 1963 was held not to be applicable to review petitions that were

filed under Rule 5A of the Rules. A further plea to exclude time

taken under
Section 14
of the Limitation Act, 1963 was also

dismissed by the DRT stating that a filing of the review petition after

the appeal would show that the appeal provision, which requires a

minimum 25% deposit, was sought to be circumvented, and,

therefore, this being the case, time taken under
Section 14
cannot

be excluded as the respondent-Company did not move bona fide in

the matter.
(viii) From the order dated 21.4.2018, a writ petition was filed before
4
the Bombay High Court on 26.04.2018, which was then disposed of

by the impugned judgment on 03.05.2019, holding that the

alternative remedy of filing an appeal not being available, the writ

petition would be maintainable.
In any case, the judgment of this

Court in
International Asset Reconstruction Company of India

Limited
(supra) was confined to consideration of Section 30 of the

RDB Act, and paragraph 14 of
the said judgment
would make it

clear that it would apply to the facts of this case inasmuch as an

original application made under Section 19 of the RDB Act, (which

by the definition clause under
Section 2(b)
applies only to

applications made under
Section 19
and to no others) would

subsume an application for review as a review application would

originate from an order passed under Section 19 of the RDB Act, as

per procedure prescribed under Section 22 of the RDB Act, and

would therefore not be an application which could be said to be

independent of Section 19 of the RDB Act. This being the case, the

High Court set aside the judgment of the DRT, condoned the delay

in filing of the review application itself, and restored the review

application to the file.
3) Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

behalf of the appellant, has contended that the High Court is wrong

on all counts. First and foremost, the High Court could not have
5
looked at
Order XLVII Rule 7 of the CPC
in order to hold that an

appeal from an order dismissing a review petition would not be

maintainable before the DRAT both for the reason that Order 47

Rule 7 itself is inapplicable under Section 22(1) of the RDB Act and

for the reason that Section 20 of the RDB Act makes it clear that

appeals lie to the DRAT from all applications that may have been

disposed of by the Tribunal under the RDB Act. He further argued

that the judgment in
International Asset Reconstruction Company of

India Limited
(supra) ought to have been applied correctly in that

the ratio decidendi of the judgment made it clear that it is only

applications under
Section 19
that are referred to in Section 24 of

the RDB Act, and this being the case, a review application, being an

independent proceeding, could not be subsumed within the

expression “application” contained in Section 24 of the RDB Act.
He also cited the judgment reported in Kamlesh Verma vs.

Mayawati and Others, (2013) 8 SCC 320 to buttress the submission

that a review petition cannot be equated with the original

proceeding. Further, contrasting Rule 5A of the Rules with Section

20 of the RDB Act, since peremptory language has been used in

the said rule, making it clear that a review petition filed beyond 30

days would have to be dismissed, coupled with the fact that no

provision for condonation of delay, as in
Section 20
, is contained in
6
Rule 5A would also make it clear that the impugned judgment has

to be faulted on this ground as well.
4) Mr. Amar Dave, learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the

respondent, stoutly resisted each one of these contentions. First

and foremost, he asked us to consider the fact that the O.A. before

the DRT was in 2012, and it is only after waiting for five years that a

thoroughly frivolous application was taken out in 2017 for a

judgment on admission. He also adverted to
Section 19
, in

particular, sub-section (2) thereof, to argue that
Section 19
is not

exhaustive of the types of applications that can be made under the

Act. He also strongly relied upon the reasoning of the High Court

judgment, and stated that
Section 19
and
22
should be read

together, as a review proceeding emanates from the original

proceeding and is really part and parcel of the proceeding, and this

being the case, Section 24 of the RDB Act would apply
Section 5
of

the Limitation Act, 1963 to review proceedings as well. He strongly

relied upon paragraph 12, in particular, in
International Asset

Reconstruction Company of India Limited
(supra) to contend that

there was a fundamental difference between the facts in that

judgment and the facts of the present case. The difference is that in

the earlier judgment,
Section 30
pre and post amendment was set

out, and it was stated that an appeal that was filed against the
7
orders of recovery officers, which will be governed by Section 30 of

the RDB Act, would be appeals filed against a persona designata

who is not a tribunal, and this being the case, the second sentence

of paragraph 12 becomes very important, in which this Court then

states that had the recovery officer been held to be a tribunal, the

matter would have to be completely differently viewed. It was his

case, therefore, that this judgment is wholly distinguishable. He also

supported the impugned judgment on maintainability of the Writ

Petition.
5) Having heard learned counsel for both sides, it is necessary to

set out some of the provisions of the RDB Act and the Rules made

thereunder. Section 2(b) of the RDB Act states as follows:
“2. Definitions.-
(b) “application” means an application made to a
       Tribunal under
section 19
;”

Section 19 of the RDB Act states as follows:
“19. Application to the Tribunal. –
       (1) Where a bank or a financial institution has to
       recover any debt from any person, it may make an
       application to the Tribunal within the local limits of
       whose jurisdiction-
(a) the branch or any other office of the bank or
       financial institution is maintaining an account in which
       debt claimed is outstanding, for the time being; or
       (aa) the defendant, or each of the defendants where
       there are more than one, at the time of making the
       application, actually and voluntarily resides or carries
       on business, or personally works for gain; or
(b) any of the defendants, where there are more than
       one, at the time of making the application, actually
8
and voluntarily resides or carries on business, or
personally works for gain; or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises
xxx xxx xxx
(2) Where a bank or a financial institution, which has
to recover its debt from any person, has filed an
application to the Tribunal under sub-section (1) and
against the same person another bank or financial
institution also has claim to recover its debt, then, the
later bank or financial institution may join the applicant
bank or financial institution at any stage of the
proceedings, before the final order is passed, by
making an application to that Tribunal.
xxx xxx xxx
(5) (i) the defendant shall within a period of thirty days
from the date of service of summons, present a
written statement of his defence including claim for
set-off under sub-section (6) or a counter-claim under
sub-section (8), if any, and such written statement
shall be accompanied with original documents or true
copies thereof with the leave of the Tribunal, relied on
by the defendant in his defence:
Provided that where the defendant fails to file the
written statement within the said period of thirty days,
the Presiding Officer may, in exceptional cases and in
special circumstances to be recorded in writing,
extend the said period by such further period not
exceeding fifteen days to file the written statement of
his defence;
xxx xxx xxx
(18) Where it appears to the Tribunal to be just and
convenient, the Tribunal may, by order—
(a) appoint a receiver of any property, whether before
or after grant of certificate for recovery of debt;
(b) remove any person from the possession or
custody of the property;
(c) commit the same to the possession, custody or
management of the receiver;
(d) confer upon the receiver all such powers, as to
bringing and defending suits in the courts or filing and
defending applications before the Tribunal and for the
realisation, management, protection, preservation and
improvement of the property, the collection of the
rents and profits thereof, the application and disposal
9
of such rents and profits, and the execution of
      documents as the owner himself has, or such of those
      powers as the Tribunal thinks fit; and
(e) appoint a Commissioner for preparation of an
      inventory of the properties of the defendant or for the
      sale thereof.”

Sections 20, 21 and 22 of the RDB Act state as follows:
“20. Appeal to the Appellate Tribunal. - (1) Save as
      provided in sub-section (2), any person aggrieved by
      an order made, or deemed to have been made, by a
      Tribunal under this Act, may prefer an appeal to an
      Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction in the matter.
      xxx xxx xxx
      (3) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed
      within a period of thirty days the date on which a copy
      of the order made, or deemed to have been made, by
      the Tribunal is received by him and it shall be in such
      form and be accompanied by such fee as may be
      prescribed:
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an
      appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days
      if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not
      filing it within that period.
21. Deposit of amount of debt due, on filing
      appeal. - Where an appeal is preferred by any person
      from whom the amount of debt is due to a bank or a
      financial institution or a consortium of banks or
      financial institutions, such appeal shall not be
      entertained by the Appellate Tribunal unless such
      person has deposited with the Appellate Tribunal fifty
      percent of the amount of debt so due from him as
      determined by the Tribunal under
section 19
:
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, for reasons
      to be recorded in writing, reduce the amount to be
      deposited by such amount which shall not be less
      than twenty-five per cent of the amount of such debt
      so due to be deposited under this section.
10
22. Procedure and powers of the Tribunal and the
      Appellate Tribunal. - (1) The Tribunal and the
      Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the
      procedure
laid down by
the Code of Civil Procedure
,
      1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided by the principles
      of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions
      of this Act and of any rules, the Tribunal and the
      Appellate Tribunal shall have powers to regulate their
      own procedure including the places at which they
      shall have their sittings.
(2) The Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall have,
      for the purposes of discharging their functions under
      this Act, the same powers as are vested in a Civil
      Court under
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (5 of
      1908), while trying a suit, in respect of the following
      matters, namely:
(a) xxx xxx xxx
(e) reviewing its decisions;”

Section 24 of the RDB Act states as follows:
“24. Limitation. - The provisions of the
Limitation Act,
      1963
(36 of 1963), shall, as far as may be, apply to an
      application made to a Tribunal.”

Section 34 (1) of the RDB Act states as follows:
“34. Act to have overriding effect.—
      (1) Save as provided under sub-section (2), the
      provisions of this Act shall have effect
      notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
      contained in any other law for the time being in force
      or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any
      law other than this Act.”

Rule 2(b) and 2(c) of the Debt Recovery Tribunal (Procedure)

Rules, 1993 states as follows:
“2. Definitions.-
(b) – "applicant" means a person making an
      application under
section 19
or under section 31A and
      includes an “applicant” who files an appeal under
section 30(1)
of the Act;
11
(c) "application" means an application filed under
section 19
or under section 31A and includes an
       “appeal” filed under
section 30(1)
of the Act”

Rule 4(1) of the Rules states as follows:
“4. Procedure for filing applications
       (1) An application under
section 19
or section 31A, or
       under
section 30(1)
of the Act may be presented as
       nearly as possible in Form I, Form II and Form III
       respectively annexed to these rules by the applicant
       in person or by his agent or by a duly authorised legal
       practitioner to the Registrar of the Bench within whose
       jurisdiction his case falls or shall be sent by registered
       post addressed to the Registrar.”

Rule 5A of the Rules states as follows:
“5A.Review.-
(1)Any party considering itself aggrieved by an order
       made by the Tribunal on account of some mistake or
       error apparent on the face of the record desires to
       obtain a review of the order made against him, may
       apply for a review of the order to the Tribunal which
       had made the order.
(2)No application for review shall be made after the
       expiry of a period of thirty days from the date of the
       order and no such application shall be entertained
       unless it is accompanied by an affidavit verifying the
       application.
(3) Where it appears to the Tribunal that there is no
       sufficient ground for a review, it shall reject the
       application but where the Tribunal is of opinion that
       the application for review should be granted, shall
       grant the same:
Provided that no such application shall be granted
       without previous notice to the opposite party to enable
       him to appear and to be heard in support of the order,
       a review of which is applied for.”

Rule 7 of the Rules states as follows:
12
“7. Application fee
(1) Every Application under
section 19(1)
, or
section
19(2)
, or
section 19(8)
, or
section 30(1)
of the Act,
or interlocutory application or application for review
of decision of the Tribunal shall be accompanied by
a fee provided in the sub-rule (2) and such fee may
be remitted through a crossed Bank Demand Draft
drawn on a bank or Indian Postal Order in favour of
the Registrar of the Tribunal and payable at the
place where the Tribunal is situated.
(2) The amount of fee payable shall be as follows:-
S.No.        Nature of Application       Amount of Fee
                                           Payable
1.     Application for recovery of
        debts due under
section 19(1)
or
section 19(2)
of the Act    Rs. 12,000
(a)Where amount of debt
              due is Rs. 10 lakhs
                                       Rs.     12,000
(b)Where the amount of plus Rs. 1,000
              debt due is above Rs. for every one
              10 lakhs                 lakh rupees of
                                       debt due or
                                       part thereof in
                                       excess of Rs.
10       lakhs,
                                       subject to a
                                       maximum      of
                                       Rs. 1,50,000
2.     Application to counter claim
        under
section 19(8)
of the Act
        –                              Rs. 12,000
(a)Where the amount of
              claim made is upto Rs.
10 lakhs.                Rs.     12,000
                                       plus Rs. 1,000
           (b)Where the amount of for every one
              claim made is above lakh rupees or
              Rs. 10 lakhs.            part thereof in
13
excess of Rs.
                                    10       lakhs,
                                    subject to a
                                    maximum      of
                                    Rs. 1,50,000

3.   Application     for     Review
     including review application in
     respect of counter-claim        Rs. 125
        (a)against an interim order
                                     50% of fee
        (b)against a final order ex- payable      at
           cluding review for cor- rates          as
           rection of clerical or applicable on
           arithmetical mistakes     the
                                     applications
                                     under
section
                                     19(1)
or 19(8)
                                     of the Act,
                                     subject to a
                                     maximum      of
                                     Rs. 15,000
4.   Application for interlocutory Rs. 250
     order
5.   Appeals against orders of the
     Recovery Officer
     If the amount appealed Rs. 12,000
     against is
(i)   less than Rs. 10 Rs. 20,000
              lakhs
(ii)   Rs. 10 lakh or more Rs. 30,000
              but less than Rs. 30
              lakhs
(iii) Rs. 30 lakhs or more
6.   Vakalatnama                    Rs. 5”
14
6) A reading of the aforesaid provisions of the Act and Rules

would show that review petitions are dealt with in
Section 22(2)(e)
read with Rule 5A of the Rules.
Section 24
, which applies the

provisions of the
Limitation Act
to applications made to a Tribunal,

would, as per the definition section contained in
Section 2(b)
,

apply only to applications that are made under
Section 19
, which

are original applications to recover debts that are made by banks

and financial institutions. What is clear is that an application for

review cannot possibly be said to be an application filed under
Section 19
even on a cursory reading of the provisions of the Act,

as it traces its origin to
Section 22(2)(e)
read with Rule 5A of the

Rules.
7) As a matter of fact, applications that are made to the Tribunal

under
Section 19
of the Act are only made in order to recover a

debt from any person. Even
Section 19(2)
, which is strongly relied

upon by Shri Dave, makes it clear that another bank or financial

institution may join an applicant bank or financial institution at any

stage of the proceeding before the final order is passed by making

an application against the same debtor for debts owed to such

other bank or financial institution. Also, under
Section 19(5)
of the

Act, a written statement may include a claim for set-off and/or a

counter-claim and under
Section 19(18)
of the Act, interim orders
15
may be passed in applications filed for recovery of debts under
Section 19
of the Act. All this must be contrasted with an

application for review that is filed under
Section 22 (2)(e)
of the Act

read with Rule 5A of the Rules. Such applications are not for

recovery of debts but are only applications to correct errors

apparent on the face of the record in a judgment that has been

delivered in an application filed under
Section 19
.
8) A reading of the Rules is also illuminating. Rules 2(b) and 2(c)

of the Rules define “applicant” and “application”, respectively, as

including applicants and applications filed under
Section 19
, 31A

as well as appeals filed under
Section 30(1)
of the Act. An

application under Section 31A is an application to enforce a

decree or order passed by any court before the commencement of

the Amendment Act of 2000 and which has not yet been executed.

An appeal under
Section 30(1)
is an appeal to the Tribunal against

orders of the Recovery Officer made under the Act. The reason

why Rule 2(c) of the Rules defines application as including an

application under Section 31A and an appeal filed under
Section

31
of the Act, apart from applications filed under
Section 19
, is

because under Rule 4 of the Rules, the procedure for filing such

applications/appeal is under Forms I to III appended to the Rules.

What is important to note is that even this extended definition,
16
under the Rules, does not include an application for review filed

under Rule 5A of the Rules. In point of fact, Rule 7 makes it

abundantly clear that each such application, including applications

for review, are viewed separately and independently, as fees

payable for filing such applications are vastly different, as is clear

from Rule 7(2) of the Rules.
9)   In fact, this Court in
International Asset Reconstruction

Company of India Limited
(supra) had to consider whether
Section

5
of the Limitation Act can be invoked to condone delay in the filing

of an appeal after the prescribed period of 30 days under Section

30(1) of the RDB Act. The Court first stated, in paragraph 8, that

the RDB Act is undoubtedly a special law and a complete code by

itself with regard to expeditious recovery of dues to banks and

financial institutions. After then noticing
Section 22(1)
in paragraph

9 and stating that
Section 5
of the Limitation Act cannot proprio

vigore apply to a tribunal as a tribunal is not a Court (in paragraph
10), the Court went on to hold:
“11. An "application" is defined under Section 2(b) of
      the RDB Act as one made under
Section 19
of the
      Act. The latter provision in Chapter IV deals with
      institution of original recovery proceedings before a
      Tribunal. An appeal lies against the order of the
      Tribunal under
Section 20
before the Appellate
      Tribunal within 45 days, which may be condoned for
      sufficient cause under the proviso to
Section 20(3)
of
      the Act. The Tribunal issues a recovery certificate
      under
Section 19(22)
to the Recovery officer who then
17
proceeds under Chapter V for recovery of the
certificate amount in the manner prescribed. A person
aggrieved by an order of the Recovery officer can
prefer an appeal before the Tribunal under Rule 4, by
an application in the prescribed Form III. Rule 2(c)
defines an "application" to include a memo of appeal
under
Section 30(1)
. The appeal is to be preferred
before the Tribunal, as distinct from the Appellate
Tribunal, within 30 days. Section 24 of the RDB Act,
therefore, manifestly makes the provisions of the
Limitation Act
applicable only to such an original
"application" made under
Section 19
only. The
definition of an "application" under Rule 2(c) cannot
be extended to read it in conjunction with
Section 2(b)
of the Act extending the meaning thereof beyond what
the Act provides for and then make Section 24 of the
RDB Act applicable to an appeal under
Section 30(1)
of the Act. Any such interpretation shall be completely
contrary to the legislative intent, extending the Rules
beyond what the Act provides for and limits. Had the
intention been otherwise, nothing prevented the
Legislature from providing so specifically.
12. A comparative study of
Section 30
, pre and post-
amendment in the year 2000, reveals that the
deemed status of proceedings before the Recovery
officer, as a Tribunal, stands denuded. Had the pro-
ceedings before the Recovery officer deemed to be
before a Tribunal, entirely different considerations
may have arisen.
Old
Section 30
before the
Section 30
after the 2000
2000 Amendment             Amendment
"30 Orders of Recovery Of- "30. Appeal against the or-
ficer to be deemed as order der of Recovery      Officer.-
of Tribunal.- Notwithstand- (1)          Notwithstanding
ing anything contained in anything contained in Sec-
Section 29
, an order made tion 29, any person ag-
by the   Recovery Officer in grieved by an order of the
exercise of his powers un- Recovery Officer made un-
18
der
Sections 25
to
28
(both der this Act may, within
inclusive), shall be deemed thirty days from the date on
to have been made by the which a copy of the order is
Tribunal   and   an   appeal issued to him, prefer an ap-
against such orders shall lie peal to the     Tribunal.
to the Appellate Tribunal."    (2) On receipt of an         ap-
peal under sub-section (1),
                               the Tribunal may, after giv-
ing an         opportunity to
                               the          appellant to be
                               heard, and after making
                               such enquiry as it deems
                               fit, confirm, modify or set
                               aside the order made by
                               the Recovery Officer in ex-
                               ercise of his powers under
Sections 25
to
28
(both in-
                               clusive)."
13. The RDB Act is a special law. The proceedings
are before a statutory Tribunal. The scheme of the Act
manifestly provides that the legislature has provided
for application of the
Limitation Act
to original pro-
ceedings before the Tribunal under
Section 19
only.
The Appellate Tribunal has been conferred the power
to condone delay beyond 45 days under
Section
20(3)
of the Act. The proceedings before the Recov-
ery officer are not before a Tribunal.
Section 24
is lim-
ited in its application to proceedings before the Tri-
bunal originating under
Section 19
only. The exclusion
of any provision for extension of time by the Tribunal
in preferring an appeal under
Section 30
of the Act
makes it manifest that the legislative intent for exclu-
sion was express. The application of
Section 5
of the
Limitation Act by resort to
Section 29(2)
of the Limita-
tion Act, 1963 therefore does not arise. The pre-
19
scribed period of 30 days under Section 30(1) of the
       RDB Act for preferring an appeal against the order of
       the Recovery officer therefore cannot be condoned by
       application of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act.”
10) The judgment of this Court makes it plain, though in a slightly

different context, that the only application that is referred to by

Section 24 of the RDB Act is an application filed under
Section 19
and no other. This being the case, an application for review, not

being an application under
Section 19
, but an application under
Section 22(2)(e)
read with Rule 5A of the Rules, this judgment

would apply on all fours to exclude applications which are review

applications from the purview of Section 24 of the RDB Act.
11) However, Mr. Dave laid great stress on paragraph 12 of
the

said judgment
and, in particular, the sentence “had the proceedings

before the Recovery Officer deemed to be before a Tribunal,

entirely different considerations may have arisen”. From this

sentence, the learned counsel sought to infer that it would not only

be applications under
Section 19
that would come within the

“application” spoken of in
Section 24
, but other applications also.
12) We are afraid we are unable to agree with the aforesaid

submission. The clear ratio decidendi of this judgment makes it

abundantly clear that the only application referred to in
Section 24
is

an application filed under
Section 19
and to no other. The sentence

that is extracted and relied upon by Mr. Dave only makes sense in
20
the context of
Section 30
unamended, when read juxtaposed with
Section 30
as amended. Under the unamended section, when the

recovery officer’s order was deemed as an order of the Tribunal,

appeals would lie to the Appellate Tribunal. This would mean that

Section 20 of the RDB Act would apply, as a result of which
Section

20(3)
would kick in and would permit condonation of delay. After the

amendment, it is important to note that the recovery officer is no

longer considered a Tribunal, as result of which an appeal from a

recovery officer’s order is made not to the Appellate Tribunal, but to

the Tribunal of first instance. It is in this context that the aforesaid

sentence in paragraph 12 of the Court’s judgment is to be read,

making it clear that if the unamended
Section 30
were to apply, the

provision contained in
Section 20(3)
would be attracted, permitting

condonation of delay.
13)   Mr. Dave’s second contention that, in any case, a review

petition is only a correction of the order made in the original

proceeding, and therefore part and parcel of the original

proceeding, cannot be countenanced in view of this Court’s

judgment in Kamlesh Verma vs. Mayawati and Others (supra). This

Court held:
“13. In a criminal proceeding, review is permissible on
       the ground of an error apparent on the face of the
       record. A review proceeding cannot be equated with
       the original hearing of the case.
21
20.2. When the review will not be maintainable:
(i) xxx
(iii) Review proceedings cannot be equated with the
       original hearing of the case.”
14) The peremptory language of Rule 5A would also make it clear

that beyond 30 days there is no power to condone delay. We may

also note that Rule 5A was added in 1997 with a longer period

within which to file a review petition, namely, 60 days. This period

was cut down, by amendment, with effect from 04.11.2016, to 30

days. From this two things are clear: one, whether in the original or

unamended provision, there is no separate power to condone delay,

as is contained in
Section 20(3)
of the Act; and second, that the

period of 60 days was considered too long and cut down to 30 days

thereby evincing an intention that review petitions, if they are to be

filed, should be within a shorter period of limitation – otherwise they

would not be maintainable.
15) We are also of the view that the High Court wrongly applied
Order XLVII Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure
. Order XLVII

Rule 7 states as follows:
“7. Order of rejection not appealable - Objections to
       order granting application.-
(1) An order of the Court rejecting the application shall
       not be appealable; but an order granting an
       application may be objected to at once by an appeal
       from the order granting the application or in an appeal
22
from the decree or order finally passed or made in the
       suit.
(2) Where the application has been rejected in
       consequence of the failure of the applicant to appear,
       he may apply for an order to have the rejected
       application restored to the file, and, where it is proved
       to the satisfaction of the Court that he was prevented
       by any sufficient cause from appearing when such
       application was called on for hearing, the Court shall
       order it to be restored to the file upon such terms as
       to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint
       a day for hearing the same.
(3) No order shall be made under sub-rule (2) unless
       notice of the application has been served on the
       opposite party.”
16)
Section 22(1)
of the Act makes it clear that the Tribunal and the

Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by
the Code of Civil Procedure
, making it clear thereby that Order

XLVII Rule 7 would not apply to the Tribunal. Also, in view of
Section 20
, which applies to all applications that may be made,

including applications for review, and orders being made therein

being subject to appeal, it is a little difficult to appreciate how Order

XLVII Rule 7 could apply at all, given that Section 20 of the RDB Act

is part of a complete and exhaustive code.
Section 34
of the Act

makes it clear that the 1993 Act, (and, therefore,
Section 20
), will

have overriding effect over any other law for the time being in force,

which includes
the Code of Civil Procedure
. The High Court, in

holding that no appeal would be maintainable against the dismissal

of the review petition, and that therefore a writ petition would be
23
maintainable, was clearly in error on this count also.
17) Shri Dave’s contention that as to the appellant’s conduct, as in

an application filed in 2012 an I.A praying that a judgment should be

given on admission, was filed unconscionably late i.e. only in 2017,

five years later, also has no legs to stand. In 2013, the respondent

challenged the jurisdiction of the DRT Mumbai which challenge was

repelled finally in appeal only in 2017 after which the said I.A was

filed. In any event, this is not an argument which would, by itself,

lead to a dismissal of the SLP filed by the appellant under
Article

136
of the Constitution of India.
18) For all these reasons therefore, we are of the view that the

High Court judgment cannot be sustained and is thus set aside.

The appeal is allowed accordingly.
……………….......................... J.
(ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN)



                                          ……………….......................... J.
(V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN)

New Delhi;
January 21, 2020.