[Cites
13
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Pawan Hans Ltd. vs Aviation Karmachari Sanghatana on 17 January, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 564, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 39, 2020 LAB IC 839, 2020 (2) ABR 214, (2020) 1 CURLR 253, (2020) 2 SCALE 194, (2020) 1 SCT 681
Author:
Indu Malhotra
Bench:
Indu Malhotra
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
REPORTABLE


                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                 Civil Appeal No. 353 of 2020
                            (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 381 of 2019)


                      M/S. PAWAN HANS LIMITED & ORS.         …APPELLANTS


                                            Versus


                      AVIATION KARMACHARI SANGHATANA
                      & ORS.                         …RESPONDENTS


                                       JUDGMENT
INDU MALHOTRA, J.
Leave granted.
1. The issue which arises for consideration is whether the

             contractual employees of the Appellant­Company are entitled to

             provident fund benefits under the Pawan Hans Employees

             Provident Fund Trust Regulations or under the Employees’
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952
(“EPF
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
RAJNI MUKHI
Act”) and the Employees’ Provident Fund Scheme, 1952 (“EPF
Date: 2020.01.17
16:20:21 IST
Reason:
Scheme”) framed thereunder.
1
2. The background facts in which the present Civil Appeal has

  been filed are as under :
2.1 The Company was incorporated on 15.10.1985 under the
Companies Act, 1956
, and is registered as a Government of

        India company with the Registrar of Companies, Delhi. The

        Government of India holds 51% shareholding in the

        Appellant­Company and the remaining 49% is held by Oil

        and Natural Gas Company Ltd. (ONGC).
The Company was incorporated with the primary

        objective of providing helicopter support services to the oil

        sector for its off­shore exploration operations, services in

        remote and hilly areas, and charter services for promotion

        of tourism. It is classified as a non­scheduled operator

        under Rule 134 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937.
  2.2   On 01.04.1986, the Appellant­Company           framed    and

        notified the Pawan Hans Employees Provident Fund Trust

        Regulations (hereinafter referred to as “the PF Trust

        Regulations”) for giving provident fund benefits to all the

        employees of the Appellant­Company.
Regulations 1.3 and 2.5 of the PF Trust Regulations are

        set out hereunder for ready reference:
2
“1.3 ­ These Regulations shall apply to all the employees of
        the Corporation.
2.5. – “Employee” means any person who is employed for
        wages/salary in any kind of work, monthly or otherwise, in
        or in connection with the work of the Corporation and who
        gets his wages/salary directly or indirectly from the
        Corporation, and excludes any person employed by or
        through a contractor or in connection with the work of the
        Corporation but does not include any person employed as an
        apprentice or trainee.”

                                               [emphasis supplied]

2.3   On 26.03.1987, the Appellant­Company instituted the

      Pawan Hans Employees Provident Fund Trust (“PF Trust”)

      wherein the management started depositing its share

      towards the provident fund contribution with respect to

      employees    on   the    regular   cadre     of   the   Company;
correspondingly, the regular employees started depositing

      the matching contribution with the PF Trust.

2.4   Out of a total workforce of 840 employees, the Company

      had engaged 570 employees on regular basis, while 270

      employees were engaged on ‘contractual’ basis.

          The Company implemented the PF Trust Regulations

      only with respect to the regular employees, even though

      the term “employee” had been defined to include “any
3
person” employed “directly or indirectly” under the PF

      Trust Regulations.
2.5   The Company having framed its own PF Trust Regulations,

      was claiming exemption from the applicability of the
EPF

      Act
and EPF Scheme under
Section 16
of the EPF Act.

2.6   On 08.01.1989, the Ministry of Labour, Government of

      India, issued a communication to the Central Provident

      Fund Commissioner, New Delhi, pertaining to the grant of

      exemption to departmental undertakings under the control

      of the Central/State Government statutory bodies. The

      Central Provident Fund Commissioner was directed to

      instruct the Regional Provident Fund Commissioners to

      carefully review the cases of departmental undertakings

      and statutory bodies falling under the categories specified

      in
Section 16(1)(b)
and
16(1)(c)
of the EPF Act, and take

      further action as indicated in the said letter.

         Clause (iv) of the said letter dated 08.01.1989 is of

      relevance, and is extracted hereunder for ready reference:
“(iv) There may be establishments which employ large
         member of casual/contingent staff, who are not entitled to
         the benefit of provident fund or pension. The
         casual/contingent staff of such establishment will
         continue to be covered under the Act, but their regular
         employees who are entitled to the benefit of provident fund
         or pension should be excluded from the purview of the
         Act.”
4
[emphasis supplied]
2.7   The Central Government, in exercise of the powers under
S.1(3)(b)
of the EPF Act, issued a Notification dated

      22.03.2001, making           the provisions of         the
EPF      Act
applicable to aircraft or airlines establishments employing

      20      or   more   persons,        excluding   aircraft   or   airlines

      establishments owned or controlled by the Central or State

      Government.
The Gazette Notification No. SO 746 dated 22.03.2001

      (“Notification”) is extracted for ready reference:­

              “ S.O. 746 – In exercise of the powers conferred by
              clause (b) of sub section (3) of Section 1 of the
              Employees       Provident   Fund    and    Miscellaneous
              Provisions Act 1952 (19 of 1952), the Central
              Government        hereby    specifies    the   following
              establishment employing 20 or more persons as the
              class of establishments to which the said Act shall
              apply with effect from 1st April 2001 namely:
(i)     An establishment engaged in rendering courier services;
(ii)    An establishment of aircraft or airlines other than the
              aircraft airlines owned or controlled by the Central or
              State Government.
(iii)   An establishment engaged in rendering cleaning and
              sweeping services.”
                                                            [emphasis
              supplied]

              The said Notification was brought into force w.e.f

      01.04.2001.
2.8   Correspondingly, amendments were made to the EPF

      Scheme framed under
Section 5
of the EPF Act. Clause 3
5
(b)(ci) was inserted vide Notification No. S­35016/1/1997­

      SS II dated 22.07.2002, by which the EPF Scheme was

      made applicable to aircraft or airlines establishments other

      than the aircraft or airlines establishments owned or

      controlled by the Central or State Government.
2.9   The members of the Respondent­Union made several

      representations on 18.09.2012, 29.09.2012, 13.03.2013,

      19.11.2014     to   extend    the   benefit   of   the   PF    Trust

      Regulations since they were directly engaged by the

      Company on contractual basis, some of whom were

      working for almost 20 years.
The Company failed to respond to the representations.


2.10 Being aggrieved by the inaction of the Company, the

      Respondent­Trade Union, filed CWP No.325 of 2017 on

      20.12.2016 against the Company praying for the following

      reliefs:
“(a) A declaration that the members of the Respondent­
          Trade Union and other similarly situated employees,
          employed on contract basis by the Appellant­Company are
          entitled to the benefit of Provident Fund as per the
EPF Act
and the EPF Scheme, and that the Appellant­Company be
          directed to forthwith enrol all such eligible contract
          employees under the EPF Scheme and deposit their
          contribution with the Respondent No. 3­ Regional Provident
6
Fund    Commissioner,     Employees’      Provident      Fund
         Organisation, from the date they are eligible till remittance,
         and thereafter, till they are in the employment of the
         Appellant­Company.
(b) Alternatively, the Appellant­Company forthwith be
         directed to suitably amend the PF Trust Regulations to permit
         the enrolment of contract workers as members of the PF
         Trust instituted by the Appellant­Company and to make all
         eligible contract employees members of the PF Trust from
         their respective dates of entitlement and continue to
         contribute amounts to the PF Trust in respect of contract
         employees.”

2.11 During the pendency of the Writ Petition, the Regional

    Provident Fund Commissioner, Bandra issued a letter

    dated 24.05.2017 to the Company wherein it was stated

    that even though the
EPF Act
would not apply to

    establishments        owned/controlled         by     the     Central

    Government as per
S.16(1)(b)
and (c), however social

    security benefits such as provident fund must be provided

    to   all    “employees/workers         who      are    engaged        on

    contractual/casual/daily wages basis” since there is no

    distinction between a person employed on permanent,

    temporary, contractual, or casual basis under
S.2 (f)
of the

    EPF Act.
2.12 The High Court vide the impugned Judgment & Order

    dated 12.09.2018 allowed the Writ Petition in terms of

    prayer (a), with the direction that the benefits under the
7
EPF Act
be extended to the members of the Respondent­

     Trade Union, and other similarly situated employees. It

     was held that a liberal view must be taken in extending

     social security benefits to the contractual employees. The

     High Court directed the Company to enrol all eligible

     contractual employees under the EPF Scheme, and deposit

     their contribution with Respondent No.3 – Regional

     Provident Fund Commissioner from the date they became

     eligible till remittance, and thereafter till they are in

     employment of the Company. This was to be carried out

     latest by 31.12.2018.
3. Aggrieved   by   the   impugned   Judgment,   the   Appellant­

  Company filed the present Civil Appeal.
This Court vide Order dated 14.01.2019 issued notice

   and granted stay of the impugned Judgment subject to the

   Company depositing a sum of Rs.5,00,00,000/­ (Rupees Five

   Crores) within 3 months in this Court.
Pursuant thereto, the Company deposited the said

   amount on 09.04.2019, which has been invested in a Fixed

   Deposit.
8
4. We have heard the learned counsel for both the parties, and

  have considered the oral and written submissions made on

  their behalf.
4.1 Ms. Pinky Anand, learned Additional Solicitor General of

       India, appearing for the Appellant­Company inter alia

       submitted that:
a) The Company is excluded from the applicability of the
EPF Act
since it neither falls under
Schedule I of the

          EPF Act
, nor is it covered by Notification dated

          22.03.2001 issued under
Section 1(3)(b)
of the EPF

          Act, since the Notification itself expressly excludes

          airline companies “owned or controlled by the Central

          Government” from the purview of the
EPF Act
.
b) The Notification 22.03.2001 was inapplicable to the

          Appellant­Company since
Section 16(1)(b)
of the EPF

          Act, excludes an establishment owned or controlled

          by the Central Government from the scope of the
EPF

          Act
.
c) The    Central   Government    holds   51%     of   the

          shareholding in the Appellant­Company, and the

          Board of Directors of the Appellant­Company have
9
been appointed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The

  Appellant­Company is governed by the guidelines

  issued by the Department of Public Enterprises,

  Government of India. The Appellant­Company is thus

  an establishment owned and controlled by the Central

  Government.     Even        after   the
EPF    Act
became

  applicable to the airlines industry, the Appellant­

  Company      being    an      establishment      owned    and

  controlled by the Central Government, was excluded

  from the purview of the
EPF Act
.
d) The High Court committed a grave error in giving

  retrospective application to the provisions of the
EPF

  Act
, i.e., from the date of the members joining the

  Respondent­Trade        Union,        given     that   several

  contractual employees had superannuated, passed

  away, resigned, or ceased to be in the employment of

  the Company. The extension of benefits under the
EPF Act
to contractual employees irrespective of their

  status of employment with the Company was wholly

  illegal, arbitrary, and liable to be set aside.
10
e) The members of the Respondent­Union and other

       similarly situated employees have already been paid

       in full their monthly financial benefits/emoluments.

       The direction of the High Court to the Company to

       contribute to the provident fund of the contractual

       employees would amount to burdening the Company

       with twice the liability.
4.2 Mr. P.S. Narasimha, learned Senior Counsel appearing

    on behalf of the Respondent­Union inter alia submitted

    that:
a) The term “employee” defined by Clause 2.5 of the PF

       Trust Regulations is widely defined to cover all

       employees, including those engaged on contractual

       basis, who are in the direct or indirect employment of

       the Company. The members of the Respondent­Union

       are in direct employment of the Company, since they

       have not been engaged through any contractor. The

       contractual workers are paid directly as evidenced by

       the pay slips issued by the Company. The benefits

       under the PF Trust Regulations, or the
EPF Act
, are

       required to be provided to even contractual employees
11
from the date of their joining till the date of

  remittance.
b) The   Company is not controlled by the Central

  Government       since   its   affairs   are managed     and

  controlled by a Board of Directors. The Company is

  not a company controlled by the Central Government.
The   Notification     dated   22.03.2001,   specified

  certain establishments including the airlines industry,

  other than airlines owned or controlled by the Central

  or State Government, to be covered under the
EPF

  Act
. Consequently, the Company was obligated to

  extend the benefits under the
EPF Act
to all its

  employees.
c)
The EPF Act
is a beneficial piece of legislation, which

  has to be liberally construed. The denial of statutory

  benefits and entitlements like provident fund to the

  members of the Respondent­Union is ex­facie illegal,

  arbitrary, discriminatory and in violation of the

  provisions of the
EPF Act
and the Constitution of

  India.
12
5    The issue which arises for consideration in the present Civil

     Appeal is whether the Appellant­Company is under a

     statutory obligation to provide the benefit of provident fund

     to its contractual employees under the PF Trust Regulations

     or the
EPF Act
?
If so, the date from which the aforesaid benefit is to be

     extended to the contractual employees.

 6    Discussion and Analysis

6.1 It is first required to be seen whether the Appellant­

      Company is excluded from the applicability of the provisions

      of the
EPF Act
and the EPF Scheme framed thereunder as

      contended by them.
6.2 As per
Section 1(3)
of the EPF Act, the EPF Act is applicable

      to every establishment in which 20 or more persons are

      employed, which is either a factory engaged in any industry

      specified in Schedule I, or an establishment which the

      Central Government may by notification in the Official

      Gazette specify in that behalf. Section 1(3) of the EPF Act

      reads as:
“
Section.1(3)
: Subject to the provisions contained in
section
           16
, it applies —
13
(a)    to every establishment which is a factory engaged in
     any industry specified in Schedule I and in which twenty or
     more persons are employed, and
(b)    to any other establishment employing twenty or more
     persons or class of such establishments which the Central
     Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
     specify in this behalf:
Provided that the Central Government may, after
     giving not less than two months’ notice of its intention so to
     do, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the
     provisions of this Act to any establishment employing such
     number of persons less than twenty as may be specified in
     the notification.”

                                           [emphasis supplied]
Section 1(3)
is subject to
Section 16
of the EPF Act.
Sub­section (1) of
Section 16
enlists those establishments

which are excluded from the applicability of the
EPF Act
. As

per clause (b) of sub­section (1), an establishment belonging

to or under the control of the Central or State Government,

and whose employees are entitled to the benefit of

contributory provident fund in accordance with any scheme

or rules framed by the Central or State Government

governing such benefits, is excluded from the purview of the
EPF Act
.
Sub­section (1) of Section 16 reads as:
“
Section 16
. Act not to apply to certain establishment.
     –
     (1)
This Act
shall not apply­
14
(a) to any establishment registered under the Co­operative
                 Societies Act, 1912 (2 of 1912), or under any other law
                 for the time being in force in any State relating to
                 cooperative societies employing less than fifty persons
                 and working without the aid of power; or
(b) to any other establishment belonging to or under the
                 control of the Central Government or a State
                 Government and whose employees are entitled to the
                 benefit of contributory provident fund or old age
                 pension in accordance with any Scheme or rule framed
                 by the Central Government or the State Government
                 governing such benefits; or
(c) To any other establishment set up under any Central,
                 Provincial or State Act and whose employees are
                 entitled to the benefits of contributory provident fund or
                 old age pension in accordance with any scheme or rule
                 framed under that Act governing such benefits;
(2) If the Central Government is of opinion that having
                 regard to the financial position of any class of
                 establishment or other circumstances of the case, it is
                 necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by notification
                 in the Official Gazette, and subject to such conditions,
                 as may be specified in the notification, exempt, whether
                 prospectively or retrospectively, that class of
                 establishments from the operation of this Act for such
                 period as may be specified in the notification.”

                                                    [emphasis supplied]

            This Court in Regional Provident Fund Commissioner v.
1
Sanatan Dharam Girls Secondary School                   laid down a twin­

      test for an establishment to seek exemption from the

      provisions of the
EPF Act, 1952
. The twin conditions are:
1 (2007) 1 SCC 268 : (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 167
15
First, the establishment must be either “belonging to” or

      “under the control of” the Central or the State Government.
The phrase “belonging to” would signify “ownership” of the

      Government, whereas the phrase “under the control of”

      would imply superintendence, management or authority to

      direct, restrict or regulate.2
          Second, the employees of such an establishment should

      be entitled to the benefit of contributory provident fund or

      old age pension in accordance with any scheme or rule

      framed by the Central Government or the State Government

      governing such benefits.
If both tests are satisfied, an establishment can claim

      exemption/exclusion under
Section 16(1)(b)
of the EPF Act.
Applying the first test to the instant case, the Central

      Government has a 51% ownership in the Appellant­

      Company, while the balance 49% is owned by the ONGC, a

      Central Government PSU.
As per
Section 2(45)
of the Companies Act, 2013, a

      “Government Company” means any company in which not

      less than 51 % of the paid­up share capital is held by the

      Central Government. Since 51% of the shares of the
2
Shamrao Vithal Coop. Bank Ltd. v. Kasargode Panduranga Maliya
, (1972) 4 SCC 600
16
Appellant­Company are owned by the Central Government,

the first test is satisfied as the Appellant­Company can be

termed as a Government Company under
Section 2(45)
of

the Companies Act, 2013.
With respect to the second test, it is relevant to note

that the Company had its own Scheme viz. the Pawan Hans

Employees Provident Fund Trust Regulations in force. The

Company however restricted the application of the PF Trust

Regulations to only the ‘regular’ employees. The PF Trust

Regulations of the Company were not framed by the Central

or State Government, nor were they applicable to all the

employees of the Company, so as to satisfy the second test.

   The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Bandra

issued letter dated 24.05.2017 addressed to the Company

wherein it was stated that the benefit of contributory

provident      fund     was          not    being         provided     to

contractual/casual employees of the Company; and was

directed to implement the provisions of the
EPF Act
.

   The   relevant     extract    from      the   letter    is   set   out

hereinbelow:
“approximately 370­400 employees have been engaged by
     M/s Pawan Hans Ltd. on contract basis in various cadres.
17
But no social security benefit is being extended to them.
The EPF & MP Act, 1952 under
Section 2(f)
lays down that
          any person employed for wages in any kind of work in or
          in connection with the work of the establishment and
          includes a worker engaged by or through a contractor.
          There is no distinction between a person employed on
          permanent, temporary, contractual or casual basis under
          Section 2(f) of the EPF & MP Act, 1952.
You are therefore, requested to implement the
          provisions of the EPF & MP Act, 1952 in respect of all the
          contractual/causal employees engaged by M/s Pawan
          Hans Ltd. who are still not getting benefits of PF and
          Pension.”
                                                  [emphasis supplied]


          In our view, the Company does not satisfy the second

     test, since the members of the Respondent­Union and other

     similarly situated contractual workers were not getting the

     benefits of contributory provident fund under the PF Trust

     Regulations framed by the Company, or under any Scheme

     or any rule framed by the Central Government or the State

     Government. Consequentially, the exemption under
Section

     16
of EPF Act would not be applicable to the Appellant­

     Company.
In view of the above discussion, we hold that the

     Company has failed to make out a case of exclusion from

     the applicability of the provisions of the
EPF Act
.

6.3 The next issue which arises for consideration is whether the

     members of the Respondent­Trade Union are entitled to the
18
benefit of Provident Fund under the PF Trust Regulations or

under the
EPF Act
.
Clause 1.3 of the Regulations would show that the PF

Trust Regulations were made applicable to “all employees”

of the Appellant­Company.
Clause 2.5 of the Regulations, defines an “employee”,

to include any employee who is employed for wages/salary

in any kind of work, monthly or otherwise, or in connection

with the work of the Company, and who gets his

wages/salary directly or indirectly from the Company.

Clause 2.5 excludes only a person employed by or through a

contractor in connection with the work of the Company, and

any person employed as an apprentice or trainee.
In the present case, the Respondent­Union submitted

that even though the appointment letters refer to the

employees   as   ‘contractual’   employees,   they   were   not

engaged through any contractor. They were being paid

directly by the Company, which is evidenced from the pay­

slips issued to them. It was submitted that about 250

contractual employees receive wages directly from the
19
Company, and are eligible to be included under the PF Trust

       Regulations framed by the Company.
6.4 We find that the members of the Respondent­Union have

       been in continuous employment with the Company for long

       periods of time. They have been receiving wages/salary

       directly from the Company without the involvement of any

       contractor since the date of their engagement. The work

       being      of   a    perennial        and     continuous           nature,     the

       employment cannot be termed to be ‘contractual’ in nature.
In our considered view, Clause 2.5 of the PF Trust

       Regulations         would     undoubtedly          cover     all    contractual

       employees who have been engaged by the Company, and

       draw their wages/salary directly or indirectly from the

       Company.
6.5 As per
Section 2(f)
of the EPF Act, the definition of an

       ‘employee’ is an inclusive definition, and is widely worded to

       include “any person” engaged either directly or indirectly in

       connection with the work of an establishment, and is paid

       wages.3

3
Sub­Regional Provident Fund Office v. Godavari Garments Ltd.
, (2019) 8 SCC 149 : (2019) 2
SCC (L&S) 483; M/s
P.M. Patel & Sons and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors
(1986) 1 SCC 32.
20
In view of the above discussion, we find that the

    members of the Respondent­Union and all other similarly

    situated contractual employees, are entitled to the benefit of

    provident fund under the PF Trust Regulations or the
EPF

    Act
. Since the PF Trust Regulations are in force and are

    applicable to all employees of the Company, it would be

    preferable to direct that the members of the Respondent­

    Union and other similarly situated contractual employees

    are granted the benefit of provident fund under the PF Trust

    Regulations so that there is uniformity in the service

    conditions of all the employees of the Company.

6.6 The question which now arises is the date from which the

    benefit of provident fund is to be extended to the

    contractual employees.
This Court vide Order dated 24.10.2019 had passed the

    following Order:
“Provident Fund is normally managed on actuarial basis;
           the contributions received from employer and the
           employee are invested and the income by way of interest
           forms the substantial fund through which any pay­out is
           made. For all these years the Fund in question was
           subsisting on contributions made by the other employees
           and, if at this stage, the benefit in terms of the judgment
           of the High Court is extended with retrospective effect, it
           may create imbalance. Those who had never contributed
           at any stage would now be members of the fund. The
21
fund never had any advantage of their contributions and
           yet the fund would be required to bear the burden in case
           any pay­out is to be made. Even if concerned employees
           are directed to make good contributions with respect to
           previous years with equivalent matching contribution
           from the employer, the fund would still be deprived of the
           interest income for past several years in respect of such
           contributions.
In order to have clear perspective in the matter
           and to see if there could be any solution to the problem
           as posed above, we call upon the petitioner to depute a
           person who is well versed in the matter and who has
           been managing the Provident Fund Scheme of Pawan
           Hans Limited to have a dialogue with the respondent
           No.3 before 15.11.2019 (a representative of the
           respondent(s) is also at liberty to remain present during
           such discussion) so that a workable solution could then
           be presented by such person and the representative of
           respondent No.3 before us on the next occasion.
List the matter on 29.11.2019 at 10.30 a.m.”

6.7 The learned ASG submitted that no workable solution could

    be   worked    out    at    the    meeting     held    between       the

    representative of the Appellant­Company, Respondent No.3,

    and the representative of the Respondent­Union. The

    learned ASG however offered that the Appellant­Company

    was willing to extend the benefit under the PF Trust

    Regulations to the members of the Respondent­Union and

    other similarly situated employees, from the date of the

    impugned Judgment.
6.8 Respondent     No.3     –    the    Regional      Provident      Fund

    Commissioner submitted that since the Company had
22
remained out of the purview of the
EPF Act
, the direction to

    deposit contribution from the date of eligibility of the

    contractual employees till the date of remittance was not

    workable, and could not be sustained.
7   After hearing the parties at length, and in light of the

    peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, we affirm the

    Judgment & Order dated 12.09.2018 passed by the Bombay

    High Court in W.P.No.325/2017 holding that members of

    the Respondent­Union are covered by the
EPF Act
. However,

    we modify the direction of the High Court to grant the

    benefits under the
EPF Act
, and direct that the members of

    the   Respondent­Union      and    other   similarly   situated

    contractual employees be enrolled under the Pawan Hans

    Employees Provident Fund Trust Regulations so that there

    is uniformity in the conditions of service of all employees of

    the Appellant­Company.
Furthermore, the direction of the High Court to pay the

    contribution from the date of their eligibility till the date of

    remittance is also modified in terms of the directions given

    in this Judgment.
23
8   We pass the following directions to effectuate the reliefs

    granted:
(i)     The interests of justice would be best subserved if the

            benefit of Provident Fund is provided to the members

            of the Respondent­Union, and other similarly situated

            contractual employees, from January 2017 when the

            Writ Petition was filed before the High Court.
(ii)    Respondent No.3 ­ the Regional Provident Fund

            Commissioner,    Regional    Office,   Bhavishya   Nidhi

            Bhawan, 341 Bandra (E), Mumbai is directed to

            determine and compute the amount to be deposited by

            the Company on the one hand, and the members of

            the Respondent­Union and other similar situated

            employees on the other hand. The computation would

            be required to be made for the past period i.e. January

            2017 to December 2019;
(iii)   The Company shall be liable to pay Simple Interest @

            12% p.a. on the amount payable by it towards

            contribution of provident fund for the past period, i.e.,
24
January 2017 to December 2019, as per
Section 7Q
of

        the EPF Act,1952 ;
(iv)    The statement of computation made by Respondent

        No.3 will be placed before this Court within a period of

        12 weeks from the date of this Judgment, and

        thereafter the matter will be listed for issuance of

        necessary directions, so that the amount can be

        remitted from the deposit made before this Court,

        directly to the PF Trust;
(v)     The employees will be obligated to deposit their

        matching contribution for the past period i.e. January

        2017 to December 2019, within a period of 12 weeks

        along with interest @ 6% p.a., after the contribution of

        the Company has been remitted to the PF Trust;
(vi)    With respect to the period from January 2020

        onwards, the Company and the members of the

        Respondent­Union as also other similary situated

        employees, will make their respective contributions as

        per the PF Trust Regulations;
(vii)   The benefit shall not be extended to those employees

        who have superannuated, expired, resigned, or ceased
25
to be in the employment of the Company on the date of

         this Judgment ;
(viii)   We   consider     it   appropriate    to    award       Costs      of

         Rs.5,00,000 (Rupees Five Lacs) to the Respondent­

         Union towards litigation expenses incurred in the High

         Court and in this Court.
(ix)     After the aforesaid amounts are disbursed, the balance

         amount lying deposited in this Court shall be refunded

         to the Appellant­Company.
The present civil appeal along with all pending

applications, if any, stand disposed of.

Ordered accordingly.
...…...............………………J.
                                            (UDAY UMESH LALIT)




                                      .......................................J.
                                                   (INDU MALHOTRA)
New Delhi;
January 17, 2020.
26