[Cites
4
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Gajaraba Bhikhubha Vadher Ors. vs Sumara Umar Amad (D) Thr Legal Heirs . on 14 January, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 506, (2020) 1 CURCC 255 (2020) 2 SCALE 40, (2020) 2 SCALE 40, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 31
Author:
A.S. Bopanna
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
A.S. Bopanna
,
R. Banumathi
NON­REPORTABLE


                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 260           OF 2020
                              (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No.33722 of 2016)


                         Gajaraba Bhikhubha Vadher & Ors.        .…Appellant(s)

                                                 Versus

                         Sumara Umar Amad (D) Thru Legal      …. Respondent(s)
                         Heirs & Ors.


                                           JUDGMENT
A.S. Bopanna,J.
Leave granted.
2.      The appellants are before this Court assailing the

                      judgment dated 19.10.2016 passed by the High Court of

                      Gujarat at Ahmedabad in Second Appeal No.12 of 2014.

                      Through the said judgment, though the appeal is allowed

                      in part to the extent of setting aside the decree dated

                      03.12.2012 passed in the Regular Appeal No.130 of 2005
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
Date: 2020.01.14
13:16:35 IST
Reason:
and confirming the judgment dated 07.11.2012 in Regular
Page 1 of 19
Civil Appeal No.130 of 2005, the High Court has held that

   insofar as the locus of the appellants, they being third

   parties had no right to challenge the judgment and order

   passed by the Lower Appellate Court.           The appellants

   being purchasers of plot in the land bearing Survey No.36

   of Dhinchna, Taluk and District Jamnagar which is the

   subject matter of the suit are therefore, before this Court

   claiming to be aggrieved by the impugned judgment.
3.          The appellants were not the parties to the suit nor

   in the regular appeal. However, the adverse judgment in

   the first and second appeal has led to the present appeal.

   The brief facts noticed for the limited purpose of disposal

   of this appeal is that the predecessors of the respondents

   No.1/1 to No.1/4, namely, Sumara Umar Amad instituted

   a suit bearing Special Civil Suit No.77/1974 against his

   father Sumara Amad Osman seeking for partition of the

   land bearing Survey No.36 situate in Dhinchna village

   Jamnagar measuring 23 Acres, 27 Guntas. The claim put

   forth was that the said property was in the joint

   ownership, occupation and possession.             The plaintiff

   referred to certain mortgage transaction with his father
Page 2 of 19
and in that light claiming to have a joint ownership right

   to the extent of half share in the said property, had sought

   for partition of the property, more fully described in

   Schedule A to the plaint. In that regard, certain exchange

   of notices by way of paper publication was referred as the

   cause of action since the defendant No.1, namely, the

   father of the plaintiff is stated to have published a notice

   in the daily Newspaper “Nobat” on 29.03.1974 expressing

   the intention to sell the property.   In the said suit the

   defendants 2 to 4 who were purchasers of the property

   under the Sale Deed dated 29.07.1975 were subsequently

   arrayed as defendants 2 to 4 though they were not parties

   initially. The defendants had opposed the claim put forth

   in the plaint. In that regard, the defendant No.1, namely,

   the father of the plaintiff had disputed the claim of joint

   ownership and had contended that the defendant had

   purchased the suit land before the birth of the plaintiff

   and the parties being Mohammedans, the plaintiff cannot

   have any right in the suit land based on his relationship

   as a son, during the lifetime of the father. The defendant

   No.1, therefore, claimed absolute right and the authority
Page 3 of 19
to sell the property which was due to the bad financial

   situation of the defendant father. During the pendency of

   the suit the defendant No.1 father expired on 21.02.1978

   and his heirs, namely, the siblings of the plaintiff were

   joined as defendants No.1/1 to 1/4.
4.          Based on the rival pleadings, the Trial Court had

   framed five issues for its consideration. During the course

   of the suit, despite not having pleaded in the plaint, the

   plaintiff put forth a different version about his right to the

   property claiming right to the property under an oral gift

   from his grandfather. The Trial Court on having adverted

   to all aspects of the matter, through its detailed judgment

   had dismissed the suit by judgment and decree dated

   17.04.1982. The plaintiff claiming to be aggrieved by the

   same preferred a Regular Appeal as contemplated under

   Section 96 of the Civil Procedure Code in R.C. Appeal

   No.130 of 2005.        In the said Regular Appeal the Lower

   Appellate Court had reversed the judgment and decree

   dated       17.04.1982   passed   by   the   Trial   Court   and

   consequently decreed the suit of the plaintiff declaring him

   to have right over half share of the suit schedule property.
Page 4 of 19
The appellants herein who had purchased plots formed in

   the layout in a portion of the property were thus aggrieved

   by the judgment dated 07.11.2012 and decree dated

   03.12.2012 passed by the Lower Appellate Court and

   preferred the Second Appeal No.12 of 2014 under Section

   100 of the Civil Procedure Code before the High Court. As

   noted above, the said Second Appeal was disposed without

   relief to the appellants and the appellants are, therefore,

   before this Court.
5.          Heard   Shri   Rakesh   Dwivedi,   learned   Senior

   Counsel for the appellants, Shri Siddharth Bhatnagar,

   learned Senior Counsel for the respondents and perused

   the appeal papers.
6.          It is to be taken note that even though a brief

   reference is made to the nature of the claim put forth in

   the suit and the conclusion reached by the Trial Court, as

   also the Lower Appellate Court and the contentions on

   merits as urged before the High Court was also urged in

   this appeal. The learned Senior Counsel for the appellants

   would at the outset refer to the apparent error committed

   by the High Court while disposing of the Second Appeal
Page 5 of 19
contrary to the established position of law. In that regard,

   it is contended that in an appeal under Section 100 of the

   Civil Procedure Code the established position is that an

   appeal would arise for consideration only if substantial

   question of law is made out. In that light, it is pointed out

   that in the instant facts the High Court having taken note

   of the contentions had framed as many as six substantial

   questions of law for consideration through the order dated

   20.02.2014       while   admitting   the   appeal,   but   while

   disposing of the appeal through the impugned judgment

   dated 19.10.2016 the High Court has failed to consider

   and answer the said substantial questions of law which

   had been framed for consideration.
7.          It is further contended by the learned Senior

   Counsel for the appellants that even though the reasoning

   is in favour of the appellants the conclusion to nonsuit the

   appellants as being subsequent purchasers would be

   unmerited.       The learned Senior Counsel would contend

   that apart from the claim of the plaintiff not being

   sustainable either for a share during the lifetime of his

   father or under the oral gift as claimed, the plaintiff had
Page 6 of 19
executed Confirmation Deeds dated 28.06.2012 bearing

   6523, 6525 and the Confirmation Deed dated 29.06.2011

   bearing Registration No.6195 whereunder the Sale Deed

   dated 29.07.1975 which was executed by the father of the

   plaintiff had been ratified.    If that be the position, the

   plaintiff in any event could not have claimed right to the

   extent indicated in the said documents and the appellants

   being purchasers from such parties in whose favour the

   Confirmation Deed was executed would have a right over

   the property and the plaintiff cannot make out a right over

   the said properties.      As such the claim for half share

   would not subsist.      These were the aspects which were

   required to be taken note by the First Appellate Court and

   High Court in the Second Appeal but there was failure in

   that regard.      In that light, the learned Senior Counsel

   would contend that consideration is required to be made

   by the High Court on all these aspects which would call

   for a remand of the matter without this Court going into

   the factual aspects herein.
8.          The learned Senior Counsel for the respondents

   would, however, seek to sustain the judgment passed by
Page 7 of 19
the High Court in the Second Appeal. It is contended that

   the Sale Deeds relied on is not placed on record.        It is

   further contended that the original purchasers who were

   parties to the suit are held to be not bonafide purchasers

   in the suit itself and, therefore, the appellants even if they

   could establish that they had purchased plots from such

   of those purchasers, they cannot be held as bonafide

   purchasers and as such no right is made out.             It is

   contended that the respondent, namely, the plaintiff is

   interested in the property bearing Survey No.36/4 and the

   appellants having no claim over the same cannot make

   out any grievance.     The learned Senior Counsel would

   further point out that the High Court has taken note that

   the main grievance of the appellants was that the decree

   travels beyond the judgment and to that extent the High

   Court having taken note of the same, as also the legal

   position and has in that regard indicated that the decree

   would be in conformity with the judgment. It is further

   contended that the sale made was under two Sale Deeds

   dated 29.07.1975 to the extent of 12 Acres and Sale Deed

   dated 01.02.1978 to the extent of 11 Acres 27 Guntas.
Page 8 of 19
The confirmation claimed by the appellants would not

   relate to the entire extent and as such the appellants

   cannot attempt to defeat the claim of the plaintiff.          It is

   contended that the High Court taking note that the

   purchase       was   made    by   the   appellants   during    the

   pendency of the proceedings before the Court has

   indicated that they would be governed by
Section 52
of the

   Transfer of Property Act which is in accordance with law.

   Insofar as the contention relating to the substantial

   questions of law, it is contended that reference to that

   effect is available in the judgment of the High Court and

   therefore the questions stand answered.
9.          As noticed the issue for consideration is limited at

   this stage to notice whether the substantial questions of

   law as framed by the Court has been dealt with

   appropriately.       If the conclusion is in the negative, the

   matter would require reconsideration by the High Court

   and this appeal will stand disposed in terms thereof.

   However, if our conclusion is that the substantial

   questions have been adverted to in an appropriate

   manner, in such event a further consideration will be
Page 9 of 19
required on the other aspects in this appeal itself for

   which the parties will have to be provided an opportunity

   to argue on merits. In that background, we have adverted

   to the appeal papers in the light of the limited contentions

   on that aspect.
10.      In that regard, a perusal of the judgment passed by

   the High Court would indicate that the substantial

   questions of law framed at the time of admission of the

   appeal on 20.02.2014 is taken note in para 5 of the

   judgment.       The    questions     of   law   as   framed    for

   consideration reads as hereunder:
1. “Whether the Lower Appellate Court has not
            erred   in   overlooking     the   principles    of
            Mohamedan Law while holding that the plaintiff
            was entitled to a half share in the ancestral
            property even during the lifetime of his father?
2. Whether the Lower Appellate Court has not
            erred in considering the evidence adduced by
            the plaintiff to establish that he had been gifted
            a half share in the suit property by this
            grandfather, when the same was clearly beyond
            the pleadings in the plaint?
3. Whether the finding of the Lower Appellate
            Court that there was a valid gift of half share in
            the suit property in his favour by this
Page 10 of 19
grandfather is not perverse and unsupported by
            any evidence whatsoever?
4. Whether the Lower Appellate Court has not
            erred in overlooking the fact that the two
            findings regarding ownership of the plaintiff of
            half share in the suit property by gift and by
            share in the ancestral property are mutually
            inconsistent and cannot stand together?
5. Whether the decree drawn up by the Lower
            Appellate Court is in accordance with the
            judgment passed by the Court and in
            accordance with law?
6. Whether the Lower Appellate Court was justified
            in drawing up the decree on the basis of a
            compromise entered into by the plaintiff with
            third parties, particularly in the absence of
            partition of the property by metes and bounds
            pursuant to the judgment and in the absence of
            any challenge to the sale deeds executed by the
            original defendant no.1 pending the suit?”
11.      The High Court after taking note of the substantial

   questions has only recorded the contentions of both sides

   from para 6 to para 19. Thereafter, a reference has been

   made to the requirement of answering the questions

   keeping in view
Section 100
of the Civil Procedure Code.

   Having noted so, the substantial questions of law are

   answered only in the manner as recorded in para 27, as
Page 11 of 19
hereunder:
“Therefore, it is clear that the Second Appeal is
             based on the substantial questions of law. The
             answers of such questions based on the same,
             this Court vide order dated 20.02.2014, admitted
             the Appeal, are as under:
1. So far as question No.1 is concerned, the Lower
          Appellate Court held the plaintiff’s entitlement for
          half share in the ancestral property as per
          Mohamedan Law. The question is not required to
          be dealt herewith because this Court has
          jurisdiction under
Section 100
of the Code of Civil
          Procedure and here this Court is not required to
          reappreciate the evidence about half share of the
          plaintiff as per Mohamedan law. So far as the
          facts of the present case is concerned, the original
          plaintiff never claimed the ownership of the suit
          land and at the first time, said fact came to be in
          knowledge by way of oral evidence of the original
          plaintiff. Therefore, this Court is not inclined to
          deal with this question.
2.     With regard to question No.2, the plaintiff had
             been gifted a half share in the suit property by his
             grandfather and it is also matter of evidence and
             looking to the facts of this case, there is only
             pleadings but no evidence in that regard is
             produced by the plaintiff.
3.     The question No.3 pertains to the valid gift of
             half share in the suit property of the original
             plaintiff by his grandfather. It is also a matter of
             evidence and the same is required to be
             determined by the lower Appellate Court.
Therefore, this question is not required to be
             dealt with by this Court.
Page 12 of 19
4.      So far as question No.4 is concerned, the two
             findings regarding ownership of the plaintiff of
             half share in the suit property by gift and by
             share in the ancestral property are mutually
             inconsistent and cannot stand to be rejected.
             Further, this question is not required to be dealt
             with by this Court so far to exercise powers under
Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure.
5. This question No.5 pertains to the decree drawn
           up by the lower Appellate Court is in accordance
           with the judgment passed by this Court and in
           accordance with law. Here the submissions of
           the appellants is that decree travels beyond the
           judgment because on 07.11.2012, the judgment
           was declared by the lower Appellate Court holding
           that the plaintiff has half share in the suit land
           and directed to draw preliminary decree. In the
           decree dated 3.12.2012, the lower Appellate
           Court decreed that (1) the sale deed dated
           29.7.1975 is illegal along with other directions.
           In this regard,
Order 20 Rule 6 of the Code of
           Civil Procedure
is required to be quoted herein:
6. Contents of decree



              (1)    The decree shall agree with the judgment;
it shall contain the number of the suit, the
              [names and descriptions of the parties, their
              registered addresses,] and particulars of the
              claim, and shall specify clearly the relief granted
              or other determination of the suit.
(2)    The decree shall also state the amount of
              costs incurred in the suit, and by whom or out
              of what properly and in what proportions such
              costs are to be paid.
Page 13 of 19
(3)      The Court may direct that the costs
            payable to one party by the other shall be set off
            against any sum which is admitted or found to
            be due from the former to the latter.”
12.      We have extracted the substantial questions of law

   and the manner in which it has been dealt by the Court to

   only to indicate that apart from the consideration in para

   27 extracted (supra), the substantial questions of law have

   not been considered in the light of the contention and

   answered with reference to the questions raised therein.

   Through      the    order   dated   20.02.2014        when    the

   substantial        questions   of   law   were   formulated   on

   admission, those were required to be answered one way or

   the other by providing High Court’s reasonings and to

   arrive at a conclusion on that basis. On the other hand, if

   the Court was of the opinion that any of the substantial

   questions of law framed was to be modified, altered or

   deleted, a hearing was required to be provided on the

   same and thereafter, appropriate substantial questions of

   law could have been framed and answered.                Without

   resorting to any such procedure, on taking note of the

   substantial questions of law as it existed, a brief reference
Page 14 of 19
is made thereto and the same is disposed of without

   answering the same, which would not be justified.
13.      That apart, the Second Appeal had been filed

   before the High Court by the appellants herein on seeking

   leave to file the same as they were not parties before the

   Courts below but have interest in the subject matter and

   such of those parties who had been arrayed in the said

   proceedings did not have any interest in the subject

   matter due to sale of the property.      In that view, the

   appellants were seeking to protect their interest.      The

   learned Senior Counsel for the appellants would point out

   that an application bearing Civil Application No.4927 of

   2013 (Annexure A17) was filed along with the appeal, a

   copy of which is filed along with an application for

   additional documents.    The said application was filed in

   the Second Appeal before the High Court seeking leave to

   file the Second Appeal and challenge the impugned

   judgment     dated   07.11.2012   and   the   decree   dated

   03.12.2012 passed in Appeal No.130 of 2005. Though no

   order is brought to our notice about the said application

   being formally allowed, the fact remains that the Second
Page 15 of 19
Appeal had been admitted by the High Court on

   20.02.2014 and the substantial questions were framed in

   the appeal filed by the appellant herein. In such situation

   when the appeal was considered after admission and to

   that extent when certain observations are also made to the

   extent of modifying the decree to bring it in conformity

   with the judgment, the nature of right claimed by the

   appellants was also to be adverted and a decision be taken

   in that regard instead of merely stating that the appellants

   would be governed by
Section 52
of Transfer of Property

   Act.
14.      Such exercise was required for the reason that in

   the application seeking leave,       the appellants while

   claiming right to the property had also referred to the

   Deed of Confirmation dated 28.06.2012 and 29.06.2011

   whereunder the Sale Deed dated 29.07.1975 executed by

   the father of the plaintiff had been confirmed by the

   plaintiff and if that be the position, the effect of the same

   was also required to be examined and determined. This is

   for the reason that even if the Trial Court had held the

   defendants No.6 to 9 in the suit were not bonafide
Page 16 of 19
purchasers,        the     said   Confirmation     Deeds    dated

   28.06.2012 and 29.06.2011 had come into existence

   subsequent to disposal of the suit on 17.04.1982 and

   prior to disposal of the Regular Appeal on 07.11.2012. In

   that regard, even if the contention on behalf of the plaintiff

   that there was another Sale Deed dated 01.02.1978 for the

   extent of 11 Acres 27 Guntas regarding which there is no

   confirmation is taken note, the existing            Confirmation

   Deeds would in any event exclude the extent of 12 Acres

   sold under the Sale Deed dated 29.07.1975. Further the

   question would also arise as to whether the plaintiff could

   still claim a share in the property after having confirmed

   the sale to the extent of half of the property by ratifying

   the sale.
15.      In that circumstance, if the said documents which

   had come into existence at the fag end of the Regular

   Appeal was to alter the right of the parties and the

   purchase made by the appellants is in the extent to which

   the Confirmation Deed relates, the effect thereto was also

   to be examined.            The said consideration would be

   necessary     in    that    circumstance   since   even    if   the
Page 17 of 19
appellants are considered to be the purchasers during the

   pendency of the suit which was still a subject matter of

   the suit, whether
Section 52
of the Transfer of Property

   Act will come into play if it stood excluded in view of

   confirmation.    Even otherwise the working out of the

   equities in the final decree proceedings in the manner of

   allotment of shares thereto despite purchase during

   pendency of suit is also an issue which will arise after a

   proper consideration is made by the High Court,       while

   answering the substantial questions of law and if need be

   by framing additional substantial questions in that

   background.
16.      Needless to mention, in the course of such

   consideration,   keeping    in    view   the    subsequent

   developments, if any additional evidence is required, in

   order to meet the ends of justice certainly it would also be

   open for the High Court to remit the matter either to the

   Trial Court or the Lower Appellate Court.      In that view,

   since we are of the opinion that the substantial questions

   raised have not been appropriately dealt with and

   answered the matter would require reconsideration by the
Page 18 of 19
High Court.
17.      To    enable    the   same,   the   judgment   dated

   19.10.2016 passed in Second Appeal No.12 of 2014

   passed by the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in

   Second Appeal No.12 of 2014 is set aside. The matter is

   remitted to the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad to

   restore Second Appeal No.12 of 2014 on file and

   reconsider the same in the light of the above observation

   and in accordance with law.
18.      The appeal stands disposed of accordingly. In the

   facts and circumstances of the case, the parties to bear

   their own costs.        All pending applications shall stand

   disposed of.
……………………….J.
                                           (R. BANUMATHI)


                                           ……………………….J.
                                           (A.S. BOPANNA)


                                            ……………………….J.
                                           (HRISHIKESH ROY)

    New Delhi,
    January 14, 2020
Page 19 of 19