[Cites
46
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Nirmal Kumar Parsan vs Commr. Commercial Tax . And Ors. on 21 January, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 98, (2020) 2 SCALE 368
Author:
A. M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Hemant Gupta
,
Dinesh Maheshwari
1

                                                                      REPORTABLE


                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7863 OF 2009

  Nirmal Kumar Parsan                                                  … Appellant

                                               Versus



  Commissioner of Commercial Taxes & Ors.                            …Respondents

                                                WITH


                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7864 OF 2009

  Parsan Brothers and Anr.                                             ... Appellants
                                               Versus

  Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes & Ors. ... Respondents



                                          JUDGMENT
A. M. KHANWILKAR, J.
1.                  The principal question involved in these appeals is whether the

  subject sales (of goods imported from foreign country and after
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
unloading the same on the land­mass of the State of West Bengal,
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2020.01.21
17:40:50 IST
Reason:
kept in the bonded warehouse without payment of customs duty) to
2
foreign bound ships as “ship stores” can be regarded as sale within

the territory of the State and amenable to sales tax under the West

Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1954 (for short, ‘the 1954 Act’) or the West

Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 (for short, ‘the 1994 Act’).
2.   The admitted factual position in the present cases is that after

importing foreign made cigarettes, the appellants stored the same in

the customs bonded warehouse within the land­mass of the State of

West Bengal and some of those articles were sold to the Master of a

foreign­going ship as ship stores, without payment of customs duty.

Those goods were escorted to the stated ship under the supervision of

the officials of the Customs authority.
3.   These appeals take exception to the judgment and order of the

High Court at Calcutta (for short, ‘the High Court’), dated 16.8.2007

in W.P.T.T. Nos. 5/2007 and 6/2007 respectively, whereby it had

upheld the decision of the West Bengal Taxation Tribunal (for short,

‘the Tribunal’) that the stated sales were within the territory of the

State of West Bengal and amenable to sales tax.
4.   Civil Appeal No. 7863/2009 emanates from the assessment

order passed by the Commercial Tax Officer, West Bengal, dated

13.3.1985 pertaining to assessment period – 1.4.1980 to 31.3.1981.
3
The assessing officer rejected the claim for exemption from payment

of sales tax in respect of the stated sales of imported cigarettes from

the stock, as the cigarettes were sold to outgoing vessels from the

bonded warehouse within the land­mass of the State of West Bengal

following the decision of the High Court in M/s.
Ranjit Shipping Pvt.

Ltd. & Anr. vs. State of West Bengal & Ors.
1. The authority found

that it was not a sale in the course of import as claimed by the

assessees (appellants).                The appellants unsuccessfully carried the

matter in appeal and finally in revision before the Tribunal, which

came to be rejected on 30.3.2007. Before the revisional authority, the

only contention pursued was that there was no sale within the State

of West Bengal or even in India because the buyer had no right to

consume the goods before the ship crossed the territorial Waters of

India. It was urged by the appellants before the revisional authority

that the process of import was not complete at the time of sale to the

foreign­going ship and the transaction was a sale in the course of

import.        Resultantly, the sold goods were not taxable under the

concerned West Bengal Sales Tax laws because the goods never

entered the local area of the State of West Bengal, crossing the

customs frontiers of India as defined in
Section 2(ab)
of the Central

Sales Tax Act, 1956 (for short, ‘the
CST Act
’). The Tribunal, however,
1 1980 SCC Online Cal 141 : (1980) 2 CHN 192
4
held that the sale had taken place on the land­mass of the State of

West Bengal and the sale was neither for import nor for export.
The

Tribunal essentially relied upon the exposition in
Madras Marine

and Co. vs. State of Madras2
to reject the revision filed by the

appellants being devoid of merits. Feeling aggrieved, the appellants

carried the matter to the High Court by way of a writ petition being

W.P.T.T. No. 5/2007, which came to be rejected by the Division

Bench of the High Court whilst upholding the view taken by the

Tribunal as just and proper.
5.      Civil Appeal No. 7864/2009 emanates from the order dated

22.10.2003 passed by the Assistant Commissioner of Commercial

Taxes under Section 65 of the 1994 Act pertaining to assessment

periods – 1.4.1999 to 31.3.2000, 1.4.2000 to 31.3.2001, 1.4.2001 to

31.3.2002 and 1.4.2002 to 31.3.2003. The claim of the appellants

that the sales in question were in the course of import on high seas

and no sales tax was payable thereon came to be rejected.                       The

authority answered the claim as follows:­


                “…..
All the judicial edicts relevant and referred to were perused
                and the documents produced by the dealer were examined.
                His Lordship Hon’ble West Bengal Taxation Tribunal
                passed the judgment after considering all the grounds
                taken by the dealer including the one for the position of the
2 (1986) 3 SCC 552
5
law after introduction of the
section 2(ab)
in
Central Sales
          Tax Act
. His Lordship Honourable High Court of Kolkata
          did not express even a mite of doubt in the correctness of
          the impugned order of the Hon’ble Tribunal. The order was
          remanded for quantification of sales in dispute. It was
          observed that, of the total goods imported and stored only a
          portion was taken out for sale to master of a particular
          ship. From the same warehouse goods for sales to local
          persons also were taken. So the sold goods could not have
          been ascertained and appropriate before those were taken
          out of the bonded warehouse. The risk in the goods was
          transferred at that time and at that place only. It might
          have so happened that the Customs authority took custody
          of the goods for preventing loss of its own revenue. No
          such sale could have been one in the course of import
          because the sale did not occasion the import. None of
          those was export because the goods were not supposed
          to enter into the territory of another country in the
          form those were dispatched. The analogy of sales from
          duty­free shops was irrelevant. For, it always remains
          on the other side customs frontier and so the risk is
          transferred before crossing of the frontier.

          Thus there was no gainsay that sales of goods to masters of
          ships were sales in the state and were taxable. The dealer
          was asked to pay tax on such sales and revise the return
          for the years yet to be assessed. The assessing authority
          was requested to revise if necessary, assessments not
          impugned. The appellate and revisional authorities were
          requested to treat the tax payable on such sale as admitted
          one.
…..”
                                                  (emphasis supplied)
6.   Feeling aggrieved, the appellants resorted to revision before the

Tribunal, which came to be rejected following the decision of the

Tribunal passed on the same date i.e. 30.3.2007 in case of the

companion appeal. The appellant carried the matter by way of a writ

petition being W.P.T.T. No. 6/2007 before the High Court, which

came to be dismissed by the High Court, upholding the decision of
6
the authority, which had held that the sales in question would be

amenable to sales tax under the 1994 Act.
7.      The thrust of the argument of the appellants in these appeals is

that the process of import was not complete at the time of sale of the

goods in question to the foreign­going ship and the transaction of sale

was “in the course of import”, for which reason it was not amenable to

sales tax and in fact, the State would have no authority to levy such

tax. To buttress this submission, reliance was placed on
Article 286
of the Constitution of India providing for restrictions as to imposition

of tax on the sale or purchase of goods and on
Section 5
of the CST

Act, in particular sub­Section (2) thereof, to contend that the sales in

question shall be deemed to have taken place in the course of import

of goods in the territory of India.         Reliance was placed on the

Constitution Bench decision of this Court in
J.V. Gokal & Co.

(Private) Ltd. vs. Assistant Collector of Sales­Tax (Inspection) &

Ors.3
, which had followed the exposition in
State of Travancore­

Cochin & Ors. vs. Shanmugha Vilas Cashew Nut Factory, Quilon

& Ors.4
.           Relying on the definition of expression “crossing the

customs frontiers of India” in
Section 2(ab)
of the CST Act, of

“customs area” in
Section 2(11)
and of “customs station” in
Section
3 (1960)
2
SCR 852 : AIR 1960 SC 595
4 (1954) SCR 53 : AIR 1953 SC 333
7
2(13) of the
Customs Act, 1962
(for short, ‘the
Customs Act
’), it was

urged that crossing the customs frontiers means crossing the limits of

the customs station including crossing the area in which imported

goods or exported goods are ordinarily kept before the clearance by

the Customs authorities.
Reliance was also placed on the decision in
Minerals & Metals Trading Corporation of India Ltd. vs. Sales

Tax Officer & Ors.5
, which has had occasion to construe
Section 5
of

the CST Act. It was then urged that the goods in question were kept

for warehousing and a declaration was given by the appellants that

the said goods would be exported to foreign­going vessels as ship

stores in terms of
Section 88
of the Customs Act.      The appellants

have adverted to
Sections 69
,
85
and
88
of the Customs Act to

contend that the stated goods could be exported to a place outside

India without payment of import duty and until import duty was paid,

the import thereof cannot be said to be complete.
Reliance was then

placed on the decision in Indian Tourist Development Corporation

Limited vs. Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes &

Anr.6, which according to the appellants, applied on all fours, as even

in that case, the goods were kept in the bonded warehouses and then

supplied to duty­free shops, which transaction has been extricated

5 (1998) 7 SCC 19
6 (2012) 3 SCC 204
8
from the applicability of sales tax payable to the State on the ground

that the goods had not crossed the customs frontiers and the sale was

deemed to have taken place in the course of import of goods into the

territory of India. According to the appellants, the finding recorded by

the authorities below which commended to the High Court, was

completely in the teeth of the aforesaid decision.
The appellants have

distinguished the decision in
Madras Marine
(supra) on the premise

that
in that case
the goods were intended for re­export only and in

that context, it was held that there was a necessity of a destination in

a foreign country.
Moreover
,
the said decision
has not considered the

efficacy of
Section 2(ab)
of the CST Act nor noticed the dictum in
J.V.

Gokal
(supra), which dealt with the case of import/‘in the course of

import’.
It was urged that the decision in
J.V. Gokal
(supra) had

been followed in a recent decision in
State of Kerala & Ors. vs. Fr.

William Fernandez & Ors.7
.
It was further urged that the dictum in
Coffee Board, Bangalore vs. Joint Commercial Tax Officer,

Madras & Anr.8
is distinguishable and inapplicable to the fact

situation of the present case and more so, may have no bearing after

the amendment of 1976 to
Section 5
by insertion of sub­Section (3)

therein, which opens with non­obstante clause and provides that the
7 2017 SCC Online SC 1291 : (2017) 12 SCALE 463
8 (1969) 3 SCC 349
9
last sale or purchase of any goods preceding the sale or purchase

occasioning the export of those goods out of the territory of India,

shall also be deemed to be in the course of such export, if such last

sale or purchase took place after and was for the purpose of

complying with the agreement or order for or in relation to such

export.   Emphasis was placed on the objects and reasons of the

Amendment Act.      In substance, it was urged that the stated sales

were in the course of import and could not be subjected to levy of

sales tax by the State under the State legislation.
8.   Per contra, the respondents would urge that the authorities had

considered all aspects of the matter and after due evaluation of the

evidence before it, justly concluded that the stated sales were neither

in the course of import nor export and had taken place on the land­

mass of the State of West Bengal and thus, amenable to sales tax

under the 1954 Act and the 1994 Act, as the case may be. It was

urged that it is an admitted position that the goods were kept in

bonded warehouses on the land­mass of the State of West Bengal and

were sold to the Master of a foreign­going ship as ship stores thereat.

It was urged that the expression “crossing the customs frontiers of

India” has already been defined in the
CST Act
and limits its

application to area of a “customs station”, as defined in the Customs
10
Act to mean any customs port, customs airport or land customs

station.           In other words, the expression “crossing the customs

frontiers of India” is exhaustive and would not include the bonded

warehouses, where the stated goods were kept to be sold to the

Master of a foreign­going ship as ship stores. It was urged that being

a taxation statute, strict interpretation should be offered to this

definition as expounded in
Commissioner of Customs (Import),

Mumbai vs. Dileep Kumar and Company & Ors.9
. It was further

urged that the stated sales of goods by no stretch of imagination can

qualify the expression “in the course of import of goods into the

territory of India”, as is contended by the appellants. For that, the

goods must actually be imported into the territory of India and sale

must be a single sale, which itself causes the import or is in the

progress or process of import. It was urged that the authorities had

rightly opined that there was sale within the State of West Bengal;

whilst rejecting the claim of the appellant(s) that merely because

buyer had no right to consume the goods in question before the ship

had crossed the territorial Waters of India, that would make no

difference because the sale was complete by appropriation of the

goods in the bonded warehouse itself.            Similarly, the fact that

customs duty was not paid on the stated goods would be of no
9 (2018) 9 SCC 1
11
consequence. It was urged that the appellants have, for the first time,

raised a new plea that they had filed declaration. No such plea was

taken before the concerned authority nor any document or evidence

was produced in support thereof for the relevant assessment

period(s). The appellants, therefore, cannot be permitted to pursue

this contention.            Thus, the appeals be confined to the plea taken

before the authorities below that the stated sales were not effected

within the territory of the State of West Bengal or in India.
The

respondents have placed reliance on the decisions in
Burmah Shell

Oil Storage and Distributing Co. of India Ltd. & Anr. vs.

Commercial Tax Officer & Ors.10, Coffee Board
(supra) and
Madras Marine
(supra) to contend that the issue is answered against

the appellants.
The respondents have distinguished the decision

relied upon by the appellants in Indian Tourist Development

Corporation (supra).
It was urged that the doctrine of Unbroken

Package evolved by American Courts has no application in India, as

expounded in
Fr. William Fernandez
(supra).                     It was thus urged

that the taxable event had occurred on the appropriation of goods at

the bonded warehouse itself, which was within the territory of the

State of West Bengal.
To buttress this submission, reliance was


10 (1961) 1 SCR 902 : AIR 1961 SC 315
12
placed on
Kiran Spinning Mills vs. Collector of Customs11
, wherein

it has been held that the taxable event would be the day of crossing of

customs barrier and not the date when the goods landed in India or

had entered the territorial Waters. The respondents would urge that

the appeals are devoid of merits and be accordingly dismissed.
9.     We have heard Mr. Siddharth Bhatnagar, learned senior counsel

and Mr. Joydeep Mazumdar, learned counsel appearing for the

appellants and Ms. Madhumita Bhattacharjee, learned counsel

appearing for the respondents.
10.    As noticed from the finding of fact recorded by the authorities, it

is not in dispute that after importing the stated goods, the appellants

stored the same in the bonded warehouse within the land­mass of the

State of West Bengal and some of the articles were then sold to the

Master of a foreign­going ship as ship stores, without payment of

customs duty thereon. The question is: whether the sales in question

would qualify the expression “sale in the course of import”?          The

phrase “sale in the course of import” would constitute three essential

features – (i) that there must be a sale; (ii) that goods must actually be

imported and (iii) that the sale must be part and parcel of the import.

The factual matrix in the present case clearly depicts that the sales in

11 (2000) 10 SCC 228
13
question would not cause import of the stated goods.       Instead, it

would result in taking away the goods (after being unloaded on the

land­mass of the State of West Bengal) on the ongoing ship as ship

stores outside the territory of Indian Waters for being consumed on

the ship and not for export to another destination as such.       The

appellants have advisedly not pursued the argument that the stated

sales would result in an export or would be in the course of export.

For, such argument has been rejected by this Court in
Madras

Marine
(supra).
11.   Concededly, the principle underlying the exposition in the above

referred reported decision would apply proprio vigore for considering

the argument as to whether the stated sales can be regarded as sale

in the course of import as such. The two­Judge Bench in
Madras

Marine
(supra) had considered the decision of Constitution Bench in
Burmah Shell
(supra).        The Court noted the dictum of the

Constitution Bench to the effect that in order to exclude the taxation

by the State, the appellants had to prove that there was some other

State, where the goods could be said to have been delivered as a

direct result of the sale for the purpose of consumption in that other

State and as they failed to do so, the goods loaded on board of an
14
aircraft for consumption though taken out of India, was not export

since it had no destination, where it can be said to have been

imported and so long as it did not satisfy that test, it could not be

said that the sale was in the course of export.
Besides noticing this

dictum of the Constitution Bench, the Court also adverted to the

decision in
State of Kerala & Ors. vs. Cochin Coal Company

Ltd.12
, wherein it was held that the concept of export in
Article 286(1)
(b) of the Constitution postulates the existence of two termini as those

between which the goods were intended to move or between which

they were intended to be transported and not a mere movement of

goods out of the country without any intention of their being landed

in specie in some foreign port. Additionally, the Court also extensively

adverted to the decision of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in
Fairmacs Trading Co. vs. The State of Andhra Pradesh13
and

approved the same dealing with the similar argument.
The Court also

noted and approved the decision of the Madras High Court in
Fairmacs Trading Co. vs. The State of Tamil Nadu14
. The Court

in paragraphs 19 to 21 and 25 to 28 observed as under:­

             “19.
The correct position, so far as the facts of the present
             case are concerned, in our opinion, has been laid in the
             decision of Burmah Shell Oil Storage and Distributing Co. of

12 (1961) 2 SCR 219 : AIR 1961 SC 408
13 (!975) 36 STC 260 (AP)
14 (1978) 41 STC 157 (Mad)
15
India Ltd. v. C.T.O. This Court observed at page 781 as
follows:
“While all exports involved a taking out of the
     country, all goods taken out of the country cannot
     be said to be exported. The test is that the goods
     must have a foreign destination where they can be
     said to be imported. It matters not that there is no
     valuable consideration from the receiver at the
     destination end. If the goods are exported and there
     is sale or purchase in the course of that export and
     the sale or purchase occasions the export to a
     foreign destination, the exemption is earned.
     Purchases made by philanthropists of goods in the
     course of export to foreign countries to alleviate distress
     there, may still be exempted, even though the sending of
     the goods was not a commercial venture but a
     charitable one. The crucial fact is the sending of the
     goods to a foreign destination where they would be
     received as imports.”
20. The appellants in that case dealt in petroleum and
petroleum products and carried on business at Calcutta.
They had maintained supply depots at Dum Dum Airport
from which aviation spirit was sold and delivered to aircraft
proceeding abroad for their consumption. The question was
whether these supplies to the aircraft which proceeded to
foreign countries were liable to sales tax under the Bengal
Motor Spirit Sales Taxation Act, 1941. The contention of the
appellants in that case was that such sales were made in the
course of export of such aviation spirit out of the territory of
India, that they took place outside the State of West Bengal,
that inasmuch as aviation spirit was delivered for
consumption outside West Bengal, the sales could not fall
within the Explanation to clause (1)(a) of
Article 286
as it
then stood. It was held by this Court that in order to exclude
the taxation by the State of West Bengal, the appellants had
to prove that there was some other State where the goods
could be said to have been delivered as a direct result of the
sale for the purpose of consumption in that other State and
that as they failed to do so, the aviation spirit loaded on
board an aircraft for consumption though taken out of India,
was not exported since it had no destination, where it could
be said to be imported and so long as it did not satisfy that
test, it could not be said that the sale was in the course of
export. It was further held that aviation spirit was sold for the
use of aircraft and the sale was not even for the purpose of
export and all the elements of sale including delivery and
payment of price took place within the State of West Bengal
and the sales were complete within the territory of that State.
16
The customs barrier did not set a terminal limit to the
territory of West Bengal for sales tax purpose. The sale
beyond the customs barrier was still a sale in fact in the State
of West Bengal.
21.    The ratio of this decision would be applicable to the
facts and circumstances of this case. It was rightly urged that
the appropriation of goods took place in the State of Tamil
Nadu when the goods were segregated in the bonded
warehouse to be delivered to the foreign going vessels. It was
not a case of export as there was no destination for the goods
to a foreign country. The sale was for the purpose of
consumption on board the ship. It was not as if only on
delivery on board the vessel that the sale took place. The
mere fact that shipping bill was prepared for sending it for
custom formalities which were designed to effectively control
smuggling activities could not determine the nature of the
transaction for the purpose of sales tax nor does the
circumstances that delivery was to the captain on board the
ship within the territorial waters make it a sale outside the
State of Tamil Nadu.
xxx                xxx                xxx
25.
In the case before the Andhra Pradesh High Court in
Fairmacs Trading Company v. State of A.P.
, the petitioner
imported ship­stores from foreign countries, kept these in
bonded warehouses of the customs department without the
levy of customs duty and later on sold and delivered to ships'
masters for consumption abroad the ship after crossing the
port boundaries. On the question whether the sales were
outside the State or in the course of export and therefore not
liable to tax under the
Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax
Act, 1957
, it was observed by the Andhra Pradesh High Court
that the goods were specific and ascertained and were within
the State when the contract of sale took place and therefore
the requirements of
Section 4(2)(a)
of the Central Sales Tax
Act, 1956 were fully satisfied and the sales must be said to
have taken place inside the State; but as the goods sold were
meant for consumption during voyage and they had no
destination in any foreign country where they could be
received as imports, the sales were not sales in the course of
exports. It was further held that mere movement of goods out
of the country following a sale would not render the sale, one
in the course of export within
Article 286(1)(b)
of the
Constitution of India. Before a sale can be said to be a sale in
the course of export, the existence of two termini between
which the goods are intended to move or to be transported is
necessary.
26. The Madras High Court in the case of
Fairmacs Trading
Co. v. State of T.N.
was dealing with an assessee, who was a
17
dealer in ship's stores and was also doing business as ship
chandlers and who imported goods from abroad for the pur­
pose of supplying them either to foreign­going vessels or to
diplomatic personnel. These goods were received and kept in
the customs bonded warehouse and were cleared under the
supervision of the customs authorities whenever these were
sold by the assessee. In respect of supplies of specific goods
made to certain ships located in the Madras harbour, pur­
suant to orders placed by the Master of the ship or other offi­
cers working in the ship, the transportation of the goods to
the ship was effected in such a manner as to ensure that the
bonded goods, which had not paid any duty, did not enter the
local market. The delivery receipt sent along with the goods
by the assessee was signed by an officer of the ship in token
of having received the goods in good condition. The question
that arose for consideration was whether the sale took place
within the State of Tamil Nadu and liable to be taxed under
the
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959
. It was held (i)
that there was nothing to show in the communications from
the ship that the goods had necessarily to be supplied only in
the ship. It was open to the officers working in the ship to
come and take delivery of the goods in which event the sale
would be a local sale. Therefore, assuming that the territorial
waters did not form part of the State of Tamil Nadu, as there
was nothing in the contemplation of the contracting parties
that the goods were to be moved from one State to another, it
was held that it was not possible to take the view that the
sales were inter­State sales; and (ii) that the assessee was not
selling specific or ascertained goods, because the goods
formed part of a larger stock within the bonded warehouse
and had, therefore to be separated and appropriated to the
contract as and when orders were placed by the officers of the
ship by description. Therefore, the sales were local sales in
view of the specific provision of
Section 4(2)(b)
of the Central
Sales Tax Act, 1956, read with
Section 2(n)
, Explanation 3 of
the
Act (Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959
), and were
accordingly taxable under the Act. The court did not find it
necessary to consider the question whether the territory cov­
ered by the territorial waters formed part of the State of Tamil
Nadu or not.
27. Attention of the Madras High Court was drawn to the
decision of Andhra Pradesh High Court in
Fairmacs Trading
Co. v. State of A.P. The Madras High
Court did not examine
the question in detail in the view it took.
28. In so far as the High Courts of Andhra Pradesh and
Madras in the said two decisions held that sales took place
within the State, we are in agreement.”
                                           (emphasis supplied)
18
The Court finally concluded in paragraphs 36 and 37 as follows:­

         “36.     The short question, therefore, that arises in all these
         matters is whether sale of the goods in question took place
         within the territory of Tamil Nadu. In these cases sale took
         place by appropriation of goods. Such appropriation took
         place in bonded warehouse. Such bonded warehouses were
         within the territory of State of Tamil Nadu. Therefore, under
         sub­section (2), sub­clauses (a) and (b) of
section 4
of the
         Central Sales­Tax Act, 1956, the sale of goods in question
         shall be deemed to have taken place inside the State because
         the contract of sale of ascertained goods was made within the
         territory of Tamil Nadu and furthermore in case of unascer­
         tained goods appropriation had taken place in that State in
         terms of clause (b) of sub­section (2) of
section 4
of the Cen­
         tral
Sales Tax Act, 1956
. There is no question of sale tak­
         ing place in course of export or import under
section 5
in
         this case. From that point of view the amendment intro­
         duced by Act 103 of 1976 by incorporating in clause (ab)
         of
section 2
of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 does not
         affect the position. In this connection reference may be
         made from the observations of this Court in Burmah Shell Oil
         Storage Ltd., where it has been held that customs barrier
         does not set a terminal limit to the territory of the State for
         sales­tax purposes. Sale, therefore, beyond the customs bar­
         rier is still a sale within the State. The amendment intro­
         duced in
section 2
by the Act 103 of 1976 does not affect
         the position because the custom station is within the
         State of Tamil Nadu. That question might have been rele­
         vant if we were considering the case of sale by the trans­
         fer of documents of title to the goods as contemplated
         by
section 5
of the Central Sales­Tax Act. In the premises
         we are unable to accept the contentions urged on behalf of
         the appellants in the civil appeals and also the contentions
         urged in the writ petition.
37.      In the view we have taken, it is not necessary to ex­
         press our opinion on the arguments whether introduction of
         clause (ab) of
section 2
of Central Sales Tax Act by Act 103 of
         1976 is prospective or not. We have, however, noted the sub­
         missions. That question, in the light of our aforesaid views, is
         not material for the present controversy.”
                                                    (emphasis supplied)
12.   Applying the principle underlying
the said decision
, it is clear

that the sale to be in the course of import, must be a sale of goods
19
and as a consequence of such sale, the goods must actually be

imported within the territory of India and further, the sale must be

part and parcel of the import so as to occasion import thereof.

Indeed, for the purposes of
Customs Act
, only upon payment of

customs duty the goods are cleared by the Customs authorities

whence import thereof can be regarded as complete. However, that

would be no impediment for levy of sales tax by the State concerned

in whose territory the goods had already landed/unloaded and kept in

the bonded warehouse. For seeking exemption, it is necessary that

the goods must be in the process of being imported when the sale

occurs or the sale must occasion the import thereof within the

territory of India. The word “occasion” is used to mean “to cause” or

“to be the immediate cause of”. In the present case, the stated sales

in no way occasioned import of the goods into the territory of India.

For, the goods were taken away by the foreign­going ship as ship

stores for being consumed after the goods had crossed the customs

frontiers/Indian Waters.
13.   Indubitably, the sale which is to be regarded as exempt from

payment of sales tax, is a sale which causes the import to take place

or is the immediate cause of the import of goods.     The appellants

having failed to establish that the stated goods would be actually
20
imported within the territory of India and had not crossed the

customs station, cannot contend that the sale was in the course of

import as such within the meaning of
Section 5
read with
Section

2(ab)
of the CST Act. Moreover, there is no direct linkage between the

import of the goods and the sale in question to qualify as having been

made in the process or progress of import. We may usefully advert to
Section 5
of the CST Act, which reads thus: ­

                “5.   When is a sale or purchase of goods said to
                take place in the course of import or export.­(1) A
                sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to take
                place in the course of the export of the goods out of
                the territory of India only if the sale or purchase
                either occasions such export or is effected by a
                transfer of documents of title to the goods after the
                goods have crossed the customs frontiers of India.
                (2)   A sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed
                to take place in the course of the import of the
                goods into the territory of India only if the sale or
                purchase either occasions such import or is
                effected by a transfer of documents of title to the
                goods before the goods have crossed the customs
                frontiers of India.
(3)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­
                section (1), the last sale or purchase of any goods
                preceding the sale or purchase occasioning the
                export of those goods out of the territory of India
                shall also be deemed to be in the course of such
                export, if such last sale or purchase took place after,
                and was for the purpose of complying with, the
                agreement or order for or in relation to such export.”
                                                   (emphasis supplied)
14.   The crucial question is whether the stated sales can be deemed

to have taken place in the course of import of the goods into the

territory of India before the goods had crossed the customs frontiers
21
of India, which is the core requirement of
Section 5(2)
of the CST Act.

The expression “crossing the customs frontiers of India” has been

defined in
Section 2(ab)
of the CST Act, which reads thus:­


             “2. Definitions.­ In this Act, unless the context otherwise
              requires,­

                          xxx                        xxx                        xxx

             (ab)      “crossing the customs frontiers of India” means
                       crossing the limits of the area of a customs station in
                       which imported goods or export goods are ordinarily
                       kept before clearance by customs authorities.

                       Explanation.­    For the purposes of this clause,
                       “customs station” and “customs authorities” shall have
                       the same meanings as in the
Customs Act, 1962
(52 of
                       1962).”

This definition refers to the expression “customs station”, which in

turn, refers to “customs port”, “customs airport” and “land customs

station”, as defined in the
Customs Act
.                                   We may usefully refer to
Sections 2(10)
,
2(11)
,
2(12)
,
2(13)
and
2(29)
of the Customs Act, as

applicable for the present cases, which read thus:­


             “2. Definitions.­ In this Act, unless the context otherwise
             requires.­

             (10)     “customs airport” means any airport appointed
             under clause (a) of
section 7
to be a customs airport;

             (11)     “customs area” means the area of a customs station
             and includes any area in which imported goods or export
             goods are ordinarily kept before clearance by Customs
             Authorities;
(12)     “customs port” means any port appointed under
             clause (a) of
section 7
to be a customs port 15[, and includes a


15 Inserted by Act 11 of 1983, sec. 46 (w.e.f. 13-5-1983) – applicable to C.A. No. 7864/2009
22
place appointed under clause (aa) of that section to be an
             inland container depot];
(13)      “customs station” means any customs port, customs
             airport or land customs station;
xxx                        xxx                        xxx

             (29)     “land customs station” means any place appointed
under clause (b) of
section 7
to be a land customs station;”

In addition, we may also refer to
Section 7
of the Customs Act, which

postulates appointment of customs ports, airports etc.                                         The same

reads thus:­

               “7.    Appointment of customs ports, airports, etc.­ The
             Central Government may, by notification in the Official
             Gazette, appoint­
(a)      the ports and airports which alone shall be
                                   customs ports or customs airports for the
                                   unloading of imported goods and the loading of
                                   export goods or any class of such goods;
16
[(aa) the places which alone shall be inland
                                  container depots for the unloading of imported
                                  goods and the loading of export goods or any
                                  class of such goods];
(b)      the places which alone shall be land customs
                                   stations for the clearance of goods imported or
                                   to be exported by land or inland water or any
                                   class of such goods;
(c)      the routes by which alone goods or any class of
                                   goods specified in the notification may pass by
                                   land or inland water into or out of India, or to
                                   or from any land customs station from or to
                                   any land frontier;
(d)      the ports which alone shall be coastal ports for
                                   the carrying on of trade in coastal goods or any
                                   class of such goods with all or any specified
                                   ports in India.”



16 Inserted by Act 11 of 1983, sec. 47 (w.e.f. 13-5-1983) – applicable to C.A. No. 7864/2009
23
We have no hesitation in accepting the argument of the respondents

that being a taxation statute, strict interpretation of these provisions

is inevitable.    Going by the definition of “customs port” or “land

customs station” as applicable in the present cases, it is customs port

or land customs station area appointed by the Central Government in

terms of notification under
Section 7
.       It is not the case of the

appellants that the bonded warehouses, where the goods were kept

and the stated sales took place by appropriation of the goods thereat,

were within the area notified as customs port and/or land customs

station under
Section 7
of the Customs Act. As the stated goods had

travelled beyond the customs port/land customs station at the

relevant time, in law, it would mean that the goods had crossed the

customs frontiers of India for the purposes of the
CST Act
.

Resultantly, the legal fiction created in
Section 5(2)
of the CST Act will

have no application.
15.   Notably, the expressions “warehouse” and “warehoused goods”

have been defined in the
Customs Act
in
Sections 2(43)
and
2(44)
respectively.    As per the applicable provisions at the relevant time,

“Warehouse” means a public warehouse appointed under Section 57

or a private warehouse licensed under Section 58.           “Warehoused

goods” means goods deposited in a warehouse. As aforesaid, there is
24
nothing to indicate that the bonded warehouse, where the stated

goods were kept by the appellants and eventually sold, formed part of

the customs port/land customs station. If so, the legal fiction of sale

being deemed to have taken place in the course of import of the goods

into the territory of India would have no bearing and applicability to

the present cases.
16.   To get over this position, emphasis was placed by the appellant

on the exposition in the Indian Tourist Development Corporation

(supra), which had considered the situation where the goods were

kept in the bonded warehouse and were made available in the duty­

free shops for sale.   This Court opined that since the goods were

supplied to the duty­free shops situated at the International Airport,

Bengaluru for sale, it cannot be said that the said goods had crossed

the customs frontiers of India. We fail to understand as to how this

decision will be of any avail to the appellants. For, the Court was not

dealing with a situation as in the present cases, in which the goods

had crossed the customs port/land customs station area and kept in

the bonded warehouse, where the sale by appropriation of the goods

was effected. Indeed, in paragraph 17 of the reported decision, the

Court in the facts of that case, has observed that when the goods are

kept in the bonded warehouse, it cannot be said that the said goods
25
had crossed customs frontiers of India.     However, the Court finally

answered the claim of the appellants therein on the finding that the

liquor, cigarettes, perfumes and food articles were sold “at the duty­

free shops” at the International Airport, Bengaluru, for which no tax

was payable by the appellants as the goods sold at the duty­free

shops were sold directly to the passengers and even the delivery of

goods took place at the duty­free shops before importing the goods or

before the goods had crossed the customs frontiers of India.       The

issue considered in the said decision, therefore, was whether the sale

at the duty­free shops situated at the Bengaluru International Airport

would attract levy of sales tax. As noticed earlier, the definition of

“customs station” clearly refers to customs airport as defined in
Section 2(10)
of the Customs Act. As the duty­free shop is situated in

airport area, it would mean that the sale of goods at the duty­free

shops was deemed to have taken place in the course of import of the

goods into the territory of India.      Thus understood, the reported

decision under consideration is of no avail to the appellants.
17.   Even the exposition of the Constitution Bench in
J.V. Gokal
(supra) that a sale by an importer of goods after the property of the

goods passed to him, either after the receipt of the documents of title

against payment or otherwise, to a third party by a similar process is
26
also a sale in the course of import, would equally have no bearing on

the present cases. Inasmuch as, the sale of goods must take place

before the goods had crossed the customs frontiers of India, which

means it was within the customs port/land customs station area.

Nothing is shown by the appellants herein to substantiate that the

subject bonded warehouse came within the customs port/land

customs station area and moreso the stated sales occasioned import

of the goods within the territory of India. If so, the finding of fact and

conclusion recorded by the authorities below, which commended to

the High Court, is unexceptionable.
18.    This Court in
K. Gopinathan Nair and Ors. vs. State of

Kerala17
has expounded the factors to be reckoned for determining

whether the concerned sale or purchase of goods can be deemed to

have taken place in the course of import. The relevant portion of the

aforesaid judgment reads thus:
“14.
In the light of the aforesaid settled legal position
            emerging from the Constitution Bench decisions of this Court
            the following propositions clearly get projected for deciding
            whether the concerned sale or purchase of goods can be
            deemed to take place in the course of import as
laid down by
Section 5(2)
of the Central Sales Tax Act:
(1) The sale or the purchase, as the case may be, must
                     actually take place.
(2) Such sale or purchase in India must itself occasion
                     such import, and not vice versa i.e. import should not
                     occasion such sale.
17 (1997) 10 SCC 1
27
(3) The goods must have entered the import stream
              when they are subjected to sale or purchase.
(4) The import of the concerned goods must be effected
              as a direct result of the sale or purchase transaction
              concerned.
(5) The course of import can be taken to have
              continued till the imported goods reach the local users
              only if the import has commenced through the
              agreement     between     foreign    exporter  and     an
              intermediary who does not act on his own in the
              transaction with the foreign exporter and who in his
              turn does not sell as principal the imported goods to the
              local users.
(6) There must be either a single sale which itself
              causes the import or is in the progress or process of
              import or though there may appear to be two sale
              transactions they are so integrally inter­connected that
              they almost resemble one transaction so that the
              movement of goods from a foreign country to India can
              be ascribed to such a composite well integrated
              transaction consisting of two transactions dovetailing
              into each other.
(7) A sale or purchase can be treated to be in the
              course of import if there is a direct privity of contract
              between the Indian importer and the foreign exporter
              and the intermediary through which such import is
              effected merely acts as an agent or a contractor for and
              on behalf of Indian importer.
(8) The transaction in substance must be such that
              the canalizing agency or the intermediary agency
              through which the imports are effected into India so as
              to reach the ultimate local users appears only as a mere
              name lender through whom it is the local importer­cum­
              local user who masquerades.”
19.   It will also be useful to advert to paragraph 6 of
Kiran Spinning

Mills
(supra), which reads thus:
“6. Attractive, as the argument is, we are afraid that we do
         not find any merit in the same. It has now been held by this
         Court in
Hyderabad Industries Ltd. v. Union of India
that for
         the purpose of levy of additional duty
Section 3
of the Tariff
         Act is a charging section.
Section 3
sub­section (6) makes the
         provisions of the
Customs Act
applicable. This would bring
         into play the provisions of
Section 15
of the Customs Act
         which, inter alia, provides that the rate of duty which will be
28
payable would be (sic the rate in force) on the day when the
         goods are removed from the bonded warehouse. That apart,
         this Court has held in Sea Customs Act, SCR at p. 803 that
         in the case of duty of customs the taxable event is the import
         of goods within the customs barriers. In other words, the
         taxable event occurs when the customs barrier is crossed. In
         the case of goods which are in the warehouse the customs
         barriers would be crossed when they are sought to be taken
         out of the customs and brought to the mass of goods in the
         country. Admittedly this was done after 4­10­1978. As on
         that day when the goods were so removed additional duty of
         excise under the said Ordinance was payable on goods
         manufactured after 4­10­1978. We are unable to accept the
         contention of Mr Ramachandran that what has to be seen is
         whether additional duty of excise was payable at the time
         when the goods landed in India or, as he strenuously
         contended, they had crossed into the territorial waters.
Import being complete when the goods entered the territorial
         waters is the contention which has already been rejected by
         this Court in
Union of India v. Apar (P) Ltd.
decided on 22­7­
         1999.
The import would be completed only when the
         goods are to cross the customs barriers and that is the
         time when the import duty has to be paid and that is what
         has been termed by this Court in
Sea Customs
case (SCR at
         p. 823) as being the taxable event. The taxable event,
         therefore, being the day of crossing of customs barrier,
         and not on the date when the goods had landed in India
         or had entered the territorial waters, we find that on the
         date of the taxable event the additional duty of excise was
         leviable under the said Ordinance and, therefore, additional
         duty under
Section 3
of the Tariff Act was rightly demanded
         from the appellants.”
                                                    (emphasis supplied)
20.   A priori, for a sale or purchase to qualify as a sale or purchase in

course of import, the essential conditions are that such sale shall

occur before the goods had crossed the customs frontiers of India and

the import of the goods must be effected or the import is occasioned

due to such sale or purchase.           In the present case, the sales in

question did not occasion import.
29
21.     Arguendo, for sale or purchase of goods to be regarded as sale or

purchase in course of export,
Section 5(1)
of the CST Act provides for

the following conditions: (i) the sale or purchase shall occasion such

export or (ii) the sale or purchase shall be effected by a transfer of

documents of title to the goods after the goods have crossed the

customs frontiers of India.
22.     A Constitution Bench of this Court in
Md. Serajuddin and Ors.

vs. State of Orissa18
has held that expression 'in the course' implies

not only a period of time during which the movement is in progress

but postulates a connected relation.               The relevant portion of the

judgment is extracted as under:
“18.     ….. A sale in the course of export predicates a
             connection between the sale and export. No single test can be
             laid as decisive for determining that question. Each case
             must depend upon its facts. But it does not mean that
             distinction between transactions which may be called sales
             for export and sales in the course of export is not real. Where
             the sale is effected by the seller and the seller is not
             connected with the export which actually takes place, it
             is a sale for export. Where the export is the result of sale,
             the export being inextricably linked up with sale so that
             the bond cannot be dissociated without a breach of the
             obligations arising by statute, contract, or mutual
             understanding between the parties arising from the
             nature of the transaction the sale is in the course of
             export. In the Nilgiri Plantations case (supra) this Court
             found that the sales by the appellants were intended to be
             complete without the export and as such it could not be said

18 (1975) 2 SCC 47
30
that the sales occasioned export. The sales were for export
          and not in the course of export.”
                                                  (emphasis supplied)
23.    It is relevant to advert to the definition of export here.
Section

2(18)
of the Customs Act defines export as follows:
“2. Definitions.­ In this Act, unless the context otherwise
          requires,­
                  xxx               xxx              xxx

          (18) ­ “export”, with its grammatical variations and cognate
          expressions, means taking out of India to a place outside
          India.”
                                                    (emphasis supplied)
24.    In the present case, it is not the case of the appellant that the

goods in question were being exported. Since the goods are to be

consumed on the board of the foreign going ship and the same would

be consumed before reaching a destination, it does not fall under the

definition of ‘export’. The sale cannot qualify as a sale occasioning

export unless the goods reach a destination which is a place outside

India. Further, since the goods have been sold from the bonded

warehouse and had crossed the customs port/land customs station

prior to their sale, it cannot qualify as a sale in course of export

within the meaning of
Section 5(1)
read with
Section 2(ab)
of the CST

Act.
25.    In regard to the contention that declaration under
Section 69
of

the Customs Act was made by the appellant, there is nothing on
31
record to show that such declaration was made in respect of the

goods pertaining to subject sale(s).      Even otherwise, the benefit

extended under the
Customs Act
of waiver of customs duty cannot be

taken as waiver of sales tax under the relevant state and central laws.

Similarly, insertion of sub­Section (3) in
Section 5
of the CST Act in

1976 does not affect these cases because the bonded warehouse

where the stated sales or appropriation of the goods occurred is

within the land­mass of the State of West Bengal and not shown to be

within the customs station area.
26.   A priori, it must be held that the stated sales or appropriation of

goods kept in bonded warehouse within the land­mass/territory of

the State of West Bengal are neither in the course of import or export

and more so, were effected beyond the customs port/land customs

station area. Therefore, in law, it was a sale amenable to levy of sales

tax under the 1954 Act and the 1994 Act, as the case may be, read

with
Section 4
of the CST Act. As a result, these appeals must fail, as

we find no infirmity in the view taken by the authorities below and

which had justly commended to the High Court.
32
27.   In view of the above, these appeals are dismissed with no order

as to costs.   Pending interlocutory applications, if any, shall stand

disposed of.
................................., J.
(A.M. Khanwilkar)


                                            ................................., J.
(Dinesh Maheshwari)
New Delhi;
January 21, 2020.