[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Magnum Power Gen.Ltd. on 21 January, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 4642, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 433
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Rohinton Fali Nariman
1

                                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4407-4408 OF 2011


                         HARYANA POWER PURCHASE CENTRE                         Appellant(s)

                                        VERSUS

                         MAGNUM POWER GENERATION LIMITED & ANR.                Respondent(s)

                                                          WITH

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 7446-7447 OF 2012



                                                  J U D G M E N T
R.F. Nariman, J.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7446-7447 OF 2012:
1)    The present appeals arise from an Appellate Tribunal

                         for   Electricity    order    dated   23.03.2012,   which,    in   turn,

                         upheld the HERC order dated 23.03.2010.             The brief facts

                         necessary for decision of these appeals are as follows:-
(i)   A Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) dated 12.08.1998 was

                         entered into between the appellant and the respondent for

                         sale by the appellant of energy produced by it after setting

                         up of a power plant.         The salient terms of this PPA are as

                         follows:-
“5.1.   Terms of Agreement: This Agreement
                                 shall become effective upon execution and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
delivery by the Parties here to and unless
NATARAJAN
Date: 2020.01.25
12:23:14 IST
earlier terminated pursuant to
Article 5
shall
Reason:
have a term from the date here of until fifteen
                                 (15) years from the Synchronization Date of
                                 last Unit. (180) days prior to the end of the
                                 full (15) Year term described above the HSEB
2
shall have the right for an extension of this
Agreement for an additional period as required
on the same terms except the Tariff (as defined
in Schedule 4) which shall be re-negotiated.
Such extension shall begin upon the end of the
full fifteen (15) Year term.
In the event the term is not extended, the
company shall have the option to sell power to
third party.
In the alternative HSEB shall have the first
right to refusal to buy the Project at the book
value.
5.2.   Company Default

   The following events unless occurring as a
result of a breach by HSEB of its obligations
under this agreement or an event of force
majeure, shall constitute an event of default
by the Company:-
(a)     The Company is adjudicated bankrupt or
dissolved or a receiver is appointed for its
assets   or  proceedings    for    the   company’s
liquidation   (except   for    the    purpose   of
amalgamation or restructuring on terms not
detrimental to HSEB) are continuing more than
120 days after they were commenced.
(b)     Any license or consent required by the
company to perform its obligation under this
Agreement is revoked or is not renewed because
of the company’s default.
(c) The Company fails to commence construction
of the Power station to a material extent
within (6) months after the date of financial
closing or abandons the Power Station due to
the company’s default or repudiates this
Agreement, contrary to the terms of this
Agreement.
(d)     The Company declares neither generating
unit available, or no generating unit is
capable of generating any electricity due to
company’s default for a continuous period of
six (6) months.
(e)     The Company commits a serious breach of
this Agreement and which results in the Company
being unable to carry out its obligations and
3
where the breach is capable of being remedied
       it has not been remedied within 60 days after
       HSEB notified the company in writing of the
       nature of the breach and required it to be
       remedied.
5.3     HSEB DEFAULT

          The following events unless occurring as a
       result of a breach by the company of its
       obligations under the agreement or an event of
       Force Majeure, shall constitute an event of
       default by the HSEB.
(a)     HSEB   is   adjudicated   bankrupt   or
       dissolved or a receiver is appointed of the
       whole or any part of its assets or proceedings
       for its liquidation (other than for the purpose
       of amalgamation or restructuring on terms not
       detrimental   to   the   company)   which   are
       continuing more than 120 days after they were
       commenced.
(b)     If an amount due equal to one months
       billing at 75% PLF, payable by HSEB to the
       company shall remain unpaid more than 60 days
       after the payment became due.
(c)     Any license or consent required by the
       HSEB or any of its entitled successors pursuant
       to clause 18.10 to purchase electricity in bulk
       from   the   company   or  to   transmit   that
       electricity for the purpose of supplying
       electricity to consumers or any licensee in the
       State of Haryana is revoked or expires for any
       reason whatsoever.
(d)     HSEB commits a serious breach of this
       Agreement which results in the company being
       unable to carry out its obligation and where
       the breach is capable of being remedied it has
       not been remedied within 60 days after the
       company notified HSEB in writing of the nature
       of the breach and required it to be remedied.
(e)     HSEB  fails   to  provide,  maintain,
       restore or replenish the letter of Credit and
       Escrow Account as per provisions of this
       Agreement.”
ii)   The appellant covenanted and agreed with the HSEB to

design, construct and complete the Project, arrange fuel for
4
the Plant and make available to the HSEB not later than the

Required Synchronization Date, the Contracted energy and the

Contracted Operating Characteristics of each Unit.    Clause

8.2 which deals with “operation” is important and is set out

herein below:
“8.2 Operation
(a) The HSEB shall issue daily Dispatch
        Instructions directing the Company’s generating
        plant operator to comply with clause 5.2(a) of
        Schedule 6 but ensuring annual PLF of 75%
        failing which the Company will be compensated
        for the Constant Component of the tariff for
        the short fall. The adjustment for PLF will be
        on semi annual basis.         However, if in
        subsequent six months declared availability is
        not sufficient to achieve 75% PLF then the
        overall annual PLF shall be considered on the
        basis of declared availability over the year.
(b) Procedures for despatch of the Project
        shall be in accordance with despatch procedures
        set out in Schedule 6.
(c) The HSEB shall have the right to request
        that the Project be shutdown subject to
        ensuring annual PLF of 75%.
(d) The company shall not be required to
        operate the Project other than in accordance
        with Prudent Utility Practices or except as
        provided in Section 8.4, the Technical Limits
        as such limits may be temporarily modified.
(e) The company shall make reasonable efforts
        to employ qualified personnel preferably from
        within the State of Haryana in the operation
        and maintenance of the Project and to institute
        appropriate   training   programs    for   such
        personnel; provided, however, that the Company
        shall have sole discretion as to the personnel
        employed for the operation and maintenance of
        the project within the bounds permitted by
        law.”
(iii)     Schedule-3 of the PPA laid down a Formula for

Contracted Electrical Output as well as Annual Plant Load
5
Factor as follows:-
“3.1 Formula for Contracted Electrical Output

       Contracted Electrical             output    per   year      in
       Million KWH (MU)

       =(8760x0.75x1000) (1-Aux Cons%) x Tested Capacity in MW
          1000000

       3.2 Annual Plant Load Factor (PLF) shall be
       calculated as under:
PLF% =   Actual net electrical output in interconnection
                point, in MU by the project x 100
                Net electrical output plant is capable of
                delivery at the interconnection point as per
                tested capacity of the project.
Note: Auxiliary consumption maximum                allowed
       3.5% including transformation losses.”
(iv) Schedule-4     which   spoke       of   “determination   of   tariff”

laid down the tariff as the applicable rate upto 75% Plant

Load Factor (PLF) which shall be Rs. 2.40 for every KWH

respondent delivered out of Rs.2.40; Rs. 1.29 shall be the

constant component during the term of the PPA and Rs. 1.11

is adjustable as per a certain formula with which we are not

directly concerned.
(v)   Under Schedule-6, which speaks of Despatch Procedure,

the appellant is first to make an Availability Declaration

as follows:
“Availability Declaration:
Magnum Power Generation Ltd. shall, by not
       later than 10.00 hrs each day, submit HSEB an
       Availability Declaration, prepared as a best
       estimate on good faith, in respect of an
       Availability   Period  during  the   following
       Scheduled Day.”

The respondent is then to give the appellant a Generation

Schedule under Clause 5 as follows:-
6
“5. Generation Schedule

      5.1. HSEB shall issue to the Company a schedule
      of its energy requirement with respect to the
      generation by the Power Plant during each
      Schedule day by 17:00 hrs on the proceeding
      Day, provided that the Company had submitted an
      Availability Declaration containing all the
      necessary information by 10:00 hrs on such
      proceeding Schedule Day.    However, if HSEB is
      unable to furnish its energy requirements by
      the stipulated time of 17.00 hrs. on preceding
      day,   the   energy   generated   as   per  the
      availability declaration shall be deemed to be
      the energy requirement.
5.2 Each Generation Schedule will contain the
      following information in respect of each
      relevant Schedule day:
(a) The level of Active Power which the Power
      Plant is required to produce by way of base
      load generation. The level of Active Power
      shall be within (-) 10% (minus ten per cent) of
      the Declared Availability of that Schedule Day;
subject to minimum of 75% of the contracted
      energy.
(b) HSEB shall ensure that the Power Station is
      despatched as per the Generation Schedule given
      to the Company for the Schedule Day.
(c) In exceptional cases during the monsoon
      season, HSEB shall have the right to despatch
      below 75% PLF, irrespective of the provisions
      of Clause 5.2 (a) above.“
(vi) The Commission issued a Tariff Order dated 12.08.2003

in which it heard the Haryana Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Limited,

the HERC and members of the public.   In the finding insofar

as the present appellant is concerned, the Commission in

sub-para (G) held as follows:-
“G. Availability of power from IPPs (Magnum)
      Magnum (liquid fuel based plant) provided 94.9
      MUs to HVPNL during FY 2002-03.      HVPNL has
      proposed to procure 160 MUs from this source.
      This being the most expensive source is being
      dis-allowed by the Commission.”
7
The Commission then held as follows:-
“The Commission has not allowed any power to be
         sourced from Magnum.     However, against the
         volume of 160 MUs proposed by the licensee the
         fixed cost at the rate of Rs. 1.29 per unit is
         being allowed.”

Ultimately, the Commission concluded:
“For Magnum, the fixed cost of Rs. 206.4
         million based on the HVPNL projected volume of
         160 MUs and per unit fixed charge of Rs. 1.29
         has been considered.    The Commission has not
         approved any purchase from this source in FY
         2003-04, however, Commission recognizes the
         Fixed Cost that has to be paid to the generator
         irrespective of the fact whether any energy is
         purchased or not.”
(vii)      This Tariff Order which binds both parties was a

final order, not being challenged by either party.
(viii)     Despite this order and the clear direction of the

Commission that fixed costs have to be paid to the generator

irrespective of whether energy is purchased or not, the HERC

order dated 23.03.2010 ultimately dismissed the appellant’s

appeal filed under
Section 86(1)(f)
of the Electricity Act

as follows:-
“Final Order
            The above order of the Commission on each
         issue needs to be given a concrete shape by
         calculating the due amount payable to the
         either party and whatever is the net to be paid
         to   the  petitioner   as  per   the  following
         directions:-
After calculating the due amount within a
         period of one month, first instalment of the
         same may be paid within a period of two months
         and the balance amount two months thereafter.
         This amount however would not be reimbursed by
         HERC through any claim or through FSA since the
         respondents have been claiming FSA in respect
         of MPGL under the head “Deemed Generation
8
Charges” and the same stands recovered from the
        electricity consumers.   Hence, whatsoever the
        excess recovery they have made from the
        consumer on this account, after settlement of
        account with MPGL in the light of the findings
        in the earlier paragraphs, the remaining amount
        either be refunded back to the consumer or to
        be adjusted against the future filing with the
        prior approval of HERC.    FSA formula approved
        by   the   Commission   itself   provides   for
        subsequent adjustment of/under/over recovery of
        the same.
In passing, the Commission would wish for
        the revival of the plant to augment the
        generating capacity in the State.        It is
        advised that both the parties may request a
        generation expert at the Central Electricity
        Authority (CEA) Govt. Of India to pay a visit
        to the site to check up the present state of
        the plant in presence of both the parties. The
        fees for this maybe equally shared. Thereafter
        the parties may work out a scheme for
        operationalising the plant for the benefit of
        all the stakeholders by entering into a fresh
        PPA/renegotiating the existing one which is
        workable and takes into account the financial
        interest of both the parties and the interest
        of the consumers of Haryana at large.
(ix) An appeal from this order was also dismissed by the

Appellate Tribunal by judgment dated 23.03.2012 in which

after   setting   out   the   various   clauses   of   the   PPA,   the

Appellate Tribunal held as follows:-
“33. The above analysis of
Article 8.2
would
        indicate   that   the   Appellant   was   under
obligation to make available the plant to
        generate atleast 148.79 MU at 75% PLF.     This
        conclusion is supported by
Article 6.1(j)
& (k)
        under which the Appellant has undertaken to
        supply the Contracted Capacity as defined in
        Schedule 3 of the PPA and works out to 143.79
        for tested capacity of the Plant.         These
        provisions are reproduced below for better
        understanding and completeness.
(i) Make available to HSEB not later than the
        Required Synchronization Date, the Contracted
        energy    and    the    Contracted  operating
9
Characteristics of each Units; and
(k) Operate and maintain the Project so as to
        provide the HSEB with the Contracted energy and
        the Contracted Operating Characteristics of the
        Units reliably over the Term of this Agreement,
        taking into account permissible degradation.
3.1 Formula for Contracted Electrical Output
        Contracted Electrical output per year in
        Million Kwh (MU) =
        (8760 x 0.75 x 1000) (1-AuxCons.%)xTested Capacity in MW
                             1000000

        = 8760 x 0.75 x 0.965 x 22.67/1000 = 143.79 MU.
34. In the light of above analysis, we hold
        that the Appellant was under obligation to
        declare annual availability of the plant to
        atleast 75% of tested capacity so as to obtain
        an annual PLF of 75%.”
2)   Mr. Jayant Bhushan, learned senior counsel appearing on

behalf of the appellant has argued that because of the

Commission’s    order     of     12.08.2002         and    because    the       power

generated by the appellant would impact the consumer as

electricity    charges     would           then    become    very     high,       the

Commission made it clear that the appellant’s electrical

energy was not a source of power which could at all be

tapped as a result of which not even a single mega watt of

power   was    supplied    or     sold        by    the     appellant      to     the

respondent.       He,     however,           contended       that     this       very

Commission’s    order     made    it       clear    that    this     was    in    the

consumer interest, but that the appellant would be entitled

to recover its fixed cost, which unfortunately has been

missed by both the Commission as well as the Appellate

Tribunal in the impugned order.                    He also argued that both

the orders were faulty in their reading of Clause 8.2 of the
10
PPA which cannot be read so that supply at atleast 75% of

the Plant Load Factor be made a condition precedent for

claiming fixed energy charges, as that clause when properly

read makes it clear that the PPA itself made it clear that

once the power project has been set up by the appellant, the

fixed energy cost will have to be paid in any event.
3)    As   against     this,   Mr.    Gurinder     Singh      Gill,    learned

senior     counsel   appearing       on   behalf      of   the    respondent,

supported the judgments of the Commission and the Tribunal,

and argued that a proper reading of
Article 8.2
would make

it clear that it would become operative only when declared

availability is more than 75% of the Plant Load Factor.
4)    Having   heard    learned      counsel    for    both      sides,   these

appeals can be disposed of on the short ground that the

Commission’s Tariff Order of 12.08.2003 had made it clear

that fixed costs during the currency of the agreement for

generating electricity must be paid despite no supply having

been made because the tariff order itself interdicted such

supply in consumer interest.              We have also noted that for

the years in question it is clear that the fixed cost that

has been demanded by the appellant from the respondent has

in fact been collected from the consumer but not paid over

to the appellant, which would result in an unjust windfall

for the respondent.       On this ground, therefore, we set aside

the   impugned   order     and    declare      that    for    the     years   in

question the demanded amount by the appellant towards fixed

cost of running their unit @ Rs. 1.29 per unit be paid by
11
the respondent within a period of 3 months from today.
5)   Given the fact that the appellant has lost in both the

original forum as well as the appellate forum, and which has

taken over 15 years to decide, and given the fact that the

respondent is a Government-Company, we deem it appropriate

that this amount be paid with simple interest @ 3% per

annum.     In case the amounts are not paid within three months

from today, the interest component shall become 6% p.a. for

payment made beyond 3 months.         The impugned judgment is set

aside to the extent that the appeals are decided against the

respondent.    The appeals are accordingly allowed.

Civil Appeal Nos. 4407-4408 OF 2011:
6)   The     appeals   before   the     Appellate   Tribunal   were

dismissed on the ground that 327 days delay be not condoned.
In any case, we find that nothing survives in these appeals

after we have partly allowed the appeals in Civil Appeal

Nos. 7446-7447 OF 2012.         These appeals are disposed of

accordingly.
.......................... J.
(ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN)



                                     .......................... J.
(V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN)

New Delhi;
January 21, 2020.