[Cites
10
, Cited by
10
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
K.V. Subba Rao vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh on 8 April, 1966
Equivalent citations: AIR1967AP202, 1967CRILJ845
JUDGMENT
 

 Sharfuddin Ahmed, J.
(1) This is a petition challenging the order of detention made by the 
Government of Andhra Pradesh on the 10th of November, 1965 under the Defence 
of India Rules, 1962 against the petitioner and seeking his release by an order in 
the nature of habeas corpus under
Section 491
Criminal Procedure Code. The 
order, G.O. Ms. No. 2012 (General Administration SCD Department) dated 10th 
November, 1965 is to the following effect:
"Whereas the Government of Andhra Pradesh are satisfied with 
respect to the person known as Shri K.V. Subbarao son of Sri Veerayya that with a 
view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the defence of India 
and civil defence and the efficient conduct of military operations, it is necessary to 
make the following order:-
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-rule (1) of Rule 30 
of the Defence of India Rules, 1962, the Governor of Andhra Pradesh hereby directs 
that the said Sri K.V. Subbarao be detained.
(By Order and in the name of the Governor of Andhra Pradesh) 

 

 Sd:K.N. Anantaraman.
10-11-1965  
  

Chief Secretary of Government."
(2) The petitioner in his affidavit stated that with the proclamation of 
emergency by the President of India under
Article 352
of the Constitution on 26th 
October, 1962 the citizens were debarred from enforcing certain fundamental rights 
under
Articles 14
, 21
and
22
of the Constitution while the emergency measures 
continued to be operative. The Supreme Court of India while dealing with the 
detentions in 1963 held that in a democratic State the effective safeguards against 
such abuse of executive powers, whether in peace or emergency, is ultimately to be 
found in the existence of enlightened, vigilant and vocal public opinion. This was the 
trend of views generally felt that the members of legal profession should take the 
lead to safeguard the fundamental rights of the citizens and to raise their voice 
against encroachment on such rights by the executive. In compliance with and in 
response to these calls the petitioner began to address pubic meetings in protest of 
detentions made under void laws and set up a committee for the preservation of 
civil liberties under the name of "Andhra Pradesh Civil Liberties Association", the 
other two prominent members being a medical practitioner and another lawyer from 
Khammam. As the movement gained momentum, the local Congress leaders 
became apprehensive and when the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh visited 
Khammam in April, 1965 the petitioner & the party were referred to as a menace to 
the ruling party and a representation was made by J. Vengal Rao and S. Sidda 
Reddy on behalf of the District Congess Committee to stiffle their voice. The Chief 
Minister promised to look into the matter. Later on 20th June, 1965 a convention 
was held at Vijayawada under the presidenship of Sri N.C. Chatterjee in which 
about 2,000 persons participated as delegates and more than 50,000 persons 
participated in the public meeting. The petitioner was elected to be one of the vice-
presidents while the medical practitioner and other lawyers were elected as 
members of the executive in the said convention. The petitioner was directed to 
address meetings to raise a voice of protest against the excesses of the executive. 
Accordingly on 7-11-1965 the petitioner addressed a public meeting at Surya pet 
which was attended by about 15,000 persons. The local Congress leaders including 
the State Congress Ministers and the Chief Minister became restive and the Chief 
Minister seems to have taken a decision on or before 10-11-1965 to punish the 
petitioner and his colleagues by detaining them and thus preventing them from 
raising an effective public voice against the curtailment of civil liberties. It is under 
these circumstances that the impugned order was made.
(3) It was further urged that the order was mechanical in form and there was 
no proper delegation to the Chief Secretary as he is not a competent authority for 
issuing such orders. Further, the petitioner claimed that he had actively participated 
in the defence of India and had in no way obstructed the conduct of the military 
operations. His further contention is that he did not belong to any political party and 
that had been only penalised for attempting to create an enlightened public opinion 
against the excesses of the executive. The statement by the Secretary of the Andhra 
Pradesh Congress Committee subsequent to his detention that the Civil Liberties 
Conventions are no other than cells of China and Pakistan is false and absurd. The 
Secretary who is personally ill-disposed towards the petitioner along with J. Vengal 
Rao was successful in prevailing upon the Chief Minister for issuing the orders of 
detention. The recitals in the detention order are untrue and the order was not made 
in exercise of the powers under the
Defence of India Act
or the Rules made 
thereunder.
(4) The last contention is that the detention was in bad faith for collateral 
purposes with false recitals to the knowledge of the State Government to curb the 
voice of the petitioner against the excess of the State Government. In view of all 
these allegations it was prayed that the petitioner be set at liberty from illegal 
detention in the exercise of the powers vested in this court under Section 491 Cr. 
P.C. or under
Article 226
of the Constitution.
(5) In the counter affidavit filed by the Chief Secretary on behalf of this State 
Government it was stated that the petitioner's activities were being watched from a 
long time before any action was taken against him. The material that came in 
possession of Govt. clearly established that the petitioner's activities had been anti-
national and prejudicial to the defence of the country. Being satisfied that his 
activities were prejudicial to the interests of India and civil defence and effective 
conduct of military operations the detention order was made under Rule 30(1) of the 
Defence of India Rules.
The allegation of the petitioner that merely because he was taking part in the 
civil liberties' movement he was detained, is not correct. That movement has been 
in existence in the country from considerably a long time. The leftist faction of the 
Communist Party of India were trying to exploit the name of the organization to 
propagate their ideologies. Quoting part of speech made by the petitioner at a 
meeting held at Vijayawada, wherein the petitioner is alleged to have stated that the 
left Communist Party in India was established to root out the vestiges of colonialism 
in India and also to eliminate the feudal system which was prevailing in the country 
and to establish the proletarian Government, it was urged that the Civil Liberties 
Movement was intended only to extoll the Leftists' ideologies and prejudice the 
minds of the people against defence activity in the country.
It was stressed that the order of detention of the petitioner has absolutely no 
political motive behind it as alleged by him. The order was made after examining 
the material against the petitioner and after being convinced that his activities were 
anti-national. The order was made with the approval of the Chief Minister who is in 
charge of the concerned portfolio. There was nothing irregular in the form or 
contents of the order. It was further averred that the Government had information that 
the petitioner had addressed a number of party meetings of the left faction and that 
he had been indulging in activities prejudicial to the defence of India and Civil 
defence and, therefore, it was necessary to detain him. This step had been taken 
after carefully examining the activities of the petitioner and no other consideration 
except the defence of country and the safety of nation was allowed to influence the 
decision of the Government in invoking R. 30(1)(b) of the Defence of India 
Rules.
(6) Lastly, it was claimed that the matter as to whether the activities of an 
individual are anti-national and prejudicial to the interests of the nation lay 
exclusively within the jurisdiction of the Government and was, therefore, not 
justifiable. A reply affidavit was filed by the petitioner reiterating the stand taken by 
him in the earlier affidavit.
(7) After the arguments on behalf of the petitioner were closed, the additional 
counter-affidavit was filed by the Chief Minister stating with reference to the specific 
allegations in paras 4, 6, 11, and 15 of the original affidavit filed by the petitioner. It 
was mentioned therein that the allegation made by the petitioner that on a 
representation made by Sri J. Vengal Rao and Sri Sidda Reddy the Chief Minister 
had promised to look into the matter was not correct and to the best of knowledge of 
the Chief Minister the petitioner was not referred to as a menace in any type of 
meeting or even conversation in which he had participated. It was denied that as a 
result of Public response the Ministers or the Chief Minister became restive. The 
other allegations were also totally denied and it was stated that the Government had 
reliable information which was not possible to reveal that the petitioner and some 
others were using the clock of the Civil Liberties Movement for their secret activities 
against the interests of the State in the matters of the defence of India, civil defence 
and the efficient conduct of military operations.
(8) The petitioner submitted a reply affidavit to this additional counter-
affidavit and objected to the filing of the counter-affidavit at such a late stage. He 
laid emphasis on the fact that the Chief Minister did not specifically mention that he 
was the satisfying authority who had taken the decision of his detention and not 
merely acted as an approving authority. The main ground urged by the petitioner is 
that the Chief Minister did not act as the satisfying authority and acted merely as an 
approving authority, which is contrary to the letter and spirit of detention order under 
the Defence of India Rules. Secondly, the order is bad as it does not conform to the 
rules. Further, the recitals in the order are not genuine and are made mala fide on 
extraneous considerations.
(9) Rule 30 of the Defence of India Rules, 1962 empowers the Central 
Government or the State Government, if it is satisfied with respect to any particular 
person that with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the 
defence of India and Civil defence, the public safety, the maintenance of public 
order, India's relations with foreign powers, the maintenance of peaceful conditions 
in any part of India, the efficient conduct of military operations or the maintenance of 
supplies and services essential to the life of the community it is necessary so to do, 
it may make an order directing him to be detained.
(10-12) In the detention order served on the petitioner it has been recited that 
with a view to prevent him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the defence of 
India and civil defence and the efficient conduct of military operations he should be 
detained. In the counter filed by the State Govt. it was stated that the activities of the 
petition were antinational and prejudicial to the interests of the country and the word 
'anti-national' has been repeated more than once. Secondly, his acts have been 
said to be prejudicial to the safety of the country & that he had been indulging in 
activities prejudicial to the interests of India and civil defence. Commenting on these 
slight deviations in the recitals of the order and affidavit, the petitioner has 
contended that the authorities had not satisfied themselves as to whether his 
activities were anti-national or prejudicial to the defence of India, civil defence and 
efficient conduct of military operations. According to him while in the detention order 
emphasis has been laid on his acting in a manner prejudicial to the defence of India 
and efficient conduct of military operations in the affidavit, his conduct was 
described as anti-national and no reference has been made to the efficient conduct 
of military operations.
(13) No doubt the words used to indicate the prejudicial activities of the 
petitioner have not been repeated in the affidavit filed by the Government and there 
is no reference to the efficient conduct of military operations in the affidavit, but it 
cannot be said that the order is bad on that ground. What has been mentioned in the 
order is that with a view to prevent the petitioner from acting in any manner 
prejudicial to the defence of India and Civil defence and the efficient conduct of 
military operations his detention has been ordered whereas in the affidavit the word 
'anti-national' has been used. If the action of citizen be one prejudicial to the interest 
of his own State, his activities can be said to be anti-national. The word ' anti-
national' is of considerably wide scope and would be attracted to all activities 
prejudicial to the maintenance of public order, India's relations with foreign powers, 
maintenance of supplies etc., mentioned under Rule 30. So that when a State is 
engaged in war to defent its integrity, any attempt on the part of an individual to 
prevent recruitment to the Armed Forces would be anti-national as it would be 
prejudicial to the defence of that country. The activity can be described as being 
anti-national or prejudicial to the defence of the country. The word 'anti-national,' 
therefore, covers all such activities and much emphasis cannot be laid on the fact 
that the word 'anti-national' has not been used in the detention order.
Perhaps if the detention order had referred to the activities prejudicial to the 
defence of India and in the affidavit it was averred that the alleged acts were likely to 
strain India's relations with foreign powers it could be argued that there was a 
material discrepancy which would warrant the inference that the order has been 
made without due consideration. But no such inference can be drawn in the instant 
case. As observed above, the word 'anti-national' can be held to cover acts 
prejudicial to the defence of India and efficient conduct of military operations.
(14) As a corollary to this contention it has been urged that the order was 
made without being duly satisifed by the Minister incharge of the Portfolio 
concerned and the safisfaction of the Government of Andhra Pradesh as 
contemplated under Rule 30 is wanting ex facie. In Paras 7 and 8 of the affidavit it 
was stated that the order was merely mechanical in form and there was no proper 
delegation to the Chief Secretary to issue orders under the defence of
India Act
and 
the Rules made thereunder. In the Counter-affidavit it was submitted as follows:
"After examining the material against the petitioner and after 
being convinced that his activities are anti-national, the Government with the 
approval of the Chief Minister who is incharge of the concerned portfolio issued 
orders for his detention. It is normal practice with the Government to use cyclostyled 
forms while communicating similar or same orders to a large number of persons. 
Using cyclostyled papers is not indicative that the orders are mechanical or each 
case has not been separately and properly examined..."
(15) It was also pointed out that the orders issued by the Chief Secretary 
were in consonance with the business rules. The petitioner has made much of the 
fact that the orders were issued by the Government with the approval of the Chief 
Minister as being contrary to the spirit of the rule which provides for the satisfaction 
of the State Government. His argument seems to be that some one else had 
recommended his detention and the Chief Minister had merely acted as an 
approving authority. We do not think that this argument is entitled to any weight, for 
even if the move for his detention was initially made by some authority, the Chief 
Minister could not have approved of it without applying his mind to the report 
received by him. The approval without being satisfied can have no meaning. 
Therefore, much emphasis cannot be laid on the averment that the order was issued 
by the Government with the approval of the Chief Minister. Undoubtedly the Chief 
Minister is in charge of the portfolio and the order by the Government could only 
have been made with his approval. Similarly, though the practice of issuing 
cyclostyled forms has been deprecated, it could not be said that the order was 
merely mechanical. The competency of the Chief Secretary to issue orders in the 
name of the Governor cannot be questioned. It is in strict compliance with the 
procedure laid down in the Government business rules.
(16) The next submission made by the petitioner is that the recitals in the 
affidavit are not genuine as they are based on extraneous considerations. 
According to him certain persons who were ill-disposed towards him had prevailed 
upon the Chief Minister to detain him and consequently the said order was made 
against him. In para 4 of the affidavit it was stated that when the Chief Minister 
visited Khammam in April 1965, the petitioner and his group were referred to as a 
menace to the ruling party by J. Vengal Rao and P. Sidda Reddy on behalf of the 
District Congress Committee, and a request was made to him to curb their voice. 
The Chief Minister announced in the public meeting that he will look into the matter. 
This allegation was denied generally by the State Government in the affidavit filed by 
the Chief Secretary, but in the additional affidavit the Chief  Minister specifically did 
not admit it to be true to the best of his recollection.
The second allegation is that when at the meeting held on 7-11-1965 at 
Suryapet about 16,000 persons responded to the call of the petitioner, the State 
Congress leaders and the State Congress Ministers including the Chief Minister 
became restrive. The Chief Minister appears to have decided on or before 10-11-
1965 to punish the petitioner and his colleagues. This was also specifically denied 
by the Chief Minister and as it is apparent from the wording of the allegations, the 
charge is vague and seems to be based on surmises. There is no indication as to 
how the petitioner became aware of the fact that the Chief Minister and others had 
became restive and made the decision to detain him and his colleagues. In para 11 
it has been mentioned that one J. Vengal Rao who bears malice towards the 
petitioner prevailed upon the Chief Minister to detain him. Even this fact has not 
been conceded and how J. Vengal Rao was ill-disposed towards the petitioner and 
what hold he had on the Chief Minister has not been stated.
(17) In para 15, the 4th allegation is that the detention is made in bad faith for 
collateral purposes with false recitals to the knowledge of the State Government. In 
the counter-affidavit this allegation has been specifically refuted and it has been 
stated that the petitioner was detained merely because he was indulging in 
activities prejudicial to the defence of India and Civil defence on the basis of 
credible and reliable information and reports, the nature of which could not be 
divulged in the public interest.
(18) Thus, the oblique motives ascribed to the Government have been 
specifically controverted. Apart from that, it would be noticed that all the allegations 
of mala fides against the State are vague and indefinite and no material has been 
produced to substantiate the said allegations. No doubt in regard to the first 
allegation two affidavits have been sought to be filed at the close of the arguments 
stating that they were filed earlier but were kept by the jail authorities. The State 
Government had no opportunity to rebut the said affidavit. Therefore, they cannot be 
looked into in support of the contentions advanced by the petitioner. Even 
otherwise, they do not seem to support the case of the petitioner as none of them 
claims to have heard the conversation which ensued between the Chief Minister and 
Sidda Reddy and others. It is well settled that an order of detention can only be 
challenged on the ground of malice and the Government is not bound to disclose the 
details of the material on which the satisfaction of the detaining authority was 
obtained vide the decision in
M. Hanumantha Rao v. Government of Andhra 
Pradesh
, . It was, therefore, 
incumbent on the petitioner to establish mala fides on the part of the Government to 
secure his release if that was the only ground on which the order against him was 
made. A plea of such a nature is to be made by proper pleadings at the initial stage 
and should not be vague and indefinite. In the instant case, a careful perusal of the 
averments made in the affidavit would show that apart from the incident said to have 
taken place at Khammam in April 1965 no other allegation can be said to be 
definite or based on actual information. In regard to the incident at Khammam viz., 
the Chief Minister's promise to look into the matter, a counter affidavit has been 
filed denying its correctness. Even otherwise, the mere promise by the Chief 
Minister to look into the matter would not warrant the inference that he acted with any 
ulterior motive. The other averments are based more or less on surmises. We are, 
therefore, of the opinion that the petitioner has not been able to make out a case of 
mala fides against the orders of Government.
(19) In the case of
Makhan Singh v. State of Punjab
, , it 
was held by the Supreme Court that a mere allegation that the detention is mala fide 
would not be enough and the detenu will have to prove the mala fides.
(20) Having regard to the material on record we are of the view that the 
petitioner has failed to prove mala fides. Accordingly the petition is dismissed.
(21)                    Petition 
dismissed.