[Cites
18
, Cited by
5
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Ramakrishna Transports, Kalahasti vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Andhra ... on 15 July, 1966
Equivalent citations: AIR1968AP34, [1968]68ITR107(AP), AIR 1968 ANDHRA PRADESH 34
JUDGMENT
1. This is a reference under
Section 66 (1)
of the Income-Tax Act, 1922. The question referred for decision is in the following terms:
"Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case the firm of Ramakrishna Transports, Kalabasthi was entitled to registration under
Section 26-A
of the Act."
2. The dispute relates to the assessment year 1950-60, the relevant accounting year being the year ending on 31-3-1959
3.   The  assessee   is  a     partnership  firm constituted  under an instrument  of partnership dated  27-3-1955.  It     carries on  business in bus transport. Two of the partners in this firm (1)  Sri  Venugopala  Reddy  and  (2) Rama-krishna   Reddy,  holding  3  annas     share each are  the  co-parceners  of  a     Hindu   undivided family,  the   Kartha      being  Sri   A.   Balarama Reddy. The only other two partners Sri Venku Reddy and  Sri  M. Veerabhadravya  holding   5 annas share each are strangers   The firm was duly    registered    under
Section 26A
of    the Income-tax   Act.  The     share     income  of  Sri Venugopala  Reddy     and     Ramkrishna   Reddy were  being     offered  for     assessment   as   the income of the  Hindu    undivided family    and assessed  by  the  Income Tax     Officer accordingly   Some years later the assessee came with the contention that  there was a  family  partition  as a result of which  the  two partners of the   family became separated with effect from 1-4-1958  and  that   thereafter  these   two  families held   their shares  on  behalf of  their  respective  branches  of   the   family   to which they belong. This case, advanced for the first  time for the assessment  year  1959-90 did not  find favour  with  the     Department.     The  assessee went in appeal, but without success, upto the stage   of   the   Appellate      Tribunal.   The   two partners of the firm were recognised as before only  as   co-parceners     of      Hindu   undivided

family. The Income-tax Officer. Tirupati
renewed the registration of the firm in the
year 1959-60 by his order dated 30-10-1960.
Thereupon the Commissioner of Income-lax
took exception as he was of the view that two
coparceners representing the Hindu undivided
family cannot enter into a valid partnership
with strangers. He served a notice under Section 33B
of the Indian Income-lax Act on 12-10-1962.
Then after hearing the assessee, he cancelled
the registration by his order, dated 29-10-1962.
Aggrieved by this order, the assessee went
in appeal before the income-tax Appellate
Tribunal. On failure to get a favourable decision, he moved the Appellate Tribunal under
Section 66 (1)
of the Income-tax Act to state
the case. That is how the matter has come
before us for decision.
4. The controversy turns mainly on the question of registration under
Section 26A
of the Indian Income-tax Act. The question of registration is of vital importance to an assessee in view of certain special benefits accruing therefrom. An unregistered firm is invariably charged as a unit. But registration makes all the difference for in that event the tax is levied on each individual partner in respect of his share in the firm's profits. The gain to the assessee thereby is not inconsiderable. In order to be entitled to this privilege it is however essential that a firm should conform to the conditions prescribed by Section 26A and rules 2 to 6 (B) made under
Section 59
of the Act. Further the authority concerned should be satisfied that the partnership is not only genuine but also a valid one. It is settled law that if a partnership is a genuine and valid one and the provisions of
Section 26
and rules connected therewith are complied with, the Income-tax authority shall have no power to reject its registration We are in this proceeding concerned with the question of the validity alone for it is only on that basis that the registration of the firm has been cancelled, Partnership being purely a creature of contrad, the validity and legality must of course depend upon a number of factors. A partnership would be illegal and invalid if its object is forbidden by law or is opposed to public policy. The same would be the consequence if a partnership when permitted would defeat any provision of law. There are other grounds rendering the validity of a parlnership open to question. It is unnecessary for us to consider all these grounds for on the facts and circumstances of the present case we are concerned with the limited question whether more than one coparcener representing a Hindu undivided family can enter into a valid partnership with strangers. The question involving as it docs a consideration of the principles of Hindu law and also the
Partnership Act
steering clear of all possible conflict must necessarily present considerable difficulty. The coparceners of H Hindu undivided family are not partners within the meaning of that term in the
Partnership Act
. Partnership according to the
Partnership Act
, is the relation between persons who have agreed to share the

profits of the business carried on by all or any of them acting for all.   The persons who have thus  entered     into     the  contract     are called individually    partners and collectively  a  firm. The  relationship  between  coparceners in  connection with joint family business is not based on contract  but on status    and  is created  by operation of law. That is why
Section 5
of the Partnership  Acl   excludes   the   members  of   a Hindu  undivided family    carrying    on  family business  as  such  from  the description  of  the parlners. The  members of a Hindu undivided family carrying on  family business are therefore   not   partners.      Nor   is   the   joint   Hindu family a firm within the meaning of the
Partnership  Act
though  that terminology  may  be used loosely in relation thereto. A joint Hindu family  is a unit  to which  no outsider can be admitted  by  agreement;  it  is  a  status  which can  only   be   acquired  by   birth   or  adoption. Then  again  it  must, as  a  unit,    act  through some  person  and  the  only     person  who can act is the Karta or manager    who may be   a single   individual   or  several     adult  members. In relation to the family business   in the naturt of  trade,  the  rights  and  liabilities  of coparceners constituting  the  family     firm  are  therefore not to  determined    by  exclusive  reference to  the
Partnership  Act
.  So long as  the trade is being carried on by them and no strangers are  associated   with  them  in  any   manner  its incidents  must  be     regulated     essentially  by Hindu Law. These incidents must vary substantially   from    those of a partnership.   Whereas the death of a coparcener or the managing  member does not dissolve the joint family   firm and property   passes  by  survivorship,  the  partnership  under  the
Partnership     Act
is  dissolved ordinarily by the   death of a   partner. A coparcener   cannot   ask   for   an      account   of   past profits  or  losses.     But  it  is  otherwise  in   a partnership.  In a joint family firm ordinarily it is only the managing member who can act on behalf of the family and bind his coparceners  by his acts; but sometimes  for the convenience of trade or business by arrangement the  amongst  members  not only  one  manager but  several  persons  with     equal  powers  are entrusted  with  the  duty  of  managership.    In such a case  the act of any one will bind all the coparceners. The Manager or managers of the  joint  family  firm  have  implied  authority to contract debts and pledge the properties and credit of the family for   the ordinary   purposes of family business. No other person has such authority. But in partnership each is the agent of the other. There is also   difference as to the extent of liabilities for debts contracted. These and other differences create considerable difficulty when the case on its particular facts and circumstances attracts  the  provisions  of  both the Hindu law and the law of partnership.
5. The instant case obviously is not one where the manager is carrying on family business with family funds without being associated with any stranger. It is in fact a case where two of the coparceners representing the family have entered into partnership with strangers in a business, the capital of which, to the






extent of their share agreed upon, is derived from the property of the joint family. It is tettled law that it is competent to the manager of a joint family business acting on behalf of the family to enter into a partnership with strangers. The manager, by doing so, does not introduce the members of the undivided family into that partnership. Such members alone us have entered partnership with the strangers ere partners. The manager and such of these members are accountable to the family. The law on this subject has been staled by Mayne in page 398 of his hook "Mayne on Hindu Law and Usage, 9th Edition" in the following terms:
"Where a managing member of a joint family enters into a partnership with a stranger, the other members of the family do not ipso facto become partners in the business so as to clothe them with all the rights and obligations of a partner as defined by the
Indian Partnership Act
. In such a case the family as a unit does not become a partner but only such of its members as in fact enter into a contractual relation with the stranger, the partnership will be governed by the Act."
This statement of law has been approved of    by     the     Privy     Council     in     Pichappa Chettiar  v. Chokalingam  Plllai,  AIR   1034   PC 192 and also accepted  by  the  Supreme Court in   Charan   Das   Haridas   v.   Commissioner  of Income Tax,  Bombay  North,  Kutch  and  Sau-rastra,  Ahmedabad,    . It  is plain from the language used  that the  Karta or the adult members of a joint Hindu family, where  it  is  a  trading family,  may enter  into a partnership with a stranger or strangers representing the Joint Hindu family. The family as a unit on that account does not become partner, but only such of    its members as in fact enter into a contractual relation with the stranger, and the partnership will be governed by the  Act.  In  the management  of that  busi-ness, therefore, the other members of the family have no part to play. The only right that they have against the manager or the Karta or the other  members   who  entered  into   partnership representing the family is to call upon him or them  to give an  account of the business that they have done with    the joint family  funds The  income  and   profits  which   the  managing member  or  members  have  earned   from   such partnership  would  belong to  the   joint   family and the other coparceners would have a right to share such profits with    these members of joint family as a joint family asset.
The position of the manager or the managing members in this way, as pointed out by the Privy Council in
Annamalai Chetty    v. Murugesa Chetty
, (1903)  ILR 26 Mad 544  (PC)  is analogous to that of a trustee.  He    or they  in  such  cases occupy a dual position. As betwe.en the parties to the contract they are partners and their rela-tionship  is  regulated  by   the
Partnership   Act
. They  as a  rule    are  personally  liable  for  all the obligations under    the contract as against the partner strangers. In relation to the family members they have a duty to account for the profits that they made. For purposes of income-
tax the Income derived is assessed to tax as the income of the Hindu undivided family. Thus the provisions of three distinct laws are attracted in view of the role that they occupy.
In
Commissioner of Income-Tax, Madras v. Bagyalakshmi & Co.
the Supreme Court stressed on the necessity of always in such cases keeping in view the principles of the three laws. Their Lordships observed thus:
"If the distinction between the three concepts is borne in mind much of the confusion disappears. A partnership is a creature of contract. Under Hindu law a joint family is one of status and right to partition is one of its incidents. The income-tax law gives the Income-tax Officer a power to assess the income of a person in the manner provided by the Act. Except where there is a specific provision of the Income-lax Act which derogates from any other statutory law or personal law, the provision will have to be considered in the light of the relevant branches of law. A contract of partnership has no concern with the obligation of the partners to others in respect of their shares of profit in the partnership. It only regulates the rights and liabilities of the partners, A partner may be the karta of a joint Hindu family; he may be a trustee, he may enter into a sub-partnership with others, he may, under an agreement, express or implied, be the representative of a group of persons, he may be a benamidar for another in all such cases he occupies a dual position Qua the partnership, he functions in his personal capacity qua the third parties in his representative capacity The third parties, whom one of the partners represents. cannot enforce their rights against the other partners nor the other partners can do so against the said third parties Their right is only to a share in the profits of their partner-representative in accordance with law or in accordance with the terms of the agreement as the case may be."
These observations were made in connection with the question of genuineness of partnership where it was said that two of the partners who were the members of a Hindu undivided famly purporting to hold 7 1/2 annas and 2 1/2 annas share each by reason of the agreement with their family members were in fact beneficially interested in much lesser share. That is not exactly the question here. But the principle enunciated is alike applicable while judging the validity of the partnership. The distinrf relationship under the
Partnership Act
and under the Hindu Law has to he necessarily kept in view in this connection we may also refer to the observations of Hidayatullah, J. in his minority judgment in Commissioner of Income-Tax.
Bombay City v. Nandlal Gandalal
,  which are to the following effect:--
"Now it is settled law that a Hindu undivided family cannot be a partner under the law of partnership. Such of coparceners who join the partnership are regarded quoad the

other partners, as individuals in their own names and rights. Yet, the benefits that arise to them from the partnership belong to the family, and their rights are the assets of the family. We have recently held in
Charandas Haridas v. Commissioner of Income-Tax, Civil Appeal No.
108 of 1957 decided on March 15, 1860 (AP) that in such a situation the matter has to be looked at in the light of three separate and independent brandies of law. They are the Law of' partnership, the Hindu Law and the Law relating to income-tax. The implications of a coparcener joining as partner with strangers are different when one views the matter from the angle of the law of part nership or from the angle of the Hindu law or the law of income-tax. In so far as the law of partnership is concerned, the coparcenary has no place in the partnership, and the coparcener partner is everything. But, viewed from the angle of Hindu law, the position is entirely different."
The question before His Lordship
in that case
was different from what is posed now; but the principle laid down as to the method of approach applies with all its vigour to our case here.
6.   While  considering  whether  the   part- nership as entered into is against law or is in valid  we cannot   but bear in  mind   the  principles   of  law   relating   to   coparcenary   and   see whether it has been violated to any extent.
7. We have noticed that under Hindu law it is open to the karta (whether one individual or several persons) on behalf of the family to enter into partnership with strangers. In that case only the person or persons entering into contract will be partners qua the strangers who are the contracting parties. The other members though beneficially interested in the profits of the shares of the managing members are not the part ners. That such partners acting on behalf of the undivided family can be more than one is not open to doubt in view of the statement of law by Mayne and the pronouncement of the Privy Council and the Supreme Court in the cases cited above.
8. There may also be cases where the members not as coparceners or members of the family but in their personal character not with the aid of or detriment to the joint family funds but with their own separate funds enter into contract with Karta who re-presents the family. It is well settled that individual members qua their separate property can enter into a valid partnership with a karta representing the Hindu undivided family.
In
Lachhman Das v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Punjab
1948-16 ITR 35 at pp.40 and 41 = (AIR 1948 PC 8 at p. 11) it was observed that when it is open to a Managing member of a Joint Hindu family to enter into partnership with a stranger, there is no reason why a coparcener could not in his individual capacity enter into partnership with the karta of the joint family. It is apt to quota here the words of their Lordships:
".....on      general      principles   they
(their Lordships) cannot find any sound reason to distinguish the case of a stranger from that of a coparcener who puts into the partnership what is admittedly his separate property held in his individual capacity and unconnected with the family funds. Whatever the view of a Hindu joint family and its property might have been at the early stages of its development, their Lordships think that it is now firmly established that an individual coparcener, while remaining joint, can possess, enjoy and Utilise, in any way he likes, pro-perty which was his individual property, not acquired with the aid of or with any detriment to the joint family properly. It follows from this that to be able to utilise this property at his will, he must be accorded the freedom to enter into contractual relations with others including his family, so long as it is represented in such transactions by a definite personality like its manager. In such a case he retains his share and interests in the properly of the family, while he simultaneously enjoys the benefit of his separate propertv and the fruits of its investment. To be able to do this, it is not necessary for him to separate himself from his family . . .
In this view of the Hindu law, it is clear that if a stranger can enter into partnership with reference to his own property, with a Joint Hindu family through its karta, there is no sound reason in their Lordships view to withhold such opportunity from a coparcener in respect of his separte and Individual property."
In view of the above discussion two things may be laid down as well-recognised, general principles The first is, as stated by Mayne, where a managing member of a joint Hindu family enters into partnership with a stranger in relation to a business whose capital in whole or in part is derived from the property or funds of the joint family, the family as a unit or the entire body of the family members do not ipso facto become partners In that partnership business. The partnership will be confined to the strangers and such of the members of the family who have actually entered into partnership with them. Secondly the members of the family in their personal or individual capacity can quoad their separate property enter into partnership with the karta of the joint family who represents the joint family
9. So far the law is well settled. Even so there arises a third question which in sub-stance seeks to demand a further clarification of the above propositions in view of the basic rule of Hindu law that persons cannot at the same time be members of a joint Hindu family and be also members of the firm of which such property forms the asset. As already noticed
Section 5
of the Partnership Act clearly lays down that the members of a Hindu undivided family carrying on family business as such are not partners in such business. The question for consideration is where some of the joint family members be-
come  partners  (within     the    meaning  of  the term in the
Partnership Act
) in a partnership firm  can  they  become  so  only in their individual  character    qua  their separate  properly or they can as well become such partners, by reason  of their     contract  with  the  strangers, representing  the     joint  family  by  themselves or in conjunction with the karta.  It is difficult to accede to the contention that the only way   for   the   members  of   the   joint   family   to become  partners  is  to  enter  into  contract   in their    individual     or  personal     character   of course   they   can      do   so  qua   their  separate property
in  that case
vis-a-vis the  Karta  representing the family they will take the   same place  as  the  strangers  would  occupy  by  any contract with him. But when it is open to the adult members    acting    within    the authority conferred on  them,  whether express or implied, to represent the family, there is no reason why they along with the karla, if he is there, should not vis-a-vis    the strangers    figure  as partners. The  statement  of law  by  Mayne as approved of by    the Privy    Council and  the Supreme   Court  does     permit  such  a  contin-gency. The contracting members alone will be partners and they are responsible to the joint family in relation to their profits they make They  are  in  fact     the  representatives of  the family  and   though   their  shares  in  the  partnership are fixed as they should  be even  for purposes of Section  26A    the    beneficial    interest therein  is of  the  joint     family.   Their  actual shares may be much    less. As representatives they are one body for purposes of Hindu law As  partners under  the
Partnership  Act
vis-avis the strangers and other partners they may be distinct. Whatever the rights and liabilities vis-a-vis  the other  partners, they  have  a   com-mon  ground.    With      the  family   members   in the coparcenary    qua partnership, their relations are determined    by the
Partnership Act
and qua coparcenary their relationship is governed by the Hindu law. The Income-tax law for purposes of registration etc. cannot ignore the considerations which     are  relevant  under the
Partnership Act
and the Hindu law   Thus each branch of law  would have  its operation in   determining   their   various   rights   and   lia-bilities.   When  the Hindu law on clear authority  permits  karta  or   manager  who  may  be a  single  individual  or several  adult   members to enter into a    contract with strangers in a representative capacity, the presence of more than  one  coparcener  in  the same partnership when  it  is in  representative    capacity cannot render  the  partnership void  or invalid.   There are  several  decisions     of  the     various   High Courts  which   have     proceeded  on   the  basis that  the  adult  members     in  a   representative capacity  can  enter into     a  valid   partnership with strangers in relation to a business whose capital   in  part  consists  of   joint   family   pro-perty or funds. The Allahabad  High Court in Ramkumar  Ramniwas.     In  re,     1952-22  ITR 474 = (AIR   1958   All   160).   expressed   the   view that the adult members of the    family acting within  their rights under the Hindu law may be able  to enter into     partnership and  make

the entire joint family liable for the debts of the partnership and be entitled to the benefits thereof. The Madras High Court in Bagya-laxmi & Co. v. Commissioner of Income-Tax, Madras (1961) 42 ITR 727 (Mad), approved of the principle of some members of joint family representing the family entering into a partnership with a stranger. The Bombay High Court also has in an unreported case Commissioner of Income-Tax v. Ganesh Na-rayan Onkarmal, I.T Ref No. 11 of 1947 decided on 16th March 1948 (Bom) accepted the principle that two or more members of a undivided Hindu Family can enter into a partnership with strangers rendering themselves accountable for their individual shares to the Joint family.
In
Commissioner of Income-Tax M.P. v. Hukamchand Mannalal & Co.
1965-57 ITR 213 (MP) the Madhya Pradesh High Court has referred In this case It was a case where the instrument of partnership showed that there were ten persons representing the four branches with different shares so as to give each branch quarter share in the profits and loss of the business. It was contended that while the karta of a Hindu undivided family could enter into a partnership with a stranger, two or more members of the joint family could not in their individual capacity, enter into a partnership with outsiders Chagla, C. J., said:
"I do not see what is there opposed to principle or opposed to authority which would or should prevenf two or three members of a joint family individually contracting with outsiders and entering into partnership As far as their individual shares are concerned they would be accountable to their joint family The profits which they would earn In respect of their individual shares would ultimately belong to the joint family but so far as the partnership with the outsiders is concerned they would he individual partners with their individual shares"
Tendolkar, J.   observed:--
"It is now well established that a member of a joint Hindu family can enter into a partnership with an outsider may be that in such a partnership he represents the joint family of which he is a member and if so, he is accountable to the joint family for the profits of such business and cannot retain those profits for himself, but qua the partnership he is certainly a partner. The position is not any different when instead of one coparcener of the Joint family two or more coparceners of that joint family enter into a partnership with the outsider. So far as the partnership is concerned, they have their individual shares in the partnership it may be that in this partnership they represent the joint family or use joint family funds for the purposes of the partnership. They are accountable to the joint family for the profits made in the partnership But the fact that the profits earned by a coparcener who is partner in a firm enure for the benefit of the joint family does not make it any the less partnership for purposes of section 26-A.

The above observations are to the effect that a partnership with strangers entered into by more than one coparcener representing the family is valid in law for purposes of
Section 26
A. It may be stated here that the expression "individual capacity" used here is not the same as personal capacity qua separate property.
10. But then in this connection we may also refer to the following observations of the Supreme Court in
Firm Bhagai Ram Mohanlal v. Commissioner of Excess Profit Tax, Nagpur
, AIR 1650 SC 374 at pp. 377 & 878.
"In AIR 1948 PC 8 it was held by the Judicial Committee that the karta of a joint Hindu family could enter into partnership With an individual member of the coparcenary 'quoad' his separate properly. It was also held by the Privy Council in Sunder Singh Majtthia v. Commissioner of Income-Tax, United and Central Provinces, AIR 1942 PC 67 that there was nothing in the
Income-tax Act
to prohibit the members of a joint Hindu family from dividing some properties, while electing to retain their joint status, and carrying on business as partners in respect of those properties treating them as its capital. But, in the present case, the basis of the partnership agreement of 1840 is that the family was joint and that Mohanlal was its karta and that he entered into the partnership as karta on behalf of the joint family. It is difficult to reconcile this position with that of Chhotelal and Bansilal being also partners in the firm in their individual capacity, which can only be in respect of their separate or divided property.
If members of a coparcenary are to be regarded as having become partners in a firm with strangers, they would also become under the partnership law partners "inter se" and it would cut at the very root of the notion of a joint undivided family to hold that with reference to coparcenary properties the members can at the same time be both coparceners and partners."
On the basis of the above observations what is contended for on behalf of the Revenue is that where a karta representing the family has entered Into a partnership with strangers the other members of the coparcenary by reason of contract of their own eannot valldly become partners in the same partnership. In order to appreciate the full implications of the above observations we may also bear in mind the further observations made by the Supreme Court in that connection which are to the following effect:--
"To get over this difficulty, it was suggested that all the three coparceners might be regarded as having entered into the contract of partnership as kartas of the joint family But even if that could be done consistently with the principles of Hindu law, the very pleadings of the appellant are against such a supposition being made, affirming as they do that it was only Mohanlal that was the

karta, not the others. The contention, therefore that Chotelal and Bansilal should be held to have become partners in the old firm tinder the agreement dated 23-8-1940 cannot be maintained."
These observations, to our mind, but clarify the rule that the adult members of the joint Hindu family can become partners along with karta only in a representative capacity, if the karta alone represents the family they can become partners only in their personal character qua their self-acquired property as held in Lachman Das' case. 1948-16 ITR 35 =(AIR 1948 PC 8). They cannot become partners quoad their share in the joint Hindu family. Of course there can be little difficulty if they together with the said karta under authority of the family express or implied represent the family.
11. The Madhya Pradesh High Court in 1965-57 ITR 213 (MP) (supra) considered this question and accepted the contention that the above observations of the Supreme Court meant simply that with reference to coparcenary property the members of the joint family cannot become partners in their personal or individual capacity and not that if the Karta had entered into partnership, the coparceners could not also be partners as representatives of the family. The learned Judges construed the observations of the Supreme Court to mean that with reference to coparcenary property the members cannot at the same time be both coparceners and partners in their individual capacity as distinct from their capacities as representatives of the joint family. We find ourselves in respectful agreement with these observations.
12.
In
Pitamberdas Bhikhabhai & Co. v. Commissioner of Income-Tax
. Gujarat, 1964-53 ITR 341 (Ouj) the Gujaral High Court had to deal with a case where the father, Pithamberdas, purported to make a gift of Rs. 10,001 to each of his sons, Raman-lal and Jayantllal. The purported gift was made by debiting a sum of Rs 20,002 in the books of the business to Pitamberdas Bhikhabhai and crediting a sum of Rs. 10,001 to Ramanlal Pitamberdas and a sum of Rs. 10,001 to Jayantilal Pitamberdas. Pitamberdas then took Ramanlal and Jayantllal as partners in the business executing a deed of partnership showing that he was the absolute owner of the assels of the business and that there was no ancestral business that he got. This stand taken by him in the deed of partnership was not true. The business did not belong to him absolutely but was an asset of the Hindu undivided family consisting of Pitamberdas, his wife and his sons and daughters. Even the sum of Rs. 10,001 a piece, purported to have been gifted by Pitamberdas to Ramanlal and Jayantilal belonged to the said Hindu undivided family. So then the only question was whether in respect of a business belonging to a Hindu undivided family the coparceners can be taken as partners in the business in their indivi-
dual capacity with specific shares. In this connection the learned Judges referred to the decision of the Privy Council in 1948-16 ITR 36=(AIR 1948 PC 8) Supra and also the observations of the S.C. in  Supra and held that no such partnership is possible in relation to coparcenary property between the coparceners themselves. The principle laid down is unexceptionable for in relation to coparcenary properly, the coparceners cannot become partners themselves.
Section 5
of the Partnership Act makes this abundantly clear. The decision of the Allahabad High Court is S. C. Mulllck & Sons. In re, (1938) 1938-6 ITR 89 (All) is to the same effect, viz., that persons cannot at one and the same time be members of a joint Hindu family in respect of joint family property and be also members of a firm of which such properly iorms the asset. It may be noted here that In both the cases mentioned above there waa no element of strangers at all in the business.
13. The facts and circumstances of the present case are entirely different. There is of course a karta of the family, but it is not he who had entered into partnership. Instead the two adult coparceners had entered into partnership with strangers. Both of them entered into the agreement as representatives of the family. The family or the Department never disputed this position. Indeed their share in the partnership was an asset of the joint family and was being regarded as such. The income from such partnership was the income of the joint family and was being assessed in the hands of the family as such. It Is therefore clear that the present case is not hit by any of the prohibitions or infirmities contemplated by the observations of the Supreme Court in  Supra. It is further clear that the partnership in question is quite consistent with the rule approved of by the Privy Council and accepted by the Supreme Court, viz., it is open to one or more coparceners representing the joint family to enter into partnership with strangers under the authority of the family. The cancellation of the registration in these circumstances was not justified in law. It is not the case of the Tribunal that the partnership is not genuine. Nor is it its case that there has been no compliance with the provisions of Section 26A or the rules framed under
Section 59
of the Income-tax Act. The only ground on which cancellation was made by the commissioner was that the case was hit by the observations of the Supreme Court In the above case. As we have already pointed out that is not the position in this case.
14.   We  therefore     answer   the  question in  the affirmative. The  Department shall the  costs  of  the     assessee.   Advocate's  fee  is fixed at Rs. 100.