[Cites
11
, Cited by
7
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
M/S. Sri Balaji Centrifugal Castings vs M/S. Icici Bank Limited Rep. By Its ... on 12 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 126
Author:
T.Amarnath Goud
Bench:
T.Amarnath Goud
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR  AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T.AMARNATH GOUD                    

WRIT PETITION No.18947 OF 2018    

12-07-2018 

M/s. Sri Balaji Centrifugal Castings  Petitioner.. Petitioner

M/s. ICICI Bank Limited rep. by its Authorized   Officer, Nanakramguda, Hyderabad and another Respondents 

Counsel for petitioner :  Sri Vedula Venkataramana,
                            M/s. Bharadwaj Associates
                                                
Counsel for respondent No.1: Sri R.Raghunandan and  
                           Sri G.Kalyan Chakravarthy
                                
^Counsel for respondent No.2:  --


<Gist:

>Head Note:     


? CASES REFERRED:      

1. (2013) 9 SCC 620 
2. 2018 SCC ONLINE SC 237    
3. (2014) 6 SCC 1
4. AIR 2010 Madras 24 
5. 2013 ILR Vol.I Allahabad 113
6. 2017 (2) Banking Cases 500 (Allahabad)


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR         
AND  
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T.AMARNATH GOUD          

WRIT PETITION No.18947 OF 2018    

O R D E R
(Per Sri Justice Sanjay Kumar)

      The petitioner firm seeks a declaration that the ICICI Bank Limited,
the first respondent herein, had no legal right to invoke
Section 14
of the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
Security Interest Act, 2002 (for short, the
SARFAESI Act
), having already
delivered physical possession of the secured asset to the auction purchaser
on 07.12.2017 and in consequence, challenges the order dated 05.05.2018 
passed by the learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Ranga Reddy District at
L.B.Nagar, in exercise of power under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act, in
Crl.M.P.No.224 of 2018 filed by the bank. In the alternative, the petitioner
firm seeks a direction to the bank to cancel the auction sale of the secured
asset held on 08.11.2017, return the highest bid amount to the auction
purchaser and thereafter avail the benefit of
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act.
The secured asset in question is Plot No.B-52, along with the
Industrial Shed therein, situated at the Assisted Private Industrial Estate at
Balanagar, Hyderabad. The petitioner firm claims to be the absolute owner
of the said shed. M/s. Sojiram Ispat Private Limited, the second respondent
herein, availed certain credit facilities from the bank and in relation thereto,
the petitioner firm created a security interest over its shed by mortgaging the
same with the bank. The said shed was put to auction sale by the bank on
08.11.2017 pursuant to recovery proceedings initiated under the
SARFAESI 
Act
. Sale certificate dated 07.12.2017 was issued by the bank in favour of
the auction purchaser, M/s. Varun Motors, which is not made a party to this
writ petition. Possession of the shed was also delivered to the auction
purchaser. However, as such possession was taken over forcibly from it by
the bank, the petitioner firm filed W.P.No.19442 of 2017 before this Court
complaining of the same and seeking redelivery. The writ petition was
allowed by this Court vide order dated 14.12.2017. S.L.P. (Civil) No.638 of
2018 filed by the bank against the said order was dismissed by the Supreme
Court on 22.01.2018. Thereupon, the bank redelivered possession of the
shed to the petitioner firm on 01.03.2018. Thereafter, the bank approached
the learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Range Reddy District at
L.B.Nagar, under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act, by filing Crl.M.P.No.224 of
2018, seeking to take possession of the shed. The petitioner firm claims that
though it was shown as a respondent in the said petition, no notice was
served upon it and a warrant was straightaway issued to an Advocate-
Commissioner to take physical possession of the shed. Apprehending 
dispossession pursuant thereto, the petitioner firm is before this Court.
The petitioner firm would point out that in the petition filed in support
of Crl.M.P.No.224 of 2018 the bank admitted that possession of the shed
was handed over to the auction purchaser on 07.12.2017 and contend that
once the auction sale concluded by delivery of physical possession of the
property sold, the security interest of the bank over the mortgaged property
would come to an end and
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act would no longer   
be available to it as the said provision is to be invoked only by a secured
creditor for taking possession of a secured asset which is required to be sold
or transferred. The petitioner firm would assert that the bank could have
invoked
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act only before such sale, when the 
shed still remained a secured asset. It would further contend that as the sale
already stood concluded, it is for the auction purchaser to take recourse to
civil legal remedies by filing a suit for recovery of possession, as the bank no
longer had a security interest in the shed sold. It is on this ground that the
petitioner firm assails the action of the bank in taking recourse to
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act by filing Crl.M.P.No.224 of 2018 before the learned
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Ranga Reddy District at L.B.Nagar. According
to the petitioner firm, the bank has to cancel the sale already held and only
thereafter avail the benefit of
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act. The logic of
the petitioner firm in this regard is that in the event the bank cancels the
auction sale, the shed would again assume the character of a secured asset,
whereby the bank could take measures for taking over its possession by
invoking
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act.
The bank filed a counter through the Authorized Officer-cum-Chief
Manager at its Hyderabad branch. Therein, the bank adverted to details of
the proceedings initiated by it for recovery of its dues in relation to the loan
account of the second respondent company, which was classified as a non-
performing asset on 30.11.2012. The bank also adverted to the creation of a
security interest by the petitioner firm over its sheds in Plot Nos.B-52 and
B-53 at Balanagar, Hyderabad, along with buildings, structures, fixtures,
fittings, plant and machinery, etc, therein. The bank stated that it invoked
the provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
by issuing demand notice dated 
16.02.2013 under
Section 13(2)
thereof. The amount due as on 15.02.2013,
mentioned therein, stood at Rs.21,96,30,336/-. Thereafter, the bank took
recourse to
Section 13(4)
of the SARFAESI Act, read with Rule 8(1) of the
Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules, 2002 (for short, the Rules of 2002),
and issued possession notice dated 19.06.2013. The same was published in  
two leading newspapers on 23.06.2013. The bank also filed O.A.No.570 of
2013 (renumbered as O.A.No.1849 of 2017) before the Debts Recovery  
Tribunal, Hyderabad, against the borrower company, the petitioner firm and
other guarantors for recovery of its dues. This O.A. is still pending.
Crl.M.P.No.489 of 2013 was filed by the bank before the learned Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate, Ranga Reddy District, under
Section 14
of the
SARFAESI Act for taking physical possession of the secured assets. Pursuant 
thereto, G.Narasimhulu, Advocate-Commissioner, was appointed by the  
Court to take over possession of the secured assets. S.A.(IR) No.483 of 2013
(numbered as S.A.No.514 of 2013 and again renumbered as S.A.No.417 of   
2017) was filed by the petitioner firm before the jurisdictional Debts
Recovery Tribunal  seeking stay of all further proceedings pursuant to the
possession notice dated 23.06.2013. Conditional stay order dated 03.10.2013
was passed therein directing the petitioner firm to pay 30% of the amount
claimed in the possession notice. As the petitioner firm failed to comply with
this condition, the stay stood vacated. However, owing to the stay order, the
Advocate-Commissioner failed to take over possession of the secured assets.
The S.A is still pending. One Darshan Agarwal filed S.A.No.625 of 2013
(renumbered as S.A.No.619 of 2017) before the Debts Recovery Tribunal,
Hyderabad, claiming that he was the tenant of the petitioner firm in relation
to the secured shed and that he was in possession. The Tribunal granted
stay in his favour but the same was not extended beyond 14.12.2016.
Thereafter, the S.A itself stood dismissed for default on 09.08.2017. While
so, the bank filed Crl.M.P.No.1020 of 2015 before the learned Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate, Ranga Reddy District at L.B.Nagar, for taking
physical possession of the secured shed in Plot No.B-53 at Balanagar,
Hyderabad. G.Jyothi, Advocate, was appointed as the Commissioner to take  
over possession of the said shed, vide order dated 17.12.2015. Possession
was accordingly taken on 11.01.2016 and handed over to the bank.
Crl.M.P.No.68 of 2017 was filed by the bank before the learned Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate, Ranga Reddy District, for taking over physical
possession of the secured shed in Plot No.B-52 at Balanagar, Hyderabad.
One Bumanandham, Advocate, was appointed as the Commissioner to take     
over the physical possession of this shed, vide order dated 31.01.2017. The
warrant issued to him was to be executed and returned on or before
26.05.2017. The Advocate-Commissioner however failed to execute the 
warrant and did not co-operate for taking over physical possession of the
shed for reasons best known to him. The warrant issued to the Advocate-
Commissioner therefore lapsed and there was no extension. The bank 
admitted that it took over physical possession of the said shed on
12.06.2017 by other means and conducted the auction sale thereof on
08.11.2017. The bank further stated that as the petitioner firm secured a
conditional order from the Tribunal in S.A.No.417 of 2017 but failed to
comply with the condition imposed, the sale was conducted, as scheduled, in
respect of the sheds in Plot Nos.B-52 and B-53.  M/s. Varun Motors was
declared the highest bidder at Rs.21.40 Crore for the two plots/sheds. Sale
certificate dated 07.12.2017 was issued in its favour and possession of both
the plots/sheds was also handed over to it along with the title deeds. The
bank however pointed out that the sale certificate in favour of the auction
purchaser had not been registered and therefore, the transfer as per law
was yet to be completed. The bank claimed that even after appropriation of
these auction proceeds, the outstanding dues of the borrower company
stood at Rs.31,96,82,364/- as on 31.05.2018. The bank adverted to the filing
of W.P.No.19442 of 2017 by the petitioner firm and the order passed
therein, directing redelivery of the possession of the subject shed. The bank
also acknowledged the dismissal by the Supreme Court of the Special Leave 
Petition filed by it against the said order. The bank stated that physical
possession of the subject shed was redelivered to the petitioner firm on
01.03.2018. Thereafter, on 09.03.2018, the bank filed a fresh application
under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act before the learned Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate, Ranga Reddy District, for appointment of an Advocate-
Commissioner to take physical possession of the subject shed in Plot No.B-52
at Balanagar, Hyderabad. Warrant was issued on 05.05.2018 appointing 
Pidugu Anitha, Advocate-Commissioner, to take over physical possession of
the shed and to handover the same to the bank on or before 03.08.2018.
The bank stated that the Advocate-Commissioner visited the subject shed on
12.06.2018 for taking over its possession and found that a tenant claimed to
be in occupation thereof. Without going into the validity of the alleged rental
agreement, the Advocate-Commissioner gave notice to the said tenant 
asking him to vacate the subject shed within fifteen days. The alleged tenant
undertook by way of a letter to vacate the subject shed within fifteen days,
i.e., by 27.06.2018. The bank stated that the petitioner firm allegedly
entered into a rental agreement with one Jilthender Mukkamala under
unregistered document dated 18.03.2018 for a period of eleven months,
commencing from 08.04.2018, at a monthly rental of Rs.20,000/-. The bank
further stated that the deponent to the writ affidavit, Gopal Agarwal, a
partner of the petitioner firm, came to the subject shed on the said day, met
the Advocate-Commissioner and confirmed that the property had been let
out in favour of the alleged tenant. The bank pointed out that the petitioner
firm had not taken its consent before entering into the alleged rental
agreement and in any event, the alleged tenant was willing to vacate the
premises within fifteen days, as undertaken by him. The bank alleged that
the creation of this rental agreement was a malafide action on the part of
the petitioner firm, which was hit by the provisions of the
Transfer of
Property Act, 1882
, and the
SARFAESI Act
. The bank denied the claim of the 
petitioner firm that it had no right over the shed after its sale in favour of
M/s. Varun Motors, the auction purchaser. It asserted that the sale
transaction would be complete only when the sale certificate issued to the
auction purchaser is registered and as the said event was yet to take place,
the transfer of the shed in favour of the auction purchaser was still
incomplete. It further contended that even after sale of the secured asset, a
secured creditor could still file an application under
Section 14
of the
SARFAESI Act for obtaining its physical possession. Reference was made to  
the fact that this Court, while allowing W.P.No.19442 of 2017, left it open to
the bank to initiate lawful measures for securing possession of the property
in accordance with the provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
. Lastly, the bank
contended that though the petitioner firm claimed that it had no notice in
Crl.M.P.No.224 of 2018, an Advocate had appeared on its behalf before the
learned Magistrate and argued against the appointment of an Advocate-
Commissioner. The bank therefore sought dismissal of the writ petition.
Sri Vedula Venkataramana, learned senior counsel representing M/s.
Bharadwaj Associates, counsel for the petitioner firm, would advance four-
fold arguments.
He would firstly contend that the banks right to invoke
Section 14
of
the SARFAESI Act is a one time measure and that it was not open to it to file
successive applications under the said provision, even if it failed to secure
physical possession pursuant to the earlier order passed thereunder. He
would assert that the liberty granted by this Court while allowing
W.P.No.19442 of 2017 must be understood in the context of the statutory
scheme and therefore, Crl.M.P.No.224 of 2018 could not be filed afresh by
the bank under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act.
The second ground of attack urged by him is that, as the auction sale
was already held on 08.11.2017 in so far as the subject shed is concerned
and its actual physical possession was delivered pursuant thereto on
07.12.2017 to the auction purchaser, the bank ceased to be a secured
creditor in so far as the shed was concerned and the shed itself ceased to be
a secured asset. He would point out that as this Court found fault with the
manner in which the bank had taken physical possession of the shed and 
allowed W.P.No.19442 of 2017 vide order dated 14.12.2017, the bank 
returned its actual physical possession. Learned senior counsel would assert
that it is irrelevant as to how and why the bank took back possession of the
shed from the auction purchaser but once it conceded that physical
possession had been handed over to the auction purchaser, it lost its right to
again file an application under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act as the subject
shed lost the character and status of a secured asset.
The third contention urged by the learned senior counsel is that while
entertaining the application under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act, the
Magistrate concerned ought to have afforded an opportunity of hearing to
the petitioner firm, which was shown as a party thereto but was not even
put on notice. Learned senior counsel would assert that failure to do so
would amount to violation of the principles of natural justice.
The fourth and last ground of attack of the learned senior counsel is
that the bank ought not to have held the auction without taking over
physical possession of the shed, as a secured creditor cannot sell a secured
asset which is not even in its possession. Reliance is placed in this regard on
Sections 13 (4)(a)
,
13(6)
and
14(1)
of the SARFAESI Act and the learned
senior counsel would assert that no title would pass in favour of such an
auction purchaser. Reference is also made to certain observations of the
Supreme Court in STANDARD CHARTERED BANK V/S. V.NOBLE            
KUMAR . Learned senior counsel would draw a distinction as to the
principles laid down recently by the Supreme Court in ITC LIMITED V/s.
BLUE COAST HOTELS LIMITED , by pointing out that the facts of the two  
cases are distinguishable.
Sri R.Raghunandan, learned senior counsel representing Sri G.Kalyan
Chakravarthy, learned counsel for the bank, would counter these arguments.
He would state that the contention of the petitioner firm that it had no
opportunity of hearing is factually incorrect as the averment in the banks
counter-affidavit that an Advocate appeared on behalf of the petitioner firm
before the learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Ranga Reddy District, prior
to appointment of the Advocate-Commissioner, remained unrebutted and no  
reply affidavit was filed by the petitioner firm. Learned senior counsel would
argue that the petitioner firm is utterly lacking in bonafides, as a new tenant
has now emerged claiming rights under an unregistered lease agreement but 
in any event, the alleged tenant agreed to part with his possession by way of
an undertaking, whereunder he agreed to vacate the subject shed and hand
over the possession thereof to the Advocate-Commissioner by 27.06.2018. 
Learned senior counsel would point out that nothing in the scheme of
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act lends itself to the interpretation that only a
single application can be maintained thereunder by a secured creditor for
taking over possession of a secured asset. He would further point out that as
the earlier taking over of possession of the subject shed was considered by
this Court in W.P.No.19442 of 2017 and the said writ petition was allowed,
delivery of possession by the bank to the auction purchaser could not be
treated as a valid and legal delivery whereby the sale could have concluded.
He would also point out that the sale certificate in favour of the auction
purchaser is yet to be registered as on date and therefore, the sale
transaction is still inchoate. On these grounds, learned senior counsel would
assert that the present application filed by the bank under
Section 14
of the
SARFAESI Act was valid and justified.
In reply, Sri Vedula Venkataramana, learned senior counsel, would
contend that as the alleged tenant was claiming rights under an unregistered
document which was not even signed by the so called lessor, the same was 
irrelevant for the purposes of this case. He would state that the learned Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate, Ranga Reddy District, did not deem it appropriate to
issue notice to his client and mere watching of the proceedings was not
sufficient in itself to infer compliance with the principles of natural justice. He
would further state that registration of the sale certificate is only for the
purpose of making it a public document but the very execution thereof is
sufficient to infer completion of the sale transaction. He would assert that
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act does not indicate that applications can be
filed multiple times thereunder and in the absence of such liberty being given
in clear terms in the provision itself, a secured creditor could not invoke it
time and again. He would assert that by exercise of power under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act, serious consequences follow as the borrower is 
divested of physical possession of the secured asset and therefore, such
power must be invoked only when the occasion warrants and not on multiple
occasions. He would therefore reiterate his prayer for relief.
The case essentially turns on the interpretation of
Section 14
of the
SARFAESI Act. This provision reads as under:
14. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or District Magistrate to
assist secured creditor in taking possession of secured asset.--(1)
Where the possession of any secured asset is required to be taken by the
secured creditor or if any of the secured asset is required to be sold or
transferred by the secured creditor under the provisions of this Act, the
secured creditor may, for the purpose of taking possession or control of any
such secured asset, request, in writing, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or
the District Magistrate within whose jurisdiction any such secured asset or
other documents relating thereto may be situated or found, to take
possession thereof, and the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or as the case
may be, the District Magistrate shall, on such request being made to him
(a) take possession of such asset and documents relating thereto;
and
(b) forward such assets and documents to the secured creditor:
Provided that any application by the secured creditor shall be
accompanied by an affidavit duly affirmed by the authorised officer of the
secured creditor, declaring that
(i) the aggregate amount of financial assistance granted and the
total claim of the Bank as on the date of filing the application;
(ii) the borrower has created security interest over various properties
and that the Bank or Financial Institution is holding a valid and subsisting
security interest over such properties and the claim of the Bank or Financial
Institution is within the limitation period;
(iii) the borrower has created security interest over various properties
giving the details of properties referred to in sub-clause (ii) above;
(iv) the borrower has committed default in repayment of the financial
assistance granted aggregating the specified amount;
(v) consequent upon such default in repayment of the financial
assistance the account of the borrower has been classified as a non-
performing asset;
(vi) affirming that the period of sixty days notice as required by the
provisions of sub-section (2) of
section 13
, demanding payment of the
defaulted financial assistance has been served on the borrower;
(vii) the objection or representation in reply to the notice received
from the borrower has been considered by the secured creditor and reasons
for non-acceptance of such objection or representation had been
communicated to the borrower;
(viii) the borrower has not made any repayment of the financial
assistance in spite of the above notice and the Authorised Officer is,
therefore, entitled to take possession of the secured assets under the
provisions of sub-section (4) of
section 13
read with
section 14
of the
principal Act;
(ix) that the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder had
been complied with:
Provided further that on receipt of the affidavit from the Authorised
Officer, the District Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, as the
case may be, shall after satisfying the contents of the affidavit pass suitable
orders for the purpose of taking possession of the secured assets within a
period of thirty days from the date of application:
Provided also that if no order is passed by the Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate or District Magistrate within the said period of thirty days for
reasons beyond his control, he may, after recording reasons in writing for
the same, pass the order within such further period but not exceeding in
aggregate sixty days.
Provided also that the requirement of filing affidavit stated in the first
proviso shall not apply to proceeding pending before any District Magistrate
or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, on the date of
commencement of this Act.
(1A) The District Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate may
authorise any officer subordinate to him,
(i) to take possession of such assets and documents relating thereto;
and
(ii) to forward such assets and documents to the secured creditor.
       (2) For the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of
sub-section (1), the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate
may take or cause to be taken such steps and use, or cause to be used,
such force, as may, in his opinion, be necessary.
(3) No act of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District
Magistrate any officer authorised by the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or
District Magistrate done in pursuance of this section shall be called in
question in any court or before any authority.
Though the language of
Section 14(1)
gives one to understand that
the power thereunder is to be invoked if a secured asset is required to be
sold or transferred by the secured creditor under the provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
, it is now well settled that a secured creditor can sell a
secured asset even without taking actual physical possession thereof. The
statutory scheme of the Rules of 2002 also make this clear, as Rule 9(7) of
the said Rules speaks of the secured asset being sold subject to
encumbrances. Further, this aspect stands settled by the recent judgment of
the Supreme Court in BLUE COAST HOTELS LIMITED2. That was a case       
where the secured asset was sold prior to taking over of its physical
possession under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act, but the Supreme Court   
did not frown upon such a sale or hold that it was contrary to the procedure
contemplated under the
SARFAESI Act
. Therefore, this Court finds no merit
in the contention of Sri Vedula Venkataramana, learned senior counsel, that
the bank could not have proceeded with the auction sale without having
legally recognized physical possession of the secured shed. In any event, it is
an admitted fact that as on the date of the said auction sale, the bank did
have actual physical possession, be it by legal or illegal means, and was
therefore in a position to deliver physical possession of the shed to the
auction purchaser. It was only due to the intervention of this Court in
W.P.No.19442 of 2017 that this delivery of possession stood abrogated and
the bank was constrained to redeliver physical possession of the shed to the
petitioner firm. It is however clear from the observations of the Supreme
Court in BLUE COAST HOTELS LIMITED2 that a sale transaction in favour   
of an auction purchaser would not be complete till legal transfer of the
physical possession of the asset sold. The observations in Paras 67 and 68 of
the judgment are apposite and are extracted herein:
67. We note that even though the entire right, title and interest were
purported to have been transferred, all the rights, transfer and interest could
not be said to have been transferred since the possession of the property
was not transferred to creditor. The possession was retained by the debtor
who continued to do business and receive rent from the rooms on the
property and has in fact continued to do so till date. There is no doubt that
after taking over the property from debtor, the creditor also acquired the
right to receive the usufruct of the property i.e. the rent in this case.
However, this was an interest in the property which was not at any point of
time transferred to the auction purchaser.
68. In this case, the creditor did not have actual possession of the
secured asset but only a constructive or symbolic possession. The transfer of
the secured asset by the creditor therefore cannot be construed to be a
complete transfer as contemplated by
Section 8
of the Transfer of Property
Act. The creditor nevertheless had a right to take actual possession of the
secured assets and must therefore be held to be a secured creditor even
after the limited transfer to the auction purchaser under the agreement.
Thus, the entire interest in the property not having been passed on to the
creditor in the first place, the creditor in turn could not pass on the entire
interest to the auction purchaser and thus remained a secured creditor in
the Act.
Though Sri Vedula Venkataramana, learned senior counsel, would rely
on certain observations of the Supreme Court in STANDARD CHARTERED      
BANK1 to the effect that preservation, valuation and sale of secured assets,
under Rule 8 of the Rules of 2002 and other subsequent rules thereof, would
arise only after possession is handed over to the secured creditor, the issue
that fell for consideration in the said case was with regard to the manner in
which possession of a secured asset is to be taken over by a secured creditor
and not as to the manner in which a sale was to be conducted. That aspect
squarely fell for consideration in BLUE COAST HOTELS LIMITED2 and   
stands settled thereby.
The other issue raised by Sri Vedula Venkataramana, learned senior
counsel, is as to the requirement of putting a borrower on notice by the
Magistrate concerned when his power is invoked under
Section 14
of the
SARFAESI Act. It is no doubt true that after insertion of the proviso to
Section 14(1)
, by Act No.1 of 2013 with effect from 15.01.2013, the
Magistrate concerned is required to satisfy himself that the contents of the
affidavit filed by the secured creditor are in conformity with clauses (i) to (ix)
enumerated thereunder. These clauses, as have been set out hereinbefore,
demonstrate that the secured creditor must declare to the effect that he has
afforded a sixty day notice period to the borrower as required by
Section
13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act, considered his objections or representation, if
any, and affirm that the borrower did not make any repayment in spite of
such notice, thereby entitling it to take measures under
Section 13(4)
read
with
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act.
Though it has been held by the Supreme Court that while exercising
power under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act, the Magistrate concerned does  
not play an adjudicatory role and merely an administrative one, the later
judgments of the Supreme Court and more particularly, in HARSHAD  
GOVARDHAN SONDAGAR V/s. INTERNATIONAL ASSETS              
RECONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED , indicate that the Magistrate        
concerned at least has to verify certain factual aspects and in that regard, he
must also put a lessee in actual physical possession of the secured asset, if
there is one, on notice and afford him an opportunity of hearing to
demonstrate that his tenancy is lawful. The Supreme Court made it clear that
if it is so, it would not be open to the Magistrate to cut short a lawful lease
and direct delivery of possession of the secured asset to the secured
creditor. The Supreme Court further made it clear that in such a situation the
secured creditor must necessarily take legal measures to terminate the
lawful lease before gaining actual physical possession of the secured asset. If
this is the situation when a lawful lessee is stated to be in possession, the
question would arise as to whether the borrower is entitled to be put on
notice prior to an order/warrant being issued by the Magistrate concerned in
exercise of power under
Section 14
. In terms of STANDARD CHARTERED      
BANK1, the borrower, if aggrieved by an order under
Section 14
of the
SARFAESI Act, is entitled to approach the jurisdictional Debts Recovery
Tribunal under
Section 17
thereof. However, in a given situation, if the
secured creditor has not been truthfully forthcoming or has willfully
suppressed its failure in complying with the mandate of Clauses (i) to (ix) of
the first proviso to Section 14(1) and files a false affidavit, the borrower
would first have to go through the inconvenience of losing actual physical
possession of the secured asset before availing the remedy under Section
17, as he would have no information till the order/warrant is executed by the
Advocate-Commissioner/Tahsildar, appointed to do so.
In that view of the matter, this Court is of the opinion that for the
limited purpose of satisfying himself as to whether the contents of the
affidavit are factually true, the Magistrate concerned may have to put the
borrower on notice. Be it noted that this is not for the purpose of any
adjudication but only for verifying the limited facts necessary to infer
compliance with Clauses (i) to (ix) stipulated under the first proviso to
Section 14(1)
of the SARFAESI Act.
However, in the case on hand, the claim of the petitioner firm does
not fall under any of the aforestated Clauses (i) to (ix) of the first proviso to
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act. The argument put forth by Sri Vedula 
Venkataramana, learned senior counsel, is that the petitioner firm ought to
have been afforded an opportunity of hearing by the Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate, Ranga Reddy District, to argue the points now advanced in this
writ petition. The issues raised presently do not fall within the ambit of
Clauses (i) to (ix) under the first proviso to
Section 14(1)
. As already pointed
out supra, the Magistrate concerned does not have the power of undertaking
adjudication under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act and plays a limited
administrative role of verifying certain factual aspects only. Therefore, even
if we are inclined to accept that
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act may have to
be construed to mean and imply that prior notice should be issued to the
borrower by the Magistrate concerned upon receipt of an application under
Section 14
only for the limited purpose of verifying the contents of the
affidavit filed by the secured creditor in the context of Clauses (i) to (ix)
stipulated under the first proviso to
Section 14(1)
of the SARFAESI Act, the
same would not come to the rescue of the petitioner firm, which practically
wants the Magistrate to undertake adjudication while exercising power under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act.
The other aspects argued by Sri Vedula Venkataramana, learned
senior counsel, with regard to the secured shed sold by the bank ceasing to
be of such character and status after its sale, thereby divesting the bank of
its right to invoke
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act, does not merit
consideration in the light of the judgment of the Supreme Court in BLUE
COAST HOTELS LIMITED2. No doubt, that was not a case where
Section     
14
of the SARFAESI Act had been invoked prior to the sale, as in the case on
hand, but the observations of the Supreme Court to the effect that even
after such sale, the secured creditor would be at liberty to invoke the power
thereunder squarely settles the issue. Further, we find no logic or rationale in
the plea that a secured creditor can invoke the power under
Section 14
of
the SARFAESI Act only once. To accept this proposition would mean that an 
unscrupulous borrower may defeat the very purpose of initiation of
SARFAESI proceedings by prevailing over the Advocate-Commissioner   
appointed in exercise of power under
Section 14
and thereby nullify the
entire recovery proceedings initiated by such secured creditor. The language
of the provision demonstrates that an application can be made thereunder
for taking possession of the secured asset or if it is required to be sold or
transferred. Therefore, there is no embargo evident from the provision itself
curtailing the right of the secured creditor to invoke it but only once. Be it
noted that this provision is a machinery provision intended to give effect to
the regime created under the
SARFAESI Act
, whereby a secured creditor is 
allowed the benefit of deviating from the ordinary legal process for
recovering its dues and bring a mortgaged asset to sale for the said purpose,
by duly following the procedure prescribed thereunder. Such a machinery
provision cannot be construed or interpreted in a narrow compass to the
extent that it would defeat the very purpose underlying the enactment, as
advocated by Sri Vedula Venkataramana, learned senior counsel. 
Significantly, in M/S. KATHIKKAL TEA PLANTATIONS V/s. STATE      
BANK OF INDIA , DILIP KUMAR SINGH V/s. STATE OF U.P.  and        
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK V/s. STATE OF U.P. , the Madras and        
Allahabad High Courts held that
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act could be 
invoked by a secured creditor even after sale of the secured asset.
It may also be noted that this Court, while allowing W.P.No.19442 of
2017, specifically observed that the said order would not preclude the bank
from initiating lawful measures for securing possession of the subject shed in
accordance with the provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
. If the petitioner firm
was of the opinion that the provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
were no longer
available to the bank for securing possession of the subject shed, it should
have been aggrieved by the liberty granted by this Court and taken
measures to challenge grant of such liberty by way of independent
proceedings. It however did not choose to do so. It is therefore too late in
the day for the petitioner firm to now claim that the order passed by this
Court in W.P.No.19442 of 2017 should be construed and interpreted to suit
its own interest.
On the above analysis, this Court holds that the auction sale by the
bank in favour of M/s. Varun Motors, the auction purchaser, was not vitiated
by the subsequent development of it being divested of the physical
possession of the shed sold to it. Further, this Court holds that the action of
the bank in initiating measures afresh under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act
for securing possession of the shed sold by it to M/s. Varun Motors, the
auction purchaser, is valid on facts and in law. Finally, this Court also holds
that there is no bar to a secured creditor maintaining more than a single
application under
Section 14(1)
of the SARFAESI Act for securing the
possession of the very same secured asset.
The writ petition therefore fails on all counts and is accordingly
dismissed. Pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall also stand
dismissed. No order as to costs.
______________  
SANJAY KUMAR,J     
_________________   
T.AMARNATH GOUD,J      
12th JULY, 2018