[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Bontha Suresh, S/O Mariya Dasu @ ... vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh, Through ... on 10 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 101
Bench:
Suresh Kumar Kait
,
T. Amarnath Goud
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT AND HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T. AMARNATH GOUD                   

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.907 OF 2012      

10-10-2018 


Bontha Suresh, S/o Mariya Dasu @ Venkatappaiah  Appellant/Accused.     

The State of Andhra Pradesh, through Inspector of Police, Chilakaluripet, by Public Proseuctor. ...Respondent

Counsel for the Petitioner: Sri V. Suryakiran Kumar

Counsel for the Respondent:  Public Prosecutor (AP)

<Gist :

>Head Note : 

? Cases referred  :     1.  2004 (1) ALT (Crl.) 513 (D.B.) (A.P.)
2.AIR 2005 SUPREME COURT 97      
3.1997(1) ALT (CRL)(A.P)568 (DB) 

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT         
AND  
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T. AMARNATH GOUD         

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.907 OF 2012      

JUDGMENT:
(per Honble Sri Justice Suresh Kumar Kait)

      The present appeal is preferred against order and
judgment dated 25.07.2012 passed in Sessions Case No.186   
of 2011 by the XIII Additional District & Sessions Judge,
Narasaraopet, whereby the learned trial Court found the
appellant guilty for the offence punishable under
Section 302
IPC.  Accordingly, convicted for the said offence and
sentenced to Life Imprisonment.
2.  The case of the prosecution as per the charge sheet
is that :
The marriage between the appellant (hereinafter
referred to as accused) and Bontha Sravanthi & Lakshmi
Koteswaramma (hereinafter referred to as deceased) was
performed three years before the incident and blessed with a
male child.  From the beginning, the accused used to beat,
abuse and harass the deceased on one pretext or other
without any reason.  On 22.04.2010 on the eve of Lord Jesus
Thirunalla, LW.1-Bontha Kanikaramma @ Marthamma, who     
is mother of accused, brought golden ear studs and gave to
the deceased.  However, the deceased refused to take them. 
Then, LW.1-Marthamma, told her to throw them on the 
ground.  Accordingly, the deceased thrown on the ground,
however, on asking of the accused, the ear studs were picked
up by the deceased and put them in the shirt pocket of the
accused and hanged the shirt to the clothes wire, and also a
chain of her sister-in-law named Jyothi was put in the same
shirt pocket.  On 27.04.2010 at about 6.00 or 7.00 a.m., the
accused asked the deceased to bring the ear studs. Then the
deceased searched for the same in the shirt pocket of
accused, but could not find them, and she informed the same
to the accused.  Thereupon, the accused poured petrol on the
body of the deceased saying that she has to die.  Then the
deceased ran in the lane and accused chased her and lit fire
with match stick, as a result, her body was burnt.  She raised
cries and fell down in front of the house portion of LW.1.  On
hearing the cries, LWs.3 to 5 rushed there and covered her
with blankets and extinguished the flames.  It was witnessed
by LWs.7 to 9.  Then the deceased was shifted to Area
Hospital, Narasaraopet, through Ambulance.  On the same  
day, at 9.00 a.m., on receipt of hospital intimation, LW.23-HC
2421 Sk. Ch. Subhani of Narasaraopet I Town Police Station,
went to the hospital, and recorded the statement of deceased,
and sent the same to Station House Officer, Nadendla Police
Station, on the point of jurisdiction.  Having received the
same, it was registered as a case in Crime No.66 of 2010
under
Section 307
IPC against the accused.  Thereafter, the
Sub Inspector of Police, Nadendla Police Station, took up
investigation, and examined LWs.1 and 2, and observed the
scene of offence in the presence of mediators LWs.13 and 14,
and seized material objects under the cover of observation
report.  Accordingly, he got photographed the scene of
offence, prepared rough sketch of scene of offence, and
examined LWs.3 to 9.  On receipt of medical intimation,
LW.19- I Additional Junior Civil Judge, Narasaraopet, went to
the hospital and recorded dying declaration of the deceased.
The accused was arrested on 07.05.2010 by LW.24-S.I. of 
Police, in the presence of mediators LWs.15 and 16.
Thereafter, recorded the confessional statement of the
accused, and then, sent him to the Court for remand. While
undergoing treatment, the deceased died on 20.5.2010 at
9.45 a.m., in the hospital.  On receipt of death intimation,
LW.24-Sk.Abdul Sattar, Sub Inspector of Police, altered the
penal section from 307
IPC
to
Section 302
IPC on 20.5.2010
at 3.00 p.m.  Thereafter, LW.25, the then Inspector of Police,
Chilakaluripet Rural, took up investigation and verified the
investigation of LW.24 and found it on correct lines.  On the
requisition, LW.20-Mandal Executive Magistrate, Nadendla,
held inquest over the dead body of the deceased in the
hospital in the presence of LWs.13, 14 and 18.  He examined
L.Ws.10 to 12.  Thereafter, he sent the dead body of the
deceased for post-mortem examination.  As per the post-
mortem report, the deceased died due to septic shock due to
burns.  The seized material objects sent to FSL, Hyderabad,
and received report.  Thereafter, the charge sheet was laid
before the concerned Magistrate, who committed the case to 
the Court of Sessions for the offence punishable under
Section 302
IPC and the same was registered as SC No.186 of  
2010.
3.  On receipt of case record and after appearance of the
accused before X Additional District Judge Court (FTC),
Narasaraopet, charge under
Section 302
IPC was framed  
against the accused, the same was read over and explained 
the substance of charge in Telugu language to him for which
the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
4.  The learned trial Court examined PW.1 to PW.20 and
considered Ex.P1 to Ex.P25 and MOs.1 to 5 marked on behalf  
of the prosecution.  After considering the statement of
accused under
Section 313
Cr.P.C., the learned trial Court
held guilty, convicted and sentenced the appellant for the
offence punishable under
Section 302
IPC.  Hence the present
appeal.
5.  It is pertinent to mention here that PWs.1 to 8, 11
and 12 declared hostile.  No one is eyewitness of the incident
and case rests on circumstantial evidence.
6.  Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant
submits that PW.1 is the mother-in-law of the deceased.
PW.2 is the junior paternal uncle of the accused.  PWs.3 to 7
are known persons and proximate residents of deceased and  
accused, deposed that deceased died due to burst of stove
while cooking.   Even, PW.11, who is elder brother of the
deceased deposed that the deceased informed him at the 
hospital that she sustained burn injuries accidentally, when
she was cooking food on the stove.  PW.12, junior paternal
uncle of PW.1 also deposed that there was no dispute
between accused and deceased.  Learned counsel submits   
that the trial Court ignored all the above facts and convicted
the appellant.
7.  Learned counsel for the appellant further submits
that there is no wound certificate or accident register
indicating the percentage of burns on the dead body of the
deceased.  Moreover, there is variation in two dying
declarations i.e., Ex.P16 and Ex.P19 recorded by PWs.15 and  
17 respectively.  Main discrepancy is that in dying declaration
Ex.P17, she stated that on 27.04.2010 at about 6.00 or 7.00
a.m. accused asked about ear rings, accordingly, she checked 
and could not find ear rings but only necklace was there.
Immediately, the accused said she should die and poured 
petrol available in the house.  Then the deceased ran into
lane out side and the accused lit the deceased with match
sticks. Whereas in dying declaration, Ex.P19 recorded by
PW.17, she stated that on 27.4.2010 at 6.00 a.m., accused 
asked about ear rings and deceased said that she will give
them and then checked however found only necklace.  
Accordingly, she told accused about missing of ear rings, but
accused insisted for ear rings.
8.  Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellant further submits that in Ex.P17 recorded by PW.15,
the deceased accuses husband about his harassment and   
then accuses the husband that he has taken ear rings.
Thereafter, the appellant scolded her and poured petrol and
burnt her.  Whereas, in dying declaration-Ex.P19 recorded by
PW.17, the deceased stated that accused beat her with 
hands, legs and broom indiscriminately and demanded  
whether she was going to give ear rings or going to die.  Then
he poured petrol available in the house on her body and lit
the deceased with match sticks.  Then the deceased in a
burning condition ran out into lane.
9.  Learned counsel for the appellant submits that on
the face of it, the above mentioned two dying declarations do
not reconcile to each other.  In the first dying declaration
recorded by PW.15- HC 2421, deceased did not state about  
the accused beating her indiscriminately before burning her.
Whereas, in second dying declaration-Ex.P19 recorded by 
PW.17-Judicial Magistrate of I Class, she categorically stated
that the accused beat her indiscriminately with hands, legs,
broom and then poured petrol and lit her with match sticks.
10.  In addition to above, learned counsel for the
appellant submits that PW.18-Duty Medical Officer
categorically admits that she has not mentioned exact time of
issuing fitness certificate in the statements of the deceased
recorded by PW.15-HC and PW.17-Judicial Magistrate of I 
Class respectively.
11.  Learned counsel for the appellant further submits
that if there are different versions in the dying declarations
then the said declarations to be discarded and benefit of
doubt to be given to the accused.
12.  On the aforesaid issue, the learned counsel for the
appellant has relied upon a case reported in
Shaik Mastan
Bee v. State of A.P.
, rep. by its Public Prosecutor   and
another case reported in State of Maharashtra v. Sanjay D.
Rajhans .
13.  Learned counsel further submits that if the
material witnesses turned hostile then benefit of doubt to be
given as held in case reported in Botukam NarsaiahVs.
State of Andhra Pradesh, rep by Public Prosecutor .
14.  On the other hand, learned Public Prosecutor
appearing on behalf of the State submits that, though there
are different versions in two dying declarations discussed
above, but the manner of attack that is by the accused has
not been disputed in both dying declarations.  The deceased
is consistent by stating that the accused used to harass her
and on the date of incident he beat her poured kerosene oil
and then lit fire due to which she received serious burn
injuries.   Learned Prosecutor further submits that though
the other witnesses have been declared hostile who were near
and dear of the deceased, but it seems said witnesses have
been won over by the accused.  Even elder brother of the
deceased i.e., PW.11, and junior paternal uncle of PW.1, also
declared hostile.
15.
In such situation, the learned Public Prosecutor
relied upon a case of
Madan v. State of Maharashtra
decided by Honble Supreme Court in Crl.A.No.1025 of 2011 
on 06.02.2018, whereby held that, dying declaration of the
deceased can form the sole basis for conviction of the
accused.  It is further held that even though some of the
prosecution witnesses turned hostile and minor discrepancies
in the prosecution case, however, it does not effect on the
result of the case for the simple reason that the Courts below
have thoroughly assessed each circumstance and after 
careful examination of the facts only recorded their
concurrent finding.
16.  Learned Prosecutor further submitted that though
it is argued by the learned counsel for the appellant that the
death is not homicidal but is an accidental, however, nothing
has been brought on record to show that the death was a
result of any accident.  He submits that learned trial Court
after considering the evidence on record and considering
Exhibits and Material Objects as mentioned above, has rightly
convicted the appellant for the offences charged for.
17.  It is pertinent to note that PWs. 1 to 8 have deposed
in their evidence that the accused and his wife deceased lived
in a separate portion of the house and on the day of incident
while deceased cooking food on the stove, she sustained burn
injuries accidentally and then she was shifted to hospital,
however, while undergoing treatment, she died.  Accordingly,
said witnesses were declared as hostile.  During cross-
examination, they denied the suggestion that, they have
stated to police as in Exs.P1 to P8 i.e., their respective
statements under
Section 161
Cr.P.C. Also denied to the
effect that the accused poured petrol on the deceased and lit
fire with match stick stating that she shall die and due to
which, the deceased sustained burn injuries on the entire
body and she raised cries.  Also denied that some of them
have extinguished flames by covering blankets on her and
that they are deposing falsely to help the accused due to their
close relationship and neighbourhood of the accused on the
request of the accused.
18.  PW.11-Akkula Koteswara Rao, who is elder brother
of the deceased and PW.12-Bellam Pitchaiah, who is cousin of 
PW.1.  These two witnesses deposed that cash dowry and gold  
ring was given to the accused at the time of marriage.  PW.11
further deposed that, on his asking, the deceased told him
that while cooking food on the stove accidentally she
sustained burns.  PW.12 deposed that he did not enquire the
deceased as to how she sustained injuries.  Accordingly, both
the aforesaid witnesses declared hostile and during their
cross-examination by the learned Additional Public
Prosecutor, they have denied the suggestion that the accused
demanded additional dowry of Rs.25,000/- and the accused 
used to beat and harass the deceased and that the accused 
for the missing of ear studs, poured kerosene on deceased
and lit fire to her as referred in Exs.P12 and P13, their
respective statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
19.  PW.9-Ch. Subrahmanyam, deposed that on the 
request of the police he went to Government Hospital,
Narasaraopet, taken photographs of the dead body of the
deceased, and after developing the same, he handed over the
four positive photos with CD to the police, which are marked
as Ex.P9.  This evidence of PW.9 stands unchallenged and not 
disputed with regard to the correctness of Ex.P9-photographs
with CD.
20.  PW.10-Rayidi Samba Siva Rao, who worked as 
Village Revenue Officer, Sankurathirpadu Village, deposed
that the police have observed the scene of offence which is
located at the house of accused and deceased and prepared 
Ex.P10-scene observation report.  The Tahsildar conducted
inquest over the dead body of the deceased in the presence of
himself and LWs.17 and 18.  They opined in Ex.P11- inquest 
report that, the deceased died as her husband poured petrol
and lit fire to her and he scribed Ex.P11 at the Area hospital,
Narasaraopet.  The evidence of PWs.9 and 10 establishes the 
case of the prosecution that Ex.P9-photographs of the
deceased taken, and also scene of offence was observed, as 
per Ex.P10-report and also held inquest over the dead body of
the deceased by the Tahsildar at the hospital.  There are no
such material contradictions, if any, elicited in the evidence of
PW.10 to discard his entire evidence.  Accordingly, the
learned trial Court has relied upon the evidence of PW.10
which proves the contents of Ex.P10 and Ex.P11.
21.  PW.16-Mandal Executive Magistrate, Nadendla
village, deposed that on the requisition of police, he held
inquest over the dead body of the deceased on 21.05.2010 in
the presence of PW.10 and as per the version of the witness it
was opined by the Panchayatdars that the accused beat the 
deceased, poured petrol on her and lit fire to her with an
intention to kill her and the same is incorporated in Ex.P11-
inquest report.  Learned trial Court relied upon the said
witness also, which proves the correctness of the contents of
Ex.P11.
22.  PW.15, the then Head Constable of Narasaraopet-I
Town Police Station,  deposed that on 27.04.2010  while he
was Station House Officer of the Police Station, he received
Ex.P16 hospital intimation, then he went to Area Hospital,
Narasaraopet at 8.45 a.m., he waited upto 9.00 a.m., as
deceased was undergoing treatment, then he recorded 
statement of the deceased, read over the contents of the
statement which are admitted by her as true, then he
obtained her left thumb impression on the statement, as the
saline was administered through her right hand and the
doctor on duty certified that the deceased was conscious and
able to give statement which is marked as Ex.P17.  It was
commenced at 9.00 a.m. and completed at 9.15 a.m,
23.  PW.17- D.Venkateswarlu Naik, Judicial First Class
Magistrate-cum-I Additional Junior Civil Judge,
Narasaraopet, deposed that he received Ex.P18 requisition
from the Duty Medical Officer, Area Hospital, Narasaraopet,
at 9.00 a.m. on 27.04.2010 to record dying declaration of the
deceased.  Immediately he went to the hospital at 9.15 a.m.
and identified the deceased with the help of duty doctor and
doctor certified that the deceased is conscious and coherent
and she is in fit state of mind to give statement.  Then he put
some preliminary questions to the deceased to know about 
her consciousness, coherence and fit state of mind to give
statement and he was satisfied with her answers about her fit
state of mind to give statement.  Then he recorded her
statement-Ex.P19 in verbatim and it was read over and
explained to her which is admitted by her as true and then he
obtained her left thumb impression on Ex.P19.  Duty doctor
again certified that she is conscious, coherent and in a fit
state of mind to give statement.  Recording of statement was
commenced at 9.15 a.m., and it was completed at 9.55 a.m.
24.  It is important to note that immediately after the
incident of burns the deceased was shifted to Area Hospital,
Narasaraopet, and then immediately, the hospital authorities
issued medical intimation to the police, which was received by
PW.15 at 8.45 a.m. and then from 9.00 a.m. to 9.15 a.m.
Ex.P17 statement of the deceased was recorded by PW.15.   
Thereafter, from 9.15 a.m. to 9.55 a.m., PW.17 recorded
Ex.P19-dying declaration of the deceased.
25.  The evidence of PWs.15 and 17 and the contents of
Exs.P17 and 19 are consistent with the case of the
prosecution that the ear studs given by PW.1 to the deceased
Sravanthi, were not accepted by her and she thrown on the
ground.  Then as per the direction of the accused they were
picked up by deceased and put them with a gold chain in the
shirt pocket of accused.   Thereafter on 27.04.2010 at about
6.00 a.m. on asking of accused, on search of shirt pocket of
accused, the ear studs were not found by deceased and she 
informed the same to the accused.  Thereupon, the accused 
beat her and abused her to die and then poured petrol on her
body and lit fire with match stick.  Consequently, she
sustained burns while running with flames on the lane and
she fell down at the portion of house of PW.1 where PW.4 and
others have extinguished the fire with blankets and admitted
her in the hospital.
26.  It is pertinent to note that there are some
contradictions in the statements of PWs.15 and 17, but there
is consistency that the accused poured kerosene oil and lit
the deceased on fire.  Though PW.15 in cross-examination 
deposed that the statement of the deceased was not in
question and answer form, however, Ex.P19 clearly shows 
that only after questioning of deceased by PW.17, she gave
Ex.P19-statement and he also put several questions to
deceased and recorded her answers as to her conscious, 
coherence, and her fit state of mind to give statement.
Accordingly, the learned trial Court has rightly opined that
Ex.P9 is not in the form of questions and answers and which
is admissible under the law.  Moreover PW.15 and PW.17  
appears to be natural and it is free from any suspicion
accordingly inspires confidence of truth.
27.  PW.18  Doctor Sharmila, the then Civil Assistant
Surgeon, Area Hospital, Narasaraopet deposed that on 
27.04.2010 at 8.30 a.m., she sent Ex.P16-intimation relating
to the deceased burns to Narasaraopet-I Town Police Station
and Ex.P18-requisition to PW.17 for recording dying
declaration of the deceased.  Accordingly, PW.15 came at 9.00
a.m. and recorded Ex.P17-statement of the deceased in her 
presence.  She certified that the deceased was conscious,
coherent and in fit state of mind to give statement, which is
Ex.P17.
28.  PW.18 further deposed that on the same day at
9.15 a.m., PW.17 came to record dying declaration of the
deceased and she certified that the deceased was conscious, 
coherent and in a fit state of mind to give statement, and then
PW.17 commenced recording Ex.P19-statement of deceased.     
She further deposed that she was present throughout the
recording of statement and after completing of recording of
statement, she certified at the end of the statement that the
deceased was conscious, coherent and in a fit state of mind to
give statement.
29.  While deposing before the trial Court, PW.18
clarified that Saline injection was administered to the
deceased before recording the statements Ex.P17 and Ex.P19.  
The presence of PW.18 is not at all disputed at the time of
recording of Ex.P17 and Ex.P19 and also clarification by her
on Ex.P17 and Ex.P19.  The evidence of PW.18 corroborates  
the evidence of PWs.15 and 17 and also the correctness of the
contents of Exs.P17 and P19.
30.  PW.14-Civil Assistant Surgeon, Government
Hospital, Narasaraopet, and on the requisition of Tahasildar,
he conducted post-mortem examination on dead body of the  
deceased on 21.05.2010 and found burn wounds all over the 
body except genitila.  Pus oozing-out from the Dorsal surface
of the body burns and the body decomposition started.  He
opined that the deceased died due to septic shock due to
burns.  Ex.P15 is the post-mortem certificate of the deceased
issued by him.
31.  PW.19 the then S.I of police deposed that on
27.4.2010 at about 1.00 p.m. he received Ex.P16 and Ex.P17 
from PW.15 and he registered Ex.P17 as a case in Crime  
No.66 of 2010 for the offence under
section 307
IPC against
the accused and submitted Ex.P20 original FIR to the Court.
Thereafter he went to hospital and examined PWs.1 and 2 
and recorded their statements.  He observed the scene of
offence in the presence of PW.10 and LW.14 and he seized 
MO.1-burn cloth pieces with skin, MO.2-petrol stained earth,
MO.3-controlled earth, MO.4-white colour 5 litres plastic
petrol tin containing some quantity of petrol and MO.5-one
match box containing match sticks, and he prepared Ex.P21- 
rough sketch of scene of offence.  He examined PWs.3 to 8.
PWs.1 to 8 have stated before him as in Exs.P1 to P8.  He got
photographed the scene of offence and the photographs with
CD are Ex.P22.  Thereafter he arrested the accused on
07.05.2010 in the presence of PW.13 and LW.16 mediators  
and recorded the confessional statement of accused.
Thereafter, he sent the accused to Court for remand.  He
further deposed that on 20.05.2010 at 3.00 p.m. he received
Ex.P23 death intimation of the deceased from hospital, then
he altered section of law from
Section 307
IPC to
Section 302
IPC and submitted Ex.P24 altered FIR to the Court and
further investigation taken up by the Inspector of Police.  This
evidence of PW.19 consistent with the case of the prosecution
and corroborates the evidence of PWs.9, 10 and 14 to 18.
32.  PW.20-Inspector of Police, Chilakaluripet, deposed
that on 20.05.2010, he received copy of FIR in this case and
he proceeded to the scene of offence at the house of accused.
He verified and found the investigation already done by PW.19
is on the correct lines.  He examined PWs.11 and 12 and
recorded their statements.  They have stated before him as in
Exs.P12 and 13.  Thereafter Mandal Executive Magistrate,
Nadendla, held inquest over the dead body of the deceased.
He sent the dead body for post-mortem examination.  The 
seized Material Objects sent to FSL, Hyderabad, and received
Ex.P25-FSL report, dated 23.06.2010.  After completion of
investigation, his successor in office filed charge sheet.  His
evidence corroborates the above evidence of PWs.9, 10 and 14
to 19.
33.  In view of the above discussion, undisputed facts in
this case are that Sravanthi (deceased) was legally wedded
wife of the accused and their marriage was performed about
five years before the incident and they were blessed with a
son.  They were residing at the house of accused at
Sankurathripadu village and the incident occurred at the
same house of the accused.  While the deceased was in  
flames running with cries the flames were put-off in front of
the house portion of PW.1 which is near by the house of
accused.
34.  There is no evidence coming forth to place reliance
on the version of PWs.1 to 9 that while deceased was cooking
food on the stove accidentally she sustained burn injuries.  To
prove above fact, Ex.P25-FSL report is relevant which reads
that item Nos.1 to 4 namely the petrol stained oil, while
coloured plastic can, and the orange colour liquid marked as
item No.3, and partially burnt cloth pieces marked as item
No.4 revealed that the petrol is found in item No.3, and traces
of petrol also found in item No.2.    The Ex.P25 corroborates
the evidence of PWs.9, 10 and 14 to 20 that the accused
poured petrol on the deceased and lit fire to her however the
incident was not due to stove accident.  Moreover, neither
food material nor stove in burst condition was found at scene
of occurrence.
35.  As per Ex.P11-inquest report, the accused while
working as bus cleaner, he also selling petrol at the house.
Thus the issue raised by the learned counsel for the appellant
that in Ex.P17-statement the deceased stated that the
accused was working as bus cleaner whereas in Ex.P19 she   
stated that he was selling petrol, discarded the arguments of
the learned counsel for the appellant.
36.  The law is settled in case reported in AIR 2002 SC
2973 by the Supreme Court that what is essentially required
is that the person who records a dying declaration must be
satisfied that the deceased would be in a fit state of mind at
the time of recording dying declaration.  Ex.P19 dying
declaration recorded by PW.17 is in full compliance of the
ratio
laid down by
the Honble Apex Court
in
the above case
which proves the entire case of the prosecution against the
accused for the offence under
Section 302
IPC.
37.  It is established from the deposition of PW.17 that
while recording statement of the deceased he put several
questions testing her consciousness and coherence and her 
fit state of mind to give statement.  Also on his asking,
deceased gave Ex.P19 statement about the occurrence which   
cannot be said that it is not in the form of question and
answer.  Hence, above arguments of learned counsel for the
appellant holds no water.
38.  No doubt, PW.18-Doctor, nowhere mentioned in her
report that the deceased received 90% burn injuries.
However she deposed before the Court regarding the same. 
She also not stated that what was the degree of injury.  But
the said facts are not fatal to the prosecution case.  For the
reason the case of the prosecution is that the accused poured
petrol and lit fire to the deceased due to which she received
burn injuries and succumbed to those injuries.
39.  After going to through the facts recorded, evidence
discussed above and in view of Exhibits and Material Objects,
we are of the considered opinion that the trial Court has
rightly convicted the appellant in the present case.
40.  Finding no merit in the instant appeal and the
same is accordingly dismissed.
41.  Since the appellant is on bail pursuant to order
dated 21.02.2018, he is directed to surrender before the trial
Court forthwith, in-turn sent the appellant to the concerned
jail, for serving the remaining sentence.
Miscellaneous Petitions, if any pending, shall stand
closed.
_____________________________     
SURESH KUMAR KAIT, J.
______________________________     
T. AMARNATH GOUD, J.
Date:  10-10-2018