[Cites
10
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Ratnakar Peddada And Antoher vs State Of Telangana, Represented By Its ... on 22 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 285, (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 424 (2018) 5 ANDHLD 617, (2018) 5 ANDHLD 617
Author:
A.Rajasheker Reddy
Bench:
A.Rajasheker Reddy
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A.RAJASHEKER REDDY           

W.P.NO.20452 OF 2018    


22.06.2018 

RATNAKAR PEDDADA AND ANTOHER....PETITIONERS             

STATE OF TELANGANA, REPRESENTED BY ITS PRINCIPAL SECRETARY, HEALTH, MEDICAL AND FAMILY WELFARE, HYDERABAD AND TWO OTHERS....                                  


Counsel for the petitioners :Sri M.Jagannatha Sarma

^Counsel for the respondents --  Government Pleader for Medical and  Health.


<Gist

>Head Note. 
        
?Cases Referred: 


1.AIR 2010 Ori, 99
2.AIR 2005 P & H 172 
3.W.P. (C) No. 15822 of 2017 (C) dated 25.05.2017
4.AIR 2013 Ori. 133
5.189(2012) DLT 427 
6.(2005) SCC 122 


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A.RAJASHEKER REDDY           

W.P.NO.20452 OF 2018    

O R D E R
This writ petition is filed for a writ of Certiorari or for any other
appropriate writ, direction or order under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
India, calling for the records and to quash the impugned proceedings of
the 2nd and 3rd respondents bearing letterNo.3910/D1/2018 dated
14.05.2018, and the order bearing Rc.No.49765/MAK/2017 dated  
12.02.2017 respectively and consequently direct the respondents 2 and 3
to immediately grant approval for the kidney transplant from petitioner
No.2 to petitioner No.1 in an expedited and time bound manner.
The case of the petitioners, as per the averments made in the
affidavit filed in support of the writ petition is that, the 1st petitioner is a
graduate in pharmacy and currently self-employed and is unmarried, due
to his health condition.  He is diagnosed with Tuberous Sclerosis, a chronic
kidney disease.  As he suffered heavy internal bleeding (Peritoneal
Haemorrhage) in his right kidney in the year 2007, he underwent a surgery
to remove his right kidney.  The function of his left kidney got affected in
November, 2016 and since then, he has been undergoing dialysis thrice a
week at Asian Institute of Nephrology and Urology, Hyderabad and the
doctors, who have been treating him regularly for the past twenty months,
have strongly recommended surgical extraction and removal of his left
kidney and transplantation of a new kidney in its place.  In the affidavit,
petitioner No.1 stated in detail, the side effects because of prolonged
dialysis since November, 2016.
It is further stated that  the 1st petitioner is unable to carry on his
profession, as  he has to undergo dialysis thrice a week on every Monday,
Wednesday and Friday with the consequent side effects of sheer
exhaustion and fatigue and that the dialysis process since November,
2016, has taken a toll in all aspects, physically, mentally and financially.
The mother of the 1st petitioner died in the year 2012 and his
grandfather died in the year 2017.  During the life time of his mother, she
employed the 2nd petitioner as driver-cum-family assistant, in the year
2007, and since then, he has been performing all the works entrusted to
him and used to call the mother of the 1st petitioner as Amma(mother).
The 2nd petitioner also developed a close bond with his late grandfather
during his visits to Hyderabad from Puttaparthi and used to help and
accompany him while he was at Hyderabad.  The 2nd petitioner was also 
taking the 1st petitioner to dialysis procedure since November, 2016 and
he has been constantly with the 1st petitioner and in some instances, has
even carried him across in the hospitals on a wheel chair, when he was
weak after the procedure or due to drop in hemoglobin levels.
The father of the petitioner No.1 died in the year 1986 due to kidney
ailment and the younger married sister of the 1st petitioner is also suffering
from chronic kidney disease stage-III (CKD III), and, therefore, unable to
donate her kidney.  Because of his health issues, the petitioner No.1
remained unmarried and, therefore, he has no spouse or children who
can donate a kidney to him.  In these circumstances, he has no other
recourse, but to obtain a kidney from a donor, who is not his near relative,
but who is close to him and his family, for the last ten years.
In the above back ground, the 2nd petitioner, who is having long
standing association of over ten years with the petitioner and his family
members, has come forward purely on account of love and affection to
donate his kidney to the petitioner and not on account of any monetary
consideration.
Petitioner No.1 is taking treatment at Asian Institute of Nephrology
and Urology (AINU), Erramanzil, Hyderabad by Dr. C.Mallikarjuna Rao,
Urologist.  On 11.11.2017,   Dr. M.V.Rao, Nephrologist and Dry.Syed Mohd.
Ghouse, Urologist, working in the said institute, interviewed the petitioner
Nos.1 and 2 and the wife of the 2nd petitioner, for the purpose of sending
a video of interview to the 3rd respondent  State Authorization
Committee for Organ Transplant, Telangana State, represented by its
Chairman, to grant permission for donation of kidney by the 2nd petitioner
to him.  In the said video, which of 13 minutes duration, doctors explained
the nature of the surgery, which the petitioner No.1 has to go through and
the nature of the surgery, which the 2nd petitioner has to go through and
the various precautions, both of them have to take.  The said video was
submitted to the 3rd respondent.
In the affidavit it is further stated that the during the course of
interview, petitioner No.1 stated that the 2nd petitioner has been working
with their family for the past ten years, ever since the time of his mother
and that he has been assisting in all normal works as mentioned earlier
and that he had voluntarily come forward, out of sheer love and affection
towards him after seeing his misery in having lost his right kidney by surgery
due to heavy internal bleeding (Peritoneal Haemorrhage) and infection
to the left kidney and his continuous dialysis since November, 2016.  In the
interview, 1st petitioner further stated that he has not pressurized the 2nd
petitioner, nor promised or paid any monetary consideration to him or to
anybody.  In the interview, the wife of the petitioner No.2 also repeated
the above version.  The 2nd petitioner also offered to show his bank
account statement to confirm that there are no monetary transactions
between himself and the 1st petitioner.  In the affidavit, the petitioner No.1
made a tabular form, containing the questioning put by the doctors and
the answers given by them.
The Asian Institute of Nephrology and Urology, Hyderabad sent the
above version in the form of CD to the 3rd respondent for consideration of
the application for kidney transplant.  The petitioner No.1 made
application on 25.11.2017 through the hospital to the 3rd respondent
seeking approval to permit the 2nd petitioner to donate his kidney to him.
The said application was submitted by the Institute along with video
recording and other documents namely the affidavits of petitioners 1 and
2 and wife of the 2nd petitioner and the related documents.
The 3rd respondent, interviewed the petitioners 1 and 2 and the wife
of petitioner No.2 on 29.11.2017 and in the said interview, they reiterated
the version noted above.  3rd respondent conducted another interview on
11.12.2017, which the petitioner No.1 attended along with his maternal
uncle.  On being questioned, the maternal uncle of petitioner No.1
informed the panel that as he was not healthy, suffering from blood sugar
problem and that the doctors advised him that any kidney donation
would be risky for his life or the donee, he was not suitable to donate the
kidney.
Pursuant to the above interviews, 3rd respondent issued the
proceedings dated 12.12.2017 rejecting the application of the petitioner
No.1, and on appeal, the 2nd respondent confirmed the same, thereby
the permission sought for by the petitioners for transplanting kidney of 2nd
petitioner to 1st petitioner, was rejected.  Aggrieved by the same, the
present writ petition has been filed.
Learned counsel for the petitioners, while reiterating the above
averments, would submit that the object of the Act is to not prohibit the
transplantation of human organs, but only to regulate and to see that
there is no element of commercialization.  Referring to the ailment which
the petitioner No.1 is suffering, learned counsel submits that due to long
association of the petitioner No.2, with the family of the petitioner No.1,
and out of sheer love and affection and considering the plight of
petitioner No.1, whose kidneys are affected, and without  there being
any pressure exerted by the petitioner No.1, or his family members, and
also without there being any monetary consideration, the petitioner No.2,
who is not a relative of the petitioner No.1, has come forward to donate
the kidney, which is permissible under the Act with the  prior approval of
the Authorization Committee under
Section 9(3)
of the Transplantation of
Human Organs and Tissues Act, 1994 (for short the Act).  He states that
Rule 7(3) of the Transplantation of Human Organs and Tissues Rules, 2014
(for short the Rules) stipulates the conditions, which the Authorization
Committee has to consider while granting prior approval for
transplantation of kidney under
Section 9(3)
of the Act.  Under these rules,
the Authorization Committee has to consider whether there is any
commercial transaction between the recipient and the donor; that no
payment has been made to the donor or any other person and; the 
circumstances which lead to the offer and the relevant documents.
Petitioners satisfy these conditions and they have filed affidavits and the
video recording of their statement given to the doctor and they have also
made affirmative statement before the authorization committee.  But,
without considering these material facts and circumstances and the
evidence produced by the petitioners, the 3rd respondent rejected the
approval on mere suspension stating that the Committee is not convinced
regarding altruistic nature of donation.  He stated that no reasons have
been recorded considering the material produced by the petitioners and
the same has been upheld by the 2nd respondent  appellate authority.
Relying on the Division Bench judgment of the High Court of Orissa in
MANORANJAN ROUT  vs.  STATE OF ORISSA , learned counsel contended         
that on the ground of mere suspension, necessary approval could not be
denied.  He stated that economic disparity between the petitioner No.2
and petitioner No.l, cannot be a ground for rejection and the facts and
circumstances of the case, has to be considered in a holistic manner.
In
support of this contention, learned counsel relied on the judgments of the
High Courts of Punjab and Haryana, and Kerala at Ernakulam, in
RAJINDERKUMAR  VS.  STATE OF PUNJAB  and
M.C.ABDUL RAHAN v.  STATE              
OF KERALA
.  Learned counsel further submits that in the present case,
there is no commercial element and there is no exploitation of the 2nd
petitioner, and the petitioners sought to prove the same by their affidavits
and also giving statements before the respondents 2 and 3.  But without
considering the said material evidence and recording any reasons, the
impugned order has been passed in a cryptic manner.
In support of his
contention that in the absence of commercial element, the competent
authority cannot reject the application of petitioner No.1, learned counsel
relied on the judgments in MRS. INDU BEHERA  vs.  STATE OF ORISA AND       
OTHERS  and
PARVEEN BEGUM  vs.  APPELLATE AUTHORITY
.  With these            
submissions, learned counsel sought to set aside the impugned order and
to grant permission for kidney transplantation.
On the other hand, learned Government Pleader for Medical and
Health appearing for respondents submit that the 2nd petitioner is working
with the family of the 1st respondent and there is huge economic disparity
and the theory of love and affection pleaded for donation of kidney, is far
from imagination, and in these circumstances, absence of monetary
consideration, cannot be ruled out.  Therefore, the primary authority
rejected the claim of the petitioners and the same has been confirmed by
appellate authority.  Therefore, the impugned proceedings may not be
interfered with.
In the present, petitioner No.2 is not the near relative of petitioner
No.1 and it is stated that because of his long association with the family of
petitioner No.1, since 2007, and out of love and affection and seeing the
health condition and misery of the petitioner, he has come forward to
donate kidney without there being any coercion or monetary
consideration.
Before considering the contentions of the learned counsel, first it is
necessary to note the object of the Act; and the relevant provisions under
Section 9(3)
of the Act and Rule 7(3) of the Rules, since the donor is not
the relative of the recipient.
Paragraph No.3 of the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the
Act, reads thus:
Against this background, it is considered necessary to enact a
comprehensive law for regulating the removal and transplantation of human
organs and for preventing commercial dealings in organs by providing
punishment for such dealings.
9. Restrictions on removal and transplantation of human organs
or tissues or both:
(3) If any donor authorizes the removal of any of his human organ or tissues or
both before his death under sub-section (1) of
Section 3
for transplantation into
the body of such recipient, not being a near relative, as is specified by the
donor by reason of affection or attachment towards the recipient or for any
other special reasons, such human organ or tissue or both shall not be removed
and transplanted without the prior approval of the Authorisation Committee.
Rule (7) Authorisation Committee:
(3)  When the proposed donor and the recipient are not near relatives, the
Authorisation Committee shall, --
(i)     evaluate that there is no commercial transaction between the recipient
and the donor and that no payment has been made to the donor or 
promised to be made to the donor or any other person;
(ii)    prepare an explanation of the link between them and the circumstances
which led to the offer being made;
(iii)   examine the reasons why the donor wishes to donate;
(iv)    examine the documentary evidence of the link, e.g. proof that they have
lived together, etc.;
(v)     examine old photographs showing the donor and the recipient together;
(vi)    evaluate that there is no middleman or tout involved;
(vii)   evaluate that financial status of the donor and the recipient by asking
them to give appropriate evidence of their vocation and income for the
previous three financial years and any gross disparity between the status
of the two must be evaluated in the backdrop of the objective of
preventing commercial dealing;
(viii)  ensure that the donor is not a drug addict;
(ix)    ensure that the near relative or if near relative is not available, any adult
person related to donor by blood or marriage of the proposed unrelated
donor is interviewed regarding awareness about his or her intention to
donate an organ or tissue, the authenticity of the link between the donor
and the recipient, and the reasons for donation, and any strong views or
disagreement or objection of such kin shall also be recorded and taken
note of.
From a reading of statement of objects and reasons of the
enactment and the provisions, it is clear that the object of the legislation is
not to prohibit, but to regulate the removal and transplantation of human
organs and to prevent commercial dealings in allowing transplantation of
organs.
Section 9
of the Act, provides certain restrictions and under sub
section 3
of the said provision, where the donor is not a near relative of
the recipient, such human organ or tissue or both, shall not be removed
and transplanted without the prior approval of the Authorization
Committee, and Rule 7(3) of the Rules mandates the Authorization
Committee to satisfy with regard to conditions enumerated therein before
granting approval for removal of the human organ or tissue.
Sub rule (3) of Rule 7 contemplates that the Authorization
Committee before approving the transplantation, shall evaluate that
there is no commercial transaction between the recipient and the donor
and that no payment is either made or promised to be made; prepare an
explanation of the link between them and the circumstances leading to
such donation of human organ; reasons for such donation of organ;
examine the documentary evidence of their link with proof viz.,
photographs; to evaluate that there is no middleman or tout involved;
evaluate the financial status of the donor to ensure that there is no
commercial transaction and; to interview near relative, or if no near
relative is available to interview one adult person related to the donor by
blood or marriage of the proposed unrelated donor.
A Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi in
Parveen Begum
(5
supra), considering the provisions of the Act, held as under:
49.  From the above statutory provisions and the scheme of the Act, it
becomes clear that the Act and the Rules do not seek to prohibit, but to only
regulate the transplant of organs and tissues from cadavers and living human
beings.  What is prohibited is the commercial transaction in the giving and
taking of organs and tissues.  However, donations offered out of love and
affection  even amongst those who are not near relatives, is permitted.  The
aforesaid scheme under the Act recognizes two of the greatest human virtues
of love and sacrifice, and also the fact that such intense love and affection
need not necessarily be felt only for ones own blood or spouse, but could also
extend to those not so closely related, or for those not related at all.
50.  From the scheme of the Act and the Rules it appears that
organ/tissue donation by a person before his death can be made not only for
the therapeutic purposes of a recipient who is a near relative, i.e., son,
daughter, father, mother, brother, sister, grandfather, grandmother, grandson
or granddaughter, but also for therapeutic purposes of persons/recipients who
do not fall within the definition of the expression near relative.
Section 9(1)
of
the Act, while generally providing that no human organ or tissue, or both,
removed from the body of a donor before his death shall be transplanted into
a recipient, unless the donor is a near relative of the recipient, saves from
application of this general rule, cases which fall under sub-section (3) of Section
9.  Therefore, a donor, who is not a near relative of the recipient may by reason
of affection, or attachment towards the recipient or for any other special
reasons authorize the removal of his human organ or tissue or both for
transplantation in a recipient for therapeutic reasons.  The caveat is that in such
circumstances prior approval, before removal and transplantation, would be
required of the Authorization Committee.
51.  It also needs to be emphasized that an approval of the
Authorization Committee is necessary and required to be obtained only in such
cases, where the donor and recipient are not near relatives, or in cases where
the donor or the recipient, being near relatives, is a foreign national (see
Section 9(1A)
.  The role of the Authorisation Committee comes into play
primarily in cases where the donor and the recipient are not near relatives, and
it is the function of the Authorizsation Committee to ascertain and evaluate, by
applying the guidelines/yardsticks and tests provided in Rule 4A(4) and 6F(d) of
the Rules, whether there is a commercial transaction between the recipient
and the donor, and to ensure that no payment of money or monies worth has 
been made to the donor, or promised to be made to the donor or any other
person on account of the fact that the donor has agreed to donate an organ
or tissue to the recipient.  The Authorization Committee is required to enquire
whether the donor is offering his organ/tissue by reason of affection or
attachment towards the recipient or for any other special reasons.  The law also
mandates that the approach of the Authorization Committee in such matters
has to be pragmatic and its discretion has to be used judiciously, particularly in
cases which require immediate transplantation.
The Apex Court in
KULDEEP SINGH  v.  STATE OF T.N.
considering the  
facts and circumstances where the donor not being near relative of
recipient, held that approval has to be accorded by Authorization
Committee under
Section 9(3)
of the Act and the burden is on the
applicant to satisfy the said Committee that such donation of human
organ, is not for commercial consideration, but for reasons of affection or
attachment towards recipient or for any other special reasons.
In the light of the above statutory provisions and the law
laid down
in
the above judgments, now it is necessary to look into the case of the
petitioners.  As per the averments made in the affidavit filed in support of
the writ petition, the case of the petitioners is that the 1st petitioner is
suffering from kidney ailment.  His right kidney was removed in the year
2007 and during November, 2016, his left kidney was also affected and he
is on dialysis since then, taking treatment at Asian Institute of Nephrology
and Urology, Erramanzil, Hyderabad, where he was recommended    
surgical extraction and removal of his left kidney and transplantation of a
new kidney in its place.  The 2nd petitioner, is not a close relative of the
petitioner No.1 and it is stated that he has been working under the family
of 1st petitioner since 2007 and has been assisting the petitioner No.1 and
taking him to dialysis and is aware of the condition of the petitioner No.1,
who is suffering from different ailments because of kidneys disfunction.
Out of love and affection, he has come forward to donate one of his
kidneys to petitioner No.1, without any commercial element and
coercion.  The wife of the 2nd petitioner consented for this act.
The doctors at AINU, Dr. M.V.Rao, Nephrologist and Dr. Syed Mohd.
Ghouse, Urologist, examined the petitioners 1 and 2 and the wife of the
2nd petitioner and the same was recorded in the form of C.Ds. for the
purpose of sending to the competent authority.  The petitioners 1 and 2
and the wife of the 2nd petitioner filed affidavits along with medical history,
C.Ds. of the above interview before the Authorizstion Committee.  The
Authorization Committee also examined them, where the petitioner No.2
and his wife reiterated their case that 2nd petitioner was offering his kidney
out of pure love and affection and on account of his long association with
the family of the petitioner No.1 for more than ten years and that there is
no involvement of pressure or monetary consideration. The 3rd respondent
 Authorization Committee passed the following order dated 12.12.2017,
rejecting the application of the petitioner No.1:
The Committee is not convinced altruistic nature of donation.
On appeal, the 2nd respondent, who is the appellate authority,
passed the following order dated 14.05.2018:
The donor Sri Kunkunooru Raju, s/o Sri K.Satyanarayana, R/o H.No.8-3-
228/678/822, Karmikhanagar, Yousufguda, Hyderabad is found to be your car 
driver and it is difficult to believe that there is no financial consideration.  The
prospective donor also could not explain the reasons for his decision.
After hearing both sides on 10.05.2018, Government after careful
examination hold that there are no grounds to interfere with the decision of the
Authorization Committee.  Accordingly Government here by uphold the order
of the Authorization Committee and the appeal is hereby rejected.
From a reading of the above orders of both the primary as well as
appellate authority it is clear that the material evidence produced by the
petitioners, has not even been referred to or considered and no cogent
reasons have been recorded for refusing their request and  cryptic orders
have been passed.  This amounts to violation of principles of natural
justice.
It is to be seen that merely because the petitioner No.2 is working
with the 1st petitioner or that there is economic disparity, in the absence of
tangible material, it cannot be concluded that there would be financial
consideration.  The specific case of petitioner No.2 and his wife is that out
of sheer love and affection and close association with the family of the 1st
petitioner, petitioner No.2 has come forward to donate his kidney.  To
prove their case, they have filed affidavits and given statements before
the doctors and also before the 3rd and the 2nd respondents.  But the said
material has not even been referred to, let alone consideration.
2nd petitioner is present in court and he is identified by his counsel
and his identity has not been disputed by the learned Government
Pleader for Medical and Health.  To ascertain the truth or otherwise of the
averments made in the affidavit, this court examined 2nd petitioner, who
categorically stated that out of sheer love and affection and close
association with the family of 1st petitioner for more than ten years and by
seeing the miserable health condition of 1st petitioner, whose both the
kidneys are damaged, he intends to donate the kidney without any
coercion or for any monetary gain.
But in the impugned order, the 2nd responded recorded that the
prospective donor i.e., the 2nd petitioner could not explain the reasons for
his decision.  This finding of the 2nd respondent, without considering the
material evidence and without recording any reasons, can be said to be
on mere suspicion and based on conjunctures and surmises, which  
cannot be sustained.
In similar circumstances, a Division Bench of the High Court of
Punjab and Haryana in Rajinder Kumars case (2 supra) held that merely
because there was economic disparity between the recipient and the
proposed donor that would be no reason to draw any inference that the
recipient was actually receiving the donated organ on money
consideration.  The relevant portion of the order is as under:
10.  A perusal of the orders Annexures P/12 and P/13 clearly shows that
the only reason given by respondent Nos.2 and 3 to refuse the necessary
approval to the petitioner and the proposed donor is that the money
involvement could not be ruled out.  The aforesaid conclusion has been drawn
merely on account of the fact that there was a great economic disparity
between the petitioner and the proposed donor.  However, in our considered
view, the aforesaid, ground is totally an extraneous ground and merely
because there was economic disparity between the petitioner and the
proposed donor would be no reason to draw any inference that the petitioner
was actually receiving the donated organ on money consideration.  The
human conduct and reactions cannot be measured in any mathematical   
terms.  The instances are not unknown where people due to sheer love and
affection or due to humanitarian consideration do act for the welfare of a
needy person.  All such actions of the good doers cannot be suspected and
need not be viewed with any tainted glasses.  We are also impressed by the
enquiry held by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Jalandhar, which has been
mentioned by the respondents in their own reply.  It has been specifically
reported by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Jalandhar that as per the
police report there was no money transaction between donor and patient and
the aforesaid kidney transplantation is likely to be done on humanitarian
ground.  In view of the aforesaid positive and specific report of the police, there
was absolutely no material with the Authorization Committee or the Appellate
Authority to reject the claim of petitioner.  It is apparent that the Authorization
Committee as well as the Appellate Authority have been influenced by the
suspicious atmosphere which had been created on account of some   
irregularities in kidney transplantation in the past.  However, the result of the
aforesaid suspicious atmosphere cannot be allowed to become a dead wall 
for seriously ill patients, like the petitioner. Accordingly we find that as per the
affidavits Annexures P/1, P/2 and P/3 and various medical reports and the
enquiry conducted by the police itself, the offer of donation of kidney made by
Jiwan Sharma to petitioner, Rajinder Kumar cannot be termed to be tainted or
because of involvement of any money consideration.
11.  As a result of the aforesaid discussion, we allow the present petition
and quash orders Annexures P/12 and P/13.  As a consequence thereof, we  
direct respondent No.3, Chairman, Authorization Committee to grant necessary
approval to the petitioner, forthwith, to receive the kidney proposed to be
donated by Jeewan Sharma.
In another judgment in
M.C.Abdul Rahman
(3 supra), a learned
single judge of High Court of Kerala, held as under:
6.  As noted above, one of the reasons stated by the Authorisation
Committee in the instant case to decline the approval sought by the petitioner
is that there is gross disparity between the financial status of the donor and
recipient.  True, financial status of the parties is certainly a factor to be gone
into by the Authorisation Committee to ascertain whether the donation of the
organ proposed is voluntary and also to ascertain whether there is any financial
dealings in the transaction.  But, that does not mean that transplantation
cannot be permitted, if there is disparity in the financial status of the donor and
recipient.  Voluntary donation of an organ by a person is a self deprivation of
the highest order and it is inhuman to hold that such sacrifices would be made
by people only based on monetary considerations.
7.  From the aforesaid materials, I am of the view that the case of the second
petitioner that he had worked with the first petitioner in his aluminium
fabrication workshop, cannot be said to be false as the first petitioner belongs
to a place near to Kanhangad.  If the said case set up by the petitioners is
correct, the only remaining question is as to whether there exists a relationship
between them sufficient for the second petitioner to donate one of his organs
to the first petitioner.  It is very difficult to make inferences about the depth of
the relationships between persons from surrounding circumstances.  Further,
according to me, such an enquiry is not contemplated also for the purpose of
the statute, for, the statue does not prohibit transplantation.  As noted above,
the scheme of the statute is that if circumstances indicate a possible
relationship for one person to donate his organ to save the life of another, the
approval sought has to be granted.
The quintessence of the above judgments is that the Authorization
Committee has to inquire whether there has been a commercial 
transaction between the donor and the recipient.  If the result of the
inquiry is in the negative, then evaluating the evidence on record, it has to
grant approval for transplantation.  The approach of the Committee shall
be pragmatic and its discretion has to be used judiciously, and that mere
suspicion or economic disparity cannot be a ground for rejection of
approval.
In the present case, the primary, as well as appellate authorities
have not considered the material evidence on record and also have not
recorded any reasons for rejecting the approval for kidney
transplantation.  The discretion vested in them has not been exercised in a
judicious manner and the rejection has been on mere surmises and 
conjunctures, and hence the impugned orders passed in violation of
principles of natural justice, are liable to be set aside.
For the foregoing reasons, the impugned proceedings of the 2nd
respondent vide letterNo.3910/D1/2018 dated 14.05.2018, confirming the
order of rejection passed by the 3rd respondent bearing
Rc.No.49765/MAK/2017 dated 12.02.2017, is set aside.  Consequently both  
the orders dated 14.05.2018 and 12.2.2017, are set aside and the writ
petition is allowed.
Learned counsel for the petitioners, based on medical record of the
petitioner No.1 submits that the petitioner No.1 is on dialysis since
November, 2016 and his condition is very disappointing and that any
delay in the process of reconsideration by the 3rd respondent in granting
approval as required under
Section 9(3)
of the Act, would further
deteriorate the condition of the petitioner and therefore, he sought to
direct the 3rd respondent to grant approval.
Learned single Judge of High Court of Delhi in
Parveen Begums
case (5 supra) relying on the judgment of the Apex Court in
COMPTROLLER   
AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA GIAN PRAKASH, NEW DELHI & ANR.  v.              
K.S. JAGANNATHAN AND ANR.
,  held that in order to prevent injustice 
resulting to the concerned parties, the court may itself pass an order or
given directions which the Government or a public authority should have
passed or exercised its discretion at a proper level.  The relevant portion is
thus:
83.  In the light of the aforesaid facts, circumstances, discussion and the
law, in my view, the impugned decision of the Authorization Committee as well
as the appellate authority are wholly unsustainable and, accordingly, they are
quashed.  The question is, at this stage, what should be the approach of the
Court  whether the matter should be remanded back to the Authorisation
Committee or the appellate authority for consideration, or whether the court
would be justified in directing the Authorization Committee to grant its approval
without any further examination of the matter by it.
84.  The Supreme Court in
Comptroller and Auditor General of India Gian
Prakash, New Delhi
(supra) held in para 20 that in an appropriate case, in order
to prevent injustice resulting to the concerned parties, the Court may itself pass
an order or given directions which the Government or a public authority should
have passed or exercised its discretion at a proper level.
85.  In the present case, the petitioner No.1 has been in need of a kidney
replacement since June, 2011.  The joint application for seeking the approval of
the Authorisation Committee was submitted by the petitioners in August, 2011.
Over this period of time, the condition of the petitioner No.1 has only
deteriorated and she requires dialysis thrice a week.  Even from the interviews of
petitioner No.1 conducted on different dates, her deteriorating condition of her
health is evident.
86.  Considering these facts and circumstances, and the urgency of the
matter, I am inclined to require the Authorization Committee to forthwith grant
its approval to the case of the petitioners for donation of one kidney by
petitioner No.2 to petitioner No.1 in terms of their application.  The formal
approval should be granted within two days, failing which it shall be deemed
that the said formal approval stands granted.
The facts of the present case disclose that the right kidney of the
petitioner No.1 was removed in the year 2007 and thereafter, as his left
kidney was also affected, he is on dialysis since November, 2016, and the
doctors at Asian Institute of Nephrology and Urology, Hyderabad,  strongly
recommended for surgical extraction and removal of his left kidney and
transplantation of a new kidney in its place.  In the affidavit filed in support
of the writ petition, petitioner No.1 has described the side effects of
prolonged dialysis since November, 2016, and by this time, as per the
submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners, his health condition
has considerably deteriorated.  He made application for kidney
transplantation on 25.11.2017 through the hospital where he is taking
treatment and thereafter, the impugned orders came to be passed.
Having regard to the above facts and circumstances, the 3rd
respondent is directed to forthwith grant approval for the kidney
transplant from petitioner No.2 to petitioner No.1.
Miscellaneous petitions pending, if any, shall stand closed.  No costs.
--------------------------------------------
A.RAJASHEKER REDDY,J       
DATE:22062018