[Cites
19
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Muppidi Chandra Mohan Reddy And Another ... vs Methuku Santosh S/O Narsimha Rao Aged ... on 7 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 100, 2019 (196) AIC (SOC) 11 (HYD), AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 68
Author:
P.Naveen Rao
Bench:
P.Naveen Rao
THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO            

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.1728 OF 2018     

07-09-2018 

Muppidi Chandra Mohan Reddy and another S/o Late M Anna Reddy Aged about 58 years Occu Retired Employee R/o H No 62511 Madhu          

Methuku Santosh S/o Narsimha Rao Aged about 32 years Occu Software Engineer R/o H No 192 Girnigadda locality Jangaon Town Ja     

Counsel for the petitioners :  Sri N Vasudeva Reddy

Counsel  for the Respondents:  Sri Venkat Reddy Donthi Reddy 

<Gist :

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
(1997) 5 SCC 76 
(2017) 2 ALT 523 (DB) 
2003 SCC Online MP 17   
AIR 2006 Raj 128 
(2003) 6 SCC 641 
(2015) 5 SCC 423 



HONBLE SRI JUSTICE P NAVEEN RAO        

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No. 1728 OF 2018     

ORAL ORDER:
Parties are referred as they are arrayed in this revision.
2.      Respondent is husband of Smt. Salini Reddy, died on 1.7.2017.
Respondent filed Succession O.P. No. 56 of 2017 on the file of the Court of
Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon, Warangal district praying to grant succession
certificate in his favour to claim gratuity amount of ?. 2,25,873/ ; insurance
amount of ? 60,43,327/; SAP shares amount of ? 44,752/-; SMP shares  
amount of ?. 1,09,349/-; and MOVE Sap shares amount of ?. 5,61,202/- 
totaling to ?. 69,84,503/- belonging to his wife Smt. Salini Reddy.  The Court of
Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon, by order dated 3.1.2018 granted the succession
certificate sought for by the petitioner mentioning the total amount and the
break up of the amounts under various headings.  Having come to know that a
succession certificate was granted to respondent, petitioners herein who are
parents of deceased filed I A No. 13 of 2018 praying to set aside the ex-parte
order/ decree dated 3.1.2018 in SOP No. 56 of 2017.  They have also filed I A
No 20 of 2018 under Sections 383 & 389. The said I As are pending
consideration of Court of Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon. While so, this revision is
instituted under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India.
3.      Heard learned counsel for petitioners Sri N Vasudeva Reddy and
learned counsel for respondents Sri Venkat Reddy Donthi Reddy.
4.1.    According to learned counsel for petitioners, respondent husband
and deceased were married in Hyderabad on 28.5.2011; initially deceased was 
working in Hyderabad and later as respondent and deceased secured  
employment in Bangalore, State of Karnataka, they shifted their residence and
were living in Bangalore.  Later, deceased was diagnosed with cancer.  To take
treatment, she had shifted to Hyderabad and was living in Hyderabad and died
in Appollo Hospital, Hyderabad, on 1.7.2017.  He would therefore submit that
at the time of her death, as deceased was living in Hyderabad, the Court of
Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon has no jurisdiction to entertain application to
grant succession certificate.  He would submit that after deceased was
diagnosed with cancer, respondent did not take care of her and she was forced
to move to Hyderabad to take treatment and stayed with her parents.
Petitioners have taken good care of the deceased till her death, they have spent
huge money towards treatment for cancer and at the advanced stage of cancer 
they gave all the support to their daughter.  Respondent never visited her
during the period of treatment and totally neglected her.  Having regard to
attitude of her husband and since parents were taking care of her health and
treatment, deceased executed registered will dated 17.5.2017 bequeathing all
her properties, moveable and immovable, to the petitioners and petitioners
alone are entitled to claim those benefits and no manner of right vests in
respondents to claim those benefits and therefore succession certificate
granted is not valid in law.
4.2.    According to learned counsel, though section 15 of the Act
recognizes husband as Class I heir, having regard to the fact that the
properties owned by the deceased were self acquired properties and that she
executed a registered will in favour of her parents/petitioners, the provision in
Section 15 (1) (a) of the Act is no more available to the respondent and
respondent cannot claim those properties under the  guise of securing a
succession certificate.
4.3.      He would further submit that there is clear suppression of true
and correct facts.  Knowing fully well that the deceased was not living in
Bangalore but was living with her parents in Hyderabad while undergoing
treatment and died in Hyderabad; that no property is located within the
territorial jurisdiction of Court of Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon; and knowing
fully well that parents are entitled to claim the properties belonging to their
daughter; without impleading them as parties, S.O.P. was filed in the Court of
Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon, only to obtain succession certificate behind their
back and to surreptitiously claim monitory benefits from the employer and
other benefits.  He would therefore submit that there is clear suppression of
true and correct facts and by misleading the Court of Senior Civil Judge,
Jangaon, succession certificate was obtained.  He would submit that in view of
provision contained in Section 383, the succession certificate ought to have
been revoked by the Court of the Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon and even though
an application is filed, Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon is not considering the
application and on the contrary there is threat of respondent claiming the
benefits by relying on succession certificate granted to him and in such an
event grave and irreparable prejudice would be caused to the parents  and
would go against the will of the deceased who desired that only parents should
avail all the properties standing on her name.
4.4.    Learned counsel for petitioner further submitted that respondent
has filed O S No. 212 of 2018 in the Court of XIII Additional District Judge
Court, Ranga Reddy challenging the registered will dated 17.5.2017. He would
therefore submit that as respondent is in the knowledge of registered will
granted to the petitioners and  already instituted suit challenging the said will,
unless the respondent succeeds in obtaining the decree from the competent
Court holding the registered will granted to the petitioners as not valid and that
the properties belong to his wife should only be succeeded by him, he cannot
seek to enforce the succession certificate to claim the benefits.
5.
In support of his contentions, learned counsel for petitioner placed
reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in
Achutananda Baidya Vs
Prafullaya Kumar Gayen and others
.
6.        Per contra, learned counsel for respondent would submit that
Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon has jurisdiction to entertain the application to
grant succession certificate and therefore there is no jurisdictional error in
entertaining the application.  According to learned counsel, respondent was
permanent resident of Jangaon.  Therefore, S.O.P., was filed in that Court.  He
would submit that against the order granting succession certificate, appeal
shall lie to the District Court under Section 384 of the Act and petitioners
ought to have availed the said remedy and revision is not maintainable when
remedy of appeal is provided by the Act. He would further submit that husband
being her Class I hair, there is no need to implead parents and they are not
entitled to claim property when the deceased was survived by husband.
Therefore, merely because parents were not impleaded in the Succession O.P., 
the order granting succession certificate does not become illegal, warranting
interference by this Court in exercise of revisional jurisdiction.  He would
further submit that petitioners are not entitled to avail simultaneously two
remedies, having moved application to revoke the certificate issued under
Section 383 of the Act, during the pendency of the said application, present
revision is not maintainable. He would therefore submit that the present
revision is not maintainable in law and liable to be dismissed.
7.        In support of his contentions, learned counsel placed reliance on
following decisions.
Pasumarthi Srinivas Vs NIL
,
Somwati Tiwari Vs People
in
General ,
and Surendra Bhatia Vs. Poonam Bhatia and others
.
8.      In reply, Sri Vasudev Reddy, learned counsel for petitioners submit
that as the Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon lacks inherent jurisdiction with
reference to territorial jurisdiction, merely because petitioners also filed an
application to revoke the certificate, the present revision cannot be rejected.  As
proceedings before the Court of Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon are vitiated on the
grounds urged above, the revision is maintainable.  He would submit that
under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India, this Court has got ample powers
to entertain the revision and to hold that the Court of Senior Civil Judge,
Jangaon has no jurisdiction to entertain the Succession O.P., and to set aside
the order granting Succession certificate.  He also pointed out that in
Succession O P, the person claiming to issue succession certificate alone
should prosecute the matter but cannot appoint a Power of Attorney to
prosecute legal proceedings.  He would further submit that at any rate, Power
of Attorney cannot give evidence which touches upon the personal relationship
of husband and wife, whereas in the case on hand, the evidence was given by
the Power of Attorney on behalf of the respondent herein and on that ground
also proceedings before the Court of Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon are vitiated.
9.      From the respective submissions, the following issues arise for
consideration:
1)      Whether the Court of Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon lacked territorial
jurisdiction to entertain Succession O.P. filed by respondent to
grant succession certificate to claim terminal and other financial
benefits of his wife?
2)      Assuming that the Court of Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon does not
have territorial jurisdiction to entertain S.O.P, whether revision
under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India is maintainable
without availing the remedy of appeal provided under
Section 384
of the Indian Succession Act?
10.       Before dealing with the claim of jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India, it is necessary to clear the objection
raised by learned counsel for petitioners on maintainability of S.O.P before
Court of Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon.
11.       The facts which are not in dispute are, Smt Salini Reddy died
intestate.  She was not blessed with children and at the time of her death, she
was survived by her husband and parents.  Husband claims that he is entitled
to succeed to the properties belonging to his wife.  However, it appears
deceased executed registered will dated 17.5.2017 bequeathing all her
properties in favour of her parents.  The validity of will is pending adjudication
in OS No. 212 of 2018 on the file of XIII ADJ, Ranga Reddy and this Court is
not expressing any opinion on that aspect.  At the time of her death, she was
living in Hyderabad.  In the S.O.P., respondent has not declared location of
properties within the territorial jurisdiction of Court of Senior Civil Judge at
Jangaon.
12.       In the above factual backdrop, to appreciate the respective
contentions, it is necessary to consider the provisions of the
Indian Succession
Act, 1925
, particularly provisions in
Sections 371
and
372
.  As per
Section 372
of the Act, an application can be filed to issue succession certificate. Such
application should be made to the Senior Civil Judge.  As per
Section 371
,
such application has to be moved before the Court within the jurisdiction of
which deceased ordinarily resided at the time of her death or if that person has
no fixed place of residence, the Court within whose jurisdiction any part of the
property of the deceased is found.
13.       At this stage it is appropriate to consider the decisions relied by
learned counsel for respondent.
13.1.     In Somwati Tiwari issue was on territorial jurisdiction of Senior
Civil Judge Court.  The S.O.P. was dismissed by the Court of Senior Civil Judge
affirmed by appellate Court holding that Court has no jurisdiction to grant
succession certificate.  Late Motilal Tiwari was permanent resident of village
Marhi, District Satna and as Section Commander, he was posted at various 
places and died in a hospital in Jabalpur.  Madhya Pradesh High Court held:
4.       In the present case there was
documentary evidence to the effect that Motilal Tiwari
was permanent resident of Village Marhi, District
Satna. He was in Government service and he was  
being transferred from one place to the other. It is the
permanent place where he resided that could also be
considered to be the place of his ordinary residence.
The word "resides" is a flexible one and has many
shades of meaning. It must take its colour and content
from the context in which it appears. If a person is a
permanent resident of a particular place, there can be
no doubt that he is ordinarily resident of that place.
Similarly, if he is posted at a different place in
connection with his service that place can also be
termed as ordinary place of his residence for the
purposes of
Section 371
of the Act. The Courts at both
the places would have concurrent jurisdiction to
entertain the application under
Section 372
of the Act.
In this view of the matter the Court at Satna had the
territorial jurisdiction to entertain the application
under
Section 372
of the Act for grant of succession
certificate when there was no opposition by
anyone.
13.2.     With respect, by plain reading of language employed in
Section
371
, territorial jurisdiction to grant succession certificate is available to that
Court of Senior Civil Judge within whose jurisdictional limits the deceased
ordinarily resided at the time of death or any part of the property of deceased is
found and not otherwise.  Permanent residence has no relevance to apply the
jurisdictional aspect.  Be that as it may, it is not stated by respondent that
deceased was permanent resident of Jangaon and no material was placed on  
record to prove the said fact.  He was only pleading that he is permanent
resident of Jangaon, where as, that is not relevant as per
Section 371
.  Thus,
said decision do not come to the aid of respondent.
13.3.     In Surendra Bhatia there was no dispute on ordinary residence of
deceased.  The objection to grant succession certificate by the District Judge,
Jaipur City was on the ground that deceased was a citizen of Canada and
therefore Indian Courts have no jurisdiction to issue succession certificate.
Said objection was over ruled and High Court held that to grant succession
certificate what is relevant is ordinary residence of deceased and not his
citizenship.  Thus, said judgment is also of no help to respondent.
13.4.     In the facts of this case, the decisions cited by learned counsel for
respondent do not come to his aid.
14.       As per
Section 371
only that Court has jurisdiction where the
deceased ordinarily resided at the time of death or the entire property or part of
the property is located within the territorial jurisdiction of that Court.
Averments made in paragraph 3 would disclose that deceased lived in
Bangalore and later taken to various places in the country to administer
treatment and died in Hyderabad.  The death certificate issued by GHMC was 
also relied upon.  From the averments in the paragraph 5, it would show that
the respondent applied succession certificate to claim terminal and other
benefits from the employer of deceased whose office is located in Bangalore.
There is no averment on location of property belonging to deceased within the
territorial jurisdiction of Court of Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon. There is no
averment in the plaint to disclose how the Court of Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon
has territorial jurisdiction except claiming that the respondent is permanent
resident of Jangaon.  However, under
Section 371
what is relevant is residence
of deceased or location of property of deceased and not that of claimant.
15.       Further,
Section 372
mandates the party applying for succession
certificate to furnish the particulars mentioned therein.  Specifically, it requires
furnishing of residence of the deceased at the time of death and if such
residence is not within the jurisdiction of the Judge to whom the application
was made, then details of the property of the deceased within those limits.
There is no averment in the plaint to show that the ordinarily the residence of
the deceased was within the local limits of Court of Senior Civil Judge,
Jangaon.  Similarly, there is no description of any property of the deceased
within those limits.
16.
Section 372
also requires specifying family and other relatives of
the deceased and their respective residences.  This was not complied.
Respondent did not disclose details of her parents, petitioners herein.  The
deceased claimed to have executed registered will in favour of her
parents/petitioners herein, bequeathing all assets standing on her name,
including terminal benefits accrued to her in her employment.  Thus,
petitioners herein are entitled to be heard before granting succession certificate
to respondent.  There is no declaration also on other aspects required by this
Section.  Thus, the S.O.P did not comply mandatory requirements  thereby
keeping the Court below in dark on rival claims and other aspects.
17.       Thus, the Court of Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon does not have
territorial jurisdiction to entertain S.O.P and to grant succession certificate.
18.       This leaves the issue as to whether revision under
Article 227
of
the Constitution of India is maintainable.
19.       Supervisory jurisdiction under
Article 227
of the Constitution of
India is exercised to keep the Subordinate Courts within the bounds of their
jurisdiction.  When a subordinate Court has assumed jurisdiction which it
does not have and has failed to exercise a jurisdiction which it does have and
the jurisdiction though available is being exercised by a Court in a manner not
permitted by law and grave injustice had occasioned thereby, the High Court
can exercise its supervisory jurisdiction and remedy the injustice caused to a
party.          20.1    The principles on scope of power of High Court under
Article
227
are summarized by Supreme Court in the following decisions.
20.2      In
State Vs Navjot Sandhu
, on review of law on the subject,
Supreme Court held as under:
28. Thus the law is that
Article 227
of the Constitution of
India gives the High Court the power of superintendence over all
courts and tribunals throughout the territories in relation to which it
exercises jurisdiction. This jurisdiction cannot be limited or fettered
by any Act of the State Legislature. The supervisory jurisdiction
extends to keeping the subordinate tribunals within the limits of their
authority and to seeing that they obey the law. The powers under
Article 227
are wide and can be used, to meet the ends of justice.
They can be used to interfere even with an interlocutory order.
However the power under
Article 227
is a discretionary power and it
is difficult to attribute to an order of the High Court, such a source of
power, when the High Court itself does not in terms purport to
exercise any such discretionary power. It is settled law that this
power of judicial superintendence, under
Article 227
, must be
exercised sparingly and only to keep subordinate courts and
tribunals within the bounds of their authority and not to correct mere
errors. Further, where the statute bans the exercise of revisional
powers it would require very exceptional circumstances to warrant
interference under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India since the
power of superintendence was not meant to circumvent statutory law.
It is settled law that the jurisdiction under
Article 227
could not be
exercised as the cloak of an appeal in disguise.
20.3      In Achutananda Baidya, on the scope of jurisdiction of High Court
under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India, Supreme Court observed as
under:
10. The power of superintendence of the High Court under
Article
227
of the Constitution is not confined to administrative
superintendence only but such power includes within its sweep the
power of judicial review. The power and duty of the High Court under
Article 227
is essentially to ensure that the Courts and Tribunals,
inferior to High Court, have done what they were required to do. Law
is well settled by various decisions of this Court that the High Court
can interfere under
Article 227
of the Constitution in cases of
erroneous assumption or acting beyond its jurisdiction, refusal to
exercise jurisdiction, error of law apparent on record as distinguished
from a mere mistake of law, arbitrary or capricious exercise of
authority or discretion, a patent error in procedure, arriving at a
finding which is perverse or based on no material, or resulting in
manifest injustice. As regards finding of fact of the inferior court, the
High Court should not quash the judgment of the subordinate court
merely on the ground that its finding of fact was erroneous but it will
be open to the High Court in exercise of the powers under
Article 227
to interfere with the finding of fact if the subordinate court came to
the conclusion without any evidence or upon manifest misreading of
the evidence thereby indulging in improper exercise of jurisdiction or
if its conclusions are perverse.
11. If the evidence on record in respect of a question of fact is not at
all taken into consideration and without reference to such evidence,
the finding of fact is arrived at by inferior court or Tribunal, such
finding must be held to be perverse and lacking in factual basis. In
such circumstances, in exercise of the jurisdiction under
Article 227
,
the High Court will be competent to quash such perverse finding of
fact.
20.4              In
Radhey Shyam Vs Chhabi Nath
, Supreme Court    
reviewed scope of power of High Court under
Articles 226
and
227
against
judicial decisions.  Supreme Court held as under:
18. While the above judgments dealt with the question whether
judicial order could violate a fundamental right, it was clearly laid
down that challenge to judicial orders could lie by way of appeal or
revision or under
Article 227
and not by way of a writ under
Articles
226
and
32.
..
22. We may now come to the judgment in
Surya Dev Rai [Surya Dev   
Rai v. Ram Chander Rai
, (2003) 6 SCC 675] . Therein, the appellant
was aggrieved by the denial of interim injunction in a pending suit
and preferred a writ petition in the High Court stating that after
the
CPC
amendment by Act 46 of 1999 w.e.f. 1-7-2002, remedy of  
revision under
Section 115
was no longer available. The High Court
dismissed the petition following its Full Bench judgment in Ganga
Saran [1991 SCC OnLine All 63 : AIR 1991 All 114] to the effect that
a writ was not maintainable as no mandamus could issue to a private
person. The Bench considered the question of the impact
of the CPC
amendment on power and jurisdiction of the High Court to entertain
a writ of certiorari under
Article 226
or a petition under
Article 227
to
involve power of superintendence. The Bench noted the legal position
that after
CPC
amendment revisional jurisdiction of the High Court
against interlocutory order was curtailed.
..
27. Thus, we are of the view that judicial orders of civil courts are not
amenable to a writ of certiorari under
Article 226.
We are also in
agreement with the view [
Radhey Shyam v. Chhabi Nath
, (2009) 5 
SCC 616] of the referring Bench that a writ of mandamus does not lie
against a private person not discharging any public duty. Scope of
Article 227
is different from
Article 226.
21.       Succession certificate is conclusive proof of succession and vests
right in such person to claim the properties belonging to deceased. By virtue of
succession certificate issued by court of Senior Civil Judge, right of petitioners
to claim those amounts as per will of deceased is affected.  No doubt, validity of
will is now subject matter of O.S. No. 212 of 2018 on the file of Court of XIII
Additional District Judge, Ranga Reddy District but would prima facie point
out a rival claim and thus they ought to have been heard.
22.       It is not in dispute that petitioners place heavy reliance on a
registered will stated to have been executed by late Salini Reddy.  The validity
of will is challenged in O.S. No. 212 of 2018 in the Court of XIII Additional
District Judge Court, Ranga Reddy District.  Thus, it cannot be said that
petitioners are total strangers to claim for succession and have no manner of
right to oppose succession claim of respondent.  Admittedly, they were not
parties to S.O.P and succession granted to respondent would affect their right
to claim terminal benefits of late Salini Reddy.
23.       The Court below did not even look into several aspects noticed
herein before accepting the plea of the respondent.
24.
Section 383
of the Act, vests power in the Court to revoke the
certificate granted, if any of the conditions mentioned in the said section are
satisfied.   Under
Section 389
certificate has to be surrendered, if it was
superseded or is invalid.  A bare reading of these two provisions would make it
clear that this power is vested in the Court which granted succession
certificate.  However, exercise of such power pre-supposes competency of the
Court to entertain the petition and valid certificate was granted by that Court.
In the case on hand, as noticed above, the Court of Senior Civil Judge,
Jangaon lacks jurisdiction to entertain the application filed by the respondent
and therefore the certificate granted by the said Court is not valid in law.
25.       Though petitioners have filed application to set aside order dated
03-01-2018 and another application under
Section 383
to revoke the
succession certificate power under
Section 383
is discretionary and it pre-
supposes grant of certificate by a Court of competent jurisdiction.  Thus,
merely because such applications are filed, cannot be an impediment to this
Court to exercise jurisdiction under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India,
when there is clear transgression of jurisdiction by the Court below and the
order in S.O.P. is unsustainable in law.
26.
Section 384
of the Act vests right in the aggrieved party to prefer
appeal against the succession certificate granted.  Availing the remedy of
appeal pre-supposes that Court of competent jurisdiction has granted
succession certificate after affording due opportunity to the party aggrieved by
that certificate.  In the case on hand, apart from the fact that the Court of
Senior Civil Judge, Jangaon does not have territorial jurisdiction petitioners
herein were not parties to S.O.P.  Thus, they can not file appeal unless leave is
granted by the Appellate Court.  Thus, it cannot be said, that the petitioners
herein have the remedy of appeal.  Therefore, the present revision petition
cannot be rejected, on the ground that
Section 384
provides remedy of appeal.
27.       In Pasumarthi Srinivas against decision of Senior Civil Judge
rejecting S.O.P, C.M.A was filed in the High Court.  Office raised objection on
maintainability of C.M.A. as remedy of appeal is available.  It was contended
that as Senior Civil Judge was acting as delegate of District Judge under the
Indian Succession Act
, no appeal would lie to him.  This contention was
rejected and office objection was upheld.  In the facts of this case, said decision
do not come to the aid of respondent.
28.       From the long line of precedent decisions, it is crystal clear that
remedy under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India is extraordinary remedy.
This remedy is not a substitute for an appeal.  In a petition under
Article 227
the Court cannot go into merits of the issue adjudicated by the lower Courts.  It
is intended to correct procedural deviations by lower Courts. In the case on
hand, the aspects noticed above are glaring, vitiating the order of Senior Civil
Judge, Jangaon.  It had erroneously assumed jurisdiction and there is an error
apparent on the fact of record in granting succession certificate and same is
not sustainable.  There was clear transgression of jurisdiction. Such errors can
be corrected in a petition under
Article 227
even if an aggrieved party has
remedy of appeal.  It is a fit case to exercise jurisdiction under
Article 227
of
the Constitution of India.
29.       Having regard to glaring infirmities noticed in the proceedings
before the Court of Senior Civil Judge at Jangaon, the order granting
succession certificate in favour of respondent in S.O.P No. 56 of 2017 is set
aside and revision is allowed.  No costs.
30.       It is made clear that this Court has not entered into merits on
whether respondent has right to obtain succession certificate to claim
properties belonging to his wife and whether petitioners have right to claim
assets standing in the name of late Mrs Salini Reddy based on a registered will
claimed to have been executed in their favour.  Court has only considered the
issue of failure to observe procedural safeguards and territorial jurisdiction by
Court of Senior Civil Judge at Jangaon. Miscellaneous petitions, if any
pending, are closed.
__________________   
P NAVEEN RAO,J    
DATE: 07-09-2018