[Cites
20
, Cited by
5
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Tatineni Venkata Subba Rao (Died Lrs ... vs Kodali Jayalaxmi Devi,S/O Late Raja ... on 7 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 27
Author:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
Bench:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU         

CRP.No.3333 of 2013  

07-06-2018 

Tatineni VEnkata Subba Rao (died LRs brought on record) Petitioners 

Kodali Jayalaxmi Devi,S/o late Raja Krishna Prasad, Dr.No.6-51, Vasantha Nagar,Kanur, Krishna District. Respondents 

Counsel for the appellants: Sri V.Narasimha Murthy

Counsel for the Respondents: ----

<Gist:


>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
  2003 (2) ALD 638
2 010 (2) ALT 648
3 009) 2 SCC 532 
4 012) 1 SCC 656 
5 014) 1 SCC 618 
6 04 (3) ALD 817
7 07 (1) ALT 668
8 08 (8) SCC 564 
9 11 AIR SCW 4484   
 10 2007 (5) ALT 758



HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S.SOMAYAJULU         
CRP.No.3333 of 2013  

O R D E R:
This Civil Revision Petition is filed against order, dated
05.07.2013, in EA.No.48 of 2013 in OS.No.25 of 2017 on the
file of the Court of the II Additional District Judge, Krishna at
Vijayawada.
EA.No.48 of 2013 is filed under
Order VII Rule 14 of
CPC
by the petitioner in the lower Court (by the claim
petitioner in the claim petition) to receive the documents,
which are filed along with the said application.  The
respondent filed a counter stating that the documents cannot
be received in evidence.  His particular objection was about
document No.4, which is an agreement of sale dated 
06.10.1974.  The objection raised in the counter is that the
document cannot be received as evidence as it is not validly
stamped and is also not registered as required under law.
The lower Court, after hearing the application, held that the
objections raised are not sustainable in law and particularly,
as the application is filed to condone the delay in receiving
the documents.  The application was allowed; the delay was
condoned and the documents were directed to be received 
subject to proof and relevancy.  It is this order that is
questioned in this appeal.
This Court has heard Sri V.Narasimha Murthy, learned
counsel appearing for the petitioner.  Despite opportunities,
the respondents did not appear and argue.
The short and simple question that involved is, whether
document No.4 can be received in evidence or not.  Learned
counsel for the revision petitioner argued that the document
cannot be received in evidence as it is neither properly
stamped nor registered.  Learned counsel for the petitioner
filed additional papers on 13.04.2018 in which a copy of the
agreement of sale dated 08.10.1974 (document No.4) and the 
gift deed executed subsequent thereto were filed.  The
contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that
document No.4, which is an agreement of sale, is a document 
of title and that therefore, it requires registration and stamp
duty.  Learned counsel relies upon the recitals in the gift deed
dated 13.10.2005 (document No.4695/2005), wherein the  
vendor states that she has acquired title to the property by
the document dated 08.10.1974.  Therefore, the argument of
the learned counsel is that as the parties treated the
agreement dated 08.10.1974 as a sale deed transferring title
to the property, it cannot be received in evidence at all.
Learned counsel relied upon the following case laws:
1.
Rachakonda Ramakoteswara Rao and others v.   
Manohar Fuel Centre, Nereducherla, Khammam
,
2. Pariti Suryakanthamma and another v. Saripalli
Srinivasa Rao and another ,
3.
Avinash Kumar Chauhan v. Vijay Krishna Mishra
,
4. Suraj Lamp and Industries Private Ltd., v. State of
Haryana and another , and
5.
Omprakash v. Laxminarayan and others
.
Relying on these judgments, learned counsel
vehemently argued that the agreement of sale dated
08.10.1974 cannot be received in evidence as it neither
stamped nor registered.  He relies upon the recitals of the gift
deed for which this document dated 08.10.1974 is a link
document.   The vendor/donor states that she has acquired
title through this document.  Therefore, learned counsels
argument is that it is to be treated as a document of title and
cannot be received in evidence.
The two applicable sections/provisions of law, which fall
for consideration in this revision are
Section 35
of the Indian
Stamp Act, 1899 (for short the
Stamp Act
) and
Section 49 (c)
proviso of the
Registration Act, 1908
.
Section 35
of the Stamp Act is to the following effect:
35 - Instruments not duly
stamped inadmissible in evidence, etc.
No instrument chargeable with duty shall
be admitted in evidence for any purpose
by any person having by law or consent of
parties authority to receive evidence, or
shall be acted upon, registered or
authenticated by any such person or by
any public officer, unless such instrument
is duly stamped:
Provided that--
(a) any such instrument shall be
admitted in evidence on payment of the
duty with which the same is chargeable,
or, in the case of an instrument
insufficiently stamped, of the amount
required to make up such duty, together
with a penalty of five rupees, or, when ten
times the amount of the proper duty or
deficient portion thereof exceeds five
rupees, of a sum equal to ten times such
duty or portion ;
(b) where any person from whom a
stamped receipt could have been 
demanded, has given an unstamped   
receipt and such receipt, if stamped,
would be admissible in evidence against
him, then such receipt shall be admitted
in evidence against him on payment of a
penalty of one rupee by the person
tendering it;
(c) where a contract or agreement of
any kind is effected by correspondence
consisting of two or more letters and any
one of the letters bears the proper stamp,
the contract or agreement shall be deemed
to be duly stamped;
(d) nothing herein contained shall
prevent the admission of any instrument
in evidence in any proceeding in a
Criminal Court, other than a proceeding
under Chapter XII or Chapter XXXVI of
the
Code of Criminal Procedure
1898;
(e) nothing herein contained shall
prevent the admission of any instrument
in any Court when such instrument has 
been executed by or on behalf of the
Government or where it bears the
certificate of the Collector as provided by
Section 32
or any other provision of this
Act.
Section 49
of the Registration Act is to the following
effect:
Section 49
in
The Registration Act
,
1908
49. Effect of non-registration of documents
required to be registered.No document 
required by
section 17
1
[or by any
provision of the
Transfer of Property Act,
1882
(4 of 1882)], to be registered shall
(a) affect any immovable property
comprised therein, or
(b) confer any power to adopt, or
(c) be received as evidence of any
transaction affecting such property or
conferring such power, unless it has been
registered: 54 [Provided that an
unregistered document affecting
immovable property and required by this
Act or the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
(4 of 1882), to be registered may be
received as evidence of a contract in a suit
for specific performance under Chapter II
of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (3 of
1877) 55, 56 [***] or as evidence of any
collateral transaction not required to be
effected by registered
instrument.(emphasis supplied)

      The provisos to both these Sections have a fundamental
impact on the present case.
Under
Section 35
of the Stamp Act, it is clearly
mentioned that no instrument chargeable with duty shall be
admitted in evidence for any purpose. (emphasis supplied).
Whereas,
Section 49
of the Registration Act, does not
contain such express language and on the other hand, the
proviso says that document can be received as evidence of
any collateral transaction not required to be effected by a
registered instrument.  (emphasis supplied)
      In
Rachakonda Ramakoteswara Raos
case (1 supra), 
the learned single Judge of this Court noticed the difference
between
Section 35
of the Stamp Act and
Section 49
of the
Registration Act and held that if a document is not properly
stamped or insufficiently stamped, it cannot be received in
evidence for any purpose under
Section 35
of the Stamp Act.
But under
Section 49
of the Registration Act, if a document is
not registered, it can be received for collateral purpose. He
however concluded at para 4 as follows: All of this will not
have any significance once the requisite stamp duty and
penalty are paid.
Similarly, in Pariti Suryakanthammas case (2 supra),
the learned Judge clearly held that as the document is
insufficiently stamped; it cannot be used for any purpose.
Because it is not registered, it can be used for collateral
purpose.  In that case the learned Judge   found that the
parties were using the document for a main purpose and not
a collateral purpose.
Next judgment cited is
Avinash Kumar Chauhan v.
Vijay Krishna Mishra
(3 supra). In this case also the Honble
Supreme Court held that under
Section 35
of the Stamp Act,
unless the document is properly stamped, it cannot be
received in evidence. The Honble Supreme Court held that
either for collateral purpose or for a main purpose, an
insufficiently stamped document cannot be used in evidence.
Therefore, the Court held that an insufficiently stamped
agreement of sale cannot be acted upon by the Court.   The
word any purpose whatsoever were interpreted to mean
both main and collateral purpose.
Suraj Lamp and Industries Private Ltd. (4 supra) is a
case, wherein the Honble Supreme Court of India reiterated
the need for having a registered document for sale and held
that GPA cum agreements of sale are not sale deeds.
In
Omprakashs
case (5 supra), the Honble Supreme
Court again was called upon to decide a similar question and
in paras 15 and 16, the Court held that unless the agreement
of sale was adequately and properly stamped, it cannot be
received in evidence.  The Supreme Court also pointed out
that the recitals in the document are important. There was an
explanation in the State of Madhya Pradesh, which was 
material in this decision. Therefore, the Supreme Court held
that the document was inadmissible in evidence. The
question that fell for consideration before the Honble
Supreme Court was whether the admissibility of a document 
would depend upon the recitals in the document or upon the
pleadings.  In this case, the Supreme Court clearly held that
at the time of considering the question of admissibility of a
document, it is the recitals in the document that would decide
the admissibility of the document.
In the present case argued before this Court, it is recited
in the document dated 08.10.1974 that the possession has 
been handed over to the vendee. However, the document also 
states that because of a bar/ban in the area for registration,
the registration is being postponed and that when the bar is
removed, the property would be registered either in the name
of the vendee or his nominee.  The document clearly mentions
that for the present, registration is not possible and that
immediately after the bar is removed, the registration will be
affected.
Therefore, it is clear that this document by itself
contemplates a future registration and the conveyance of title.
The submission of the counsel is that in the subsequent
sale deed that is executed on 13.10.2005, (document
No.4695/05), it is recited that the vendor acquired title under
the document dated 08.10.1974.  The counsel hence  
contended that the document dated 08.10.1974 is to be
treated as a sale deed only and as it is not registered, it
cannot be received in evidence at all.
This submission cannot be appreciated and the Court
relies upon the findings of the Honble Supreme Court in
Omprakashs
case (5 supra), wherein the Honble Supreme  
Court held that at the time of admissibility of a document, the
recitals in the document alone are critical and the parties
interpretation of the same either in the pleading or elsewhere
in not material.  As noticed, the document dated 08.10.1974
contemplates the execution of a further registered document.
This Court also notices that a Division Bench of the Andhra
Pradesh High Court in a case reported in
A. Kishore @
Kantha Rao vs. G. Srinivasulu
held that an un-registered
document can be marked for a collateral purpose.  The
Division Bench answered the reference made by considering 
the three judgments of the Honble Supreme Court of India
and ultimately came to the conclusion that an un-registered
lease deed, which is compulsorily registerable can be
admitted in evidence for a collateral purpose.
In
R.Suresh Babu v. G.Rajalingam and others
, a
learned single Judge of this Court undertook a review of the
case law on a very similar question and noticed the
judgments of the Supreme Court of India in
K.B.Saha and
Sons Pvt. Ltd. v. Development Consultant Ltd.
, and also
the judgment of M/s. Sms Tea Estates P.Ltd. v. M/s.
Chandmari Tea Co. P. Ltd.  and other judgments and 
ultimately held that for a collateral purpose the document can
be received in evidence.  Although this was a case relating to
an agreement of sale, still the discussion in this case is valid
and appropriate.
In any view of the matter, the Division
Bench in
A. Kishores
case (6 supra) is good law.
Another single Judge of this Court in
Nookala
Krishnaiah and Anr. v. Nookala Dakshina Murthy and 
Ors.
also held that for a collateral purpose an un-registered
document can be received in evidence.
Therefore, on a review of the entire case law available on
record, this Court is of the opinion that an insufficiently
stamped document cannot be received in evidence for any 
purpose (main or collateral).  If an insufficiently stamped
document comes before a Court, a duty is cast upon the
Court to impound the document by following the procedure
under the
Stamp Act
and ensure that the requisite stamp
duty is paid.  Only after the requisite stamp duty is paid, the
document becomes admissible in evidence. If the
duty/penalty is not paid, it is wholly inadmissible.
In case of a document that is required to be registered
under law, but is not registered, as per the proviso to
Section
49 (c)
of the Registration Act, which is a Central Act, the
document can be received for a collateral purpose in terms of
the proviso.
In this revision, as the issue involved is decided, this
Court is not pronouncing on what is a collateral or a main
purpose.  The witness is not before this Court and this Court
cannot comment for what purpose the witness is tendering
the documents. The Court that is faced with that question
has to decide the purpose for which the document is being
tendered- whether it is tendered in evidence for a main
purpose or a collateral purpose.
For the purpose of answering and deciding this revision
petition, it is enough to state that the recitals in the
document dated 08.10.1974 are critical for deciding its
admissibility.  The mere fact that in a subsequent document
this document dated 08.10.1974 is relied upon as a
document by title is not very material as the Supreme Court
clearly held that the subsequent conduct of the party is not
important and the recitals in the document are important.
Therefore, the revision petition is dismissed.
      In the result, the Civil Revision Petition is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
___________________________     
D.V.S.S.SOMAYAJULU, J     
Date:  07.06.2018