[Cites
24
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Asu Venkatanarsamma & Another vs Pindi Ramanuja & Others on 16 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 HYDERABAD 141, AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 305, (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 414 (HYD), (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 414, (2018) 4 ANDHLD 669, (2018) 4 CURCC 131
Author:
A. Rajasheker Reddy
Bench:
A. Rajasheker Reddy
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A. RAJASHEKER REDDY           

CRP No.735 of 2018  

16-04-2018 

ASU VENKATANARSAMMA & ANOTHER ...Petitioners          

PINDI RAMANUJA & OTHERS ...Respondents       

Counsel for Petitioners: Sri T. Sharath

Counsel for Respondents: None appeared for R1 

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred
1.AIR 1925 BOMBAY 327    
2.AIR 1961 SC 787  
3.AIR 1923 LAHORE 242   


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A.RAJASHEKER REDDY          

CRP No.735 of 2018  

ORDER:
The civil revision petition is filed by the defendants in
the suit OS No.22 of 2011 against the order dated
05-01- 2018 passed by the Senior Civil Judge at Narsapur,
West Godavari District whereby and whereunder the 
objection raised by revision petitioners herein (defendants)
regarding the admissibility of suit agreement of sale dated
18-11-2010  on the ground that it is not signed by parties
and properly stamped is overruled.
2.      1st respondent herein, the plaintiff in the suit, filed the
suit for specific performance of agreement of sale dated
18-11-2010.  During the pendency of the suit proceedings,
plaintiff sought to mark the document styled as sale
agreement dated 18-11-2010 curiously,  not signed by either
of the parties. The trial Court, on the plea of the plaintiff
that the document is being brought on record only to prove
that the plaintiff got the document prepared by reducing the
terms of the sale agreement, as agreed to by the 1st
defendant owner of the suit schedule property (1st petitioner
herein),  brought it to the office of the Sub-Registrar for
registration, but the 1st defendant denied to execute the
same, admitted the same into evidence subject to assessing 
its evidentiary value at a later stage.  Aggrieved by the same,
this civil revision petition.
3.      Facts of the case as emerging from the pleadings are;
the 1st defendant-petitioner herein is the owner of the suit
schedule property and other defendants are her close
relatives.  Plaintiff offered to purchase the suit schedule
property for a sum of Rs.7,50,000/- which was accepted by
the 1st defendant.  An advance amount of Rs.1,40,000/- was
paid on 15-11-2010 in the presence of 2nd defendant and
one  Seelam Rajesh, after settling the terms of sale at the
house of 1st defendant. Further amount of Rs.5,10,000/-
was paid to the 1st defendant, in respect of the same
transaction on 18-11-2010 on the understanding that the 1st
defendant would execute registered sale agreement and 
handover possession of the suit schedule property to the
plaintiff. The latter condition was complied with as
defendants 1 and 2 seems to have gone to the  suit schedule
property and handed over possession thereof to the plaintiff.
4.      The grievance of the plaintiff is that the 1st defendant,
though agreed to execute the registered sale agreement did
not come forward to execute the sale agreement dated 
18-11-2010 though it was drafted and prepared for
registration, which necessitated him to file the above suit.
5.      Sri T. Sharath, learned counsel for the defendants-
revision petitioners contended under
Section 3
of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872,  a document can be anything like
letters, figures or marks, a map, words printed, lithograph,
photograph and even inscriptions made on the metal plate
or stone and  a caricature can be considered as document.
Under
Section 2(14)
of the Indian Stamp Act, 1889, (for
short, the
Stamp Act
) a document to become an 
instrument, it has necessarily to be executed by the parties
and unless the parties to a document execute the document, 
it does not become an instrument chargeable with duty and
unless a document fulfils the requirement to be considered
as an instrument, it does not attract stamp duty and for the
purpose of collecting stamp duty, a document must assume  
the character of an instrument.
6.      Though notices are served, none appears for the 1st
respondent-plaintiff.
7.      Now the point that falls for consideration is whether
the agreement of sale dated 18-11-2010,  which none of the
parties have signed  can be construed as evidence in the eye
of law and; if  so can it be received in evidence, particularly
when possession of the suit schedule property is alleged to
have been delivered to the plaintiff  under that document ?
8.      It is to be seen from the contents of the document
dated 18-11-2010,  the parties have agreed to enter into
transaction in respect of sale of the suit schedule property
by the 1st defendant to the plaintiff and the plaintiff  is
stated to have paid part sale consideration on two occasions
on 15-11-2010 and on 18-11-2010 and on receipt of these
amounts by the 1st defendant, both 1st and 2nd defendants
went to the suit schedule property and handed over
possession thereof to the plaintiff, implies that the sale
agreement, though not signed by the 1st defendant, for
reasons best known to her, it is a sale agreement with
possession. By pressing the document into service, the
plaintiff is trying to make out a case of contract between
himself and the 1st defendant in relation to sale of the suit
schedule property. The interesting feature of the document
styled as sale agreement dated 18-11-2010 is that it is not
signed by either of the parties raising a question whether an
unsigned document can be received in evidence.  The word 
evidence signifies in its original sense something in the
state of being evident  and obvious. As soon as the
document is produced before the Court it becomes evidence,
and the Court can  rely upon it, when the same is  proved.
Evidence is one thing, proved, disproved or not proved are
different altogether.
9.      A look at few provisions of law, relevant to the extent
and for the purpose of the facts in issue would be
worthwhile. As per
Section 3
of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872, (for short, the
Evidence Act
) interpretation clause,
the term evidence is described as follows:-
Evidence means and includes
       (1) all statements which the Court permits or requires to be
made before it by witnesses, in relation to matters of fact under
inquiry, such statements are called oral evidence;
(2) all documents including electronic records produced for the
inspection of the Court, such documents are called documentary
evidence.
10.     This speaks of all statements required by law, to be made
before the Court or all the documents including the electronic
one, for the inspection of the Court are called oral and
documentary evidence. It, nowhere, speaks of proving or
disproving the document or the statements at the stage of
leading evidence meaning, thereby the evidentiary value of a
document can be assessed at a later stage.  The term
document is described as follows under
Section 3
of the
Evidence Act.
DocumentDocument means any matter expressed   
or described upon any substance by means of letters, figures
or marks, or by more than one of those means, intended to be
used, or which may be used, for the purpose of recording that
matter.
Illustrations
      A writing is a document; Words printed, lithographed or
photographed are documents; A map or plan is a document; An  
inscription on a metal plate or stone is a document; A
caricature is a document.
11.      From the above definition clause it is understood that
any letters, figures or marks, each of such expression  is a
document. The illustrations further clarify that a writing,
words printed, lithographed or  photographed are
documents; a map or a plan, an inscription on a metal plate,
on a stone or even a caricature are all documents. It goes to
show that anything can be a document which conveys a  
meaning or an indication, but  it was not stipulated that to
become a document, the document is to be signed or 
authenticated  by the executant  thereof.
In
EMPEROR vs.
KRISHTAPPA KHANDALA
(AIR 1925 BOMBAY 327), the          
Bombay High Court dealing with similar issue held that a
document need not necessarily be something which is 
signed, sealed or executed.
Section 3 (18)
of the General
Clauses Act, 1897 which is in pari-materia  with the
interpretation given to the word document in
Section 3
of
the Evidence Act, is as follows:-
document shall include any matter written, expressed or
described upon any substance by means of letters, figures or marks,
or by more than one of those means which is intended to be used, or
which may be used, for the purpose of recording that matter;
12.     But in the instant case, it would suffice to refer to the
interpretation of the word document given in the
Indian
Evidence Act, 1872
as reference to
General Clauses Act,
1897
, is required only when relevant enactment in that
behalf is silent.
Section 2(12)
of the Stamp Act refers to
executed and execution with reference to an
instrument, which is thus:-
(12) Executed and execution, used with reference to
instruments, mean signed and signature.
13.
Section 2 (14)
of the Stamp Act refers to an
instrument.
Section 2(14)
reads as follows:-
(14) Instrument includes every document by which any right
or liability is, or purports to be, created, transferred, limited,
extended, extinguished or recorded.
14.
Section 2 (14)
explains that instrument includes every
document by which any right is, or purports to be created,
transferred, limited, extended, extinguished or recorded.  It
is discernable that every document is not an instrument, but
every instrument is a document. For the purpose of charging
a document with stamp duty as also for impounding as
Section 33
of the Stamp Act, statute mandates that the
document must necessarily be executed so as to satisfy the
definition of instrument under
Section 2 (12)
.
15.     Learned counsel for the revision petitioners raised two
objections for marking the document, regarding its
admissibility, firstly;  it is not signed by parties  and
secondly; it contains an averment that possession was
delivered, it being an agreement of sale has to be charged as
sale under Article 47-A of  Schedule 1-
A of the Stamp Act
as
same is insufficiently stamped and not admissible in
evidence as per
Section 35
of the Stamp Act.   Regarding the
second objection, had there been no clause in the document
as to delivery of possession of suit property, it would have
been admissible in evidence, since it is a document and
documentary evidence creating rights falling  within the
definition of instrument. But  it is not properly stamped, the
same is  inadmissible in evidence and requires to be
impounded under
Section 33
of the Stamp Act.
16.
Section 33
of the Stamp Act,  deals with examination
and impounding of instruments not duly stamped. Sub- 
Section (2) of
Section 33
of the Stamp Act,  is thus:-
(2) For that purpose every such person shall examine
every instrument so chargeable and so produced or coming 
before him, in order to ascertain whether it is stamped with a
stamp of the value and description required  by the law in
force in India when such instrument was executed or first
executed: Provided that: (emphasis supplied)
(a)..
(b)..
17.     Analogous provision
Section 74
of the Registration Act,
1908,  also makes it incumbent upon the Registrar, when a
document is refused registration by the Sub-Registrar on the
ground of denial of execution of such a document, to enquire
whether the document has been executed and the  
requirement of the law have been complied with  by the
person presenting the document for registration.
18.
Section 17
of the Registration Act, 1908, speaks of what
documents are compulsorily registerable and
Section 18
about
the documents whose registration is optional. Proviso to
Section 49
is an exception to
Section 17
of the Registration
Act, 1908, which reads as follows:-
..Provided that an unregistered document affecting
immovable property and required by this Act, or the
Transfer of
Property Act, 1882
to be registered may be received as
evidence of a contract in a suit for specific performance under
Chapter-II of the Specific Relief Act, 1877, or as evidence of any
collateral transaction not required to be effected by registered
instrument.
19.     Proviso to
Section 49
prohibits the Court to receive in
evidence any document affecting immovable property which is
not registered as required under
Section 17
of the Registration
Act, 1908, of any provisions of the
Transfer of Property Act,
1882
.  The proviso  contains three exceptions, viz.,  i) part
performance of a contract for the purpose of
Section 53-A
of
the Transfer of Property Act; ii) contract in a suit for specific
performance and iii) an unregistered document affecting
immovable property required to be registered under law may
be received as evidence of any collateral transactions not
required to be affected by registered instrument.
20.
In
GOVT. OF UP vs. RAJA MOHAMMAD AMIR AHMAD           
KHAN
, the Supreme Court while interpreting
Sections 31
,
32
and
33
of the Stamp Act, at para 5 held thus:-
It was conceded that if the instrument is unexecuted,
i.e., not signed and the opinion of the Collector is sought, he has to
give his opinion and return it with his opinion to the person
seeking his opinion. The language in regard to executed and
unstamped documents is no different and the powers and duties 
of the Collector in regard to those instruments are the same, that
is, when he is asked to give his opinion, he has to determine the
duty with which, in his judgment the instrument is chargeable and
there his duties and powers in regard to that matter end.  Then
follows
Section 32
. Under that section, the Collector has to certify
by endorsement on the instrument brought to him under
Section 31
that fully duty has been paid, if the instrument is duly stamped, or
it is unstamped and the duty is made up, or it is not chargeable to
duty.  Under that section  the enforcement can be made only if the
instrument is presented within a month of its execution
21.   In TIRKHA vs SOHLU , the Lahore High Court 
observed that before a document can be treated as such for
the purpose of registration, in fact for almost any purpose it
must be executed. The operative portion thereof reads thus:-
Now, before a document can be treated as such for purposes
of registration, or, in fact, for almost any purpose, it must be
executed, and, as defined in
Section 2 (12)
of the Stamp Act,
"Executed" means "signed" a point explained in 22 I.C., 75, a Full
Bench ruling of the Lower Burma Chief Court. If unsigned, the
document is not liable to stamp duty and a fortiori  is not
compulsorily remittable, nor, in fact, remittable at all.
The
Registration Act
presumes throughout that the document tendered for
registration has been executed (see
section 58
and
section 74
). Under
section 58
the Registration Officer must endorse the signature of
every person admitting the execution of the document. The first
ground on which Registrar can refuse to register a document under
section 74
is that it has not been executed.
22.      It is settled law that suit for specific performance is
maintainable on oral agreement of sale.  Admittedly, suit
document contains a clause that suit property is delivered
and it is also the case of the plaintiff that possession of the
suit property is delivered and if that is the case, suit
document has to be charged as sale as per Explanation-I to
Article 47-A of Schedule 1-
A of the Stamp Act
.   Explanation-
I to Article 47-A of Schedule 1-A reads as follows:-
Explanation-I
        An agreement to sell followed by or evidencing delivery of
possession of the property agreed to be sold shall be chargeable
as a sale under this Article:
Provided that, where subsequently a sale deed is executed in
pursuance of an agreement of sale as aforesaid or in pursuance of
an agreement referred to in Clause (b) of
Article 6
, the stamp duty,
if any, already paid or recovered on the agreement of sale be
adjusted towards the total duty leviable on the sale deed.
23.     Admittedly, stamp duty is not paid on suit document
as sale, as such the same cannot be received in evidence as
per
Section 35
of the Stamp Act,  unless it is impounded as
per
Section 33
of the Stamp Act.  For impounding said
document, it has necessarily to be executed as per Section
33 of the
Stamp Act
. But since same is not signed by
parties, it is not executed as per
Section 2 (12)
of the Stamp
Act which cannot be impounded as such, same cannot be   
received in evidence.
24.     For the reasons stated above, the impugned order is set
aside and accordingly, the civil revision petition is allowed. It
is needless to state that any observations made hereinabove
is for the purpose of disposal of this revision. The trial Court
is to dispose of the suit OS No.22 of 2011 on its own merits
and in accordance with law without being influenced by any
of the observations made hereinabove. Miscellaneous
petitions if any pending shall stand disposed of.  There shall
no order as to costs.
______________________________     
A.RAJASHEKER REDDY, J      
Dated:16-04-2018.