[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Sri Chakradhara Nataraj Kumar vs Visakhapatnam Urban Development ... on 16 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 HYDERABAD 178, (2018) 6 ANDHLD 420
Bench:
C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy
,
Gudiseva Shyam Prasad
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY AND HONBLE SRI JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD                       

WRIT PETITION No.30230 of 2010   

16.08.2018 

Sri Chakradhara Nataraj Kumar Petitioner 

Visakhapatnam Urban Development Authority,Visakhapatnam, rep. by its Vice-Chairman and others.  Respondents     

COUNSEL FOR PETITIONER : Mr. S. Rajan      


COUNSEL FOR RESPONDENTS :  Mr. Jagadish Chandra Prasad, SC for R1 Mr. A. Samir Kumar Reddy, SC for R2 Mr. K. Lakshman, Asst.            

THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:         


ORDER :
(per Honble Sri Justice C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy)          



        This is a desperate  piece of litigation launched by an
unsuccessful consumer before the District Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Forum-II, Visakhapatnam (for brevity the District
Forum) and the A.P. State Consumer Disputes Redressal  
Commission at Hyderabad (for brevity the State Commission),
seeking declaration that
Section 16(1B)
of the Consumer Protection
Act, 1986 (for brevity the Act) and
Regulation 12
of the
Consumer Protection Regulations, 2005 (for brevity the
Regulations) are bad in law and violative of
Section 14(2)
and
14(2A)
of the Act.
The brief facts leading to the filing of this writ petition are
that the petitioner has filed Consumer Case, C.C.No.691 of 2003
before the District Forum to direct respondent No.1 Authority (i)
to furnish the factors and the details of escalation as per the terms
of the agreement, (ii) to furnish the particulars of the site and the
relevant documents, (iii) to remove the encroachments and deliver
the site free from all encumbrances, (iv) to refrain from collecting
penal interest on interest and to adjust the amount already collected
as principal amount, (v) to pay for compensation for causing mental
agony and financial hardship at Rs.2,00,000/-, and (vi) to pay for
costs of the complaint at Rs.3,000/- and to pass such other relief.
Respondent No.1 contested the case by filing its version. The
District Forum, presided over by its President sitting with another
Member, dismissed the said case, by order dated 23.04.2007. Feeling 
aggrieved by the said order, the petitioner has filed F.A.No.712 of
2007 before the State Commission. The Bench comprising a  
woman Member and a former District Judge, by order dated 
22.10.2009 dismissed the appeal confirming the order of the
District Forum. Feeling aggrieved by the said order, the petitioner
has filed this writ petition.
Mr. S. Rajan, learned counsel for the petitioner, submitted
that in this writ petition his client has not raised illegality or
otherwise of the order of respondent No.2 on merits and that he is
only concerned with the limited aspect of the legal validity of
Section 16(1B)
of the Act and
Regulation 12
of the Regulations.
The sheet anchor of the case of the petitioner, as presented
by Mr. Rajan, is that there is a disparity between
Sections 14
and
16
of the Act. Under the former provision, every proceeding before
the District Forum shall be conducted by the President of the
District Forum and atleast one Member sitting together and every
order of the District Forum shall be signed by its President and the
Member or Members, who conducted the proceeding. That in   
contrast to the said provision, the learned counsel argued, under
Section 16
of the Act, while a Judge or former Judge of the High
Court shall be the President, not less than two, and not more than
such number of members, as may be prescribed, one of whom shall  
be a woman, shall comprise the Bench. He further submitted that as
per Explanation to
Section 16(1)
of the Act, a Judge at the District
level with 10 years experience as Presiding Officer could be
appointed as a Member and that unlike
Section 14
of the Act, the
Benches in the State Commission could be constituted with one or
more Members and orders of the State Commission passed by such    
Benches need not be signed by the President. He has further argued
that where a District Forum presided over by the District Judge
passes an order, there is a possibility of such an order being
considered in appeal and set aside by a Bench consisting of two
Members only of the State Commission, who are equal in rank with 
that of the President of the District Forum.
The learned counsel also submitted that under
Section 18
of
the Act, the provisions of
Sections 12
,
13
and
14
of the Act and the
Rules made thereunder for disposal of complaints shall, with such
modifications as may be necessary, be applicable to the disposal of
disputes by the State Commission, which shall necessarily mean that
the provisions, identical to
Section 14
of the Act applicable to the
District Forum, should have been made for the State Commission 
also.
We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned
counsel for the petitioner.
When the petitioner has conceded that he is not interested in
questioning the orders passed by the said Forum i.e., State
Commission, the writ petition is liable to be thrown out in limini as
he cannot call upon the Court to adjudicate the legality or otherwise
of the provisions of a Statutory enactment in vacuum or academic
interest. Therefore, there is no necessity for us to adjudicate the said
issue. However, even on examination of the issues raised by the
petitioner, we do not find any merit whatsoever therein for the
following reasons.
In order to deal with the submissions of the learned counsel
for the petitioner, it is necessary to refer to the relevant provisions
of the Act hereunder:
10. Composition of the District Forum.
(1) Each District Forum shall consist of,
(a) a person who is, or has been, or is qualified to be a District
Judge, who shall be its President;
(b) two other members, one of whom shall be a woman, who shall 
have the following qualifications, namely:
(i) be not less than thirty-five years of age,
(ii) possesss a bachelors degree from a recognised university,
(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing, and have adequate
knowledge and experience of at least ten years in dealing with
problems relating to economics, law, commerce, accountancy,  
industry, public affairs or administration:
12. Manner in which complaint shall be made.
(1) A complaint in relation to any goods sold or delivered or
agreed to be sold or delivered or any service provided or agreed to
be provided may be filed with a District Forum by
(a) the consumer to whom such goods are sold or delivered or
agreed to be sold or delivered or such service provided or agreed
to be provided;
(b) any recognised consumer association whether the consumer to 
whom the goods sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or
delivered or service provided or agreed to be provided is a
member of such association or not;
(c) one or more consumers, where there are numerous consumers   
having the same interest, with the permission of the District
Forum, on behalf of, or for the benefit of, all consumers so
interested; or
(d) the Central or the State Government, as the case may be,
either in its individual capacity or as a representative of interests of
the consumers in general.
(2) Every complaint filed under sub-section (1) shall be
accompanied with such amount of fee and payable in such 
manner as may be prescribed.
(3) On receipt of a complaint made under sub-section (1), the
District Forum may, by order, allow the complaint to be
proceeded with or rejected: Provided that a complaint shall not be
rejected under this sub-section unless an opportunity of being
heard has been given to the complainant: Provided further that
the admissibility of the complaint shall ordinarily be decided
within twenty-one days from the date on which the complaint was
received.
(4) Where a complaint is allowed to be proceeded with under sub-
section (3), the District Forum may proceed with the complaint in
the manner provided under this Act: Provided that where a
complaint has been admitted by the District Forum, it shall not be
transferred to any other court or tribunal or any authority set up
by or under any other law for the time being in force.
Explanation.For the purposes of this section, recognised
consumer association means any voluntary consumer association  
registered under the
Companies Act, 1956
(1 of 1956) or any other
law for the time being in force.]
14. Finding of the District Forum.
Section 14(2)
Every proceeding referred to in sub-section (1)
shall be conducted by the President of the District Forum and at
least one member thereof sitting together:
Provided that where a member, for any reason, is unable to
conduct a proceeding till it is completed, the President and the
other member shall continue the proceeding from the stage at
which it was last heard by the previous member.]

(2A) Every order made by the District Forum under sub-section
(1) shall be signed by its President and the member or members
who conducted the proceeding:
Provided that where the proceeding is conducted by the President
and one member and they differ on any point or points, they shall
state the point or points on which they differ and refer the same
to the other member for hearing on such point or points and the
opinion of the majority shall be the order of the District Forum.
(3) Subject to the foregoing provisions, the procedure relating to
the conduct of the meetings of the District Forum, its sittings and
other matters shall be such as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
15. Appeal.Any person aggrieved by an order made by the  
District Forum may prefer an appeal against such order to the
State Commission within a period of thirty days from the date of
the order, in such form and manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the State Commission may entertain an appeal after
the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that
there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.
16. Composition of the State Commission 

(1) Each State Commission shall consist of
(a) a person who is or has been a Judge of a High Court,
appointed by the State Government, who shall be its President:
Provided that no appointment under this clause shall be made
except after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court;
(b) not less than two, and not more than such number of
members, as may be prescribed, and one of whom shall be a  
woman, who shall have the following qualifications, namely:
(i) be not less than thirty-five years of age;
(ii) possess a bachelors degree from a recognised university; and
(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing, and have adequate
knowledge and experience of at least ten years in dealing with
problems relating to economics, law, commerce, accountancy,  
industry, public affairs or administration:
Provided that not more than fifty per cent. of the members shall
be from amongst persons having a judicial background.
Explanation.For the purposes of this clause, the expression
persons having a judicial background shall mean persons having
knowledge and experience for at least a period of ten years as a
presiding officer at the district level court or any tribunal at
equivalent level.
(1B) (i) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the State
Commission may be exercised by Benches thereof.
(ii) A Bench may be constituted by the President with one or more
members as the President may deem fit.
(iii) If the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the
points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority, if
there is a majority, but if the members are equally divided, they
shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a
reference to the President who shall either hear the point or points
himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by
one or more or the other members and such point or points shall
be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the
members who have heard the case, including those who first
heard it.
18. Procedure applicable to State Commissions.
The provisions of
sections 12
,
13
and
14
and the rules made
thereunder for the disposal of complaints by the District Forum
shall, with such modifications as may be necessary, be applicable
to the disposal of disputes by the State Commission

Rule 12. Hearing by Benches:
Where a Bench, constituted by the President of the State
Commission or the National Commission as provided under
Section 16
or
Section 20
as the case may be, does not have a
member with judicial background and any complex question of 
law arises and there is no precedent to decide the point, the Bench
so constituted may refer the matter to the President of the State
Commission or the National Commission as the case may be to   
constitute another Bench of which the President shall be a
Member.
Rule 6(9) Where any such vacancy occurs in the office of the
President of the State Commission, the senior most (in order of
appointment) member holding office for the time being, shall
discharge the functions of the President until a person appointed
to fill such vacancy assumes the office of the President of the
State Commission.
Rule 6(10) When the President of the State Commission is unable 
to discharge the functions owing to absence, illness or any other
cause, the senior most (in order of appointment) member of the
State Commission shall discharge the functions of the President
until the day on which the President resumes the charge of his
function.
As regards the submission of the learned counsel for the
petitioner that the Members in the State Commission are equal in
rank with the President of the District Forum, under
Section
10(1)(a)
of the Act, it is sufficient, if a person is qualified to be a
District Judge, to be its President.
However, as for the State Commission, to be a Member from 
the category of persons having judicial background, one must not
only have knowledge, but also experience for atleast 10 years as
Presiding Officer of the District level Court or any Tribunal at
equivalent level. Thus, the qualifications prescribed for being
selected as President of the District Forum and Member of the
State Commission are at variance with each other. In other words,
to be appointed as President of the District Forum, one need not
even be a District Judge and even if he is a District Judge, he need
not have presided over the Court at District level or any Tribunal
for a period of atleast 10 years unlike in the case of a Member of
the State Commission. When there is no parity in the qualifications
prescribed for selection and appointment to the office of the
President of the District Forum and the Member of the State
Commission, there could be no comparison between them, and   
consequently, no attempt can be made to equate both these 
categories.
Indeed, under
Section 10(1)(a)
of the Act, the Selection
Committee consisting of the President of the State Commission;
Secretary, Law Department of the State; Secretary, incharge of the
Department dealing with consumer affairs in the State, who, upon
selection and recommendation by the State Government appoint  
the President and Members of the District Forum. Similar exercise
is prescribed under
Section 16(1)(a)
of the Act, for selection to the
posts of Members of the State Commission. When the selection  
process is undertaken separately for both these categories with
different qualifications prescribed therefor, it is arduous to compare
the person selected as a Member of the State Commission with a 
person selected as President of the District Forum through the
Selection Committees constituted therefor.
The submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that
absence of the President of the State Commission on the Bench 
and his not signing the orders of the Bench not presided over by
him runs contrary to
Section 14(2A)
of the Act, is also without any
merit. If we consider the scheme of the Act, the District Forum
shall comprise only one Bench presided over by the President.
Therefore,
Section 14
of the Act envisages signing of the orders by
the President, who inevitably will be part of the Bench dealing with
every case decided by the District Forum. In contrast, the State
Commission may comprise multi-Member Benches with the     
President presiding over one Bench in which he sits and two or
more independent Members functioning as separate Benches. As   
the State Commission is intended to be a multi-Member Bench, the 
President cannot be expected to sit in every Bench. Therefore, if a
Bench, constituting two or more Members only without the
President, passes orders, such orders cannot be expected to be
signed by the President without being part of the said Bench. In our
opinion, the comparison between
Sections 14
and
16
of the Act is
wholly preposterous as these provisions govern the proceedings
before different Fora with dis-similar structure and constitution
between them. In this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that
the challenge to the provisions of
Section 16
of the Act is wholly
without any basis.
The submission that
Section 16
of the Act runs contrary to
Section 18
is equally fallacious.
Section 16
deals with composition
of the State Commission which is a counterpart provision to
Section 10
of the Act dealing with the composition of the District
Forum.
Section 18
deals with the procedure which made the 
provisions of
Sections 12
,
13
and
14
of the Act and the Rules made
thereunder mutatis mutandis applicable to the State Commission.
The words with such modifications as may be necessary in
Section 18
of the Act indicate that if a separate procedure is
prescribed for disposal of the complaints by the State Commission,
the procedure laid down under
Sections 12
,
13
and
14
of the Act
need not be followed. When the plenary legislation itself has
contained a provision in the form of
Section 16(1B)(ii)
facilitating
constitution of Benches with one or more Members, it is idle to
contend that
Section 16
runs contrary to
Section 10
of the Act. In
other words, the modification referred to in
Section 18
is envisaged
by the Act itself, which provided a separate procedure for disposal
of the complaints to the extent of composition of Benches.
For the aforementioned reasons, the writ petition fails and it
is accordingly dismissed.
Though the petitioner has stated that he is not interested in
pressing the legality or otherwise of the orders of the Fora below,
he nevertheless not only filed the writ petition but also secured
interim suspension of the orders of the District Forum as
confirmed by the State Commission. The petitioner has thus
enjoyed the benefit of interim order for eight years in the guise of
which he withheld the amounts legitimately due to respondent No.1
 Public Authority. For indulging in frivolous and vexatious
litigation, the petitioner is saddled with costs of Rupees Fifty
Thousand payable to respondent No.1.
As a sequel to the dismissal of the writ petition, interim order
dated 03.12.2010 is vacated and consequently WPMP.No.38507 of    
2010 is dismissed.
_________________________    
C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY, J      
____________________________     
GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD, J        
16.08.2018.