[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Jukanti Ramesh, R/O. Tangutoor ... vs The State Of Telangana Rep. By Its ... on 10 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 257
Author:
Ramesh Ranganathan
Bench:
Ramesh Ranganathan
HONBLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SRI THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN AND HONBLE SRI JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN                          

WRIT PETITION (PIL) No. 320 of 2017  


10-07-2018 


Jukanti Ramesh, R/o. Tangutoor Village, Alter Mandal, Yadadri Bhuvanagiri District, and two others..petitioners
                                

The State of Telangana Rep. by its Principal Secretary to Govt., Youth Advancement Tourism and Culture Department, Telangana


Counsel for the petitioners:Smt. K.V. Raja Sree


!Counsel for Respondents 1 and 2:  Learned Additional Advocate General

Counsel for Respondent No.3: 


<Gist :

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:

HONBLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SRI THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN             
AND  
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN            
        
WRIT PETITION (PIL) No. 320 of 2017  

ORDER:
(per the Honble the Chief Justice Sri Thottathil B. Radhakrishnan)
      This writ petition is filed challenging the action taken by the
third respondent  Telangana Samskruthika Sarathi in the matter of
appointing artists.
2.      We have heard learned counsel for the petitioners and learned
Additional Advocate General for respondents 1 and 2, who also
made submissions on behalf of the third respondent.
3.      The plea of the petitioners is that though the persons
appointed as artists in the Telangana Samskruthika Sarathi are paid
out of public funds and such employment is public employment, 550 
persons have been appointed without any competitive selection,
thereby excluding opportunity to other persons who could aspire for
such employment. It is contended and argued that no advertisement
was issued inviting applications from eligible hands and no selection
was duly conducted as enjoined by the governing legal principles.
4.      With the avowed object of disseminating information on
different Government policies and schemes and also to create
awareness and a sense of pride among the people about the unique 
cultural identity of Telangana, the Government of Telangana decided
to constitute Telangana Samskruthika Sarathi as per Memo dated 
09.02.2015 and the Director of Department of Culture was to be the
Member Secretary of that institution.  The Chairman of that Sarathi
was also appointed.  The Government considered all aspects and 
accorded permission to the Member Secretary to appoint artists not
exceeding 550 as proposed by the Telangana Samskruthika Sarathi.
5.      To our query, we are told by the learned Additional Advocate
General that Telangana Samskruthika Sarathi is a society registered
under the aegis of the State Government and the Government 
provides funds to that institution for carrying out its purposes and
activities.
6.      Obviously therefore, public funds in the hands of the State
Government are utilized to pay emoluments to the artists employed
by the third respondent.  Such employment is public employment. 
Under such circumstances,
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution of
India clearly apply to exclude any hostile discrimination or structured
exclusion of people who are eligible to compete in the selection as
artists.  The undisputed fact of the matter remains that applications
were not invited by advertising the requirement to appoint artists.  It
appears to have been essentially a pick and choose mode made by 
the President and Member Secretary, going by the submissions of 
the learned Additional Advocate General.  May be that those at the
helm of affairs of the third respondent are well versed in the field of
literature and art and they may also be quite  familiar with the group
of people who are involved in the field of literature, art, stage,
drama, music and the like.  However, we have to necessarily caution
ourselves that the structured constitutional scheme, in particular,
that contained in Part III thereof, does not provide any room for
such pick and choose appointments. Even if the establishment is
ultimately making the choice of the best of the best available and
appointing the most competent ones to hold the posts; transparency
in intake of persons who aspire to join public employment is an
inexcusable hallmark inherent and inbuilt in
Articles 14
and
16
of the
Constitution of India. We have seen the quantum of emoluments.
There is no voluntary service by the appointees as suggested,
though faintly, by the learned Additional Advocate General.
Whatever the category of posts may be; or however short the time
duration those posts and of such employment may be; principles of
transparency, cannot be excluded.  Similarly, there cannot be any
reason to hold that short duration posts could be filled up otherwise
than by opening up the doors of appointment to all persons
available in the field of choice, particularly when there is no primary
legislation or duly authorized subordinate legislation governing the
employment in the service of the third respondent.
7.      The appointments of the 550 persons would have happened  
sometime early in 2015.  In July, 2018, we have to necessarily note
that three years of their such officiation has gone through.  This
means that without requisite selection, there had been a
constructive exclusion, may be, not mala fide, all persons, who
would have been otherwise eligible for competition from the open
market. The gaze of
Article 21
also falls with a gloomy stare at the
situation in hand.
8.      On the given fact scenario, having particular regard to the
time lag between early 2015 and now, as well as noticing that those
550 appointees are not before us, we are of the view that it is the
situational need that the third respondent carries out the due
modality of selection in accordance with norms in consonance with
settled principles of law, by advertising all the posts, including the
550 which are occupied by different persons, and by carrying out a
competitive selection by giving opportunity also to the 550 persons
who are now in office, to compete in such selection.  This would
justify the situational requirement to balance the rights of those
persons who have been excluded as well as the eligibility of those
who are now working.  We would hasten to add that this judgment
does not stand in the way of the third respondent or the
Government considering the enhancement of the total number of 
posts of artists who could be appointed under the third respondent,
Telangana Samskruthika Sarathi, having regard to the practical
wholesomeness of the issues in hand; also bearing in mind the
institutional need.
For the aforesaid reasons, this writ petition is ordered
directing that the third respondent shall notify all the posts of artists
in its service and carry on the requisite selection in terms of what is
stated above.  The process thereof shall start within a period of
three weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order and
shall be completed, without fail, within a period of three months
therefrom.  It is clarified that this order does not preclude the
continuance of the persons, who are now holding office as artists;
however that their such continuance would depend upon the result
of the selection process as ordered hereinabove.
Pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall stand closed. No
order as to costs.
___________________________________      
THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN, CJ       
_________________________    
RAMESH RANGANATHAN, J        
Date: 10.07.2018