[Cites
6
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Smt. Achanta Chaya Devi vs State Of Telangana Represented By Its ... on 10 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 HYDERABAD 148, (2018) 6 ANDHLD 6 (2018) 3 CURCC 291, (2018) 3 CURCC 291, AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 174
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR         

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.4319 OF 2018     

10-08-2018 

Smt. Achanta Chaya Devi  Petitioner... Petitioner

State of Telangana represented by its  The Inspector General, Stamaps &  Registration, Hyderabad and others  Respondents 


Counsel for petitioners: Sri V.Narasimha Goud
                                                
Counsel for respondents: --


<Gist:

>Head Note:     


? CASES REFERRED:      

1.2007(1) ALD 497 



THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR         


CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.4319 OF 2018     
O R D E R
The plaintiff in OS(SR).No.3276 of 2018 on the file of the learned
II Additional Junior Civil Judge-cum-XVIII Metropolitan Magistrate at
Malkajgiri, Ranga Reddy District, filed this revision petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution aggrieved by the return of her plaint on the ground of
non-compliance with
Section 80
CPC.
OS(SR).No.3276 of 2018 was filed by the petitioner-plaintiff seeking a
declaration that the sale deed bearing Document No.2221 of 2002 dated
29.04.2002 executed in favour of defendant 9 in respect of the suit schedule
property was null and void. She also sought a permanent injunction
restraining defendants 8 and 9 from interfering with her peaceful possession
and enjoyment of the suit schedule property. Plot No.7, admeasuring 300
square yards in Sy.Nos.404 and 405, Srinivas Nagar Colony, Rampally Village
and Gram Panchayat, Keesara Mandal, Medchal-Malkajgiri District (Ranga  
Reddy Judicial District), is the suit schedule property.
For reasons best known to her, the petitioner-plaintiff added the State
of Telangana represented by its Inspector General, Stamps and Registration,
Hyderabad; the District Registrar, Medchal-Malkajgiri District; the
Sub-Registrar, Shamirpet, Medchal-Malkajgiri District; and the Sub-Registrar,
Keesara, Medchal-Malkajgiri District, as defendants 1 to 4 in the suit, though
she sought no relief against them.
The suit papers were returned on 08.05.2018 with certain objections
and were re-submitted on 04.06.2018. The suit papers were again returned
by the trial Court with objections on 07.06.2018. One of the objections was
that a
Section 80
CPC petition was not filed. The suit papers were
re-submitted on 13.06.2018 and as to the objection raised in connection with
Section 80
CPC, it was stated that legal notice dated 03.02.2018 was issued
to the officials prompting a reply on 26.02.2018 from defendant 1 and hence
notice, as required under
Section 80
CPC, was complied with. It was further
stated that it was not necessary in any event as the suit claim was against
the other defendants and that the issue was covered by the decision in
KOLANATI SATYANARAYANA V/s. NIZAMPATNAM MASTAN . The suit              
papers were however returned again on the very same day i.e., 13.06.2018,
with the following endorsement:
All objections are complied but a petition is not filed under
Section 80
CPC which is required as defendants 1 to 4 are
Government bodies.
Hence returned to comply the same within 7 days.
Aggrieved thereby, the petitioner-plaintiff is before this Court. Heard
Sri V.Narasimha Goud, her learned counsel. As the suit is yet to be
registered, this Court does not deem it necessary to put respondents 1 to 8
herein, the defendants in the suit, on notice or afford them an opportunity of
hearing at this stage.
Section 80
CPC reads as under:
80. Notice:-
(1)     Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2) no suit shall be
instituted against the Government including the Government of
the State of Jammu and Kashmir or against a public officer in
respect of any act purporting to be done by such public officer
in his official capacity, until the expiration of two months next
after notice in writing has been delivered to, or left at the office
of--
(a)     in the case of a suit against the Central Government,
except where it relates to a railway, a Secretary to that
Government;
(b)     in the case of a suit against the Central Government
where it relates to a railway, the General Manager of
that railway;
(bb)  in the case of a suit against the Government of the
                State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Chief Secretary to
                that Government or any other officer authorized by
                that Government in this behalf;
(c)     in the case of a suit against any other State
Government, a Secretary to that Government or the
Collector of the district;
and, in the case of a public officer, delivered to him or
left at his office, stating the cause of action, the name,
description and place of residence of the plaintiff and
the relief which he claims; and the plaint shall contain a
statement that such notice has been so delivered or left.
(2)     A suit to obtain an urgent or immediate relief against the
Government (including the Government of the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir) or any public officer in respect of any act
purporting to be done by such public officer in his official
capacity, may be instituted, with the leave of the Court,
without serving any notice as required by sub-section (1); but
the Court shall not grant relief in the suit whether interim or
otherwise, except after giving to the Government or public
officer as the case may be, a reasonable opportunity of
showing cause in respect of the relief prayed for in the suit:
Provided that the Court shall, if it is satisfied, after hearing the
parties that no urgent or immediate relief need be granted in
the suit, return the plaint for presentation to it after complying
with the requirements of sub-section (1).
(3)     No suit instituted against the Government or against a public
officer in respect of any act purporting to be done by such
public officer in his official capacity shall be dismissed merely
by reason of any error or defect in the notice referred to in
sub-section (1), if in such notice -
(a)     the name, description and the residence of the
plaintiff had been so given as to enable the
appropriate authority or the public officer to
identify the person serving the notice and such
notice had been delivered or left at the office of
the appropriate authority specified in sub-section
(1), and
(b)     the cause of action and the relief claimed by the
plaintiff had been substantially indicated.
In effect,
Section 80(1)
CPC states that no suit shall be instituted
against the Government or against a public officer in respect of any act
purported to be done by such public officer in his official capacity.
Section
80(2)
provides that in the event of urgent or immediate relief being sought
against the Government or any public officer in respect of any act purported
to be done by such public officer in his official capacity, a suit may be
instituted with the leave of the Court without service of notice as stipulated
in
Section 80(1)
CPC.
Section 80(3)
CPC provides that a defective notice
issued under
Section 80(1)
would not be reason enough to dismiss the suit if
the name, description and residence of the plaintiff has been given correctly
so as to enable the appropriate authority or the public officer to identify the
person serving the notice and such notice has been delivered at the office of
the appropriate authority or public officer and the cause of action and relief
claimed are substantially indicated.
Overall, it is manifest that a notice under
Section 80
CPC is a condition
precedent when the suit instituted seeks relief against the Government or
against a public officer in respect of any act purported to be done by him in
his official capacity. In the present case, no relief whatsoever is claimed
against defendants 1 to 4, the officials of the State. It appears that they
have been impleaded only because the petitioner-plaintiff is seeking
cancellation of a registered sale deed.
Trite to state,
Section 31(2)
of the Specific Relief Act, 1963, provides
that when the Court cancels a registered instrument, it shall also send a copy
of its decree to the officer in whose office the said instrument had been
registered and such officer shall note on the copy of the instrument
contained in his books the fact of its cancellation. Therefore, a direction from
the Court need not be sought by the petitioner-plaintiff to the registration
authorities in this regard. In fact, the plaint does not contain any such
prayer.
In such circumstances, insistence by the trial Court as to compliance
with
Section 80
CPC is superfluous and unnecessary. It may be noted that
this Court had occasion to consider this very issue in KOLANATI
SATYANARAYANA1.  That was a case where a suit was filed for a   
declaration that the plaintiffs were entitled to remove clay from the suit
schedule property and for a consequential injunction to protect their right.
Dealing with the objection as to non-issuance of a notice under
Section 80
CPC, this Court held that the same was untenable as the plaintiffs therein did
not claim any relief against the Government or its officials. This Court further
observed that the necessity to issue a notice under
Section 80
CPC arises
only if any action of the Government is challenged. Despite this decision
being brought to its notice, it appears that the trial Court is still insisting
upon compliance with
Section 80
CPC without application of mind.
On the above analysis, this Court holds that the return of the plaint,
on the ground of non-compliance with
Section 80
CPC and that a petition is
to be filed thereunder, is unsustainable in law.
The civil revision petition is accordingly allowed. The trial Court shall
entertain and register the suit if it is otherwise found to be in order and
proceed in accordance with law.
The Registry is directed to return the original plaint to the learned
counsel for the petitioner-plaintiff.
Pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall stand closed in the light
of this final order.  No order as to costs.
_______________   
SANJAY KUMAR, J    
10th AUGUST, 2018