[Cites
27
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Mudavath Tharya vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh, Rep.By Its ... on 14 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 94
Author:
T.Amarnath Goud
Bench:
T.Amarnath Goud
THE HONBLE SRI T.AMARNATH GOUD         

WRIT PETITION NO.26399 OF 2007     

14-09-2018 

Mudavath Tharya.. Petitioner

The State of Andhra Pradesh, Rep.by its Principal Secretary, Revenue Department, Secretariat, Hyderabad and others .. Respon

Counsel for the petitioner :  Sri J.Ugra Narasimha.

Counsel for the Respondents 1 and s:  Government Pleader for Revenue 
Counsel for respondents 3 to 8:  Sri K.Ram Mohan 

<Gist:

>Head Note:     


? CASES REFERRED:       

1. (1995) 3 SCC 291 
2. AIR 1964 SC 477 
3. (2015) 1 SCC 417 
4. 2007(2) ALD 28 
5. (1992) 2 SCC 598 
6. (1998) 8 SCC 1
7. (2009) 1 SCC 168 
8. (1986) 4 SCC 566 
9. 2012 (5) ALD 781
10. (2014) 1 SCC 603 
11. AIR 1959 SC 107 
                        

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T.AMARNATH GOUD          

WRIT PETITION NO.26399 OF 2007     

ORDER:
This writ petition is filed challenging the order of the second
respondent dated 30.09.1993 in file No.J/4529/1993.
2.      It is the case of the petitioner that he is the legal
representative of one late Mudavath Chinna Laxman (died on
15.08.2007), who was the occupant of land admeasuring Ac.40.00  
guntas in Sy.No.93/2, situated at Phulmamidi Village, Kandukur
Mandal, Ranga Reddy District, and the said land is Inam land
covered by the provisions of the
A.P (Telangana Area) Inams
Abolition Act, 1955
(hereinafter referred to as the Act) and that he
is entitled for grant of Occupancy Rights Certificate (herein after
referred to as ORC).  The father of the petitioner during his life
time submitted representation dated 19.05.2006, apart from
several other representations, before the second respondent for
grant of ORC, but the second respondent did not pass any order in
this regard.  While the matter stood thus, respondents 3 to 8
interfered with the possession of the petitioner in the month of
May, 2007, for which, the petitioner resisted the same.
3.      It is further stated that on verification of revenue records, the
petitioner came to know that the second respondent granted ORC 
to respondent Nos. 3 to 8 by the impugned order dated 30.09.1993
basing on the fabricated documents, without issuing any notice to
him and hence the said order is without jurisdiction and is in
violation of the principles of natural justice and suffers from
blatant error which is apparent on the face of the record.  It is
further stated that the second respondent, having found that the
father of the petitioner was the occupant (entitled for grant of ORC),
granted ORC to respondents 3 to 8 on the ground that they
purchased the land from the occupant, which is illegal.  It is
further stated that unless and until there is a re-grant by
determining the occupancy rights as on 1.11.1973, there cannot be
any sale, and that even if there is any such transaction, the same is
null and void and it does not confer or pass any right, title or
interest in relation to the Inam land to the purchasers and as such,
the impugned order is liable to be set aside.
4.      Respondent Nos. 3 to 8 filed their counter affidavit stating
that the writ petition is filed after a lapse of 14 years of granting
ORC in their favour by respondent No.2 on 30-09-1993 and that
the father of the petitioner sold the said land to respondent No.7
under a registered sale deed vide document No.3763 of 1988 dated
19.11.1988 and through various other registered sale deeds in the
years 1988-89.  After conducting a detailed enquiry and after
obtaining no objection from the father of the petitioner and by
following the procedure under the Act, ORC has been granted by
respondent No.2 in favour of respondents 3 to 8 and therefore,
prayed to dismiss the writ petition.
5.      Heard.
6.      Sri J.Ugra Narasimha, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner, argued that the writ petition is filed under
Article 226
of
the Constitution of India to issue a writ of Certiorari, in which
jurisdictional error has to be looked into whether on the crucial
date i.e., on 01.11.1973 all the lands vest with the Government and
subsequently, the Government can issue grant (re-grant) to the
occupants.  The father of the petitioner was not granted re-grant
under
Section 3
of the Act by the Government and thus, the
Government is the owner.  Moreover, the second respondent has 
not recognized the rights of Mudavath Laxman (father of the
petitioner). Thus, the sale deeds said to have been executed by the
father of the petitioner are null and void as the vendor had no
transferring title upon the lands to transfer the same to the
vendees i.e., the unofficial respondents herein, and hence the
unofficial respondents cannot claim better title.  It was further
argued that respondents 3 to 8 obtained ORC on the strength of
bogus and fabricated documents.
In support of his arguments on
the issue of grant of ORC, he relied on the judgments in
Lokraj V.
Kishan Lal
,
Syed Yakoob V. K.S.Radhakrishnan
,
N.Padmamma V. S.Rama Krishna Reddy
and Chama Narasimha        
Reddy V. Joint Collector, Ranga Redy District, Hyderabad .
He
also relied on the judgment in M/s.Dehri
Rohtas Light Railway
Company Limited V. District Board, Bhojpur
on the ground of
condonation of delay and laches and
Whirlpool Corporation V.
Registrar of Trade Marks, Mumbai
on the ground of dispensing
alternative remedy.
7.      Per contra, Sri K.G.Krishna Murthy, learned Senior Counsel
appearing on behalf of Sri K.Ram Mohan, learned counsel for
respondent Nos.3 to 8, submitted that ORC was granted on 
30.09.1993 in favour of respondents 3 to 8 after complying with
required formalities of law and by issuing a notice and also after
conducting enquiry. The father of the petitioner also gave no
objection for the alienation of the property in favour of un-official
respondents.  Subsequently, sale deeds were executed on several 
occasions and land has been changed many hands.  First time, the 
land was alienated by virtue of a sale deed in the year 1964 and
second instance of alienation by way of sale deed took place during
the year 1988-89.  No objection by the father of the petitioner to
grant ORC in favour of un-official respondents 3 to 8 is binding on
the petitioner.  He further submitted that the petitioner approached
this Court by suppressing the facts.
In pursuance of the latest
Supreme Court judgments, the law
laid down in
Lokraj
case (1
supra) is no longer a good one and therefore, the writ petition is
liable to be dismissed on the ground of laches.  Apart from the
same, the petitioner has not availed the remedy of statutory appeal
and approached this Court by filing this writ petition on 9.12.2007
with an abnormal delay of more than 14 years.  He further
submitted that the lands were divided into plots and most of them
have been sold to others and because of hike in the prices of lands,
the petitioner is intending to make unlawful enrichment and filed
this writ petition, which is unjust and the same has to be
dismissed with costs.
8.  The learned Government Pleader for Revenue submitted that
there is no infirmity in the impugned order as the same has been
passed after following due procedure contemplated under the Act
and after considering all documentary evidence including re-grant
and that the Revision Divisional Officer, being the competent
authority, passed the impugned order which is in conformity with
law.
9.      For the purpose of convenience, the relevant provisions of
Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Abolition of Inams Act, 1955
are
extracted hereunder:-
2. Definitions:.  (1) In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant
in the subject or context-
(a) Collector means the Collector of a district and includes any
other officer, not below the rank of a Deputy Collector, who may be
authorised by the Government by notification in the Official Gazette,
to discharge the functions of a Collector under this Act;
(b) the expression date of vesting when used-
(i) in sub-section (1), sub-section (2) with reference to clauses (a),
(b), (c), (e) and (f) and sub-section (3) of
Section 3
and in
Section 34
,
means the date of publication of this Act in the Official Gazette;
(ii) elsewhere in this Act means the date appointed by the
Government under clause (b) of sub-section (3) of
Section 1
;
(c) inam means land held under a gift or a grant made by the
Nizam or by any Jagirdar, holder of a Samsthan or other competent
grantor and continued or confirmed by virtue of a muntakhab or
other title deed, with or without the condition of service and coupled
with the remission of the whole or part of the land revenue thereon
and entered as such in the village records and includes:
(i) arazi makhta, arazi agrahar and seri inam; and
(ii) lands held as inam by virtue of long possession and entered as
inam in the village records:
Provided that in respect of former Jagir areas, the expression inam
shall not include such lands as have not been recognised as inams
by the Government after the abolition of the Jagirs.
(d) inamdar means a person holding an inam or a share therein,
either for his own benefit or in trust and includes the successor in
interest of an inamdar, and
(i) where an inamdar is a minor or of unsound mind or an idiot, his
lawful guardian;
(ii) where an inamdar is a Joint Hindu family, such joint Hindu
family;
(e) kabize-e-khadim means the holder of inam land, other than an
inamdar, who has been in possession of such land at the time of the
grant of inam or has been in continuous possession of such land for
not less than twelve years before the date of vesting and who pays
the inamdar only the land revenue;
(f) land revenue means the land revenue assessed by the
Government under the
Land Revenue Act, 1317
Fasli and the rules 
thereunder, and where no land revenue has been assessed, the 
amount of land revenue that could be reasonably assessed if the
land had been liable to payment of revenue;
(g) non-protected tenant means a tenant other than a permanent
tenant or a protected tenant;
(h) permanent tenant means a person who, from a date prior to
10th June, 1950, has been cultivating the inam land on a
permanent lease from the inamdar whether under an instrument or
an oral agreement;
(i) prescribed means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(j) protected tenant means the protected tenant as defined in 1[the
Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Tenancy and Agricultural Lands  
Act, 1950
]; (Act XXI of 1950.)
(k) Special Tribunal means a Special Tribunal constituted under
Section 22
of this Act;
(l) Judi or quit-rent means the amount fixed by and payable to
Government by the Inamdar out of the land revenue assessed, on 
inam land-
(2) Words and expressions used in this Act but not defined therein
shall have the meaning assigned to them in the
Land Revenue Act,
1317
Fasli, [the
Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Tenancy and 
Agricultural Lands Act, 1950
], Act XXI of 1950 and [the
Andhra
Pradesh (Telangana Area) Atiyat Enquiries Act, 1952
], Act X of 1952
and the rules thereunder.
10. Enquiry by Collector in certain cases:.  The Collector shall
examine the nature and history of all lands in respect of which an
inamdar kabiz-e-kadim, permanent tenant, protected tenant or non-
protected tenant, claims to be registered as an occupant under
Sections 4
,
5
,
6
,
7
and
8
as the case may be, and decide-
(a) in whose favour, and in respect of which inam lands, the claims
should be allowed:
(b) the land revenue and the premium payable in respect of such
lands.
24. Appeals from orders under
Section 10
to prescribed
authority:.  (1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Collector
under
Section 10
may, within thirty days from the date of decision,
or such further time as the prescribed authority may for sufficient
cause allow, appeal to the prescribed authority and its decision
shall be final.
(2) If any question arises whether any building or land falls within
the scope of
Section 9
the same shall be referred to the prescribed
authority whose decision shall be final.
10.     Respondents 3 to 8 are successors-in-interest in getting ORC.
The father of the petitioner, who purchased the land for valid sale
consideration from the legal heir of original inamdar through
registered sale deed dated 18.11.1964, was in possession of the
land as on 1.11.1973 and he gave statement before the Revenue 
Divisional Officer that he has no objection for granting ORC in
favour of respondents 3 to 8.  As per
Section 10
of the Act, the
Revenue Divisional Officer is the competent authority for grant of
ORC. By virtue of said power and by following due procedure,
respondent No.2 granted ORC in favour of respondents 3 to 8 on
30.09.1993.
Section 24
of the Act provides for statutory appeal to
the Joint Collector, but the petitioner has not availed efficacious
alternate remedy available to him.
11.     The subject lands were purchased by the father of the
petitioner from the daughter of the inamdar by way of a registered
sale deed vide document No.379/64, dated 18-11-1964.  Later, he
sold the said lands to respondent Nos.3 to 6 under four registered
sale deeds dated 29-04-1989, vide document Nos.1273/1989,  
1275/1989, 1274/1989 and 1272/1989 respectively, and 
respondent No.7, vide document No.3763/1988, dated 19-11-1988.  
The petitioner has not established his locus standi to question the
impugned proceedings.  He is not a party and has not filed any
document to show that he is the only legal heir of Mudavath
Laxman to challenge the said proceedings.
12.     It is seen from the record filed by the un-official respondents
that further alienation has been taken place on 21.7.2006 and the
lands are now the subject matter of the sanctioned lay out by
Hyderabad Metropolitan Development Authority by proceedings  
dated 21.01.2011 and plots have been sold to several individuals
and obviously rights of third parties are also involved.
13.     The learned Government Pleader for Revenue has filed the
extracts of revenue records from the office of the Tahsildar,
Kandukur Mandal for the year 2017-18, showing the un-official
respondents as pattadars:-
Sl.
No.
Sy.No. 
Extent
Khatha 
No.
Name of the pattadar
(Col.No.12)
Name of the possessor 
(Col.No.13)
1
932/A8/3 
5.00
484
Mudavath Thavurya 
S/o Laxman  
Mudavath Thavurya 
S/o Laxman
2
93/2/E
5.00
122
M.Satyanarayana Raju  
S/o Subba Raju 
M.Satyanarayana Raju  
S/o Subba Raju
3
93/2/Ee 
5.00
192
M.Savithri Devi
W/o Surya Raju 
M.Savithri Devi
W/o Surya Raju
4
93/2/U
5.00
226
M.Suraparaju 
S/o Ramaraju 
M.Suraparaju 
S/o Ramaraju
5
93/2/Uu 
5.00
261
M.Ramakrishna Raju  
S/o Suraparaju
M.Ramakrishna Raju  
S/o Suraparaju
6
93/2/Ru 
5.00
269
M.Umasathyanagaveni   
Rajeswari
W/o M.R.K.Raju  
M.Umasathyanagaveni   
Rajeswari
W/o M.R.K.Raju
7
93/2/Ruu 
15.00
289
Kola Krishna Murthy 
 S/o Yenkanna 
Kola Krishna Murthy 
S/o Yenkanna
14.     The argument of the learned counsel for respondents 3 to 8
that reasonable inference has to be drawn that because of the
development in respect of the subject lands the petitioner
approached this Court for unlawful gain, cannot be ruled out.  The
disputed question of facts contended by the petitioner with regard
to the signatures and thumb impressions in the enquiry
proceedings and other documents cannot be gone into by this 
Court under writ jurisdiction.  The issue of laches under the garb of
writ of Certiorari cannot be entertained and the petitioner cannot
overcome the act of his laches.  The petitioner has not ventilated
any cogent reasons in the affidavit in support of his argument on
the point of laches.
15.     The Supreme Court in
City and Industrial Development
Corporation V. Dosu Aardeshir Bhiwandiwala
held as follows:
26. It is well settled and needs no restatement at our hands
that under
Article 226
of the Constitution, the jurisdiction of
a High Court to issue appropriate writs particularly a writ of
mandamus is highly discretionary. The relief cannot be
claimed as of right. One of the grounds for refusing relief is
that the person approaching the High Court is guilty of
unexplained delay and the laches. Inordinate delay in
moving the court for a writ is an adequate ground for
refusing a writ. The principle is that the courts exercising
public law jurisdiction do not encourage agitation of stale
claims and exhuming matters where the rights of third
parties may have accrued in the interregnum.
27. The appellant in its reply opposing the admission of writ
petition in clear and categorical terms pleaded that the writ
petitioner has kept silent for more than 35 years and filed a
belated writ petition. It was asserted that on account of
inordinate delay and laches the writ petition suffers from
legal infirmities and therefore is liable to be rejected in
limine. The High Court did not record any finding
whatsoever and ignored such a plea of far-reaching
consequence.
28. As noticed hereinabove, the High Court obviously was
impressed by the oral statement made during the course of
the hearing of the writ petition and some vague and self-
defeating averments made in the affidavit filed by the
appellant in the High Court.
29. In our opinion, the High Court while exercising its
extraordinary jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the
Constitution is duty-bound to take all the relevant facts and
circumstances into consideration and decide for itself even in
the absence of proper affidavits from the State and its
instrumentalities as to whether any case at all is made out
requiring its interference on the basis of the material made
available on record. There is nothing like issuing an ex parte
writ of mandamus, order or direction in a public law remedy.
Further, while considering the validity of impugned action or
inaction the Court will not consider itself restricted to the
pleadings of the State but would be free to satisfy itself
whether any case as such is made out by a person invoking 
its extraordinary jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the
Constitution.
30. The Court while exercising its jurisdiction under
Article
226
is duty-bound to consider whether:
(a) adjudication of writ petition involves any complex and
disputed questions of facts and whether they can be
satisfactorily resolved;
(b) the petition reveals all material facts;
(c) the petitioner has any alternative or effective remedy for
the resolution of the dispute;
(d) person invoking the jurisdiction is guilty of unexplained
delay and laches;
(e) ex facie barred by any laws of limitation;
(f) grant of relief is against public policy or barred by any
valid law; and host of other factors.
16.     The Supreme Court also in
State of M.P. V. Nandlal Jaiswal
held as follows:
If there is inordinate delay on the part of the
petitioner in filing a writ petition, and such delay is not
satisfactorily explained, the High Court may decline to
intervene and grant relief in the exercise of its writ
jurisdiction.
17.     This Court in
K.R.Shankar Singh V. The Presiding Officer
of the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour
Court, Godavarikhani,
Karimnagar District , held:
The principle on which the Court refuses relief on the
ground of laches or delay is that the rights accrued to others
by the delay in filling the petition should not be disturbed,
unless there is a reasonable explanation for the delay,
because Court should not harm innocent parties if their
rights had emerged by the delay on the part of the
petitioner.
18.     The delay is not properly explained and the sale deeds are not
cancelled by any competent civil Court.   The petitioner could have
preferred the appeal under
Section 24
of the Act to ventilate all the
disputed question of facts, legal issues including the issue of
jurisdictional act if any before the appellate authority, but the
petitioner has not explained the reason for not availing the effective
alternate remedy.
19.     The Supreme Court in
Commissioner of Income Tax V.   
Chhabil Dass Agarwal
held:
Though vested with discretion to grant relief under
Article
226
despite existence of alternative remedy, High Court must
not interfere if an adequate efficacious alternative remedy is
available to petitioner unless an exceptional case warranting
interference is made out or sufficient grounds exist to invoke
extraordinary jurisdiction under
Article 226.
20.     As pleaded by the counsel for the petitioner, writ of Certiorari
cannot be considered.  The impugned order passed by the second  
respondent does not fall for adjudication within the scope of writ of
Certiorari and decide the same under
Article 226
of the
Constitution of India.  The Constitution Bench of Supreme Court in
Radheshyam V. State of M.P
held:
There are three requisites in order that the act of
a body may be said to be quasi-judicial act, namely that
the body of persons (1) must have legal authority, (2) to
determine questions affecting the rights of parties, and
(3) must have the duty to act judiciously.  Since a writ
of Certiorari can be issued only to correct the errors of a
court of a quasi-judicial body it would follow that the
real and determining test for ascertaining whether an
act authorized by a statute is a quasi-judicial act or an
administrative act is whether the statute has expressly
or impliedly imposed upon the statutory body the duty
to act judicially as required by the third condition.  The
question whether or not there is a duty to act judicially
must be decided in each case in the light of the
circumstances of the particular case.
The counsel for the petitioner has not denied that the official
respondent has no legal authority to pass the impugned order.  The
petitioner has not demonstrated as to what rights of the petitioner
are affected.   It is not in dispute that the petitioner is not a party
before the official respondent and to the sale deeds, no objection
issued by the father of the petitioner, therefore, it is construed that
his rights are not affected.  The official respondent has acted
judiciously and there is no error committed by him in passing the
impugned order.
21.     The father of the petitioner executed registered sale deeds in
favour of the un-official respondents in the year 1988-89 and they
are still holding good as they are not challenged before any
competent civil Court. The representation dated 19.05.2007 is not
filed and no legal steps were taken by the petitioner or his late
father to act upon the said representation.   The petitioner is
neither an occupant nor vendor of the lands and has not been
declared as only legal heir by any competent civil Court in respect
of the subject lands. The petitioner has not approached this Court
with clean hands, and for the reasons indicated above, he is not
entitled for the relief claimed in the writ petition. The writ petition
is devoid of merits and is liable to be dismissed.
22.    For the reasons indicated above, the writ petition is
accordingly dismissed. No order as to costs.  As a sequel,
miscellaneous petitions pending, if any, shall stand closed.
________________________    
T.AMARNATH GOUD, J     
Date:14-09-2018.