[Cites
4
, Cited by
2
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Merla Venkateswara Rao, S/O. ... vs The Regional Joint Commissioner, Multi ... on 5 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 48, AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 202
Author:
Challa Kodanda Ram
Bench:
Challa Kodanda Ram
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE CHALLA KODANDA RAM            

WRIT PETITION No.15005 OF 2008    

05-07-2018.

Merla Venkateswara Rao, S/o. Ramakrishnayya, Aged 48 years, cultivation, R/o. Ryali, Atreyapuram Mandal, East Godavari Distr 

The Regional Joint Commissioner, Multi Zone  I, Endowment Department, Kakinada, East Godavari District and others..    RESPOND    

Counsel for the petitioner: Sri S.Subba Reddy

Counsel for the respondents:G.P. for Endowments 
                             Smt. K.Lalitha

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?CITATIONS:  


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE CHALLA KODANDA RAM           

WRIT PETITION No.15005 OF 2008    

ORDER:
This writ petition is filed under
Article 226
of
Constitution of India, which is in the nature of Writ of
Certiorari, questioning the orders dated 23.06.2007 of the
Assistant Commissioner, Endowment Department,    
Rajahmundry, East Godavari District  2nd respondent herein,
as confirmed by the orders dated 11.02.2008 of the Regional
Joint Commissioner  1st respondent herein.
2.      Petitioner herein claims to be a landless poor person
and sought benefit of
Section 82
of the Andhra Pradesh
Charitable and Hindu Religious Institutions and Endowments
Act, 1987 (herein after, the Act).  It is the contention of the
petitioner that he, being the landless poor person, has
satisfied the conditions and was eligible to be declared as
landless poor person on account of the fact that his income
does not exceed Rs.1,000/- per month and further contends
that he does not own residential property exceeding
200 square yards in Urban Area.  The other contention of the
petitioner is that he is tenant of the agricultural land and in
those circumstances, he ought to have been declared as a
landless poor person and was eligible for the benefits under
Section 82
of the Act.
3.      The Assistant Commissioner  2nd respondent herein, 
after elaborate enquiry, had recorded a finding that the
petitioner was not a tenant as on the date of commencement 
of the Act 30 of 1987, dated 28.05.1981; he was a chronic
defaulter of payment of Maktha and as on the date of passing
of the orders, the due amount that has to be paid by the
petitioner is Rs.5,070/-; there are no continuation orders
approving his lease and thereby, he is not a cultivating tenant
in terms of the
Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area) Tenancy Act, 
1956
and he also does not possess a registered lease
agreement between himself and the temple authorities.  For
all the above reasons, petitioner is not eligible to be declared
as a landless poor person and consequently cannot avail the
benefits under
Section 82
of the Act.
4.      The Appellate Authority also considered the same and
recorded a finding that as per the records the petitioner was
highest bidder of the temple land for lease hold rights on
27.05.1999 and the lease period was for three years and
thereafter, after expiry of the lease, he continued further
period, however, without approval orders.  Further he was
also not a tenant as on the crucial date i.e., 28.05.1981.  In
those circumstances, the Appellate Authority confirmed the
orders of the Primary Authority.
5.      Sri S.Subba Reddy, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner, vehemently contends that the petitioner satisfied
all the conditions particularly that he being landless poor
person earning less than Rs.1,000/- per month is not being
disputed at all and further he also continued the lease as a
tenant, admittedly from the period 27.05.1999 onwards, for
more than six years.  In those circumstances, the petitioner
assails the orders and seeks to declare him as a landless poor
person under
Section 82
of the Act.
6.      Learned Government Pleader as well as learned 
standing counsel opposed the writ petition and submit that
there is no error apparent for this Court to interfere
particularly in exercise of Certiorari jurisdiction.
7.      Having considered the respective submissions, at the
outset, it may be noted that now it is settled that the benefit
of
Section 82(2)
of the Act would enure to such of those
tenants who were in occupation as on the date of Act 30 of
1987, coming into force i.e., the crucial notified date is
28.05.1981.  Admittedly, the petitioner became the tenant of
the land for a period of three years, being the highest bidder,
pursuant to the public auction on 27.05.1999 and he further
continued the said lease for a period of three years even there
is no such continuation.  Though the said continuation has
not been objected by the respondents, it would not enure the
petitioner to claim benefits under
Section 82(2)
of the Act.  As
per the precondition for availing the benefits under
Section
82(2)
of the Act, petitioner shall be an existing cultivating
tenant of the lands as on the notified date.  It may also be
noted that with effect from the notified date, there was no
practice of leasing out the lands for more than three years
and also leasing out the lands has to be done only through
public auction.  In no circumstances, an individual highest
bidder shall have the benefit of renewal for more than six
years.  That being the statutory restriction and there being no
vested right in the petitioner and in view of the finding of fact
which is recorded, which is unassailable, there is no merit in
the writ petition.  Therefore, this writ petition is dismissed.
8.      At this juncture, it is submitted by the learned counsel
for the petitioner that by virtue of the interim orders of this
Court, petitioner continued to cultivate the subject land and
at present, there is a standing crop.  Hence, the respondents
are directed to allow the petitioner to harvest the standing
crop for this agricultural season.
9.      Accordingly and with the above observation, this writ
petition is dismissed. Miscellaneous petitions pending
consideration, if any, in this case shall stand closed as a
consequence.  There shall be no order as to costs.
____________________________     
CHALLA KODANDA RAM, J       
05.07.2018