[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Kondapalli Buchaiah, S/O Bhumaiah vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh, Rep. By ... on 27 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 107
Bench:
Suresh Kumar Kait
,
T. Amarnath Goud
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT AND HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T. AMARNATH GOUD                   

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.944 OF 2012      

27-09-2018 


Kondapalli Buchaiah, S/o Bhumaiah  Appellant/A-1.  


The State of Andhra Pradesh, rep. by  Public Prosecutor ...Respondent

Counsel for the Petitioner: Sri M. Ram Mohan Reddy 

Counsel for the Respondent:  Public Prosecutor (TG)


<Gist :

>Head Note : 

? Cases referred


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT         
AND  
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T. AMARNATH GOUD         

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.944 OF 2012      

JUDGMENT:
(per Honble Sri Justice Suresh Kumar Kait)

      The present appeal is preferred against judgment and
order dated 14.09.2012 passed in Sessions Case No.667 of 
2011 by the IV Additional Sessions Judge, Karimnagar,
whereby the learned Court acquitted the accused/A-2 to A-5,
who are not found guilty.  However, accused/A-1 (appellant
herein) has been convicted for the offence punishable under
Sections 498-A
,
302
,
201
of IPC and
Sections 3
&
4
of Dowry
Prohibition Act (for short D.P.Act).  Consequently sentenced
him to undergo (1) Simple Imprisonment, for three years and
fine of Rs.5,000/-, in default, to suffer Simple Imprisonment,
for three months for the offence punishable under
Section 3
of D.P Act; (2)  Simple Imprisonment for three months and
fine of Rs.2,000/-, in default, to suffer Simple Imprisonment,
for one month for the offence punishable under
Section 4
of
D.P Act; (3)  Simple Imprisonment for one year and fine of
Rs.1,000/-, in default, to suffer Simple Imprisonment, for one
month for the offence punishable under
Section 498-A
IPC;
(4)  Life Imprisonment and fine of Rs.10,000/-, in default, to
suffer for six months for the offence punishable under
Section
302
IPC and sentence of one year; and (5)  Simple
Imprisonment for one year and fine of Rs.1,000/-, in default,
to suffer for one month for the offence punishable under
Section 201
IPC.  All the sentences are directed to be run
consecutively in the sequence stated above.
2.  The case of the prosecution in brief is that:
One Myakala Ramesh, Ramaraopalli Village, lodged a
complaint before Vemulawada Police on 12.09.2011, alleging 
that, marriage of his sister deceased Jamuna was performed
with appellant (who shall be referred as A-1) about 10 years
back after giving Rs.50,000/- cash and 5 tulas gold as dowry.
The couple were happy for some period and they blessed with
three children.  Ever since the marriage, A-1 was demanding
money from the deceased Jamuna for his business and to go  
to abroad.  Accordingly, they arranged Rs.15 lakhs.  But there
was no change in his attitude.  The deceased Jamuna 
returned to her parents house about 10 days before the date
of incident, as she was necked out by A-1, and complained
the same to them.  A-1 came to his house on 11.09.2011 
discussed with them, assured good treatment and had taken 
away his wife Jamuna at 5.30 PM and started living in their
rented house at Vemulawada.  On the next day, A-1 informed 
him at 12.00 noon that, he murdered his sister and hanged
her to ceiling fan and asked him to go and see her dead body.
On receipt of this information, he informed to his father and
went to Vemulawada, found her sister Jamuna hanging with 
a rope to ceiling fan.  He suspected that A-1 must have
murdered deceased Jamuna and hanged her to roof to show it 
as a suicide.  He suspected the role of A-2 to A-5 also.
Accordingly, he made a complaint to the police.
3.  On receipt of the complaint, Vemulawada Police
registered a case for the offences punishable under
Sections
498-A
,
302
,
201
IPC and
Sections 3
&
4
of D.P. Act.  The said
Police took up investigation, visited the scene of offence,
secured mediators, got the dead body  photographed, 
removed body from the roof, examined the dead body, found 
ligature mark on throat. Thereafter, made arrangement for
post-mortem examination, prepared inquest, secured 
evidence and arrested the accused/A-1.  Thereafter, Police
examined accused/A-1 and recorded his confessional  
statement in the presence of witnesses and seized a pillow as
produced by the accused, arrested later on other accused
also.  Accordingly, completed other formalities and laid charge
sheet before the concerned Magistrate.
4.  On receipt of the same, learned Magistrate had taken
it on file, complied necessary requirements under
Section 208
Cr.P.C., and committed the case to District & Sessions Court,
Karimnagar, which had taken it on file as S.C.No.667 of 2011
and made over the case to 
I Additional District & Sessions Judge.  Later, it was
transferred to the Court mentioned above for trial on
16.05.2012.  After accused appeared in the trial Court, upon
considering the record and hearing the accused and
prosecution, and as there was ground to presume that
accused committed above offences, charges under
Section  
228
Cr.P.C., for offence punishable under
Sections 498-A
,
302
,
201
of IPC and
Sections 3
&
4
of D.P.Act against the
accused were framed, read over and explained it to them in
Telugu.  They all pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
5.  To prove its case, the prosecution examined PW.1 to
PW.18, marked Exs.P1 to P11 and MOs.1 and 2.  Thereafter   
incriminating material available against the accused was
informed to them under
Section 313
Cr.P.C.  They denied the
same and examined DW.1 to show that the appellant/A-1 was   
with him at the alleged time of offence.
6.  After appearance of learned counsel for the accused
and learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the State, the
learned trial Court acquitted A-2 to A-5 for all the charges
mentioned above, however, convicted A-1 i.e., the appellant
herein, for the offences mentioned above.  Hence, the present
appeal.
7.  Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellant/A-1 submits that the complaint-Ex.P1 made by 
PW.1 was received in Vemulawada Police Station on  
12.09.2011, whereby stated that, on 12.09.2011 at 12.00
noon the appellant/A-1 called PW.1 on mobile
No.9553355703 from his mobile No.9701709862 and   
informed that he killed his sister and hanged her dead body
to ceiling fan and asked him to go and see her dead body.
Immediately, he through telephone informed to his father
Gangaram and his younger sister Jyothi.  On reaching there,
they found the dead body of his sister Jamuna was hanging
with a rope to ceiling fan in her house.  Accordingly, alleged
that his sister was killed by her husband (A-1) and hanged
her dead body with a rope to ceiling fan in the house
screening that herself committed suicide.  After the incident,
the appellant fled away from the house.
8.  Learned counsel submits that since the police has
got verified the calls of PW.1 and the appellant therefore the
deposition of PW.1 cannot be relied upon.  The fact is that A-1
purchased house which was sold by PW.1 without the  
consent of A-1.  Accordingly,   PW.1 and his family members
implicated all the members of A-1 so that they would not ask
money which PW.1 has received from the sale consideration 
of the house of A-1.  He further submitted that the deceased
has committed suicide herself but there is no role of A-1 who
is appellant herein.
9.  Learned counsel for the appellant further submits
that the deceased left a written suicide note which has not
been sent to FSL for examination whereby the deceased 
herself stated that no one is responsible for her suicide.
10.  It is further submitted that it cannot be believed
that A-1 committed murder first and thereafter hanged the
deceased on ceiling fan just to show that the deceased herself
committed suicide.  He submitted that it is difficult to hang
the dead body single handily on a ceiling fan.
11.  To strengthen his arguments, on the above aspect,
learned counsel for the appellant, has relied upon a case of
R.Rajendran Nair vs. State of Kerala
, whereby the
Honble Supreme Court held that, for an individual to hang a
living person (who would certainly make all possible efforts to
extricate himself) after lifting him to a certain height seems to
be rather improbable.  Thus, in the present case also, it was
not possible for A-1 to hang the dead body of the deceased
after committing murder.
12.  While concluding his arguments, learned counsel
for the appellant has argued that, the witnesses examined by
the prosecution are not independent but interested witnesses.
Though prosecution has examined some villagers, elders to
prove the harassment of the deceased by A-1, however they 
did not support the prosecution case.  But, the evidence of
the interested witnesses has erroneously relied upon by the
trial Court and convicted the appellant herein.  He further
submitted that there is no direct evidence against the
appellant and based upon the same evidence, A-2 to A-5 have 
already been acquitted by the trail Court.  Thus, A-1 is also
entitled to be acquitted in the present case.
13.  Learned Public Prosecutor appearing on behalf of
the State, submits that, the prosecution has examined, as
many, as, 18 witnesses, marked Ex.P1 to Ex.P11 and MOs.1    
and 2, which established that the appellant committed
murder of the deceased and thereafter hanged her on ceiling
fan to show that the deceased herself committed suicide.
Moreover, after considering the defence of the appellant under
Section 313
Cr.P.C., learned trial Court has rightly convicted
the appellant/A-1.  Thus there is no merit in the present
appeal and the same is liable to be dismissed.
14.  There is no direct evidence in the present case thus
rests upon the circumstantial evidence.  It is trite that such
evidence must satisfy the following tests:
(i)  the circumstances from which an interference of
guilt is sought to be drawn, must be cogently and firmly
established.
(ii)  those circumstances should be of definite
tendency unerringly pointing towards guilt of the accused.
(iii)  the circumstances, taken cumulatively, should
form a chain so complete that there is no escape from the
conclusion that with all human probability the crime was
committed by the accused and none else;
(iv) the circumstantial evidence in order to sustain
conviction must be completed and incapable of explanation
of any other hypothesis than that of the guilty of the
accused and such evidence should not only be consistent 
with the guilt of the accused but should inconsistent with
his innocence.
15.  PW.1 is the elder brother of the deceased and de
facto complainant.  He stated that, they performed marriage
of deceased with the appellant/A-1 about 10 years back by
giving Rs.1,50,000/- as dowry.  His father had given some
amount subsequently also as additional dowry.  The couple
has three children and there were disputes between the
appellant and the deceased.  There were panchayats also to
settle the disputes.  A-1 was beating Jamuna for bringing
money from her parents. So they had given Rs.3 lakhs once 
and Rs.7 lakhs another time to satisfy him.  A-1 agreed in a
panchayat about his harassment and assured to look after
the deceased properly.  Six months thereafter his sister
complained again that the appellant/A-1 was beating her.
Accordingly she returned to their parents house.  She made
such repeated complaints.  They had no money to pay  
immediately but promised to pay after some time.  A-1 again
came to their house and took the deceased with him but the
next day they received a call at 10.30 A.M. from A-1 that he
murdered Jamuna, go and see her dead body.
16.  PWs.2 and 3 are parents of PW.1 and the deceased.
PWs.4 to 9 are her relatives.  They all stated on the lines as
deposed by PW.1.
17.  On considering the depositions of aforesaid
witnesses, the learned trial Court observed that all the
witnesses added certain unbelievable things in their evidence.
They stated that they had given additional dowry.  Figure of
the amount differs from witness to witness.  There is no basis
to believe that payment of such huge amount as additional
dowry.  PW.2 stated that 10 acres of agricultural land and
house in the village are only immovable properties.  He is
working as vastu pandit.  He has two sons in addition to
one daughter.  So the learned trial Court observed that it is
difficult to believe that such person having given
Rs.1,50,000/- as dowry at the time of marriage and had given
as huge as Rs.15 lakhs thereafter.
18.  It is further observed by the trial Court that most of
the witnesses stated that the dead body had injuries on
thighs, fingertips and knees.  But PW.17-Doctor who
conducted post-mortem examination on the dead body of the  
deceased did not notice any such injuries on these parts.
During inquest report, Inspector of Police-PW.18 also did not
notice any injuries on these parts.  Except these two aspects
the learned trial Court did not find any other considerable
variations or inconsistency in the evidence of witnesses as
mentioned above.
19.  PWs.1 to 9 stated that the deceased came to house
of her parents 10 days prior to the death.  A-1 came to her
house one day before the death with promise that he would
treat the deceased in a better way.  So there is no evidence to
disbelieve that the appellant/A-1 had not taken the deceased
with him to Vemulawada one day prior to the incident.
20.  In addition to above, all the prosecution witnesses,
the inquest and photographs, have established that, roof the
house is 10  ft height.  The deceased was found hanged.
Her both knees were completely touching the floor.
Remaining part of the legs were towards backward.  As per
the complaint, PW.1 received a message about death at 12.00 
noon on 12.09.2011, when he was at Sirisilla.  He informed
immediately to his father PW.2, who was in the same village
reached place of death within 15 minutes.  PW.1 joined later.
The FIR and complaint reached the Court on the very same 
day promptly at 5.00 p.m. Inquest also reached the Court on
the same day at 7.30 P.M.  So these circumstances give 
hardly any scope to create a false story or change the features
at scene of offence by her parents.
21.  The state of dead body says that, it was a homicide
and an attempt was made to show it as suicide for the
following reasons:
Firstly : One end of her saree (Pita Kongu) was intact
without pin on her left shoulder.  It cannot be if it is a suicide.
Secondly :  If legs or knees are accessible to floor, even a
frustrated person (preparing to die) will not accept throat pain
as there was chance to escape.
Thirdly :  Doctor stated Hyoid bone intact.  It can not
normally be intact in case of suicide.  As per prosecution she
was pressed with a pillow on her throat to suffer asphyxia and
die.  So there is no associated injury on her throat.  The injury
i.e., ligature mark over her throat is found post-mortem.
22.  It is pertinent to mention here that in suicide note
i.e., Ex.P10, it states as under:
My name is Jamuna.  I have illegal contacts.  So I am
hanging myself.  Others are not responsible for my death.
23.  This slip contains thumb impression.  As per the
prosecution, it is written by the appellant/A-1 to save him
and obtained her R.T.I.  The photos show that her right
thumb contains inkpad indicating that it was used for her
thumb impression somewhere.  Inquest also says that her 
right thumb contains inkpad.  The circumstantial suspicion is
that the thumb impression must have been taken either
before her death or immediately thereafter.  But Ex.P10 was
not written by her for the following reasons:
Firstly, If any lady is having illegal contacts, she
continues or her stops but will not put her life end, unless it
was known to public.  It is nobodys case that, deceased had
illegal contacts with anybody.  So her own statement that she
was illegal contact is unbelievable.
Secondly : Even if she has illegal contacts, she will not
canvass it through a note, tarnishing her reputation and
reputation of her parents a lot.  So contention of prosecution
that it was created by A1 to show it as a suicide appears to be
true.
24.  As per inquest-Ex.P4, height of the deceased is 5ft.
There is no ligature mark from the ears to back.  Knees of the
deceased were touching the floor.  As per the position of
deceased, it appears that, after killing the deceased a rope
was rounded over neck and tied to create it as hanging to fan.
There were no injuries on the dead body of the deceased.
25.  Moreover, two breasts of the deceased were
appearing outside as the blouse was upside.  It shows that
after committing murder the appellant hanged the deceased
on fan, but as held in case of
R.Rajendran Nair
case supra,
it is difficult for a single man to hang a dead body.  Thus he
could not hang properly and knees of the deceased were
touching to the floor and in the force used by the
appellant/A-1 her two breasts came out from the blouse.
Moreover, there was no object like stool, near dead body,
which is used in hanging herself.  In addition, there was no
possibility of touching her knees to the floor, had she
committed suicide.  Ex.P8-Post Mortem report depicts that
ligature Mark U shaped, of 10 x  dimensions present
around the neck  not extending upto both ears  P.M.  No
other external injuries present and Hyoid bone intact.  Thus it
proves that it is not a case of suicide but homicide.
26.  In view of the discussion in Para-17 above, we are
of the considered opinion that the appellant/A-1 has
erroneously been convicted by the trial Court for the offences
punishable under
Sections 3
and
4
of D.P. Act.
Consequently, A-1 is hereby discharged from the offences
mentioned above.
27.  But, in view of the above discussion, we hereby
maintained the conviction and sentence of A-1 for the
offences punishable under
Sections 302
,
498-A
and
201
of
IPC and decline to interfere with the order of Trial Court in so
far as this charge is concerned.
28.  We also set aside the directions of the Trial Court
that all the sentences shall run consecutively.  Consequently,
all the sentences shall run concurrently and remand period
shall be set-off under Section 428 of Cr.P.C.
29.  Accordingly, the Criminal Appeal is partly allowed.
      Miscellaneous Petitions, if any pending, shall stand
closed.
_____________________________     
SURESH KUMAR KAIT, J.
______________________________     
T. AMARNATH GOUD, J.
Date:    27  -09-2018