[Cites
7
, Cited by
2
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Marripudi Narasimha Rao And Another vs Maripudi Chenchaiah And 3 Others on 25 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 26
Author:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
Bench:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU         

AS.No.1203 of 2001 

25-06-2018 

Marripudi Narasimha Rao and another  Appellant.  

Maripudi Chenchaiah and 3 others. Respondents   

Counsel for the appellants: Sri G.Pedda Babu

!Counsel for the Respondents: Sri Y.V.Ravi Prasad

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
  2008 (17) SCC 491 
2 AIR 1999 SC 3029  
3 (1992 )1SCC 197 
4 AIR 1975 SC 733  
5 AIR 2013 SC 1204  
6 2017 (4) ALT 757
7 2009 (2) ALT 22 (SC)
8 2018 (11) SCC 119 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S.SOMAYAJULU         

AS.No.1203 of 2001 
And 

TRAS.No.804 of 2017  

COMMON JUDGMENT:
These first appeals are filed against common judgment
dated 19.02.2001 in OS.No.52 of 1994 and OS.No.8 of 1998  
on the file of the Court of the Additional Senior Civil Judge,
Ongole. As these are first appeals, the parties are referred to
as plaintiffs and defendants as in the lower Court only.
The brief facts of the cases are that:
OS.No.52 of 1994 is filed by the plaintiffs against
defendant Nos.1 to 4 for partition of the plaint properties into
12 equal shares and for allotment and separate possession of
five such shares to them, for future profits and also for costs
of the suit.
OS.No.8 of 1998 is filed originally as OS.No.465 of 1994
on the file of the District Munsif Court, Ongole, by the
plaintiffs for grant of permanent injunction restraining the
defendants and their men and relatives from interfering with
their peaceful possession and enjoyment of the plaint
schedule properties therein and also for costs of the suit.
The averments in the suit OS.No.52 of 1994 are that the
plaintiffs are a father and daughter.  Defendant No.1 is the
younger brother of the first plaintiff.  Defendant Nos.3 and 4
are the sisters of the first plaintiff and defendant No.1.
Defendant No.2 is the undivided son of defendant No.1.  Sri
Venkata Subbaiah, who is the father of the first plaintiff and
defendant No.1, died about three (3) years prior to the suit.
Their joint family owns the plaint A schedule immovable
properties and plaint B schedule movable properties.  The
undivided 1/3rd share in the joint family property of late Sri
Venkata Subbaiah devolved equally upon the first plaintiff
and defendant Nos.1, 3 and 4.  Thus, the plaintiffs became
entitled to 5/12th share and the defendant Nos.1 and 2
together entitled to 5/12th share, while the defendant Nos.3
and 4 each are entitled to 1/12th share in the suit properties,
consequent to the death of Sri Venkata Subbaiah.
The first plaintiff came to know that prior to the death of
his father Sri Venkata Subbaiah, a fraudulent and nominal
sale deed dated 16.01.1990 was brought into existence in
respect of the western Ac.4.50 cents of land in item No.1 in
respect of entire items 2 and 3 of the plaint schedule lands for
Rs.99,500/- in favour of defendant No.2.  Late Sri Venkata
Subbaiah was very old and since two years prior to his death
he was not mentally sound and was not in disposing state of
mind.  Neither the defendant No.2 nor his maternal grand-
father Sri Venkaiah had the capacity to pay the huge sale
consideration of Rs.99,500/- under the said sale deed to Sri
late Venkata Subbaiah.  The said sale transaction was kept
secret as the entire suit property was joint in possession of
the first plaintiff and the defendants and late Sri Venkata
Subbaiah.  The said sale transaction is null and void and is
non-est in the eye of law.  The said sale document is also not
acted upon.  The plaintiffs are entitled to ignore the said sale
transaction.  Hence, the suit was filed for partition.
Defendant No.1 in his written statement contended that
the suit schedule properties are not ancestral properties; that
items 1 and 3 of the plaint A schedule properties originally
belong to Sri Idupulapati Chenchaiah, who died and that all
his properties devolved upon his only daughter Smt.
Audemma.  On the death of Smt. Audemma intestate, all her  
properties devolved upon her two daughters namely
Mahalakshmamma and Parvathamma and her only son Sri     
Venkata Subbaiah.  Smt. Mahalakshmamma sold her 1/3rd    
share in item-1 of the plaint A schedule property to him
under a registered sale deed dated 02.05.1980 and
Smt.Parvathamma sole her 1/3rd share in item-1 of plaint A
schedule property to defendant No.3 under a registered sale
deed in the year 1990.  Sri Murripaudi Venkata Subbaiah
sold his 1/3rd share in items 1 and 3 and item-2, which was
his self-acquired property to defendant No.2 under a
registered sale deed dated 16.01.1990 and that  all the suit
properties are the self-acquired properties of himself and
defendant Nos.2 and 3.  Sri Venkata Subbaiah was hale and 
healthy and with sound mind till his death and that the
documents executed by him are valid.  The plaint B schedule
movable properties are not at all in existence.  The plaintiffs
have no share in the suit schedule properties and the
plaintiffs have neither possession nor right over the suit
schedule properties.  The Court fee paid is not correct and the
suit, which is not maintainable at all, may be dismissed with
costs.
Defendant No.2 adopted the written statement of the
defendant No.1.
Defendant No.3 in her written statement contended that
the suit schedule immovable properties originally belonged to
Sri Idupulapati Chenchaiah, who is her great-grandfather.
Smt. Audemma, who is the only daughter of Smt. Late  
Chenchaiah became entitled to the entire properties after the
death of Sri Chenchaiah.  Smt. Audemma died intestate 
leaving behind her two daughters Smt. Mahalakshmamma    
and Smt. Parvathamma and a son Sri Venkata Subbaiah.   
Smt.   Mahalakshmamma died issueless.  Late Sri Venkata   
Subbaiah married Smt. Venkamma, who is the daughter of  
his sister Smt. Parvathamma.  Subsequently, she (defendant 
No.3) was married to Sri Thirupathaiah, who is the son of
Smt. Parvathamma, who was 25 years elder than her, that on 
account of the old age of her husband and her mother-in-law
Smt. Parvathamma, she was looking after the agricultural
operations of the schedule land.  Smt. Parvathamma sold a
portion of item-1 of plaint A schedule property in her favour
under a registered sale deed dated 25.01.1990.  On the same
day, defendant No.1 as guardian of his son, who is defendant
No.2, sold a portion of item-1 of the plaint A schedule
property in her favour though the extents are separate, she
has been enjoying the said extents as a single plot and that
her father Sri Venkata Subbaiah sold his share in item No.3
of the plaint schedule house in favour her son.  Ever since,
she; her son and her husband have been in exclusive
possession and enjoyment of the said house property by 
paying tax to the Gram Panchayat.  From the beginning, the
first plaintiff was hostile towards his parents, brother and
sisters.  The first plaintiff left the village long back to
Piduguralla Village and other places by abandoning his right
and share in the properties of his father Sri Venkata
Subbaiah.  Prior to filing of the suit, the first plaintiff came to
the suit village and began making false claims in the
properties.  When the first plaintiff and his brother-in-law
tried to forcibly dispossess her from the plaint schedule
properties, which have been exclusively belonging to her and
her sons, she and her son filed OS.No.465 of 1994 (later
numbered as OS.No.8 of 1998) on the file of the District
Munsif Court, Ongole against the first plaintiff and others for
grant of permanent injunction.  The plaintiffs have no right to
seek partition of item No.1 and a portion of house property
under item-2 of the plaint A schedule which have been in
exclusive possession and enjoyment by her and her son and 
hence, the suit may be dismissed with costs. Defendant No.4
remained ex parte.
On the above pleadings, the following issues were
settled for trial:
1.      whether the plaintiffs are entitled for partition of
plaint schedule properties into 12 equal shares
and allot five such shares in their favour?
2.      whether the first plaintiff abandoned his rights
and shares in his fathers properties?
The averments in OS.No.8 of 1998 (old OS.No.465 of
1994) on the file of the District Munsif Court, Ongole are
virtually the same averments of the written statement filed by
defendant No.3 in OS.No.52 of 1994.   The plaintiffs therein
filed the suit for grant of permanent injunction restraining the
defendants and their men from interfering with the
possession and enjoyment of the plaintiffs and the plaint
schedule properties therein.  The averments in the written
statement of defendant No.1 are virtually the same averments
in the plaintiff in OS.No.52 of2004 filed by him and his
daughter.  A memo was filed on behalf of defendant Nos.2 and
4 adopting the written statement of defendant No.1.
On the above pleadings, the following issues were
settled for trial:
(1)     Whether the plaintiff is entitled for permanent
injunction as prayed for?
(2)     Whether the Court-fee paid is correct?
A joint memo was apparently filed in OS.No.8 of 1998 to
try the said suit along with OS.No.52 of 1994 and to record
the evidence in OS.No.52 of 1994.  Therefore, the evidence in
respect of both the suits were recorded in OS.No.52 of 1994.
In support of the claim of the plaintiffs in OS.No.52 of
1994, PWs.1 to 4 were examined and Exs.A.1 to A.7 were   
marked.  On behalf of defendant Nos. 1 and 2, DWs.1 and 2 
were examined and Exs.B.1 to B.12 were marked. The   
defendant No.4 in OS.No.52 of 1994 remained ex-parte.
The facts which are not in dispute in this case are the
genealogy/relationship between the parties to the suit.
Hence, the same is not being repeated.
This Court has heard Sri G.Pedda Babu, learned
counsel for the appellants/plaintiffs in OS 52/94 and Sri
Y.V.Ravi Prasad, learned counsel for the respondents.
The first plaintiff and his daughter (second plaintiff) filed
the suit OS.No.52 of 1994 for partition of item 1 to 3 of the
plaint A schedule immovable properties and the B schedule
movable properties.  They plead that the property should be
divided into 12 shares and five such shares are to be allotted
to them.  As OS.No.52 of 1994 is the comprehensive suit, this
Court proposes to take up the said suit first.  Both in the
lower Court and in the submissions before this Court, learned
counsels also relied upon questions of title and partition first.
Following the issues framed and the submissions made, this
Court is of the opinion that issue No.1 in OS.No.52 of 1994
namely, whether the plaintiffs are entitled to a partition as
prayed for? is the crucial issue in this entire lis and it should
be decided first.  The claim for partition is based upon the
fact that the property in question is admittedly the property
belonging to Idupulapati Chenchaiah.  The claim of the
plaintiffs is that Smt. Audemmas husband Sri Narsimham 
was an Illatom son-in-law of late Chenchaiah.  Therefore,
after the death of Sri Chenchaiah the property devolved upon
the Illatom son-in-law of Sri Narasimham, who is father of the
first plaintiff.  The case of the plaintiffs is that the Venkata
Subbaiah, S/o late Narasimham and the father of the
plaintiff, got 1/3rd share which in turn devolved upon the
present plaintiff and defendant Nos.1, 3 and others.  Hence,
the first plaintiff and second plaintiff together claim a 5/12th
share in the properties.
Therefore, the first and foremost point to be determined
is whether the Audemma succeeded to the properties or her 
husband acquired the properties as the illatom son-in-law.
The counsel for the appellants argued that the parties to
the proceedings belong to the Kamma community and that  
there is a custom of bringing in a boy as an illatom son in the
absence of a natural born son.  The learned counsel for the
appellant argued that as per the said custom, N.Venkata
Subbaiah was brought as an illatom son-in-law.
In reply thereto, the learned counsel for the respondents
argued that there is no pleading at all of the existence of such
a custom let alone evidence on the same and that the
defendants do not agree that there is such a custom at all.
Both the counsels referred to the extensive discussion in para
26 of the lower Court judgment, wherein case law and
extracts from leading books were discussed in the impugned
judgment.  Both the learned counsels made submissions in 
this Court also about the existence/non existence of the
custom and the taking of N.Venkata Subbaiah as illatom son-
in-law.
Learned counsel for the respondents also strongly relied
upon the judgment in
Bachhaj Nahar v. Nilima Mandal 
and Anohter
and argued that there is no pleading about
illatom son-in-law and that the lower Court mistakenly went
into the issue of illatom son-in-law without adequate
pleading.
On the other hand, the reply of the learned counsel for
the appellants is that in the suit which is clubbed with
OS.No.52 of 1994 namely OS.No.8 of 1998 there is  adequate  
pleading about the illatom son-in-law and this is the reason
why the lower Court went into the question of illatom son-in-
law.
This Court on an examination of the pleadings finds
that in the plaint in OS.No.52 of 1994 there is absolutely no
pleading about the illatom son-in-law.  This is the more
comprehensive case but there is no pleading about this
illatom at all. The suit OS.No.465 of 1994, which is re-
numbered as OS.No.8 of 1998 is a mere suit for injunction
filed by defendant No.3 in OS.No.52 of 1994.  The succession
by Audemma was clearly mentioned in the plaint in para 3(b).
In that suit, the defendant had pleaded in paragraph 4 as
follows: By virtue of an oral arrangement which also
amounts to an illatom arrangement  Venkata Subbaiah came  
as an illatom son-in-law.    As per the appellants this pleading
is sufficient in the facts and circumstances of the case.  The
learned counsel for the appellants argued that the pleading is
enough and that both the parties were at issue on the issue of
illatom son-in-law and that therefore, this Court has the
jurisdiction to look into the same. He also relied upon
Syed
Dastagir v. T.R.Gopalakrishnasetty
and argued that the
pleadings cannot be treated as an expression of art and
science and that the Court should look at the substance
rather than content.  The learned counsel for the appellants
also argued that this Court is bound to look into the issue of
the illatom son-ion-law.  Despite the lack of pleading, both
the parties, according to the appellants, introduced evidence.
For the plaintiffs in OS.No.52 of 1994, four (4) witnesses
were examined as PWs.1 to 4.  This Court notices that none of
the witnesses deposed about the existence of such a custom 
particularly in the community to which the plaintiffs in
OS.No.52 of 1994 belong.  No caste elder or a senior citizen
was examined to prove the existence of such a custom in the
community to which the plaintiffs belong.  In fact no evidence
is given of the particular community to which the plaintiffs
belong.  No evidence of similar instances of illatom son-in-
law were pleaded or proved.  PW.1 is the grand son of
Marripudi Narasimham @ Narasaiah, who supposedly came     
to the house of his father-in-law as illatom son-in-law.
Obviously, PW.1 will not have personal knowledge of the said
fact.  He claims to have knowledge of the fact through his
grand mother.  PW.2 was examined to talk of the possession 
and enjoyment of the property.  He was aged 35 years by the
date he gave evidence.  PW.3 is another person aged 45 years
when gave evidence in 1999 and the 4th witness is the
husband of the second plaintiff in OS.No.52 of 1994 who was
aged 34 years when he gave evidence in the year 1999.
Therefore, it is clear that none of them have any personal
knowledge about the so called custom or of the fact whether
Marripudi Narasimham came as an illatom son-in-law.  Even 
if this Court examines the documentary evidence that is
introduced, PW.1 the main witness merely marked Exs.A.1 to  
A.3.  Ex.A.1 is a sale deed dated 16.01.1990 executed by the
father of PW.1.  EXs.A.2 and A.3 are the village accounts.
The sale deed Ex.A.1 shows that Ac.4.50 cents was alienated 
by the father of the plaintiff.  He clearly states that he has
inherited the property by succession.  The contents of the sale
deed do not speak of the illatom son-in-law at all.  Exs.A.2
and A.3 are two village accounts, which are filed to prove the
possession of Venkata Subbaiah, the father of PW.1.  Both
these documents are of November, 1994 i.e. after filing of the
suit.  The name of Audemma is also visible in this document.
So therefore, neither Ex.A.2 nor Ex.A.3 which are revenue
records would prove the fact that there was a custom of son-
in-law being brought as illatom son-in-law.  All other
documents that are marked in A series namely, Exs.A.4 to
A.7 do not support the case of the son-in-law inheriting the
entire property as he has come as an illatom son-in-law.
Ex.A.4 is the decree and judgment in OS.No.156 of 1963 filed
by Venkata Subbaiah against third parties and not against
the present contestants.  Similarly, Ex.A.5 is the decree and
judgment in AS.No.79 of 1965 against the judgment and 
decree in OS.No.156 of 1963 (Ex.A.4).  Learned counsel for
the respondents also pointed out that Exs.A.4 and A.5 were
not filed and marked through PW.1, but are in fact marked
through PW.4, who is the husband of the second plaintiff in
this suit OS.No.52 of 1994.   He is defendant No.4 in the suit
OS.No.8 of 1998, which is filed for injunction.  He was
examined as a witness after the defendants witnesses were
examined and his testimony, therefore, as per the learned
counsel, will have to be scrutinized with care.   On a perusal
of the testimony, this Court is of the opinion that the evidence
of PW.4 does not support the case of an illatom son-in-law.
He does not speak of the existence of a custom.  He only
speaks of what he supposedly heard from his grand father.
The learned counsel for the respondents also rightly
submitted that even if the theory of illatom son-in-law is
taken as correct, there should be some documentary or other
proof to show that the father of the plaintiff enjoyed the
property as the son-in-law who was brought as an illatom
son-in-law. The evidence on record shows that both
Audemma and her husband Narasaiah (grand parents of first 
plaintiff PW.1) died long ago.  The witness PW.1 when he was
deposing in March 1999, in his cross-examination, clearly
stated Audemma and Narasaiah are no more.  Audemma     
died about 25 years back.  Narasaiah died prior to
Audemma.  Therefore, learned counsel agued that if the son-
in-law was managing the property as the owner and illatom
son-in-law, there would definitely be some documentary
evidence like village accounts, mutation entries etc., to prove
that the son-in-law inherited the properties and was enjoying
the same.  The witness could not produce any documents to 
show that his grand father Narasimham @ Narasaiah enjoyed  
these properties as the owner.  In fact, he deposes that he
does not even know the contents of Ex.A.3-adangal.  Learned
counsel also pointed out that even in the sale deed marked as
Ex.A.1, there is no recital about the illatom son-in-law or
through whom the vendor of Ex.A.1 got the property.
The learned counsel also points out that the property
was divided into three different bits as pleaded in the written
statements filed and each of the parties who inherited Ac.4.50
cents sold/transferred the same.   Therefore, learned counsel
submits that long prior to the dispute itself, the transfers
were being effected without any query or question through
registered sale deeds like Ex.A.1, Exs.B.1, Ex.B.2 and
Ex.B.16 (1980) etc., and the owners  were issued pattadar
pass books/title deed books (Exs.B.27 and 28).  In addition,
Ex.B.29patta clearly shows that the name of Audemma is  
mutated in the revenue records.
This Court also notices that the sale deed Ex.A.1 which
is mentioned in the plaint in OS.No.52 of 1994 is dated
16.01.1980. PW.1 in his chief-examination filed the
registration extract of this document.  In his cross-
examination on 23.03.199, he clearly admits that he came to
know about Ex.A.1 sale deed after its execution.  He also
states that I did not raise any dispute with my father about
this alienation.  Therefore, the conduct of the plaintiff also
clearly establishes that he was aware of the rights that his
father had namely 1/3rd share inherited from his mother and
that therefore, it is this reason why the plaintiff did not raise
any dispute about the same.  This Court finds substantial
force in the submission that the delay makes it clear that the
plaintiff was actually aware of what was happening and that
therefore, he did not file this suit immediately after Ex.A.1.
There is neither adequate pleading nor proof to show the
existence of a custom more so in this case.
The practice of bringing a boy as an illatom son-in-law
is a custom that is recognized in certain communities in
certain parts of the State of Andhra Pradesh as can be seen
from the decided cases which are cited and the texts relied
upon in the lower Court.  These judgments do show that the
custom of an illatom son-in-law is accepted in Kamma and
Reddy communities.  As this has the effect of upsetting the
normal line of succession and particularly as it is a custom
confined to a few communities only, like any other custom the
same should be pleaded with certainty in the case.  There are
a long line of cases which have held that the existence of a
custom should be pleaded with certainty.   Evidence should
also be introduced of the said custom.  A few relevant cases
on illatom son-in law and custom are reproduced below.
In
G.Narayanappa and Others V.  Govt. of Andhra
Pradesh
, the Honble Supreme Court held as follows:
5. It has also been stated by Mayne that an
illatom son-in-law has no right to claim
partition with his father-in-law unless there is
an express agreement or custom to that effect.
An illatom son-in-law is not an adopted son in
any sense. In N.R. Raghavachariar's Hindu
Law, 8th Edition, in paragraph 176, it is
stated that an illatom son-in-law loses no
rights of inheritance in his natural family and
the property he takes in the adoptive family is
taken by his own relations to the exclusion of
those of his adoptive father. The position, as
set out in Mulla's Hindu law, 16th Edition is
no different. Regarding the position of an
illatom son-in-law it has been inter alia
observed by Mulla at para 515 (page 534) as
follows:
He does not lose his right of inheritance in his
natural family. Neither he nor his descendants
become coparceners in the family of adoption
though on the death of the adopter he is
entitled to the same rights and the same share
as against any subsequently born natural son
or a son subsequently adopted in accordance 
with the ordinary law. He cannot claim a
partition with the father-in-law and the
incidence of a joint family, such for instance
as right to take by survivorship, do not apply.
In respect of the property or share that he
may get he takes it as if it were his separate
and self-acquired property.
13. Coming to the position in law, the
discussion in the text books, which we have
referred to in some detail earlier, makes it
clear that although an illatom son-in-law has
some rights similar to those of a natural son
born after the adoption of the illatom son-in-
law, his rights are not identical to those of
conferred by law on a son or an adopted son.
To cite two main differences, he does not
succeed to the properties of his father-in-law
by survivorship, but only on account of
custom or an agreement giving him a share in
the property of his father-in-law. His position
is not identical to that of an adopted son
because he does not lose his rights in his
natural family on being taken as an illatom
son-in-law and continues to be entitled to a
share in the property of his natural father. It
is, therefore, difficult to regard an illatom son-
in-law who has attained majority as a major
son for the purposes of Section 4A of the
Ceiling Act.
In
Harihar Prasad Singh and Others V. Balmiki
Prasad Singh and Others
, the Honble Supreme Court of 
India held as follows:
6. Now on whom does the burden rest and 
what is the scope of the evidence that is
admissible ? The earliest decision on the
question regarding proof of custom in variance
of the general law is found in Ramalakshmi
Ammal v. Sivanatha Perumal Sethuraya  
MANU/PR/0027/1872 to the effect:
it is of the essence of special usages
modifying the ordinary law of succession that
they should be ancient and invariable; and it
is further essential that they should Be
established to be so by clear and
unambiguous evidence. It is only by means of
such evidence that the Courts can be assured
of their existence, and that they possess the
conditions of antiquity and certainty on which
alone their legal title to recognition depends.
This passage was quoted by this Court with
approval in its decision in Pushpavathi
Vijayaram v. P. Visweswar (AIR 1964 SC 118) 
and this Court went on further to observe:
In dealing with a family custom, the same
principle will have to be applied, though, of
course, in the case of a family custom,
instances in support of the custom may not be
as many or as frequent as in the case of
customs pertaining to a territory or to the
community or to the character of any estate.
In dealing with family customs, the consensus
of opinion amongst the members of the family,
the traditional belief entertained by them and
acted upon by them their statements, and
their conduct would all be relevant and it is
only where the relevant evidence of such a
character appears to the Court to be sufficient
that a specific family custom pleaded in a
particular case would be held to be proved,
vide Abdul Hussein Khan v. Bibil Sana
MANU/PR/0125/1917.
In Laxmibai (Dead) thr. L.Rs. and Other V.
Bhagwantbuva (Dead) thr. L.Rs. and Others , the Honble
Supreme Court of India held as follows:
7. Custom is an established practice at
variance with the general law. A custom
varying general law may be a general, local,
tribal or family custom. A general custom
includes a custom common to any  
considerable class of persons. A custom which 
is applicable to a locality, tribe, sect or a
family is called a special custom.
Custom is a rule, which in a particular family,
a particular class, community, or in a
particular district, has owing to prolonged
use, obtained the force of law. Custom has the
effect of modifying general personal law, but it
does not override statutory law, unless the
custom is expressly saved by it.
Such custom must be ancient, uniform, 
certain, continuous and compulsory. No
custom is valid if it is illegal, immoral,
unreasonable or opposed to public policy. He
who relies upon custom varying general law,
must plead and prove it. Custom must be 
established by clear and unambiguous 
evidence.
In
S. Sugunamma V. B. Padmamma and Others
, a   
Bench of this Court held as follows:
19. As pointed out by the Supreme Court in
G. Narayanappa v. Government of Andhra  
Pradesh
(1) MANU/SC/0028/1992 : (1992) 1  
SCC 197, an illatom son-in-law is a creature
of custom. The Supreme Court quoted in
the 
said decision
, a passage from Mayne's Hindu 
Law, which records the fact that the custom of
taking a person in illatom adoption prevailed
among Reddy and Kamma castes in the    
Madras Presidency. But the rules that govern
the rights of an illatom son-in-law, as culled
out from various judicial decisions both by
Mayne and by N.R. Raghavachariar are as  
follows:
(i) to constitute a person as illatom, a specific
agreement is necessary,
(ii) after the death of the adopter, such a son-
in-law is entitled to the full rights of a son
even as against natural sons subsequently
born or a son subsequently adopted in the
usual manner,
(iii) an illatom son-in-law has no right to claim
partition with his father-in-law unless there is
an express agreement or custom to that effect,
(iv) an illatom son-in-law cannot be taken to
be an adopted son,
(v) an illatom son-in-law will not lose the
rights of inheritance in his natural family and
similarly the property that he takes in the
adoptive family is taken by his own relations
to the exclusion of those of his adoptive father,
(vi) neither he nor his descendants become
coparceners in the family of adoption though
on the death of the adopter he is entitled to
the same rights and same share as against 
any subsequently born natural son or an
adopted son,
(vii) the rights of an illatom son-in-law are not
identical to those conferred by law on a son or
an adopted son, and
(viii) an illatom son-in-law does not succeed to
the properties of his father-in-law by
survivorship, but only on account of custom
or an agreement giving him a share in the
property of his father-in-law.
In Salekh Chand (Dead) by Lrs. V. Satya Gupta and
Others , the Honble Supreme Court held as follows:
6.
In
Mookka Kone v. Ammakutti Ammal   
MANU/TN/0603/1927
, it was held that where  
custom is set up to prove that it is at variance
with the ordinary law, it has to be proved that
it is not opposed to public policy and that it is
ancient, invariable, continuous, notorious, not
expressly forbidden by the legislature and not
opposed to morality or public policy. It is not
disputed that even under the old Hindu law,
adoption during the lifetime of a male issue
was specifically prohibited. In addition, I have
observed that such an adoption even if made
would be contrary to the concept of adoption
and the purpose thereof, and unreasonable.
Without entering into the arena of controversy
whether there was such a custom, it can be
said that even if there was such a custom, the
same was not a valid custom."
It is incumbent on party setting up a custom
to allege and prove the custom on which he
relies. Custom cannot be extended by analogy. 
It must be established inductively and not by
a priori methods. Custom cannot be a matter
of theory but must always be a matter of fact
and one custom cannot be deduced from  
another. It is a well established law that
custom cannot be enlarged by parity of
reasoning.
Where the proof of a custom rests upon a
limited number of instances of a
comparatively recent date, the court may hold
the custom proved so as to bind the parties to
the suit and those claiming through and
under them; but the decision would not
in
that case
be a satisfactory precedent if in any
future suit between other parties fuller
evidence with regard to the alleged custom
should be forthcoming. A judgment relating to
the existence of a custom is admissible to
corroborate the evidence adduced to prove
such custom in another case. Where, however  
a custom is repeatedly brought to the notice of
the courts, the courts, may hold that the
custom was introduced into law without the
necessity of proof in each individual case.
Custom is a rule which in a particular family
or a particular class or community or in a
particular district has from long use, obtained
the force of law. Coming to the facts of the
case P.W.1 did not speak any thing on the
position either of a local custom or of a
custom or usage by the community, P.W.2,  
Murari Lal claimed to be witness of the
ceremony of adoption he was brother-in-law of
Jagannath son of Pares Ram who is said to 
have adopted Chandra Bhan. This witness 
was 83 years old at the time of deposition in
the Court. He did not speak a word either with
regard to the local custom or the custom of
the community. P.W.3 as observed by the  
lower appellate Court was only 43 years' old at
the time of his deposition where as the
adoption had taken place around 60 years
back. He has, of course, spoken about the
custom but that is not on his personal
knowledge and this is only on the information
given by P.W.2, Murari Lal. He himself did not
speak of such a custom. The evidence of a
plaintiff was thus insufficient to prove the
usage or custom prevalent either in township
of Hapur and around it or in the community of
Vaish. The evidence of D.W.3 refers only to
one instance. From his evidence it cannot be
inferred that Om Prakash had adopted Munna  
Lal who was his real sister's son. As already
pointed out above, the trial court found that
the evidence of D.W.3 was not so clear and
unambiguous as to lead to no other
conclusion except that Munna Lal was son of 
real sister of Om Prakash. Besides, this
solitary instance of adoption of his sister's son
cannot amount to long usage, which has 
obtained the force of law. Mulla has
categorically commented that where the 
evidence shows that the custom was not valid
in numerous instances, the custom could not 
be held to be proved. A custom derives its
force from the evidence from long usage
having obtained the force of law.
All that is necessary to prove is that usage has
been acted upon in practice for such a long
period with such invariability as to show that
it has, by consent, been submitted so as to
establish governing rules of a particular
locality or community.
A custom, in order to be binding must derive
its force from the fact that by long usage it has
obtained the force of law, but the English rule
that "a custom in order that it may be legal
and binding, must have been used long that
the memory of man runneth not to the
contrary" should not be strictly applied to
Indian conditions. All that is necessary to
prove is that the usage has been acted upon
in practice for such a long period and with
such invariability as to show that it has, by
common consent, been submitted to as the  
established governing rule of a particular
locality. A custom may be proved by general
evidence as to its existence by members of the
tribe or family who would naturally be
cognizant of its existence, and its exercise
without controversy, and such evidence may 
be safely acted on when it is supported by a
public record of custom such as the Riwaj-i-
am or Manual of Customary Law.
In yet another decision reported in Hem Singh
and Anr. v. Hakim Singh and Anr.
MANU/SC/0105/1954 : [1955]1SCR44 , this   
Court observed that the custom recorded in
the 'Riwaj-i-am' is in derogation of the general
custom and those who set up such a custom   
must prove it by clear and unequivocal
language. Similarly, when a custom is against
the written texts of the Hindu Law then, one
who sets up such a custom must prove it by a 
clear and unequivocal language ..
Against this backdrop of settled law, if the present case
is viewed and the evidence is weighed, this Court has to
conclude that the pleading is absolutely bald and bereft of
any details whatsoever.  Neither the custom nor the full facts
which would establish the rights of the illatom son-in-law in
this case and in the community of the plaintiffs are pleaded
or proved.    None of the facts which are considered relevant
under
Section 13
of the Indian Evidence Act are proved in
this case in relation to custom.  Even the so called oral
agreement is not deposed about or proved by evidence.
In addition, this Court also notices a very recent
judgment of Honble Supreme Court of India reported in
Ratanlal @ Babulal Chunilal Samsuka v. Sundarabai 
Govardhandas Samsuka , wherein his Lordship Sri  
N.V.Ramana, speaking for the Bench held as follows:
As customs, when pleaded are mostly
at variance with the general law, they should
be strictly proved. Generally, there is a
presumption that law prevails and when the
claim of custom is against such general
presumption, then, whoever sets up the plea
of existence of any custom has to discharge
the onus of proving it, with all its requisites to
the satisfaction of the Court in a most clear
and unambiguous manner. It should be noted 
that, there are many types of customs to name
a few-general customs, local customs and 
tribal customs etc. and the burden of proof for
establishing a type of custom depend on the
type and the extent of usage. It must be
shown that the alleged custom has the
characteristics of a genuine custom viz., that
it is accepted willfully as having force of law,
and is not a mere practice more or less
common. The acts required for the
establishment of customary law ought to be
plural, uniform and constant.  (emphasis supplied)

      In view of this latest  judgment, the earlier reported
judgements and the judgment cited by the counsel for the
respondents, which is based on the salutary principle of no
pleading no evidence this court  holds that the plaintiffs have
failed to plead about the existence of a custom and prove the
custom as required under law.  Neither the pleadings nor the
evidence in the case prove the existence of the custom or the
actual factum of the son in law being an illatom son in law.
Hence, this Court holds that the finding of the lower
Court on issue No.1 is correct.  Neither the existence of the
custom nor the oral agreement is spoken about or proved by
any of the witnesses. There is absolutely no proof that the son
in law was actually an illatom son in law. The plaintiffs case
in OS.No.52 of 1994 is thus bound to fail and this Court
confirms the finding that the plaintiffs are not entitled for a
partition of A schedule property.
So far as the other issues are concerned, neither of the
learned counsels really argued on the same.  This Court also
finds that the Court fee paid is not correct.  A fixed court fee
is paid as if the plaintiff is in joint possession.  PW.1 in his
cross-examination on 223.03.1999 clearly admits as follows:
by the date of filing of the suit, the schedule properties were
not in my possession.  Witness volunteers that the schedule
properties were in the possession of Chenchaiah.  Therefore,
in view of this categorical admission and the documents filed
by the defendants, this Court holds that there is no joint
possession of the property.  Hence, the Court fee is totally
inadequate.
This Court concurs with all the findings of the Court
below and holds that there are no grounds to interfere with
the orders passed in OS.No.52 of 1994.
Further in view of the clear documents of title in the
plaintiffs favour and their possession of the property as
evidenced by the sale deeds, revenue records, pass book etc.,
the plaintiffs in OS.No.8 of 1998 have proved their possession
and so they are entitled to a permanent injunction against the
defendants therein. The learned counsels essentially argued
about the suit OS.No.52 of 1994.  The submissions both oral
and written were in this suit only and both concentrated on
the issue of title.  The issues involved in the second suit for
injunction were not touched upon.  However on a review of
the order passed by the lower Court in this suit, this Court
finds that the same is a reasoned order passed after
considering the facts, pleadings etc.  This Court finds no
reason to interfere with the findings on this suit also.
For all these reasons, this Court is of the opinion that
there are no merits in these two appeals and both the appeals
are, therefore, dismissed.  In the circumstances, no order as
to costs.
As a sequel, miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending in
these appeals shall stand closed.
_________________________    
D.V.S.S.SOMAYAJULU, J     
Date: 25.06.2018