[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Parikala Koteswara Rao vs The State Of A.P.,Rep. By Its Public ... on 6 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 164
Bench:
C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy
,
Gudiseva Shyam Prasad
The Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy and The Honble Sri Justice Gudiseva Shyam Prasad  

Criminal Appeal No.1431 of 2011 

06.08.2018 

Parikala Koteswara Rao   Appellant/accused No.1          

The State of A.P.,Rep. by its Public Prosecutor,High Court, Hyderabad   Respondent
Counsel for the Appellant:Sri C.Sharan Reddy,
                           for Smt.C.V.Vasundhara Reddy 

Counsel for the respondent:Public Prosecutor (AP)

<GIST:
>HEAD NOTE:
? Cases cited:
The Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy 
and 
The Honble Sri Justice Gudiseva Shyam Prasad  
Criminal Appeal No.1431 of 2011 
Date: 06.08.2018 


The Court made the following:
Judgment: (Per the Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy)

        Accused No.1 in Sessions Case No.652 of 2010 on the  
file of the Judge, Family Court cum- Additional District &
Sessions Court, Ongole, filed this Criminal Appeal against
Judgment, dated 08-12-2011, passed therein, whereby he was  
convicted for the offence punishable under
Section 302
IPC
and sentenced to undergo Imprisonment for Life and also to
pay a fine of Rs.1,000/-, and in default of payment of the
same, to suffer Simple Imprisonment for a period of three
months.
For convenience, the parties shall be referred to as they
are arrayed in the Sessions Case.
The case of the Prosecution, as set out in the
chargesheet, is briefly narrated hereunder:
Accused No.1 was the husband and accused No.2 was    
the mother-in-law of one Parikala Madhavi (hereinafter
referred to as the deceased); that they resided in Nalgonda
District for two years, during which period the deceased was
blessed with one child; that when the deceased became 
pregnant for the second time, accused Nos.1 and 2 on
suspicion that she has illegal contacts with PW.6, started
harassing her without giving her proper food; that on
information, PW.2- mother of the deceased took the
deceased along with her to her house; that the deceased gave
birth to the second child, but the accused did  not visit her;
and that on 19-09-2009, both the accused along with PWs.10 
and 11 went to the maternal house of the deceased,
negotiated with her and her parents in the presence of PWs.3
and 4 and took the deceased with them to their house in
Tangutur Village.
That on the night of 20-09-2009, while accused No.2,
PW.10 and PW.11 were sleeping on the roof of the 
neighbouring house, accused No.1 and the deceased were  
alone in their house; that accused No.1 again abused her in
filthy language by suspecting her character; that the deceased
slept in the late hours on that night; that at about 4.00 a.m.
on 21.09.2009, accused No.1 poured kerosene on her body,  
due to which the deceased woke up; that in the meantime,
accused No.1 lit her with match box; that the deceased raised
cries, on hearing which, accused No.2, PW.10, PW.11 and  
their neigbours reached there and witnessed the deceased
burning; that accused No.1 poured water on the body of the
deceased and tried to put off the flames; that PW.10
telephoned to 108 ambulance and shifted the deceased to 
RIMS Hospital for treatment; and that on information, the
parents and relatives of the deceased came to the hospital
and enquired her about the incident.
That on receipt of Ex.P.18-  intimation, PW.17- Head
Constable, Ongole II Town Police Station, visited the
hospital, recorded Ex.P.19- statement of the deceased, and
forwarded the same to P.W-19-Sub-Inspector of Police,
Tangutur Police Station, on the point of jurisdiction; that
PW.19 registered a case in Crime No.145 of 2009 under
Sections 498(A)
and
307
IPC of Tangutur Police Station on
21-09-2009 at 13.00 hours;that on receipt of Ex.P.16-
Hospital Intimation, PW.16- Judicial First Class Magistrate,
Special Mobile Court, Ongole, visited the hospital and
recorded Ex.P.23- Dying Declaration of the deceased; that
while undergoing treatment, the deceased died at 1.50 p.m.,
on the same day; that on receipt Ex.P.25- death intimation,
PW.19 altered the provision of Law from
Section 307
IPC to
302
IPC
and issued express FIRs to all the officers
concerned.
That PW.20- Inspector of Police, S.Konda Circle, who
received the express FIR, sent a requisition to LW.23-
Tahsildar, Tangutur, to conduct inquest over the dead body
of the deceased; that LW.23 and  PW.20 visited the scene of
offence in Tangutur on 22.09.2009 at about 6.00 a.m.,
inspected the scene of offence in the presence of PW.12 and
LW.13- Vailala Sada Siva Sastry, seized the burnt pieces of
the clothes belonging to the deceased along with a match
box and kerosene tin under the cover of Ex.P.14- Scene
Observation Report duly attested by PW.12 and LW.13; that 
thereafter, LW.23 and PW.20 went to the Government  
Hospital, Ongole, secured the presence of the parents of the
deceased and recorded their statements. That LW.23 
conducted inquest over the dead body of the deceased in the
presence of the panchayatdars (PW.13, LW.15- Munnangi   
Isac and LW.16- Bole Lakshmi) under the cover of Ex.P.15-
Inquest report and sent requisition to the Government
Medical officer to conduct autopsy over the dead body of
the deceased with a team of doctors; that PWs.14 and 15-
Civil Assistant Surgeons, who conducted autopsy over the
dead body of the deceased, issued Ex.P.17- Post-Mortem  
Certificate, opining that the cause of death of the deceased
was Hypovolemic shock due to burns; and that PW.20 
secured the presence of PWs.1 to 11 and recorded their
statements.
That during the course of further investigation, on
25.09.2009 at 9.30 a.m., both the accused surrendered before
the Police by admitting their guilt; that PW.20 caused their
arrest after explaining them the grounds of arrest and sent
them for remand.
After completion of the investigation, PW.20 prepared
the charge sheet against the deceased and filed the same in
the Court.
On the basis of the chargesheet and the material
collected during the investigation, the Court below has
framed the following charges:
FIRSTLY:-
That you/A1 being the husband of Perikala Madhavi and 
A2 of you, subjected to cruelty by suspecting her fidelity
and harassed her and you thereby committed an offence 
punishable under
Section 498-A
of the Indian Penal Code;
and within my cognizance;
And I hereby direct that you be tried by this Court on the
said charge.
LASTLY:-
That you/A1, on 21st day of September, 2009 at Tangutur
at about 4-00 am., have committed murder by causing the 
death of deceased Perikala Madhavi by pouring kerosene 
on her body and lit fire and thereby committed an offence,
punishable under
Section 302
of the Indian Penal Code,
and within my cognizance;
And I hereby direct that you be tried by this Court on the
said charge.
As the plea of the accused was one of denial, they were
subjected to trial, during which the Prosecution has
examined PWs.1 to 20, got Exs.P.1 to P.28 marked and   
produced MOs.1 to 4.  On behalf of the accused, DWs.1 and  
2 were examined.
On appreciation of the oral and documentary evidence,
the Court below has disposed of the case in the manner as
noted herein before.
The Court below, while acquitting accused No.2 of the
offence with which she was charged, convicted and
sentenced accused No.1 in the manner as noted  
hereinbefore.
Mr.C.Sharan Reddy, learned Counsel representing 
Mrs.C.Vasundhara Reddy, learned Counsel for the 
appellant/accused No.1, submitted that though PWs.1 to 11 
have turned hostile, the lower Court has wrongly convicted
accused No.1 by relying upon Exs.P.19 and 23- Dying 
Declarations recorded by PW.17 and PW.16 respectively,  
which suffer from contradictions with each other; that both
the Dying Declarations were a result of tutoring by PW.1
and other family members of the deceased as could be 
deciphered from the evidence of PWs.1 and 2- parents of the
deceased; and that the lower Court has failed to realise that it
is wholly unsafe to rely upon Exs.P.19 and 23, which
remained uncorroborated, as none of the family members of
the deceased examined as Prosecution Witnesses, supported   
the version of the deceased as recorded therein.    The
learned Counsel further submitted that from the evidence of
PWs.1 and 2, it is quite manifest that the deceased caught fire
accidentally when she tried to boil milk for her children and
that even in Ex.P.14- Scene Observation Report, the
presence of empty Kerosene tin was referred to and that
PW.14- Civil Assistant Surgeon, who not only treated the
deceased but also conducted the autopsy, did not refer to
kerosene smell, which supports the version of the parents of
the deceased that the death was accidental but not homicidal.
He has further submitted that accused No.1 has proved the
plea of alibi set up by him through the evidence of DWs.1
and 2.
The learned Public Prosecutor for the State of Andhra
Pradesh sought to support of the judgment of the lower
Court.
We have carefully considered the respective
submissions of the learned Counsel for the parties and
perused the record.
This is a case where Exs.P.19 and P.23- Dying 
Declarations of the deceased are pitted against the oral
testimony of the Prosecution Witnesses, who, evidently, for
their own reasons, resiled from their earlier stands and
sought to save the accused.   It is ironical that the Defence
Counsel had to place strong reliance on the testimony of the
Prosecution Witnesses.   In our opinion, no credence could
be given to the evidence of these witnesses for the simple
reason that the Prosecution was able to extract the
contradictions vide Exs.P.1 to P.13, which were the
statements of PWs.1 to 11 recorded by the Police under
Section 161
Cr.P.C., during the course of their investigation.
Though, for obvious reasons, these witnesses have denied
their having given such statements as noted above, the
Prosecution was able to succeed in extracting the
contradictions during the evidence of PW.20.   He has
deposed that initially, he visited the Government Hospital,
Ongole, where he has examined and recorded the statements  
of PWs.1, 2 and 3 and later, he has secured the presence of
PWs.4 to 11, examined them and recorded their statements.  
He has further stated that PWs.1 to 11 stated before him as
in Exs.P.1, P.3 and P.5 to 13 respectively. Interestingly, in
the cross-examination for the accused, no suggestion was put
to this witness that either he has not recorded Exs.P.1, P.3
and P.5 to P.13 from PWs.1 to 11 respectively or that the
contents thereof do not reflect the correct statements made
by the latter.
Ordinarily, when a witness turns hostile, his conduct
evokes serious suspicion.   Therefore, the Court will be very
slow in believing their statements.  In a case where the
Prosecution was able to prove that the Investigation Officer
has recorded the statements of the witnesses, which run
contrary to the evidence given by them in the Court in order
to help the Defence by taking a complete volte-face, such
evidence cannot be taken into consideration even with a
pinch of salt.  The conduct of PWs.1 to 11 in taking a
complete U-turn shows that they were evidently managed by 
accused No.1 for the reasons best known to him.  Therefore,
no credence could be given to the evidence of these
witnesses.
Once we discard the evidence of PW.1 to 11 from 
consideration, there remain Exs.P.19 and P.23- the two
Dying Declarations of the deceased recorded by PWs.17 and  
PW.16 respectively on 21-09-2009.  The incident, allegedly,
occurred at around 4.00 a.m., on 21-09-2009.  While the first
statement was recorded by PW.17 at about 7.50 a.m., at the 
RIMS hospital, Ongole, the second statement was recorded  
by PW.16, who was the Judicial First Class Magistrate,
Special Mobile Court, Ongole, on the same day at about 8.30
a.m.   No doubt, in Ex.P.19, the fitness of the deceased to
make statement was not certified by the Doctor.  Even
PW.17 has not endorsed thereon that the deceased was in a  
fit condition to give statement.  Be that as it may, in Ex.P.23
recorded by PW.16, the Doctor has certified at three places
that the patient is conscious, coherent and in a fit state of
mind to give statement.  The first endorsement marked as
Ex.P.20 was made before preliminary questions were put by 
PW.16.  The second endorsement marked as Ex.P.21 was     
made after preliminary questions were put and answers were
elicited by PW.16 from the deceased and the third
endorsement marked as Ex.P.22 was made by the Doctor    
after PW.16 completed the recording of Dying Declaration.
The learned Counsel for the appellant submitted that
making three endorsements regarding fit state of mind of the
deceased by the Doctor at three places in Ex.P.23- Dying
Declaration is somewhat unusual and it creates a doubt
about the authenticity of Ex.P.23.  We are afraid we cannot
accept this submission.  A perusal of the original of Ex.P.23
would show that the Doctor appeared to be very cautious in
certifying about the mental fitness of the deceased to make
statement and as noted herein before, these endorsements 
were made at three different stages viz., (i) prior to
commencement of preliminary questions by PW.16; (ii) after
completing the preliminary questions and eliciting answers
from the deceased and (iii) after recording her statement.
Therefore, we do not find anything unusual in the Doctor
making three endorsements so as to suspect the authenticity
of Ex.P.23.  A reading of Ex.P.23 clearly reveals that the
deceased was candid and forthright in making her statement
as to the events that have transpired leading to her suffering
burns.  Her statement does not suffer from any
exaggerations or embellishments.
We are not impressed by the submission of the learned
Counsel for the appellant that as per the evidence of PW.1,
at 6.00 a.m., he talked to the deceased at Government
Hospital and that therefore, it could be inferred therefrom
that she was tutored to give a statement.  He also sought to
rely upon the testimony of PW.1 that as the appellant
refused to return the dowry given to him at the time of
marriage, himself and his relatives talked to the deceased and
on the advise given by some of their relatives, the deceased
made the statement against the appellant.  This part of the
evidence of PW.1 cannot be given any credence because he  
did not explain the reason for giving a statement as in Ex.P.1
to the Police.   He completely denied having given any
statement as in Ex.P.1 to the Police except offering an
explanation that as the accused failed to return the dowry,
himself and other witnesses have stated as in Exs.P.1 to P.11.
In our opinion, PWs.1 to 11 have changed their colours like
chameleons to serve their own selfish ends and turned
hostile in order to save the accused.
The law is well settled that unless the Dying
Declaration is a result of tutoring or the same is so unnatural
that no person of ordinary prudence would accept it, the
Court is bound to accept the same in spite of the fact that it
was not lent corroboration by any witness. The dying
declaration is treated as an exception to the hearsay evidence
as it is based on the maxim Nemo oriturus praesumitur mentire,
which means, a man will not like to meet his maker with a lie
in his mouth.  As we are convinced that there is no reason
for the deceased to falsely implicate the appellant, who was
no other than her husband, and in the absence of any
suggestion that she was tutored by her parents or any one
else, we have no reason to disbelieve Ex.P.23.
The submission of the learned Counsel for the
appellant that the latter was in Nalgonda at the time of the
incident and that he went straight to the Hospital is based on
the evidence of DWs.1 and 2.  DW.1 claims to be a 
neighbour and DW.2 claims to be the employer of the
appellant.  DW.1 deposed that on the date of incident, the
appellant went to Nalgonda on Beldar work.  In his cross-
examination, he has stated that the appellant came to the
Government Hospital at Ongole at about 8.00 a.m. DW.2  
deposed that the appellant used to work under him; that
while himself and the appellant were on the way to their
village- Tangutur from Nalgonda, the latter received a phone
call to the effect that his wife was in serious condition and
then, both of them have got down the bus at Ongole and
went to the Government Hospital.  In the cross-
examination, he was unable to state the time at which the
appellant has received the phone call and the place at which
their bus was traveling at that time.  He also failed to state as
to how many hours after receipt of phone call, they reached
Ongole.  Interestingly, neither of these witnesses were
examined by the Police during the investigation.  If both
these witnesses had personal knowledge about the appellant 
not being in the village at the time of the incident, the
appellant would not have failed to take them to the Police
for giving their statements during the investigation.  Indeed,
if the appellant wanted to prove alibi, he would have been
the first defence witness to examine himself and produce
some reliable evidence such as the bus tickets, bus number
etc.  No such attempt was made by him to prove the plea of
alibi.   On top of it, in his examination under
Section 313
Cr.P.C., he has not taken such a stand at all except giving
cryptic answers to every question either as he is not aware or
true or false or nothing.  Though the family members of the
deceased examined as Prosecution witnesses tried to save the 
appellant by stating that he was not present at the house at
the time of the incident, as the appellant himself failed to
come out with such a stand when an opportunity was 
presented to him during his examination under
Section 313
Cr.P.C., no credibility could be attached to the testimony of
those witnesses.
In
Arepalli Chalapathi Rao vs. State of A.P.
, this
Court held as under :
Alibi is a double edged weapon, in that, if the
accused is successful in proving the same, he will be
entitled for acquittal and in a converse case, this plea would
operate as a link in the chain of circumstances for
conviction. The false plea of alibi of the appellant
strengthens the case of the prosecution that he was with
the deceased at the time of the incident and the cause of
her death was especially in his knowledge, thereby, placing
the burden on him to explain the same, as envisaged under
Section-106
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
Dealing with alibi, the Supreme Court in
State of
Maharashtra v. Narisingarao Gangaram Pimple
, held 
that when the presence of the accused at the scene of
occurrence has been established satisfactorily by the
prosecution through reliable evidence, normally the Court
would be slow to believe any counter-evidence to the effect
that that he was elsewhere when the occurrence happened. 
But, if the evidence adduced by the accused is of such a
quality and of such a standard that the Court may entertain
some reasonable doubt regarding his presence at the scene 
when the occurrence took place, the accused would, no 
doubt, be entitled to the benefit of reasonable doubt and that
for that purpose, it would be a sound proposition to be laid
down that in such circumstances, the burden on the accused 
is rather heavy and that it follows, therefore, that strict proof
is required for establishing the plea of alibi.
In
Debar Kundu Rama Krishna Rao v. State of 
West Bengal Crimes
, the Kolkata High Court held that a
false plea of alibi is also an incriminating circumstance giving
an inference of guilt even in a case based purely on
circumstantial evidence.
As regards the submission of the learned Counsel for
the appellant that Kerosene smell was not noted in Ex.P.14-
Scene Observation Report and in the evidence of PW.14, in
our opinion, the same pales into significance once we accept
Ex.P.23- Dying Declaration of the deceased.  The plea that
the death occurred on account of accident is belied by the
recovery of MO.1- plastic can and MO.2- match box from 
the scene of offence.  No explanation was offered by the
defence as to the presence of these two material objects
thereat.
On a careful consideration of the evidence on record
in its entirety, we are of the opinion that the Prosecution has
succeeded in proving the guilt of the accused beyond all
reasonable doubts.  Hence, we do not find any reason to
interfere with the judgment of the lower Court

        In the result, the Criminal Appeal is dismissed.
_____________________    
(C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy, J) 
______________________    
(Gudiseva Shyam Prasad, J)  
Dt: 6th August, 2018