[Cites
3
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
M/S.Avon Lifesciences Limited Medak ... vs M/S.Ashika Credit Capital Ltd. ... on 24 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 60
Bench:
C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy
,
D.V.S.S.Somayajulu
The Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy  and The Honble Sri Justice D.V.S.S.Somayajulu 

OSA.No.30 of 2017  

24.04.2018 

M/s.Avon Lifesciences Limited  Medak District rep. by its Director ---Petitioner


M/s.Ashika Credit Capital Ltd. Kolkata, rep. by its authorized rep.Ms.Subidha Saraf.Respondent
Counsel for the petitioner: Mr.R.Raghunandan
                             for Mr.D.Narendar Naik

Counsel for the respondent:  Mr.Vikram Pooserla


<GIST:
>HEAD NOTE:
?Cases cited:
(1988) 63 CompCas810 (MP)   
AIR 2002 HP 113  
        

The Court made the following:
Judgment:  (per Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna  Reddy)

        This Original Side Appeal is filed against Order, dated
17-08-2017, in CP.No.184 of 2016, whereby the learned
Company Judge, while admitting the Company Petition filed
by the respondent for winding up of the appellant-
Company for not being able to pay the debt, appointed the
Official Liquidator as the Provisional Liquidator.
At the hearing, Mr.R.Raghunandan, learned Senior 
Counsel representing Mr.D.Narendar Naik, learned Counsel 
for the appellant, has fairly submitted that the appellant is
not intending to press the Appeal to the extent it pertains to
admission of the Company Petition.  He further submitted
that the order appointing the Official Liquidator as the
Provisional Liquidator cannot be sustained for two reasons
viz., (i) that the Petition for appointment of Provisional
Liquidator can be entertained and an order thereon can be
passed only after the admission of the Company Petition,
but not along with the admission; and (ii) that neither any
notice was issued nor any reasons, for dispensing with such
notice or for appointing the Provisional Liquidator, have
been assigned.
In support of his submissions, the learned Senior
Counsel has relied upon Sub-Sections (1) and (2) of
Section
450
of the Companies Act, 1956 r/w Rule 106 of the
Companies (Courts) Rules, 1959, and the Judgments in
Kailash Prasad Mishra and others vs.  Medwin 
Laboratory P.Ltd
. and others.  and Himachal  Grameen 
Sanchayka Ltd. and Anr.
Mr.P.Vikram, learned Counsel for the respondent,
sought to sustain the order of the learned Single Judge.
A perusal of the order under Appeal shows that, while
admitting the Company Petition, for the reasons assigned
therein for such admission, the learned Company Judge has 
appointed the Official Liquidator as the Provisional
Liquidator to the appellant- Company.
Sub-Sections (1) and (2) of
Section 450
of the Act and
Rule 106 of the Companies (Court) Rules, 1959 (for short
the Rules) read as under:
Section 450
: Appointment and powers of provisional
liquidator
(1) At any time after the presentation of a winding up
petition and before the making of a winding up order, the
[Tribunal] may appoint the Official Liquidator to be
liquidator provisionally.
(2) Before appointing a provisional liquidator, the
[Tribunal] shall give notice to the company and give a
reasonable opportunity to it to make its representations, if
any, unless, for special reasons to be recorded in writing,
the [Tribunal] thinks fit to dispense with such notice.
Rule 106: Appointment of Provisional Liquidator
(1) After the admission of a petition for the winding-up of
a company by the Court, upon the application of a
creditor, or a contributory, or of the company, and upon
proof by affidavit of sufficient ground for the
appointment of a Provisional Liquidator, the Court, if it
thinks fit, and upon such terms as in the opinion of the
Court shall be just and necessary, may appoint the Official
Liquidator to the Provisional Liquidator of the company
pending final orders on the winding-up petition.  Where
the company is not the applicant, notice of the application
for appointment of Provisional Liquidator shall be given
to the company unless the Court, for special reasons to be
recorded (in writing), dispenses with the notice.
(2) The order appointing the Provisional Liquidator shall
set out the restrictions and limitations, if any, on his
powers imposed by the Court.  The order shall be in
Form No.49, with such variations as may be necessary.
Though Sub-Section (1) of
Section 450
of the Act
permits the Company Court to appoint the Official
Liquidator as the Provisional Liquidator at any time after
the presentation of a winding up petition and before the
making of a winding up order, Rule 106 of the Rules is
specific as to the stage at which such order could be passed.
It clearly refers to the post admission of the petition for
winding up of a Company as the stage for passing of an
order upon such Application to be made by the creditor or
contributory or the Company etc.  Therefore, on the plain
language of the above-reproduced provision, we are of the
opinion that the order admitting the Company Petition and
the order appointing the Provisional Liquidator cannot be
passed contemporaneously and the latter order could be
passed only on an Application filed by a party referred to in
the abovementioned statutory provisions after admission of
the Petition filed for winding up of the Company.
As regards the submission of the learned Senior
Counsel that no notice was given before the Provisional
Liquidator was appointed, the learned Counsel for the
respondent is unable to show that the learned Company 
Judge has issued any notice on the Application filed by the
respondent for appointment of the Provisional Liquidator.
Sub-Section (2) of
Section 450
of the Act ordains that
the Court shall not only give the Company a notice but also
a reasonable opportunity to it to make its representations
against the appointment of the Provisional Liquidator
before such appointment is made.   In our opinion, Sub-
Section (2) of
Section 450
of the Act is incorporated with
the avowed object of allowing the Company to make its
representations before appointing a provisional liquidator,
for, appointment of the Provisional Liquidator is drastic in
nature like appointment of a receiver in respect of the
property in a civil dispute.  As rightly argued by the learned
Senior Counsel, only for special reasons to be recorded in
writing, issue of such notice can be dispensed with.
Admittedly, no such reasons have been assigned for
dispensing with such notice to the appellant.
Yet another reason for setting aside the order of the
learned Company Judge appointing the Provisional
Liquidator is that no reasons whatsoever have been assigned
by the learned Company Judge for appointing the
Provisional Liquidator.
In
Kailash Prasad Mishra and others
(1 supra), the
Madhya Pradesh High Court held as under:
Appointment of a provisional liquidator is a drastic
measure and should not be resorted to except in special
circumstances.  Both on authority and on principle, a
provisional liquidator is not, in general, appointed before
the hearing of the petition for winding up unless the
company is shown to be insolvent or unless the petition is
prosecuted by the company itself or shown to be
unopposed.  Before the court takes this drastic step, it
must be satisfied that such an order is absolutely
necessary.  The appointment of a provisional liquidator
for a company would in effect put a stop to the business
though ultimately the court may refuse to wind up.  A
company may have liabilities exceeding its assets, but still
may have in particular circumstances the capacity to meet
demands from creditors, i.e., it may be in a position to
meet its liabilities as and when they arise.  In such
circumstances a provisional liquidator should not be
appointed.  A provisional liquidator shall also not be
appointed where the appointment is clearly against public
interest.
In
Himachal Grameen Sanchayka Ltd. and Anr.   
vs. Reserve Bank of India
(2 supra), the High Court of
Himachal Pradesh at Shimla held as under:
It is, no doubt, true that an action of winding up of the
company is a serious one and appointment of provisional
liquidator ought to be taken carefully and cautiously.  It is
also correct that, as a rule, before appointing a provisional
liquidator, the court shall issue notice to the company and
afford reasonable opportunity of making a
representation.
Referring to the provisions of
Section 450
of the Act,
the
Court further held
as under:
.A bare reading of the above section makes it
obligatory on the Company Judge to issue notice and
afford opportunity to the company to make
representation before appointment of provisional
liquidator unless, for special reasons to be recorded in
writing, the court thinks fit to dispense with such notice.
For the aforementioned reasons, the order of the
learned Company Judge to the extent of appointing the
Provisional Liquidator cannot be sustained and the same is,
accordingly, set aside while confirming the order under
Appeal to the extent of admission of the Company Petition.
This Order, however, will not preclude the respondent from
pursuing the Application for appointment of Provisional
Liquidator stated to have been pending.
Subject to the liberty given to the respondent as
above, the Appeal is partly allowed to the extent indicated
above.
As a sequel, Application Nos.902 and 1083 of 2017,
filed by the appellant for interim relief, are disposed of.
_____________________    
(C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy, J) 
____________________   
(D.V.S.S.Somayajulu, J) 
Date: 24-04-2018