[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Daulatram Vyas (Died) Per Lrs vs Vallabha Vyas And 3 Others on 29 January, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 9
Author:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
Bench:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU         

A.S.No.2950 of 1999 

29-01-2018 

Daulatram Vyas (died)  per LRs Appellants/Defendants  

Vallabha Vyas and 3 others. Respondents/Defendants   

Counsel for the appellant: M.V. Suresh Kumar, Senior counsel
                            Aravala Sreenivasa Rao
Counsel for the Respondents: S. Sriram, B. Shiva Kumar and  Muralidhar Reddy Katram  

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:

1. AIR 1977 Karnataka 173 
2.  AIR 1992 Delhi 118
3.  2000 (2) ALD 292
4.  AIR 1948 Madras 451 
5.  AIR 1954 Madras 83 
6.  AIR 1971 SC 2184 
7.  2010 (10) SCC 512 
8.  AIR 1983 Calcutta 337
9. 1989 (1) ALT 91
10. 1959 (II) AWR 23
11. 1982 (1) SCC 4 
12.  AIR 1997 AP 53 
13.  (2006) 1 SCC 697 
14. (1995) 2 SCC 543 
15. (1980) 2 SCC 247 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU         

A.S.No.2950 of 1999 

JUDGMENT:
This appeal arises out of the judgment and decree dated
30.10.1999 in O.S.No.41 of 1988 passed by the I Additional
District Judge, Rajahmundry.
2.      For the sake of convenience, as this is a first
appeal, the parties are referred to as the plaintiffs and the
defendants only.
3.      The brief facts of the plaintiffs case are as follows:
i)      Originally, the first plaintiff filed the suit against
the defendants 1 to 4 on the file of the Sub-Court,
Rajahmundry seeking the following reliefs:
a)      partition of plaint A, C and E schedule properties into
three equal shares and for allotment of one such share
to the plaintiff.
b)      for applying partition Act in respect of plaint-B schedule
properties and to allot 1/3rd of the sale proceeds realized
thereon to the plaintiff or for sale of the machinery in
plaint-B schedule and for allotment of 1/3rd of the sale
proceeds to the plaintiff and for division of the vacant
site into three equal shares and for allotment of one
such share to the plaintiff.
c)      for partition of plaint-D schedule property into three
equal shares and for allotment of one such share to the
plaintiff.
d)      for partition of the plaint F-schedule property into three
equal shares and for allotment of one such share to the
plaintiff and separate possession.
e)      for future profits on the share of the plaintiff over the
plaint schedule properties till the date of delivery; and
f)      for costs of the suit.
ii)       Subsequently, the second defendant was
transposed as the 2nd plaintiff as per the orders, dated
30.10.1998 in I.A.No.1269 of 1998 in O.S.No.41 of 1988 and
consequential amendments to the plaint were brought.
iii)      The plaintiffs and the first defendant are brothers
and are the sons of late Parasuram Vyas.  Late Parasuram 
Vyas died in the year 1952 leaving behind the plaintiffs,
1st defendant and their mother-Smt. Somini Bai as his heirs.
Later, Smt. Somini Bai also died in the year 1980 leaving
behind the plaintiffs and the first defendant as her heirs.
After the death of late Parasuram Vyas, the plaintiffs, first
defendant and their mother partitioned the joint family
properties under a registered partition deed dated
06.11.1958.  The E-schedule in the said partition deed was
kept joint in between the plaintiffs and the first defendant.
Out of the same, item-II of the said E-schedule was lost by
them in court litigation and as far as item No.3 is concerned,
the Government acquired the same and the compensation   
amount thereto was shared equally. Excluding the said
properties, the remaining properties of said E-schedule of
partition deed are shown in the present suit as plaint-A
schedule.  The plaintiffs and the first defendant are entitled
each to a 1/3rd share in the plaint-A schedule properties.
iv)       There is an oil Mill at Vizianagaram under the
name and style as M/s. Ganesh Rice and Groundnut Oil Mill 
with machinery, boiler etc.  After the partition, the Rice Plant
was sold away and the proceeds were divided equally in
between the plaintiffs and the first defendant.  The remaining
property of the above said Mill is shown in plaint-B schedule.
The plaintiffs and the first defendant are entitled each to
1/3rd share in the said property. The said property being
machinery with sheds etc., the same cannot be partitioned in
specific into three equal shares.  Therefore, the Partition Act
has to be applied and the said property is to be sold out as a
single Unit and the proceeds realized thereon have to be
divided into three equal shares between the plaintiffs and the
first defendant.
v)      Subsequent to the said partition, the plaintiffs and
the first defendant jointly purchased the properties shown in
the plaint-C schedule with their joint funds and for their
benefit.  Item-II of the plaint C schedule and sub-items
therein along with the other properties were purchased by the
first defendant in court auction held in E.P.No.14 of 1968 in
O.S.No.47 of 1966 of Sub-Court, Vizianagaram.  Out of the
properties so purchased, item-II of C schedule alone was
delivered to the first defendant and the judgment debtors in
the said proceedings are still continuing in possession of the
remaining property covered by the said auction sale.
The plaintiffs and the first defendant are each entitled to
1/3rd share in plaint-C schedule properties.  Sub-item No.1 of
item-II of plaint C schedule was leased out by the plaintiffs
and first defendant to the third defendant on a monthly rental
of Rs.50/- and is in his possession as a tenant. The third
defendant is not paying any rent on the said item.  The first
defendant is residing in sub-item (ii) of item-II of the plaint C
schedule.       The plaint-D schedule movable properties are
jointly owned and to be partitioned in between the plaintiffs
and the first defendant.
vi)       On the death of Smt. Somini Bai in the year 1980,
her properties devolved on the plaintiffs and the first
defendant in equal shares and the plaintiffs and the first
defendant are entitled each to 1/3rd share thereon.
vii)      The father of the plaintiffs and the first defendant
carried on business under the name and style as M/s.
Sivakaran and Harikaran at Rajahmundry. Late Parasuram 
Vyas purchased in or about 1922, a vacant site and out-
house and later constructed a building thereon and named it
as Sivahari Bhavan.  His pious wish and desire was that the
said building should be exclusively used for the use of visiting
pilgrims from Marwar on a nominal rental.  While so, the
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department   
initiated proceedings for a declaration that the aforesaid
building is a pubic Trust.  Later, the Department also filed a
suit in O.S.No.1 of 1972 on the file of the District Court,
Rajahmundry for a declaration that the said building in a
public Trust.  At the time when the partition was effected in
between the plaintiffs and the first defendant, as the above
proceedings were pending, the plaintiffs and the first
defendant, on the valuable advice of their then family
advocate late Sri I. Suryanarayana Murthy, nominally put the
said building to the share of the first defendant, he being the
eldest of the three brothers with the specific understanding
and arrangement that the first defendant should continue to
implement the pious wish and desire of their late father.
It was also specifically understood in between them that in
case the above building is not put to the use as desired by
their father, the same should be divided equally in between
them.
viii)   Subsequent to the finalization of the proceedings
initiated by the Endowments Department, the first defendant
leased out a portion of the said building to the fourth
defendant for the purpose of running a lodge, which was quite
inconsistent with the pious wish and desire of his father.
Since the first defendant deviated from the purpose for which
the F schedule building was to be utilized, the plaintiffs are
entitled to file the suit for eviction of the fourth defendant
therefrom and for partition of the said building into three
equal shares and for allotment of two such shares to the
plaintiffs.
4.      The first defendant filed a written statement
contending as follows:
a)      He denied that Hari Bhavan building shown in F
schedule of the plaint was nominally allotted to his share.
He is not aware of the specific understanding pleaded in para
10 (b) of the plaint. The lease in favour of the fourth
defendant is true, valid and binding. Initially,
Sri Suryanaraya Murthy put the F schedule property under
the head of the items of the properties that were kept joint,
but when Poosram Bajaj brought to his notice that it was
allotted to the share of the first defendant, the advocate
struck it off and clearly put it to the share of the first
defendant. Therefore, it was definitely understood that
Sivahari Bhavan was given to him with absolute rights.
b)        The first defendant, therefore, prays for a decree
(a) for partition of A, C and E schedule properties into three
equal shares and for allotment of one such share to the first
defendant; (b) for applying
Partition Act
in respect of
machinery in plaint B schedule and sell the machinery and
for payment of share of the first defendant and for partition of
vacant site and for delivery of the first defendants share;
(c) for partition of plaint D schedule except item-3, into three
equal shares and for allotment of one such share to the first
defendant or their value; (d) for partition of silver and gold
ornaments in the custody of the plaintiffs belonging to the
three brothers;  (e) for an account of the business carried on
and rents realized by the 2nd plaintiff in respect of plaint B
schedule property and for payment of the first defendants
share; (f) for an account of the rents realized by the 2nd
plaintiff in respect of annexures I & V since 1974 and for
payment of the share of the first defendant; and (g) for
dismissing the suit in respect of F schedule property with
costs of the first defendant.
5.      The 3rd defendant a filed written statement
contending that he was inducted as a tenant in the shop by
the 1st defendant. He has not committed any default in
payment of the rent to the 1st defendant. He is not a
necessary party to the suit. Therefore, the suit may be
dismissed against him.
6.      The 4th defendant filed written statement
admitting that he is the tenant of the portion of F schedule
under a lease deed obtained by him from the 1st defendant.
He is not aware of the disputes between the plaintiffs and the
1st defendant.  Only a portion of the F schedule building was
set apart for the pilgrims from Marwar etc.  The rest of the
building is being let out since a long time.  The lease in favour
of the 4th defendant is valid and is binding on the plaintiffs
and the 1st defendant.
7.      Based on the above pleadings, the lower Court
framed the following issues for trial:
i)      Whether the plaintiff is entitled to ask for partition
of ACDEF into three equal shares and allot one
such share to the plaintiff and in respect of D
schedule either one share or its equal value?
ii)     Whether the plaintiff is entitled to ask for partition
of B schedule by applying partition Act dividing
into 3 equal shares and to allot 1/3rd sale
proceeds?
iii)    Whether the plaintiff is entitled for future profits?
iv)     Whether D schedule is not correct? If so, what is
the correct schedule?
v)      Whether the 1st defendant and 3rd and 4th
defednants are not necessary parties to the suit?
vi)     Whether the E schedule was allotted for the
benefit of the 1st defendant?
vii)    To what relief?
8.        For the plaintiffs, PWs.1 to 4 were examined and
Exs.A.1 to A.3 were marked.  The 1st defendant was examined  
as DW.1 and Exs.B.1 and B.2 were marked for the  
defendants.
9.      The lower Court after considering the evidence on
record and the submissions granted a preliminary decree for
the purpose of the plaint schedule properties into three equal
shares, which is as follows:
i)      that item-I of the plaint C schedule, item-3 of
plaint D schedule, items I, II and III of the plaint E
schedule and plaint F schedule properties be divided
into three equal shares and the plaintiffs 1 and 2 be
put in separate possession of the 1/3rd share of each.
It is this judgment that is impugned in the present
appeal.
10.       Heard Sri M.V. Suresh Kumar, learned senior
counsel & Aravala Sreenivasa Rao, learned counsel appearing 
for the appellants and Sri S. Sriram, B. Shiva Kumar and
Muralidhar Reddy Katram, learned counsels appearing for the
respondents.
11.     The essential question that is urged in the appeal
and is argued by the learned counsel for the appellants and
respondents is about the F-schedule of the plaint, which is a
building bearing door No.7/186 situated in the site of 1147
square yards or 960.04 square meters. The focus of all the
learned counsels is on this property alone.  For the rest of the
properties, there is no dispute at all and thus, this judgment
is also being confined to the points urged with regard to F-
schedule property only.
12.       The documents marked in this case are also
limited. The facts which are not really disputed by either of
the learned counsel are as follows:
The father of the plaintiffs and the contesting first
defendant died in 1952.  The parties belonged to a trading
family which had extensive assets and businesses. The family
members decided to partition the properties both movable
and immovable and in fact completed the partition in 1958.
For the sake of partition, the plaintiffs and the contesting first
defendant relied upon the advice and guidance of Sri I.
Suryanarayana Murthy, a counsel of their family. Both the
parties admit that Sri Suryanarayana Murthy was a lawyer of
repute and a man of integrity and knowledge. He was the
author of Exs.A.1 and A.3, which are the two critical
documents involved in this case. The F schedule property is a
building in Rajahmundry town.  It was constructed by the
father of the plaintiffs and the contesting first defendant and
was used as a transit house/choultry for people coming from
the Marwar Region of Rajasthan. The plaintiffs family
emigrated from that area and settled in Andhra Pradesh.
Therefore, the father of the plaintiffs by name Parasuram
desired and used this property for use of travelers from
Marwar region.
13.     It is the case of the plaintiffs that the Hindu
Religious and Charitable Endowments Department initiated 
proceedings against this building for a declaration that it is a
public trust. They also filed a suit O.S.No.1 of 1972 for a
declaration that the said building is a trust.  As per the
plaintiffs, when the partition was being effected in 1958, as
per the advice of their family advocate, late I. Surya Narayana
Murthy, the building was nominally kept in the name of first
defendant with a specific understanding that the first
defendant should continue to implement the pious wish of the
plaintiff and use the building for the pilgrims of marwar
region only.  It is the case of the plaintiffs that as per the said
understanding if the first defendant deviates from the said
wish, the same should be partitioned amongst the family
members.
14.     On the other hand, it is the case of the contesting
first defendant that in the partition deed of 1958, this
building was specifically allotted to him.  The said deed was a
registered deed.  Therefore, he states that he is the absolute
owner of the same.  It is also asserted by him that there is no
understanding at all to the effect that if the building is not
used as desired by the father, it would be thrown back into
the common pool.
15.       The lower Court rightly clubbed the issues 1, 4 &
6 for common discussion and decision.  There is no dispute
amongst the parties about the other items except the
F-schedule property. It is also to be noted here from the
evidence that there was a decision to partition the properties
and a partition was effected.  Thereafter, a draft partition
deed was prepared, which is marked as Ex.A.1. After the draft
was corrected and finalized, the partition deed was duly
registered.  A certified copy of the registered partition deed is
marked as Ex.A.3. It is also important to note that the parties
to Exs.A.1 and A.3 kept certain items of their family
properties as joint for various reasons including the litigation
pending.  It is these properties that are kept joint in 1958 and
the properties left behind by the mother on her death that are
the subject matter of the present suit in addition to the F
schedule.
16.     The properties that are kept joint are not in
dispute.  In the initial draft that is prepared and marked as
Ex.A.1, the present F-schedule property was included as a
joint property.  However, the same is struck off clearly in the
draft i.e., it is excluded from the properties kept joint.  Later,
in the registered partition deed, the F-schedule property is
allotted to the first defendant.  The said deed of partition was
registered in the year 1958.  The present suit was filed in the
year 1988 raising a serious dispute about the F-schedule
properties.
17.     Now, the question that falls for consideration and
which is the crux of the appeal is issue No.6, which is to the
effect: whether the F-schedule property was allotted to the
first defendant. Based on the submissions made by both the
learned counsel, the questions that arise for determination
are:
a)     whether the plaintiffs have succeeded in
proving that there is an oral understanding
amongst the family members to the effect
that if the pious wish of the father is not
carried out, the property would be thrown
into the common pool despite the recitals of
the registered deed of partition (Ex.A.3); and
b)      whether oral evidence can be given of an
understanding contrary to the terms of
Ex.A.3 registered partition deed.
18.       As far as point No.1 mentioned above is
concerned, the burden is squarely on the plaintiffs to prove
that there is an oral understanding as pleaded by them in
paragraph-10(b) of the plaint and that the property was kept
nominally in the name of the first defendant.
19.       It is the specific submission of the learned senior
counsel for the appellants that the plaintiffs have accepted
the entire contents of Ex.A.3 partition deed. The same was
acted upon and each party has taken their respective shares.
From 1958 till 1988, there was no challenge to the terms and
conditions of the deed except with the present plaint. The
learned counsel therefore submits that the conduct of the
plaintiffs estopps them from challenging the terms of the
deed.  It is also his submission that the claim of the plaintiffs
is barred by time as more than 30 years expired from the date
on which the terms of the deed have been entered into. It is
also his alternative submission that both the parties have
made it clear in their evidence that in the year 1976 the F
schedule property was leased out to the third parties and was
no longer used by the parties for which it was intended as per
the plaintiffs case.  From 1976 till 1988 when the present
suit was filed, the plaintiffs did not take any steps to
challenge the so-called action.  Therefore, the learned counsel
submits that the plaintiffs case is barred by the principles of
estoppel/acquiescence; standing by apart from the law of
limitation. According to the learned counsel for the
appellants, the plaintiffs have filed a suit for partition in order
to avoid a bar of limitation.  As per him to get over the bar of
limitation a suit for a declaration was not filed. According to
the learned counsel,
Article 59
of the
Limitation Act
applies
and plaintiffs should have sued for a declaration for the
cancellation of Ex.A.3.  From 1975 onwards all the plaintiffs
were aware that the property was not used for the alleged
purpose for which it is meant for.  Therefore, the suit is filed
as barred by time as per him.
20.     On the other hand, the learned counsel for the
respondents argued that there is need to file a suit for
declaration that the F-schedule property is kept nominally
and that the contents of the deed are not correct. The learned
counsel relying upon
Syed Rasool and others v. Mohammad   
Moulana
,
Sanjay Kaushish v. D.C. Kaushish and others
,
Seera Simhachalam and another v. Pediredla Simhachalam   
and others
,
Sahul Hameed Rowther v. K.C.P. Mohideen  
Pichai
,
Khata Chinna Eswarareddi and others v. Kukkala
Reddigari Venkatachelamma Reddi
contends that there is no 
need to file a suit for declaration since the property was kept
nominally in the name of the first defendant in view of the
pending litigation on the said property.
21.       A reading of the case law cited by the learned
counsel for the respondents, clearly shows that these cases
relate to documents or decrees which are being challenged as
sham or nominal or vitiated. They relate to cases where the
entire document was challenged as a nominal document or  
cases where the document was found to be void.  None of the
above cases can be applied to the facts of the present case,
because the entire document of 1958 is acted upon and it is
the plaintiffs case that only one particular part of the
property is kept nominally in the name of first defendant.  All
the parties to Ex.A.3 acted upon the same; divided the
properties and enjoyed the same as the owners.  Therefore,
this Court is of the opinion that the judgments cited by the
learned counsel are not really applicable to the facts and
circumstances of the present case.  It is also argued that
merely because a property is kept nominally in the name of a
person, it does not become void.  It is at best a voidable
document, which has to be necessarily set aside or avoided
through a proper decree by filing a suit for a declaration.  In
this case also, this Court is of the opinion that even if the
theory advanced by the plaintiffs is found to be true and the F
schedule property is found to be kept in the name of the first
defendant nominally, the proper relief to be sought is a
declaration that the F-schedule property was kept nominally
in the name of the first defendant and for a consequential
relief of partition. This Court agrees with the submissions of
the learned counsel for the appellants that the form of suit is
not correct.
22.       As a continuation to this, the learned senior
counsel argued that since the property was put in his client
possession in 1958, the suit filed in 1988 is hopelessly barred
by time. In reply thereto, the learned counsel for the
respondents argues that a right to seek a partition is
admittedly recurring right or a permanently recurring right.
The learned counsel relied upon
Syed Shah Ghulam Ghouse   
Mohiuddin and others v. Syed Shah Ahmed Mohiuddin   
Kamisul Quadri
(died) by LRs and others  for this proposition.
The learned senior counsel distinguished the case and drew
the attention of this Court to the facts of the said case
wherein it is found that the fraud in the cited case was
discovered on 13.08.1938 and the suit was filed on
24.07.1941.  Therefore, the Court held that the case is not
barred by time.  Even otherwise, that was a case of fraud and
fraud vitiates everything. Therefore, the learned counsel
submits that the same cannot be equated to the case of this
nature.
23.     It is also the submission of the learned counsel for
the appellants that if the right to seek partition can be treated
as a periodically recurring right, the period of limitation is
three years as per
Article 104
of the
Limitation Act
. The right
to sue accrued to the plaintiffs in 1976 when the so-called
understanding was breached by the defendants and the 
property was leased commercially infringing upon the
plaintiffs rights as per the oral understanding.  The learned
counsel also argues that by clever pleading F schedule is
included in the suit with properties that are left joint in the
partition deed.  He argues that even if the earlier submissions
are not accepted,
Article 113
of the
Limitation Act
would
apply and right to sue according to the plaintiffs came in the
year 1976, when they realized that the first defendant has
allegedly misused the building by renting it out commercially.
This Court finds force in the argument of the learned counsel
for the appellants. Even if the theory advanced by the
plaintiffs of an oral understanding contrary to the terms of
the deed is accepted; by the year 1976, they were aware of the
fact that the property was used commercially and contrary to
the fathers desire.  Therefore, the suit should have been filed
within three years therefrom when the right to sue has
accrued as per
Article 113
of the
Limitation Act
.
24.     Both the learned counsel argued on the issue of
limitation.  Even though no specific plea is taken in the lower
court about the bar of limitation,
Section 3
of the Limitation
Act, 1963 casts a duty upon this Court to reject the case on
the ground of limitation. Therefore, after hearing all the
submissions of the learned counsel on the matter of
limitation, this Court is of the opinion that the frame of the
suit is wrong and that the claim relating to F schedule is
barred by limitation under
Article 113
of the
Limitation Act
.
25.     The learned counsel for the appellants also
strongly attacked the finding of the lower Court which held in
para-34 of the judgment that there is no cogent evidence to
show that the F-schedule property was enjoyed with absolute
rights by the first defendant from 1958 (Ex.A.3).  The learned
counsel for the appellants pointed out that the lower Court
totally ignored the evidence that was available on record.
He drew the attention of this Court to cross-examination of
PW.1 which is to the following effect:
It is true that after partition under Ex.A.3, we the three
brothers submitted individual income tax returns as per the
share allotted under Ex.A.3.  It is true that myself and 1st
plaintiff did not show our 1/3rd share in the F schedule in
our income tax returns.  Even after Ex.A.3, the accounts
maintained by us disclose that we are enjoying plaint F
schedule property jointly.  One staff member wrote the
accounts in Marvadi language. We did not produce the
accounts.  The accounts are with me.  I do not remember
till which year the accounts were being maintained
regarding the plaint F schedule property.  We the three
brothers had only one auditor even after Ex.A.3.  I do not
know till what date.  Now we are submitting our income tax
returns individually through separate auditors.  Myself and
the 1st plaintiff are having only one auditor.
..........................................     
We came to know that D-1 leased out portion of the plaint
F schedule property in the year 1976, and we the plaintiffs
informed the same to our advocate Suryanarayanamurty.  
I do not know whether the draft of the lease deed was
prepared by our advocate Suryanarayanamurty.  Our 
advocate told us that he would enquiry with D-1.  I do not
know the whereabouts of D-1 by that time, but he might be
residing at Vizianagaram, Rajahmundry or Secunderabad.  
The distance between our house and plaint F schedule 
property is about 4 furlongs.  We did not question D4 a to
why he took a portion of plaint F schedule property on
lease from D-1, when the property is our joint family
property. ..
Myself and 1st plaintiff never issued any notice to D-1 prior
to the filing of this suit demanding our share in the income
and in F schedule property.
He, therefore, concludes that the plaintiff a) said that the
accounts show the alleged joint enjoyment but he did not file
the same nor did he examine the auditor, b) did not file any
evidence to show that he questioned the deviation.  The
learned counsel points out that if it was the intention that the
F-schedule property is being enjoyed by the first defendant
contrary to the terms of the deed, a duty is cast upon the
plaintiffs to immediately protest about the same and his
inaction leads to the conclusion that he was aware that the F
schedule is allotted to the first defendant absolutely. The
failure to file the accounts also leads to this conclusion as per
him. In addition, the learned counsel also points out the chief
examination of first defendant at page No.115, which reads as
follows:
I met all the litigation expenses and was also enjoying the
rents.  As per the entries in the Municipal Record the F
schedule property stands in my name.  PWs.1 and 2 never  
demanded me any share in the rents treating the property
as joint family property.  PWs.1 and 2 never demanded me 
to pay their shares of rent through late Sri I.
Suryanarayana Murthy.
The learned counsel points out that there is no cross-examination
on this important affirmation on oath by the first defendant as
DW.1.  He argues and rightly says that failure to cross-examine
amounts to an admission.  The decision of the Honble Supreme 
Court of India in Man Kaur (dead) by LRs. v. Hartar Singh
Sangha  and the decision of the Calcutta High Court in
Traders Syndicate v. Union of India
are very relevant here.
The cross examining counsel clearly had a duty to cross
examine on these aspects.  The failure to do so leads to the
conclusion that the plaintiff cannot dispute the statement.
26.     This Court also agrees with the submissions made 
by the learned counsel for the appellants and holds that the
lower Court committed an error in para-34 of the judgment
that the first defendant has not filed any evidence to show
that he has been enjoying the property.  The fact that the first
defendant alone has leased the property in 1976 to the other
defendants is a factor which shows that he exercised the right
of ownership. Leasing of property through the registered
lease deed is in view of this Court an exercise of a right of
ownership of the first defendant.  The plaintiffs admission is
that the said property is only 100 feet away from their
residence and they were aware of the lease deed executed in
1976 itself.  This Court agrees with the submission that the
first defendant cannot be called upon to prove that he was
enjoying the property absolutely.  It is for the plaintiffs who
are challenging the contents of the deed to show that the
property was kept nominally in his name and that they have
still got some rights in the property entitling them to relief
from this Court.  This Court therefore holds that the finding
of the lower court on the enjoyment of the F-schedule
property by the first defendant is incorrect. The first
defendant asserted as mentioned earlier that the property was
mutated in his name; that he was using the same as the
owner; and that he has converted the same and gave it on
lease in 1976. PW.1 also admits in his cross examination that
the first defendant alone attended the enquiry before the
Additional Commissioner of Endowments Department.   
He deposed as follows on this issue:
It is true that by the date of Ex.A.1, the Endowments
Department was disputing that the choultry was a public
choultry and the matter was pending enquiry before
Additional Commissioner, Endowments, Rajahmundry.    
I do not remember whether we three brothers attended the
enquiry before the Additional Commissioner, Endowments  
Department, Rajahmundry.  I did not attend the enquiry.
D.1 attended the enquiry.
Therefore, it is clear that the first defendant was doing all that
is necessary to enable the Court to conclude that he was
enjoying the property and safeguarding the same.  Hence, the
finding of the lower Court on this point is incorrect.
27.     The most critical issue on which both the learned
counsel argues at length is about the so-called oral
understanding that was pleaded by the plaintiffs.   It is the
case of the plaintiffs that the F-schedule property was kept
nominally in the name of the first defendant with an
understanding that the same shall be allotted equally
amongst the brothers if the building is not used as desired by
the father.  This averment in the plaint was clearly denied by
the first defendant. Therefore, the following questions would
arise on this issue a) whether the plaintiffs proved that there
was an oral understanding, b) whether the evidence of the
oral understanding can be given, since there is registered
partition deed of 1958 signed by all the parties concerned and
whether
Section 92
of the Evidence Act permits the same.
28.       A reading of the entire evidence makes it clear that
the plaintiffs did not discharge their burden of proving that
the property was kept nominally in the name of the first
defendant. As per the law on the subject and ultimately as
the suit is for a partition, meaning thereby establishing a
right over the property, the burden is heavily on the plaintiff
to prove the same.  There is absolutely no evidence of this
oral understanding. PW.1 also admits that except his oral
evidence, there is no documentary evidence to prove that the
F-schedule property was allotted to the first defendant.
He also admits that he and 1st plaintiff did not ask their
lawyer to get a document executed for allotting F schedule
property nominally in the name of first defendant.  The other
testimony available is that of PW.2  he says he was told by
plaintiff and first defendant that plaint F schedule was kept
nominally in the name of first defendant. His evidence is thus
not reliable. The evidence available on record also shows that
the first defendant exercised rights of ownership and was
openly enjoying the property from 1958 till 1988 when the
present suit was filed.  This enjoyment of the property does
not support the theory that he is the nominal owner and not
the real owner.
29.     The other and larger important question is
whether the plaintiffs can introduce evidence to contradict or
vary the terms of a written document and the effect of
Section
92
of the Indian Evidence Act. The learned counsel for the
appellants relied upon Bonam Venugopal Rao and others v. 
Tavvala Veerabhadra Rao and others  and a Division Bench 
of this Court in
Bolumal Dharmdas v. Venkatachelapathi
Rao
and argues that the oral evidence contrary to the terms
of the document cannot be introduced.
In Bonam Venugopal 
Raos case (7 supra), the learned single Judge of this Court
held that when the validity of the document has not been
impeached, it is not open to the plaintiffs to lead any evidence
contrary to the recitals in the document.
In
Bolumal
Dharmdass
case (8 supra), the Division Bench of this Court
discussed
Section 92
of the Indian Evidence Act clearly along
with the exceptions provided therein and clearly held that the
object of Section 92 cannot be nullified by the exceptions to
that section.  The exceptions or proviso to the section are not
meant to render the section itself nugatory. The Division
Bench clearly held that in case the terms of the document
impeached are not clear, then oral evidence can be introduced
to explain the same.  But if the meaning of the words is clear,
the Division Bench held that no evidence can be introduced.
30.
In reply thereto, the learned counsel for the
respondents relying upon
Gangabai v. Chhabubai
,
Habeeb 
Khan and others v. Valasula Devi and others
contends that
as the document was meant to be nominal, there is no bar to
introduce the oral evidence.
A close perusal of the judgment
reported in
Gangabais
case (11 supra) shows that while
dealing with Section 92 proviso (1) of
Indian Evidence Act
, the
Honble Supreme Court held that sub-section (1) is not
attracted when the transaction recorded in the document was
never intended to be acted upon.  Such a question would
arise when the party asserts that there was a different
transaction altogether than what is recorded and the
document was intended to be of no consequence whatsoever.  
This is a case of an entire document being challenged.
Similarly, in
Habeeb Khans
case (10 supra) also, the learned
single Judge of this Court was called upon to decide whether
the sale deeds and agreement of sale
in that case
were actual
sale deeds and agreement of sale or nominal documents and  
in reality they were anomalous mortgage deeds.
The learned
single Judge also relied upon
Gangabais
case (11 supra) and
came to the conclusion that the oral evidence can be given if
the recorded transaction was not meant to be what it says.
The learned single Judge went into the terms of the document
and came to the conclusion that the document in question
although styled as a sale deed is in reality an anomalous
mortgage.
31.       In the case on hand, the entire document is
accepted as held by both the parties and only in the case of
F-schedule property it is argued that it is kept nominally in
the name of the first defendant. The learned counsel for the
appellants argued that as per
Section 92
of the Evidence Act,
no oral evidence can be allowed to be admitted for the
purpose of contradicting or varying the terms of the deed. He
therefore argues that Section 92 is a clear bar to consider the
oral evidence on record.  The judgment of
Gangabhais
case
(11 supra) was considered in
R. Janakiraman v. State
, and
the following extract from para-24 is an answer to the
respondents arguments as per the learned counsel for the
appellants.
24.    We may cull out the principles relating to
Section 92
of the
Evidence Act, thus:
i) Section 92 is supplementary to Section 91 and corollary to the
rule contained in Section 91.
ii) The rule contained in Section 92 will apply only to the parties
to the instrument or their successors-in-interest. Strangers to the
contract (which would include the prosecution in a criminal
proceeding) are not barred from establishing a contemporaneous
oral agreement contradicting or varying the terms of the
instrument. On the other hand, Section 91 may apply to
strangers also.
iii) The bar under Section 92 would apply when a party to the
instrument, relying on the instrument, seeks to prove that the
terms of the transaction covered by the instrument are different
from what is contained in the instrument. It will not apply where
anyone, including a party to the instrument, seeks to establish
that the transaction itself is different from what it purports to be.
To put it differently, the bar is to oral evidence to disprove the
terms of a contract, and not to disprove the contract itself, or to
prove that the document was not intended to be acted upon and
that intention was totally different.
32.       The learned counsel also drew the attention of this
Court to proviso (2) of Section 92 which states that the
existence of a separate oral agreement on a matter on which
the document is silent and which is not inconsistent with the
terms can be proved. In considering whether or not this
proviso applies, the Court should consider the degree of
formality of the document as per the learned counsel.
33.       The learned counsel also submits that the proviso
is not applicable because the document is not silent on the
matter of allotment of F-schedule property.  It is shown to be
clearly allotted to the first defendant. It was initially included
and later deleted from the draft. He therefore submits that
this is not a silent matter on which evidence can be given. He
also argued that oral evidence of an understanding would be
inconsistent with the recorded terms, because the alleged oral
agreement is to the effect that if the first defendant acts in a
particular manner, the property would be taken out of the
partition and thrown back into the common pool. The learned
counsel submits that this is totally inconsistent with what is
recorded in the document.  Therefore, he urges that an oral
agreement to vary the terms of the document and oral
evidence which is inconsistent with the terms of document
cannot be taken.  This Court finds force in the contention of
the learned counsel for the appellants and holds that the oral
evidence to take the property out of the partition deed and to
bring it back into the common pool would also be
inconsistent with its terms and therefore, the same cannot
be considered.
34.       The later half of the proviso to which the learned
counsel drew the attention of this Court is the degree of
formality of the document. In this case, it is clear that the
parties were all experienced businessmen.  They had decided
to partition the property.  They have in fact partitioned the
property.  They met a senior counsel who, as stated by all,
drafted the deed. The initial draft of the partition deed was
prepared (Ex.A.1). The F-schedule in that was struck off.
Thereafter, the formal deed was registered in 1958 and acted
upon by all the concerned. A registered deed carries a
presumption that the transaction is a genuine one. Only in
1988 (almost 30 years later) was the challenge mooted to a
formal registered partition deed. The learned counsel also
argued basing on the last two lines of the proviso that the
document in question is very formal document executed after
a great deal of thought.  He also points out that a reading of
the document reveals that whenever there was a property
belonging to the family that was the subject matter of a
dispute, the same was very clearly mentioned in the deed
itself, wherein it is clearly described that certain items are
kept joint because of the pendency of the litigation.  He points
out to the case pending with regard to item No.1 in schedule-
C where a case is filed in the Court of Munsif, Vijayawada and
an injunction not to use the furnace as also the eviction
petition pending in the Court of Secunderabad Rent
Controller were mentioned.  The learned counsel also points
out that it is very clearly mentioned in the document that the
respective sharers will pay the taxes of Schedule ABCD
properties from 01.01.1958 and on A1, B1, C1 properties
from the date of the document. Similarly, expenses towards
income tax, sales tax etc. shall be borne equally up to the
date of deviation and from there onwards, it will be borne by
each party separately.  In case of this F schedule property, if
the litigation or claim of the Endowment Department was an
issue, it would have been included in the list of properties
kept joint due to litigations; as per the learned counsel.
He also points out that as per the terms in the deed, the
sharers shall enjoy the properties forever with absolute rights.
There shall not be any dispute amongst them as to the
differences in the quantum of share etc.  The document as
per the learned counsel clearly is a very formal document,
well thought out; reasoned and ultimately registered with the
consent of all the parties.  It is his contention that the oral
evidence cannot be introduced or considered about its terms.
This Court is of the clear opinion that the plaintiffs in the suit
did not prove the nominal nature of the document and even
otherwise the evidence of an oral understanding contrary to
the terms of Ex.A.3 cannot be considered.
35.       For all the above reasons, this Court is of the
opinion that the oral evidence to prove the nominal nature of
a particular part of the deed cannot be entertained and the
lower Court committed an error in relying upon the so-called
oral agreement contrary to Section 92 proviso (2) of the
Indian
Evidence Act
.
36.        The other contentious issue is about the court fee
paid. It is the contention of the learned counsel for the
appellants that the suit for a declaration should be filed and
that the court fee should be paid on the market value.  On the
other hand, it is the contention of the learned counsel for the
respondents that the possession of one joint owner is
possession of all the joint owners and that therefore, as the
property is yet to be divided, the mere fact that one party is
not in joint possession does not lead to the conclusion that
there has been an ouster. The learned counsel relying upon
Annasaheeb Bapusaheb Patil v. Balwant
and
Neelavathi v. 
N. Natarajan
, argues that the court fee paid is correct.
A close reading of these cases, particularly
Neelavathis
case
(12 supra) reveals that the Supreme Court held that as long
as the right to a share and the nature of the property as joint
is not disputed the law presumes that he is in joint
possession.
37.       In the case on hand, on review of the entire
evidence, it is clear that as far as the F-schedule property is
concerned, the plaintiffs are not in joint possession with the
first defendant.  Their possession is disputed and their right
to a share is disputed.  The first defendant was enjoying the
F-schedule property as the owner.  It is his act of leasing the
property to the 4th defendant that has led to the present
litigation. The 4th defendant began to run a commercial
establishment therein.  The first defendant also asserted in
his evidence that municipal taxes are in his name only. Thus,
there is no evidence of joint possession of F schedule after
the partition in 1958. Therefore, as the reading of the entire
evidence shows that the plaintiffs and the first defendant are
not in joint possession, this Court is of the opinion that the
court fee paid is incorrect to seek a relief against F schedule.
38.       For all the above reasons, this Court holds that
the lower Court did not correctly decide the matter with
regard to the F schedule property.  The findings of the lower
Court are contrary to the law and therefore, this Court holds
that the judgment of the lower Court should be set aside as
far as it relates to the plaint-F schedule property only.  The F
schedule is held to be the property of the first defendant
alone. As far as the other aspects of the impugned judgment
are concerned, apart from F schedule and the court fee paid,
there is no dispute about the same.  Hence, the same are not
touched upon or discussed.
39.       With the above observations and modification, the
appeal is partly allowed. The F schedule is held to be the
property of the first defendant alone and cannot be
partitioned. The rest of the judgment relating to other
properties is held to be correct.  In the circumstances of the
case, there shall be no order as to costs.  Miscellaneous
Petitions, if any, pending in this appeal shall stand closed.
___________________________     
D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU, J    
Date: 29.01.2018