[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Bhogadi Venkatramaiah vs The State Rep. By Its Public Prosecutor ... on 12 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 251, (2018) 2 ALD(CRL) 792
Bench:
C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy
,
Gudiseva Shyam Prasad
THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY AND THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD                              

Criminal Appeal No.811 of 2011

12-06-2018 

Bhogadi Venkatramaiah Appellant   

The State Rep. by its Public Prosecutor  High Court of Andhra Pradesh  Respondent 

Counsel for the appellant :  Mr. T. Pradyumna Kumar Reddy 

Counsel for the respondent: Mr. Posani Venkateswarulu,
                             Public Prosecutor (AP)

<GIST 

>HEAD NOTE:    

?CITATIONS: 1. (2011) 3 SCC 306  
            2. 1993 Supp (3) SCC 305
            3. AIR 1994 SC 110
            4. AIR 1956 SC 54
            5. (1995) 3 SCC 574
            6. (2001) 10 SCC 340


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY           
AND  
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD             
        
Criminal Appeal No.811 of 2011


DATED:12-06-2018   

Between: 

Bhogadi Venkatramaiah             Appellant 

And 

The State
Rep. by its Public Prosecutor
High Court of Andhra Pradesh      Respondent 



COUNSEL FOR THE APPELLANT: Mr. T. Pradyumna         
                                                                 Kumar Reddy,
                                                     for Mr. Ramesh Babu Sanaka

COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENT: Mr. Posani          
                                                                   Venkateswarulu,
                                                                  Public Prosecutor
                                                                   (AP)














THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:         
JUDGMENT:
(per the Honble Sri Justice C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy)  

        The conviction under
Sections 450
,
302
and
201
of the
Indian Penal Code (
IPC
) and sentencing inter alia to
imprisonment for life gave rise to this appeal by the sole
convict in Sessions Case No.295 of 2008 on the file of the I
Additional Sessions Judge, Krishna, at Machilipatnam.  For
convenience, the appellant will be referred to as the accused.
2.      The case of the prosecution in brief as reflected from the
charge sheet, is as under:
(a)     The accused is the elder son and one Bhogadi Pavan 
Kumar (hereinafter referred to as the deceased) was the
younger son of P.Ws.2 and 13  mother and father respectively
and all of them were living in joint family.  While the accused is
spendthrift even without doing any work and participating in
politics, P.W.13 and the deceased were doing agriculture and
earning the amounts for the joint family.     P.Ws.2 and 13 and
the deceased used to scold the accused as he was not having 
any avocation, even in the presence of their relatives, due to
which the accused suffered humiliation in the family circle.
During the years 1999 to 2003, the accused sustained loss in
agriculture and prawn culture.  P.Ws.2 and 13 and the deceased
scolded the accused for the loss and they did not give money to
him even for his necessities.  Hence, the accused developed
jealousy towards the deceased.
(b)     The marriage of the accused was performed with L.W.20 
(Bhogadi Sampoorna) in the month of April, 2006.  In the
month of September, the accused threatened P.W.13 with a  
knife alleging that he caught the hand of the wife of the accused
while she was taking bath, in the absence of inmates.  However,
P.W.13 escaped with the assistance of the deceased and went to 
the house of P.W.5.  Later, the dispute was settled by P.Ws.7
and 8 and the accused was pacified.  Thereafter the accused did
seeds business and sustained loss and in this connection there
were disputes in the family.  As the disputes were developing
day by day between them, P.Ws.7 and 8 elders held  
compromise and agreed that Rs.4,000/- cash and 25 Kgs. of 
rice would be given to the accused and his wife and they have
to live separately.  Accordingly, P.Ws.2 and 13 with the
deceased were living jointly and the accused and his wife were
living separately in a rent house at Nagayalanka.  All the above
incidents made the accused further jealous and turned into
enmity against the deceased and was waiting for an opportunity
to do away with the life of the deceased.  At that time, P.Ws.2
and 13 went to Hyderabad to attend the marriage of
their relative scheduled on 25.11.2007 and the accused decided
to kill the deceased since he alone is in the house.
(c)     On 24.11.2007 the accused purchased pesticide in the 
shop of P.W.12, collected cable wire, went to the house of the
deceased at about 7.00 p.m., entered into the house from the
back door, found the deceased and chatted with him while he
was sitting on a cot.  Then the accused strangulated the neck of
the deceased with the cable wire, and pulled him forcibly from
the back side and in that process the deceased fell on his
backside on the cot.  The accused poured the pesticide in the
mouth of the deceased so as to create the death as suicidal one,
but the deceased thrown it aside and the pesticide got sprinkled
on the bed sheet, pillow and clothes.  The accused further
strangulated the neck of the deceased forcibly with the wire,
made him fell down on ground to his face side and tightened
the wire, by catching its both ends by sitting on the scapula
portion of deceased.  At that time, as the telephone rang, the
accused kept the receiver aside.  The accused again strangulated
the neck of the deceased with the wire till blood oozed from
the mouth of the deceased.  Then the accused skulked away  
from the back side of the house on hearing the callings of
P.W.9 from front side of the house.  While the accused was
skulking away, P.Ws.9 and 10 witnessed him at the house and at 
also at turning of the street, respectively.  The accused removed
his shirt and pant, kept them in a polythene cover along with
the wire and cutter, threw them into a dilapidated house
situated opposite to his house at Nagayalanka and proceeded 
hurriedly to catch the train at Repalle to go to Hyderabad for
attending the marriage of a relative by parking the TVS Moped
at the stand at Repalle Railway Station.  P.W.2 was also
travelling in the same train to go to Hyderabad.
(d)     On 25.11.2007, L.W.5 (Bhogadi Kutumbham) and P.Ws.4     
and 5 observed the house doors of the deceased not opened 
and the lights in the house switched on.  Then they peeped
through the windows, found the deceased lying on the floor in
the hall and intimated the same to P.W.13, through P.W.6.
P.W.13 immediately informed the same to P.W.1, daughter of  
P.W.13, and sister of the accused and the deceased, who along 
with her husband  P.W.3 rushed to the house of the deceased. 
P.W.1 informed the incident to P.W.13 and P.Ws.2 and 13 and  
the accused came to their village in a car from Hyderabad.
(e)     P.W.1 gave a report to P.W.26  Sub-Inspector of Police,
Nagayalanka Police Station, who registered the crime under
Section 174
CrPC, inspected the scene of offence, got
photographed the scene of offence through P.W.20, prepared a
rough sketch, seized the material objects and conducted inquest
over the body of the deceased in the presence of P.Ws.6 and 23
and L.W.29 (Gali Babu) under mediators reports and also
recorded the statements of P.Ws.1 to 5, 7 to 10 and 20, and
L.W.5.  On 30.11.2007 the accused was produced before  
P.W.26 along with the extra judicial confession of the accused
by P.W.21  Ex. Member of the Mandal Praja Parishad,  
Nagayalanka Mandal and P.W.23  Village Revenue Officer,  
Parrachivara Village.  Based on the extra judicial confession,
P.W.26 altered the section of law from
Section 174
Cr.P.C. to
Sections 302
and
201
IPC.  P.W.27  in-charge Circle
Inspector, Avanigadda, took up the investigation in pursuance
of the confession of the accused, seized the material objects
shown by him in the presence of P.W.25 and L.W.31 (Topula  
Sankar), got photographed the seizure of the material objects,
prepared rough sketch  Ex.P.43 and sent the accused to 
judicial custody.  During the course of investigation, P.W.27
examined and recorded the statements of P.Ws.11, 12, 14 to 19, 
and 21 to 23, L.W.16 (Bandreddi Yesu), L.W.19 (Remala  
Ramesh), L.W.20 (Bhogadi Sampoorna) and L.W.22 (Dasyam      
Satyanarayana).  Thereafter, P.W.28  Inspector of Police,
Avanigadda Circle, took up the investigation, recorded the
statement of P.W.6, got sent all the material objects to the
Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL), Hyderabad and received 
the Ex.P.36  FSL report through the Sub-Divisional Police
Officer, Avanigadda.  P.W.24  Civil Assistant Surgeon,
Government Hospital, Avanigadda, has conducted autopsy  
over the body of the deceased and issued Ex.P.37  post-
mortem report.  P.W.28 verified the entire investigation,
collected all the documents and on completion of the
investigation, filed the charged sheet.
3.      Based on the charge sheet and the material collected in
the investigation, the lower Court has framed the following
charges.
Firstly: - That you Bhogadi Venkatramaiah, on the
24th day of November 2007 at about 7.00 p.m. in the
house where the deceased and your parents are residing in
Parrachivara village of Nagayalanka Mandal, committed
house trespass by entering into the said house used as a
human dwelling with the intent to commit an offence
punishable with imprisonment for life to wit. To commit
murder of your younger brother Pavan Kumar, and that
you thereby committed an offence punishable U/s. 450 of
the
Indian Penal Code
and within my cognizance.
Secondly: - That you, Bhogadi Venkatramaiah, on
the aforesaid date, time and place as mentioned in Charge
No.1, did commit murder by intentionally (or knowingly)
causing the death of your younger brother Bhogadi Pavan
Kumar, by strangulating his neck with the help of a cable
wire, since the deceased and your father are scolding and
chastising you for your useless acts and also about your
behaviour being a spendthrift, and that you thereby
committed an offence punishable Under
Section 302
of 
Indian Penal Code and within the cognizance of Court of
Session.
Thirdly & lastly: -  That you, Bhogadi
Venkatramaiah, on the aforesaid date, time and place as
mentioned in Charge No.1, knowing (or having reason to
believe) did commit murder of your younger brother
Pavan Kumar, and in such attempt did a certain act
towards the commission of the said offence, to wit
attempted to pour pesticide into the mouth of the
deceased to create the death as suicide to screen the
offence from legal punishment, and that you thereby
committed an offence under
Section 201
IPC read with
Section 511
of Indian Penal Code, and within the
cognizance of Court of Sessions.
4.      As the plea of the accused was one of denial, he was
subjected to trial.  The prosecution has examined P.Ws.1 to 28,
got Exs.P.1 to P.46 marked and produced M.Os.1 to 15.  On  
behalf of the accused, no oral evidence was let in, but Exs.D.1
and D.2 were marked.  On appreciation of the oral and
documentary evidence, the Court below has found the accused 
guilty and imposed sentence of imprisonment for life and to
pay a fine of Rs.500/- and in default of payment of the fine, to
suffer simple imprisonment for one year for the charge under
Section 302
IPC; rigorous imprisonment for ten years and to
pay a fine of Rs.500/- and in default of payment of the fine, to
suffer simple imprisonment for one year for the charge under
Section 450
IPC; and simple imprisonment for two years and to
pay a fine of Rs.500/- and in default of payment of the fine, to
suffer simple imprisonment for three months for the charge
under
Section 201
IPC.
5.      We have heard Mr. T. Pradyumna Kumar Reddy, learned    
Counsel for the appellant, and Mr. P. Venkateswarlu, learned
Public Prosecutor for the State of Andhra Pradesh.
6.      This is a case based on circumstantial evidence where
motive plays a very critical role.  We shall therefore first deal
with this aspect.  It is the case of the prosecution that the
accused is the elder son and the deceased is the younger son of
P.Ws.2 and 13 and all of them were living in joint family.  That
the accused is a spendthrift without doing any work and
involved in politics, and that in contrast to the accused, the
deceased was helping P.Ws.2 and 13 in agriculture.  That during
the years 1999 to 2003 the accused had carried on agriculture
and prawn culture and sustained loss and hence P.Ws.2 and 13  
and the deceased scolded the accused for the loss and they have
not given any money to the accused even for his necessities.
That therefore the accused developed jealousy towards the
deceased, since he suffered humiliation and the deceased was
praised in his relatives circle.
7.      The prosecution relied upon the evidence of P.Ws.1, 2
and 13 to prove the motive.  In her evidence, P.W.1, the sister
of the accused and the deceased, stated that the accused was 
sent out of the house along with his wife, made to stay in one
portion of the house belonging to P.Ws.2 and 13 in
Nagayalanka arranging Rs.4,000/- per month and supply of 25 
Kgs. of rice in pursuance of a compromise.  She further stated
that while leaving the house the accused threatened their father,
i.e., P.W.13, to kill him.  P.W.1 did not raise a whisper about
the ill-will between the accused and the deceased and any
quarrel taking place at any point of time between them.  She
further admitted that she did not state in Ex.P.1  report given
by her to the Police that the accused was picking up quarrels
with their father while he was living with his parents, that the
deceased used to support his father, and that the accused was
demanding money from his father as he used to move as  
vagabond.
8.      P.W.2  mother of the accused in her evidence stated that
P.W.13, her husband, in 2003 questioned the accused for 
causing loss of Rs.50,000/- in agriculture and a quarrel ensued
during which the accused has beaten P.W.13 and also the 
deceased, when he interfered.  She further stated that in the
year 2006 the accused got married, that in the year 2007disputes
arose in connection with the STD Booth standing in the name
of the accused and that in a quarrel arosing in connection with
the STD Booth, the accused caught hold of the shirt of the
deceased, dragged him and attempted to beat him, stating that
he was responsible for the high telephone bill.  That as the
accused beat the deceased, P.W.13 has beaten the accused.  She   
further deposed that due to the conduct of the accused, he was
sent to their house at Nagayalanka by providing him with
Rs.4,000/- per month and 25 Kgs. of rice.  That the incident
has occurred three months thereafter.
9.      P.W.13, father of the accused, corroborated the evidence
of P.W.2.  He has further deposed that there used to be
quarrels between him and the accused in connection with the
loss of Rs.50,000/- caused by the accused in agriculture, that
the accused used to beat the witness, that whenever such
attempts are made, the deceased used to help the witness by 
intervening and that the accused used to beat the deceased for
such intervention.  He has further stated that for the last four
or five years the accused was quarrelling with him.
10.     On a holistic reading of the evidence of P.Ws.1, 2 and 13
it is clear that none of these witnesses spoke about the accused
having any grudge against the deceased.  On the contrary, all
these witnesses in one voice spoke about the accused nursing
grudge against his father  P.W.13.  Except a vague statement
by P.W.2 that the accused grew jealous against the deceased as 
he was being praised in the society, nothing has been stated by
these witnesses to infer that the accused has developed
animosity against the deceased and that too for going to the
extent of killing him.  If at all the accused has nursed any
grievance, it is only against his father.  The learned Public
Prosecutor sought to emphasise on the portion of the evidence
of P.W.13 wherein he has stated that whenever the deceased 
intervened in the quarrel between the accused and P.W.13, the
accused used to beat the decreased.  But, none of these
witnesses have deposed that whenever the deceased was beaten,  
he either resisted or retaliated against the accused.  The conduct
of the deceased as spoken to by the witnesses would thus reveal
that he was meekly suffering the onslaught of the accused
instead of revolting against him.  Therefore, in the absence of
any resistance from the deceased, there could be no reason for
the accused to develop vengeance against the deceased.  As 
noted hereinbefore, if at all the accused has developed any
motive it would have been against P.W.13  his father and not
against the deceased.  Though the motive is a state of mind
with respect to which no one can predict with certainty as to
the reason for entertaining it, the burden still lies on the
prosecution to prove with some degree of certainty the reason
for the accused to develop motive against the deceased, in a
case based purely on circumstantial evidence.  Motive being an
important link in the chain of circumstances, its absence would
considerably weaken the case of the prosecution.  In the light
of the above discussion, we are inclined to hold that the
prosecution has failed to prove the motive against the accused.
11.     As regards the evidence on other aspects placed by the
prosecution, the oral testimony of P.Ws.1, 2 and 13 would not
be of much help to connect the accused to the offence.  It is
significant to note in this context that when P.W.13 has
informed P.W.1 about the murder, the latter has given Ex.P.1 
report, at about 6.30 p.m. on 25.112007 the day following the
night during which the murder has taken place.  From the
perusal of the contents of this report, it is seen that it is not a
case of suicide and a suspicion was expressed about the death.
12.     The learned counsel for the accused submitted that based
on Ex.P.1  report, Ex.P.42  FIR was registered on 25.11.2007
for the offence under
Section 174
Cr.P.C.  He has further
submitted that though during the inquest itself held on
26.11.2007  involvement of the accused was suspected and the 
statements of important witnesses, such as P.Ws.1, 2 and 13 
were shown to have been recorded on the same day, wherein  
the accused was alleged to have killed the deceased, the FIR
was not altered till 30.11.2007.  He has also submitted that it
has been stated by all the material prosecution witnesses that
after the inquest and the recording of
Section 161
CrPC
statements on 26.11.2007, the accused was taken into custody 
by the Police and that the accused was shown to have been 
arrested only on 30.11.2007 purportedly based on extra judicial
confession.  Relying on these facts, the learned counsel argued
that though the accused was taken into custody on 26.11.2007 
itself, he was shown to have been arrested on 30.11.2007 after
creation of extra judicial confession and based on the same the
Police have fabricated
Section 161
CrPC statements by 
antedating the same.  We shall now consider this aspect.
13.     It is not in dispute that inquest was held at about 12.00
noon on 26.11.2007.  Column No.XI contains the detailed
narration of the motive on the part of the accused and the fact
of his causing murder.  Under Ex.P.29  the alleged extra
judicial confession, the accused has allegedly stated that
between 11.00 and 12.00 Hours of intervening night of
25.11.2007 and 26.11.2007 he absconded out of fear that the
Police dogs may identify him and returned from the hiding
during the night of 29.11.2007.  In this context, it is significant
to refer to the evidence of P.W.1 wherein she has deposed that
her parents, the accused and others have reached the house of
her parents between 9.00 and 10.00 p.m. on 25.11.2007, that
the Police were present at that time, that thought they all went
inside, the accused did not follow them to see the dead body
and that on the following day morning also they went to the
scene of offence and on that day also the accused did not
venture to see the dead body but he was moving with others in
front of the house and was waiting in the front yard of the
house till the evening of 26.11.2007.  She further stated that the
Police have shifted the dead body from the house at about
10.00 p.m. on 26.11.2007 and taken the accused along with 
them and that the accused was with the Police since then.  It is
very important to note that though being prosecution witness,
P.W.1 has categorically spoken about the Police taking the
accused into custody and detaining him with them on the night
of 26.11.2007, the prosecution has not re-examined her to spell
out its stand regarding the time and date of the arrest of the
accused.  Thus P.W.1s statement on the above aspect remained  
unimpeached.
14.     P.W.26, the Sub-Inspector of Police, who registered the
case, stated that on 30.11.2007 at about 11.30 a.m. in the
morning while he was present in the Police Station, P.W.23
(wrongly mentioned as P.W.24)  Village Revenue Officer of
Parrachivara Village of Nagayalanka Mandal came to the Police
Station along with P.W.21  Jayaprakash, and also the accused, 
and handed over the statement of the accused recorded by 
P.W.23 and that based on the extra judicial confession made by
the accused before P.W.23, the witness has altered the section
of law from 174
CrPC
to
Sections 302
and
201
IPC.  A
suggestion was put to him that on 26.11.2007 at the time of
inquest the witness has approached the accused and took him 
into custody and that since then the accused was in the illegal
custody.  The suggestion was, however, denied by the witness.
It is also suggested to the witness that
Section 161
CrPC
statements were fabricated just before the filing of the charge
sheet, which suggestion was also denied.
15.     Significantly, P.W.26 failed to set the record straight with
reference to the evidence of P.W.1 that the accused was taken
into custody on 26.11.2017 by making any positive statement,
excepting denying the suggestion put to him in his cross-
examination.  As noted supra, not only in the inquest report,
but also in
Section 161
CrPC statements allegedly recorded on
26.11.2007 the accused was imputed with the act of killing the
deceased.  Still, the FIR was not altered till 30.11.2007.  No
explanation was forthcoming from P.W.26 or P.W.27 for the
reason for such non-alteration showing the death as a murder
and the appellant as the accused.  The learned Public
Prosecutor submitted that the Police cannot alter the FIR
without filing a Memo before the jurisdictional Magistrate and
obtaining the latters permission.  No provision has been cited
by him in support of this submission.  That no such Memo was 
filed and no permission was taken from the Magistrate is
evident from P.W.26s deposition wherein he has stated that on
30.11.200 at 11.30 a.m. while he was present in the Police
Station, P.W.23  the Village Revenue Officer of Parrachivara
Village of Nagayalanka Mandal came to the Police Station along
with P.W.21  Ex. Member of the Mandal Praja Parishad, 
Nagayalanka Mandal,  and the accused, handed over Ex.P.23,  
the so called extra judicial confession upon which he has altered
the section of law from
Section 174
CrPC to 302 and 201
IPC
including the name of the accused and submitted Ex.P.44  
altered FIR to the jurisdictional court.
16.     We shall now see whether the prosecution version about
the accused approaching P.Ws.21 and 23 and giving his 
confessional statement is worthy of acceptance. P.W.21 
deposed that on a day which happened to be the 30th of a
month, which he did not remember, in the year 2007 the
accused approached him after 7.00 a.m. and confessed that he 
has killed his brother on the 24th day of that month due to
disputes.  He then took the accused to P.W.23 - Village
Revenue Officer, Parrachivara, that on making enquiries he
recorded Ex.P.29 - statement of the accused and, the witness,
the accused and P.W.23 signed on the same and thus took the  
accused along with the statement to the Police Station and
handed over the same to the Sub-Inspector of Police.  In his
cross-examination P.W.21 stated that he is a resident of
Nagayalanka, that he was a former Member of the Mandal Praja 
Parishad, Nagayalanka, and that while he and his brother, who
was President of Co-operative Society, Parrachivara, belong to
congress party, the accused, who was also in Congress Party, 
was later working for B.J.P.  The witness also admitted that in
the year 2005 the paddy heaps of his brother were burnt in
Parrachivara village and the accused was suspected to be
responsible for the same and that since then they had no talking
terms with the accused and his father. He has further deposed
that during the mediation on the burning of paddy heaps, the
accused admitted his guilt, tendered apology by catching the
feet of the brother of the witness and that the latter has let off
the accused accepting his apology.  It was suggested to the
witness that the Police apprehended the accused on 27.11.2017 
and since then he was in the Police custody and he has not
approached the witness on 30.11.2007.  The witness denied the
same. The version spoken to by P.W.21 appears somewhat    
unnatural for, not only that the accused and P.W.21 belonged
to different political parties, but also following an unpleasant
incident happened in the year 2005, P.W.21 was not in talking
terms with the accused and his father.  Therefore, it is difficult
to believe that the accused would have had any hope that
P.W.21 would save him from the physical harm from the 
Police.  On his part, being a former Member of the Mandal
Praja Parishad and active member of the Congress Party, which 
was in power at the relevant time, he allegedly acted in a
peculiar manner by not taking the accused straight away to the
Police Station and instead by taking him to P.W.23, only a
Village Revenue Officer.
17.     As regards P.W.23, he actively participated in the
investigation process at the instance of the Police.  He was the
scribe of Ex.P.34  Scene Observation Report prepared on
26.11.2007 and also one of the attestors to the same.  He is also
the author of Ex.P.35 - inquest report.  In his chief examination
he has deposed that he himself has scribed Ex.P.29 at his
house, obtained the signature of the accused and P.W.21 on the
said statement, he endorsed on the statement that it was made
in his presence, and took the accused to the Police Station and
handed over him to the Police in the presence of P.W.21.  He
admitted that the accused has earlier submitted a complaint to
the District Collector complaining that he committed
irregularities in distribution of compensation leading to
enquiries and that since then they were not in talking terms
with each other.  The most crucial admission coming from
P.W.23 is to the effect that at the time of scribing Ex.P.29, the
accused, himself, P.W.21, Krishnaiah (evidently referable to
P.W.13  father of the deceased) and P.W.26 - Sub-Inspector
of Police were present and that Ex.P.29 was scribed at
Nagayalanka Police Station.  This admission completely
destroys the credibility of the testimony of P.Ws.21 and 23 and
also supports the defence version that Ex.P.29 is fabricated as if
the accused was absconding and produced by P.W.23 for the  
first time on 30.11.2007.  From the testimony of P.W.21 and
the fact of the aforementioned admission of P.W.23 it could be
concluded without any cavil of doubt that the accused was in
the illegal custody of the Police from the evening of 26.07.2007
itself, till 30.11.2007 on which date he was shown to have been
formally arrested, after creating Ex.P.29, the alleged extra
judicial confession of the accused.
18.     The above discussed facts also raise a serious doubt as to
whether the Police have recorded
Section 161
CrPC statements 
on 26.11.2007, and lend support to the defence version that
following the purported extra judicial confession, the Police
have fabricated
Section 161
CrPC statements after 30.11.2007,
because, as the said statements were evidently sent along with
the charge sheet, there was no material with reference to which
the prosecution could prove that they were recorded prior to
30.11.2007.  The aforementioned suspicious circumstances 
would make it appear that the prosecution has come out with a
false version by not only suppressing the real time and date on
which the accused was taken into custody, but also by creating
a purported extra judicial confession by planting P.Ws.21 and
23.  This conduct of the investigation agency is abhorrent for
which we have decided to initiate separate proceedings for
considering prosecution of P.Ws.21, 23, 26 and 27 for perjury
and other related offences.
19.     The next aspect to be considered is the alleged recovery
of M.O.6, M.O.13 and M.O.14 from the accused. It is the case
of the prosecution that after the accused was surrendered by
PWs.21 and 23 on 30.11.2007, along with the alleged 
extrajudicial confession, the accused led the police and the
mediators to a dilapidated tiled house situated to the east of the
metal road running from north to south, situated in the eastern
side of the house in which the accused was living and took out
MO.6- cable wire piece and MOs.13 and 14  shirt and pant of
the accused, stating that he has hidden them in the northern
side room of the dilapidated tiled house. It is the further case of
the prosecution that the accused went to the house in which he
was living and brought MO.15  cutter, with which he has cut a
cable in the second portion of the house bearing No.74/2 in
which he is residing. Ex.P.40 is the admissible portion of the
mediators report under which the aforementioned MOs. were 
seized in the presence of PW.25. In his chief examination, PW-
27, the investigating officer has stated that MOs.6, 13 and 14
were seized from the dilapidated house situated opposite to the
house of the accused. However, in the cross-examination he
admitted that in the remand report dated 01.12.2007, he has
stated that he has seized the said material objects from the
house bearing D.No.11-61/2 in which the accused is residing
and it is different from the  said dilapidated house. Though the
remand report does not constitute evidence, the fact that the
prosecution has come out with conflicting versions regarding
the place from which MOs. 6, 13 and 14 were seized, cannot be 
ignored. Added to this, the evidence of PW-20  photographer,
who was deployed only for the purpose of taking photographs
of the place from which the material objects were seized, is
somewhat ambiguous. Nowhere in his evidence, he has referred 
to the dilapidated house from which the police have seized the
material objects from the accused. The dilapidated house which
is supposed to be photographed vide Ex.P.26 is described by
PW-20 as the building situated by the side of the house of the
accused. But he has not deposed that it is from that house, that
the aforementioned MOs. were seized by the police. All these
aspects create reasonable doubt in the mind of the court that
the prosecution is not coming out with true version as regards
the place from which the said MOs. were seized.
20.     Even assuming that MOs. 6, 13 and 14 were seized from  
the possession of the accused, the further question to be
considered is whether the said MOs. could be connected to the
accused.  The investigating officer has sent the said MOs. along
with the wearing apparel of the deceased to Forensic Science
laboratory, which submitted its report vide Ex.P.36. Of 16
items sent for testing, item Nos.5 to 11 were examined. The
report reveals that blood was detected on item
Nos.5,10,11,12,14 and 15 and the blood group on item
Nos.11,12,14 and 15 was B group. Item No.11 is MO.2 and 
item No.12 is MO.3. Both these belong to the deceased. Item
No.14  green and maroon colour checks full hand polyester
shirt, belongs to the accused and item No.15 is the cable wire
which was allegedly seized from the accused. Though the blood
group on items No.5,10,11, 12, 14 and 15 was shown to belong 
to the same group, for reasons best known to the investigating
officer, he has not got the blood group of the deceased
ascertained. From the mere fact that the blood group on the
aforementioned items tallied with each other, it is not safe to
presume the culpability of the accused, for, there is every
possibility for the police to plant the blood belonging to some
group on all the material objects, including the clothes of the
deceased and the accused. We venture to make this observation 
for the simple reason that when the police have fabricated the
extrajudicial confession and distorted the fact relating to the
actual date of arrest, we would not be surprised if they have
planted the blood also.
21.     The law is well settled that in the absence of any other
corroborative evidence, it is not safe to convict the accused,
merely based on recovery.
In
Wakkar v. State of U.P.
, the
Supreme Court held:
26. It is true that recovery of certain incriminating
articles at the instance of the accused under
Section 27
of
the Evidence Act by itself cannot form the basis of
conviction. The recovery of incriminating articles and its
evidentiary value has to be considered in the light of other
relevant circumstances as well and the chain of events
suggesting the involvement of the accused. The trial court
as well as the appellate court did not rest the conviction
of the appellants solely based on the recoveries. The fact
remains that the recovery of articles used in the
commission of offence has been taken into consideration
together with other incriminating circumstances brought
on record by the prosecution.
22.     Even if we believe that the recovery is proved, whether
the appellant is liable to be convicted only based on recovery
without there being any corroborative evidence needs to be
considered.
In
Union Territory of Goa v. Beaventura
DSouza
,
Surjit Singh v. State of Punjab
, and
Sanwat
Khan v. State of Rajasthan
the Supreme Court held that it is
unsafe to draw a presumption of guilt merely based on recovery
of incriminating articles from the possession of the accused.
In
Gulab Chand v. State of Madhya Pradesh
, a converse view 
was taken.
A two-Judge Bench in
Limbaji v. State of
Maharashtra
, analyzed the divergent views and observed that
the two-Judge Bench which decided
Gulab Chand
(5 supra)  
has merely taken note of the three-Judge Bench decision in
Sanwant Khan
(4 supra), and observed that
the said decision
is
not applicable in the facts and circumstances of the case.
In
conclusion, the Court in
Limbaji
(6 supra) has chosen to give
due weight to the dicta
laid down by
the Larger Bench in
Sanwant Khan
(4 supra) in order to adopt a safer course.
Thus, as on today, the preponderance of judicial opinion is to
the effect that mere recovery by itself cannot be made basis for
convicting the accused without the prosecution establishing the
other important links in the chain of circumstances.  For the
aforementioned reasons, we are unable to place any reliance on
the prosecution case relating to recovery, for convicting the
appellant.
23.     The next aspect to be discussed is the last seen theory
propounded by the prosecution, which was found favour with
the court below. Though the prosecution has pressed into
service, PWs.9 and 10 in support of this theory, the court below
has refused to rely upon the evidence of PW-9. However, it has
accepted the evidence of PW-10, which we shall now consider. 
PW-10 has deposed that he is the farm servant of one Mandali
Anjaneyulu of Parrachivara  and that he knows PW-13 and the 
accused, whose house is situated by the side of his masters
house. He has further deposed in his chief examination that on
one day about 2 years ago, at about 7 or 7.30 p.m., when he was
returning from the field with hay stack, he found the accused
running away from the back yard and when he called the
accused by name twice, the latter has gone away with his
motorcycle, without replying. He has further deposed that as it
was a full moon day, he could identify the accused, though it
was night and that he came to know on the next day that the
deceased died. In his cross- examination, the witness admitted
that he did not reveal to any villagers, of his seeing the accused
running away. He admitted that he was bringing hay from the
land of his master, which is at a distance of two furlongs from
the house of the deceased and that he need not go in front of
the house of Krishnaiah, for carrying grass.  He further
admitted that the house of the deceased is not visible from the
land of Anjaneyulu. The defence has got Ex.D1  a portion of
Section 161
Cr.P.C. statement of the witness, marked. In
Ex.D1, the witness stated that when he was cutting the grass on
the land of his master, he saw the accused coming out from the
backdoor of his fathers house and proceeding towards
Nagayalanka on his TVS XL Moped. Though the witness has   
denied having made such statement, such a denial cannot be 
countenanced and thus, there is a serious contradiction in the
evidence of PW-10, as to the place at and the manner in which
he has seen the accused at around the time of the incident. As
noted above, he has admitted in his evidence that the house
where the occurrence has taken place, is not visible from the
land where the witness was cutting grass. The further
improbability of the witness noticing and identifying the
accused, is evident from the fact that it is unusual for a person
to cut grass after sunset and it is also not possible for a person
to identify other persons after sunset.  We are, therefore,
convinced that PW-10 has not come out with the truth and he
was evidently planted by the prosecution to put forth the last
seen theory.
24.     As regards the medical evidence, in Ex.P.37  post
mortem report, PW-24, the doctor who conducted autopsy, has  
opined that the deceased died due to Asphyxia due to
strangulation as well as Fenvalrate an insecticide poison. It is
not the case of the prosecution that the accused has
strangulated as well as poisoned the deceased. On the contrary,
the case of the prosecution is that pesticide was
sprinkled/poured into the mouth of the deceased so as to
create the death as suicide.  The medical evidence, such as the
autopsy report and the depositions of the doctor and also the
FSL report, shows that insecticide poison was found in the
stomach, liver and kidney pieces. Unless poison was
administered, there would be no possibility of the same being
found in stomach, liver and kidney pieces. Thus, even this part
of the evidence does not support the case of the prosecution
and, therefore, the charge against the accused under
Section
201
I.P.C., is wholly misconceived. It is thus clear from the
above discussion that the prosecution has failed to prove the
manner and the real cause of death, as set out in its case.
25.     One other relevant aspect to be considered, is the accused
allegedly procuring the poison from PW-12. PW-12 was 
examined to speak about the accused procuring poison from 
him. In his chief examination, he has deposed that on
24.11.2007, the accused purchased Fenval 20 EC tin for
Rs.75/- in the forenoon and he would identify the said tin. The
witness accordingly identified the same as MO.5, sold to the
accused. In his cross-examination, the witness deposed that the
accused left the shop without taking the bill and he did not also
write the bill. He however, admitted that there was no written
document to show that the accused purchased pesticide tin 
from his shop. Though the witness stated that he has bills to
show that MO.5 was purchased by him from the dealers, he  
expressed his inability to disclose the bill number or the date
and also admitted that he did not furnish the said bill number
or date under which he purchased MO.5 from the dealer. He 
further admitted that the tins similar to M.O.5 are available in
any fertilizer shop and that MO.5 does not carry any specific
identification mark, to show that it was sold by him. These
admissions clearly render the evidence of PW.12, wholly
unreliable and we have no doubt that the prosecution has
planted him, only for the purpose of proving the purchase of
pesticide by the accused, to support its otherwise false version
that the accused has procured poison from PW-12.
26.     For the aforementioned reasons, the judgment dated
01.04.2011 in Sessions Case No.295 of 2008 of the I Additional
Sessions Judge, Krishna at Machilipatnam, is set aside. The
appellant/accused is acquitted of all the offences with which he
is charged.  The fine amount, if any, paid by him shall be
refunded to him. As the appellant is on bail, he is directed to
surrender himself before the Superintendent, Central Prison,
Nellore, for completing the formalities for his release, if he is
not required in any other case or crime.
27.     The criminal appeal is accordingly allowed.
_________________________    
C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY, J      
____________________________     
GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD, J        
12-6-2018