[Cites
40
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
State Of A.P. Rep. By Its Prl. Secretary, ... vs Datla Krishna Varma & Ors on 3 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 44
Bench:
Ramesh Ranganathan
,
Kongara Vijaya Lakshmi
HONBLE THE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN AND  THE HONBLE SMT JUSTICE KONGARA VIJAYA LAKSHMI                            

WRIT APPEAL Nos.36 of 2018    

03.04.2018 

State of A.P. rep. by its Prl. Secretary, Revenue, A.P.Secretariat, Velagapudi, Amaravathi & Ors..Appellants-Respondents 1,

Datla Krishna Varma & Ors.. Respondents 1 & 2 -Writ Petitioners 

Counsel for Appellants-Respondents: Learned Government Pleader for Registration and  Stamps. 

Counsel for respondents-writ petitioners: Sri Anand Kumar Kapoor, Learned Counsel

<GIST:  

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Citations:

1)      (1981) 4 SCC 8 
2)      (2001) 2 SCC 588 
3)      2002 (5) ALD 1 (LB)
4)      (1973) 2 SCC 705 
5)      (2013) 9 SCC 221 : (2013) 4 SCC (Civ) 285
6)      1952 SCR 28 : AIR 1952 SC 12  
7)      AIR 1983 SC 1272  
8)      (Judgment in Writ Appeal No.797 of 2016 dated 17.09.2016) 
9)      (1984) 2 SCC 436 
10)     (1985) 1 SCC 260 
11)     (1985) 3 SCC 217 
12)     (1995) 3 SCC 257 
13)     1994 Supp (3) SCC 220  
14)     (2009) 14 SCC 48 
15)     (2009) 5 SCC 452 
16)     (2004)11 SCC 168  
17)     (1994) 5 SCC 380 
18)     (2006) 10 SCC 261 
19)     (2011) 14 SCC 227 : (2012) 4 SCC (Civ) 935 : (2012) 2 SCC (L&S) 890 
20)     2002 (1) ALD 280 
21)     ILR 35 Mad. 1 
22)     2016(1) ALT 550 (FB) 
23)     1983 (67) STC 424 
24)     2001(1) ALD 443(DB)  
25)     2012 (6) ALD 458 (DB) 
26)     (1972) 2 SCC 200 
27)     1942 AC 130  
28)     AIR 1960 SC 1156  
29) 1990 Supp. SCC 727  

THE HONBLE THE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN                
AND  
THE HONBLE SMT JUSTICE KONGARA VIJAYA LAKSHMI             


WRIT APPEAL Nos.36 AND 215 of 2018     
COMMON JUDGMENT:
{Per the Honble the Acting Chief Justice Ramesh Ranganathan}       

      These two appeals are preferred, under Clause 15 of the
Letters Patent, by respondents 1, 3 and 4 in W.P. No.38480 of
2017 aggrieved by the interim orders passed by the Learned Single
Judge in WPMP. No.47767 of 2017 in W.P. No.38480 of 2017 dated   
15.11.2017, and in WPMP No.47768 of 2017 in W.P. No.38480 of   
2017 dated 15.11.2017.
Respondents 1 and 2 herein had filed the said Writ Petition
seeking a mandamus to declare the proceedings of the District
Collector, Visakhapatnam dated 23.08.2017, including Sy.
No.187/4 for an extent of Ac.4.35 cts of Desapatrunipalem village
in the list of prohibited properties under
Section 22-A(i)(a)
of the
Registration Act, as wholly arbitrary and opposed to the provisions
of the
Registration Act
and the rules made thereunder.  A
consequential direction was sought to the Sub-Registrar,
Lankelapalem, Visakhapatnam to register the document presented  
by the petitioner for registration.  By way of interim relief,
respondents 1 and 2 herein sought an order (1) in W.P.M.P.
No.47768 of 2017 to suspend the endorsement dated 23.08.2017  
of the District Collector, Visakhapatnam; and (2) in
W.P.M.P.No.47767 of 2017 to direct the Sub-Registrar,
Lankelapalem to register the documents, presented by the
petitioner for registration, in respect of the property purchased
under the registered sale deed No.8629 of 2005.
In his order in WPMP No.47768 of 2017 in W.P. No.38480 of
2017, the Learned Single Judge observed that, prima facie, the
order of the District Collector dated 23.08.2017, refusing to delete
the subject lands from the notification issued under
Section 22-
A(i)(a) of the
Registration Act
, on the ground that they are assigned
lands, could not be sustained because the said order did not
mention when the alleged assignment was made, and whether   
there was a clause prohibiting alienation in the assignment patta
granted to the assignees; the condition, prohibiting alienation, was
introduced for the first time by G.O.Ms. No.1142 dated
18.06.1954; unless the assignment is shown to have taken place
after the said date, on which point the order of the District
Collector was deliberately silent, the District Collector could not
treat the subject land as Government land, and include it in the
notification issued under
Section 22-A(i)(a)
of the Act; and the
second respondent did not also advert to the proceedings dated
13.07.2004 and 25.06.2004, issued by the Mandal Revenue  
Officer, Paravada stating that the said lands are private patta
lands, and not assigned or government lands, though the said
proceedings were relied upon by the petitioners in their application
made to the District Collector.  The Learned Single Judge granted
interim suspension of the endorsement of the District Collector
dated 23.08.2017 pending disposal of the Writ Petition.
By his order, in WPMP No.47767 of 2017 in W.P. No.38480 
of 2017 dated 15.11.2017, the Learned Single Judge directed the
Sub-Registrar, Lankelapalem, Visakhapatnam to receive the 
documents presented by the respondents-writ petitioners for
registration, and consider the same strictly in accordance with the
provisions of the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899
and the
Registration Act,
1908
, without reference to the proceedings dated 23.08.2017 of the
District Collector, Visakhapantam, in view of the order dated
12.05.2016, within two months from the date of presentation of
the document by the petitioners.  The Learned Single Judge
observed that any such registration would be subject to final
orders in the Writ Petition, and in the case pending before the
Supreme Court.  While these two appeals have been preferred 
against the interlocutory orders passed in WPMP No.47768 of 2017 
and WPMP No.47767 of 2017 respectively, the main Writ Petition 
i.e., W.P. No.38480 of 2017 is still pending adjudication before the
Learned Single Judge.
Learned Government Pleader for Revenue (Assignment)
would submit that the order of the District Collector,
Visakhapatnam dated 23.08.2017 refers to the subject lands
having been included in the list of prohibited properties vide his
proceedings dated 08.07.2016;  the Learned Single Judge has in
effect granted, by way of interim relief, a relief which could only
have been granted as a consequence of the Writ Petition being
finally allowed; in view of
Section 22-A
of the Registration Act all
those properties, included in the list of prohibited properties,
cannot be subjected to registration; it is only if the proceedings of
the District Collector dated 08.07.2016 is set aside, could the
Learned Single Judge have granted a consequential direction to the
Registrar to consider grant of registration of the subject property;
such an order could not have been passed at the stage of
admission of the Writ Petition; while W.P.No.38480 of 2017 was
filed on 13.11.2017, the interim orders under appeal came to be
passed within two days thereafter on 15.11.2017; an ad-interim
order at the stage of admission of the Writ Petition, which has the
effect of allowing the Writ Petition itself, ought not to have been
passed by the Learned Single Judge; and the orders under appeal
necessitate being set aside.
On the other hand Sri Anand Kumar Kapoor, Learned
Counsel for the respondent-writ petitioner, would submit that the
Learned Single Judge has merely followed the interim order passed
by the Supreme Court in granting the relief sought for in the Writ
Petition; an appeal under Clause 15 of the Letters Patent is not
maintainable against an ad-interim order; the rights, over the
property in dispute, is not affected by the order under appeal;
Section 52
of the Transfer of Property Act enables the Court to
permit lis pendens sale; such lis pendens registration does not
affect the right of parties; nowhere has the appellant stated, even
subsequently, that the subject document is not genuine; the order
under appeal is merely a facilitative order; the Learned Single
Judge has imposed a condition that the registration is subject to
the result of the Special Leave Petition and the Writ Petition; and
an interim order, which is passed taking a cue from the interim
order of the Supreme Court, is in furtherance of the order of the
Supreme Court, and does not necessitate interference.  Besides
placing reliance on
Section 52
of the Transfer of Property Act, Sri
Anand Kumar Kapoor, Learned Counsel, would also rely on
Shah   
Babulal Khimji v. Jayaben D Kania
;
Central Mine Planning and
Design Institute Ltd. v. Union of India
;
B.F. Pushpaleela Devi
v. State of A.P.
;
Rajender Singh v. Santa Singh
; and
Mohd.
Mehtab Khan v. Khushnuma Ibrahim Khan
.
In the impugned order dated 23.08.2017 the District
Collector, Visakhapatnam, after referring to an earlier
representation submitted by one Sri B. Radhakrishna Varma who  
had purchased land adjacent to that of the appellant-writ
petitioner, held that Sri B. Radhakrishna Varma had purchased
assigned lands which were prohibited from alienation under
Section 3(1)
of the A.P. Assigned Lands (Prohibition of Transfer)
Act, 1977; as per
Section 3(1)
and
3(3)
of the A.P. Assigned Lands
(Prohibition of Transfer) Act, 1977; the list of prohibited properties
under Section 22-A(1)(a) to (d) along with Form-III (Assigned lands
list under Section 5(1) of the A.P. Assigned Lands (Prohibition of
Transfer) Act) had been communicated to the registration
department vide his office proceedings dated 08.07.2016; Sri B.
Radhakrishna Varma had no valid title over the subject lands;
hence his request for de-notification of the lands covered by Sy.
No.80/4 and 187/4 of Desapatrunipalem village, from the list of
prohibited properties, deserved no consideration; and it was,
therefore, rejected.  The Tahsildar, Parawada was directed to
initiate necessary action, under the provisions of the
A.P. Assigned
Lands (Prohibition of Transfer) Act, 1977
, by issuing notices in
Forms I and II to the assignee/purchasers, since the applicant had
purchased assigned land through registered documents, and had 
blatantly violated the provisions of the said Act.  The Tahsildar was
directed to report compliance within thirty days.
In the affidavit, filed in support of W.P. No.38480 of 2017,
the respondent-writ petitioner has stated that, aggrieved by the
said endorsement, Sri B. Radha Krishna Varma had filed an appeal 
and, on its dismissal, had filed W.P. No.4293 of 2014, which was
disposed of along with W.P. No.4271 of 2014 dated 25.04.2014,
directing the Mandal Revenue Officer, Paravada, Visakhapatnam to
verify the genuineness of the certificates issued earlier; if  the
certificates were genuine, he should then communicate his
decision to the Sub-Registrar, Lankelapalem, Visakhapanam, and 
also to the respondent-writ petitioner; if, according to the Mandal
Revenue Officer, the status of the land, as per the revenue records,
was not private patta land, the said information should then be
furnished to the petitioner; such exercise should be completed
within four weeks;  the petitioners are simultaneous purchasers
with Sri B. Radhakrishna Varma; on being made aware of the 
proceedings undertaken by him, and its likely impact on the
petitioners, the first petitioner along with Sri B. Radhakrishna
Varma had submitted a joint representation to the District
Collector on 02.03.2017 and 20.07.2017 requesting him to delete
the subject survey numbers from the list made under
Section 22-
A(1) of the
Registration Act
; and the District Collector had passed
the order dated 23.08.2017 even without considering the orders
passed by this Court earlier.
As noted hereinabove the District Collector, by his
proceedings dated 23.08.2017, informed that the subject lands
were included in the list of prohibited properties vide proceedings
dated 08.07.2016.  While the relief sought for in W.P.No.38480 of
2017 is to declare the proceedings of the District Collector dated
23.08.2017 as arbitrary and illegal, curiously the proceedings of
the District Collector dated 08.07.2016, including these lands in
the list of prohibited properties, has not even subjected to
challenge in the Writ Petition.
Section 22-A
of the Registration Act
relates to prohibition of registration of certain documents and,
under sub-section (1) thereof, the classes of documents mentioned
in clauses (a) to (e) thereunder are prohibited from registration.
On the subject lands being included by the District Collector in the
list of prohibited properties, the concerned Sub-Registrar was
disabled thereafter from registering the documents in view of
Section 22-A(1)(a) & (b) of the
Registration Act
.  It is only if, and
after, the subject lands are excluded from the list of prohibited
properties, and the order of the District Collector including the
subject lands in the said list is set aside, would the Sub-Registrar,
thereafter, be entitled in law to register alienation of the subject
lands.
Clause (a), of
Section 22-A(1)
of the Registration Act, are the
documents relating to transfer of immovable property, the
alienation or transfer of which is prohibited under any statute of
the State or Central Government.
Section 5
of the A.P. Assigned
Lands (Prohibition of Transfer) Act, 1977 prohibits registration of
assigned lands.  The District Collector, Visakhapatnam has
included the subject lands in the list of prohibited properties on
the ground that they are assigned lands.  Whether the subject
lands are, in fact, assigned lands justifying their inclusion in the
list of prohibited properties; whether the proceedings dated
13.07.2004 and 25.06.2004, issued by the Mandal Revenue  
Officer, required the District Collector to abstain from including
the subject lands in the list of prohibited properties; whether the
subject lands are assigned lands, as is claimed by the District
Collector as justification for inclusion of these lands in the list of
prohibited properties, or are private patta lands rendering its
inclusion in the list of prohibited properties illegal, are all matters
of examination in the Writ Petition after the appellants herein
(respondents in the Writ Petition) are given a reasonable
opportunity of filing their counter-affidavit.
By the interim order in WPMP No.47767 of 2017 dated
15.11.2017, which is under challenge in W.A. No.36 of 2017, the
Sub-Registrar was directed to consider registration of the
documents, without reference to the District Collectors
proceedings dated 23.08.2017.  The said interim order is not only a
direction to the Sub-Registrar to violate the law (
Section 22-A
of
the Registration Act), but also amounts to granting a relief which
could only have been granted consequent upon the main relief,
sought for in the Writ Petition, being granted. Such an order
would, ordinarily, not be passed at the stage of admission without
the appellants herein (respondents in the Writ Petition) being given
an opportunity of filing their counter-affidavit.
An interim relief can be granted only in aid of, and as
ancillary to, the main relief which may be available to the party on
a final determination of his rights. (
State of Orissa v. Madan
Gopal Rungta
;
Cotton Corporation of India v. United
Industrial Bank Ltd
; The State of A.P. v. M/s.Maheswari
Minerals ).  The main purpose of passing an interim order is to
evolve a workable formula or a workable arrangement to the extent
called for by the demands of the situation, only in order that no
irreparable injury is occasioned. The Court has to strike a delicate
balance after considering the pros and cons of the matter to ensure
that larger public interest is not jeopardized thereby.
(
Siliguri
Municipality v. Amalendu Das
).  Interim orders, which
practically give the principal relief sought for in the writ petition,
only for the reason that a prima-facie case has been made out,
without considering the balance of convenience, the public interest
and other considerations, should not be passed.
(Asstt. CCE v.
Dunlop India Ltd. ;
State of Rajasthan v. Swaika Properties
;
Bank of Maharashtra v. Race Shipping & Transport Co. (P)
Ltd
; M/s.Maheswari Minerals8).
Interim orders are, ordinarily, made to maintain the status
quo so that the ultimate relief to be granted, to the party
approaching the Court, may not become futile. (
Bihar Public
Service Commission v. Shiv Jatan Thakur (Dr
) ).  Interim relief
is granted during the pendency of proceeding so that, while
granting final relief, the court is not faced with a situation of the
relief having become infructuous or that, during the pendency of
the proceeding, an unfair advantage has been taken by the party in
default or against whom interim relief is sought. The object behind
granting interim relief is to maintain the status quo so that the
final relief can be appropriately moulded without the party's
position being altered during the pendency of the proceedings.
(Cotton Corporation of India7).
It is settled legal position that, by
way of interim relief, the final relief should not be granted till the
matter is decided one way or the other, (
Mehul Mahendra
Thakkar v. Meena Mehul Thakkar
;
All India Anna Dravida
Munnetra Kazhagam v. Govt. of T.N.
, ), as interlocutory orders
are made in aid of final orders and not vice versa.
(
Shipping
Corporation of India Ltd. v. Machado Brothers
;
Kavita Trehan
v. Balsara Hygiene Products Ltd
; and
Pitta Naveen Kumar v.
Raja Narasaiah Zangiti
).  An interim order should not be of such
a nature as to result in the writ petition being finally allowed at an
interim stage nor should relief be granted, at the interlocutory
stage, by which the final relief, which is asked for and is available
at the disposal of the matter, is granted.
(UPSC v. S. Krishna
Chaitanya ; M/s. Maheswari Minerals8).
While W.P. No.38480 of 2017 was filed on 13.11.2017, the
ad-interim orders under appeal came to be passed on 15.11.2017 
just two days after the Writ Petition was filed.  It is evident,
therefore, that the interim order, which has the effect of allowing
the Writ Petition itself at the admission stage, was passed in
W.P.M.P. No.47767 of 2017 without the appellants herein
(respondents in the Writ Petition) being given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard i.e., of filing their counter-affidavit.
Clause 15 of the Letters Patent provides for an appeal from
the Courts of original jurisdiction to the High Court in its appellate
jurisdiction.  An appeal does not lie to the Division bench of the
same High Court against every order passed by a Single Judge of
the High Court.  It is only against a judgment would an intra-
Court Appeal lie.   The Letters Patent jurisdiction is not attracted
and available if the judgment is passed by the High Court in the
exercise of its appellate jurisdiction in respect of a decree or order
made in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction by a Court
subject to the superintendence of the said High Court. It is also not
attracted and available if the order is made under the revisional
jurisdiction of the High Court, and it is also not attracted in
respect of a sentence or order made or passed in the exercise of the
power of superintendence under the provisions of
Section 107
of
the Government of India Act or in the exercise of criminal
jurisdiction. If the order complained of is not a judgment, the
appellate jurisdiction of the High Court, under Clause 15 of the
Letters Patent. is not attracted and available. (Shah Babulal
Khimji1;
H. Kondal Reddy v. Central Bank of India,
Hyderabad
; B.F. Pushpaleela Devi3).
The word judgment, in Clause 15 of the Letters Patent,
should receive a much wider and more liberal interpretation than
the word judgment used in
the Code of Civil Procedure
. At the same
time, all orders passed by a trial Judge would not amount to a
judgment, otherwise there would be no end to the number of
orders which would be appealable under the Letters Patent.  The
word judgment has, undoubtedly, a concept of finality in a broader
and not a narrower sense. (Shah Babulal Khimji1; Central Mine
Planning and Design Institute Ltd.2).
A judgment can be of three kinds: (1) a final judgment.in
this category falls a judgment by which the suit, or action, brought
by the plaintiff is dismissed or decreed in part or full; (2) a
preliminary judgment.this category is sub-divided into two
classes: (a) where the trial Judge, by an order, dismisses the suit,
without going into the merits of the suit, and only on a preliminary
objection raised by the defendant/respondent on the ground of
maintainability; (b) where maintainability of the Suit is objected on
the ground of bar of jurisdiction, e.g., res judicata, a manifest
defect in the suit, absence of notice under
Section 80
and the like;
and (3) intermediary or interlocutory judgment.in this category
fall orders referred to in clauses (a) to (w) of Order 43 Rule 1 and
also such other orders which possess the characteristics and
trappings of finality, and may adversely affect a valuable right of
the party or decide an important aspect of the trial in an ancillary
proceeding. (Shah Babulal Khimji1; Central Mine Planning and
Design Institute Ltd.2).
Under the third category, every interlocutory order cannot be
regarded as a judgment.  Only those orders would be judgments
which decide matters of moment or affect vital and valuable rights
of the parties, and which work serious injustice to the party
concerned. (Shah Babulal Khimji1; Central Mine Planning and
Design Institute Ltd.2).  Interlocutory orders, in order to be a
judgment, must contain the traits and trappings of finality either
when the order decides the questions in controversy in an ancillary
proceeding or in the suit itself or in a part of the proceedings.
(Shah Babulal Khimji1).
The following are the tests to assess the import and
definition of the word 'judgment' as used in Clause I5 of the Letters
Patent.  (1) It is not the form of adjudication which is to be seen
but its actual effect on the suit or proceeding; (2) If, irrespective of
the form of the suit or proceeding, the order impugned puts an end
to the suit or proceeding it doubtless amounts to a judgment; (3)
Similarly, the effect of the order, if not complied with, is to
terminate the proceedings, the said order would amount to a
judgment; (4) Any order in an independent proceeding which is
ancillary to the suit (not being a step towards judgment) but is
designed to render the judgment effective can also be termed as
judgment within the meaning of the Letters Patent. (5) An order
may be a judgment even if it does not affect the merits of the suit
or proceedings or does not determine any rights in question raised
in the suit or proceedings. (6) An adjudication based on a refusal to
exercise discretion the effect of which is to dispose of the suit, so
far as that particular adjudication is concerned, would certainly
amount to a judgment within the meaning of the Letters Patent.
(
T.V.Tuljaram Row v. M.K.R.V. Alagappa Chettiar
; Shah
Babulal Khimji1).
In order to determine the question, whether an interlocutory
order passed by a Judge of a High Court falls within the meaning
of judgment, for purposes of the Letters Patent, the test is whether
the order is a final determination affecting vital and valuable rights
and obligations of the parties concerned. This has to be
ascertained on the facts of each case. (Shah Babulal Khimji1;
Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Ltd.2).
In the present case, the effect of the interim order under
appeal (i.e in W.P.M.P.No.47767 of 2017) is to grant the main relief
sought for in the Writ Petition.  The said order has the traits and
trappings of finality and has decided the question in controversy in
the Writ Petition.  It also requires the Sub-Registrar to consider the
respondent-writ petitioners application for registration in violation
of
Section 22-A
of the Registration Act, and thereby works serious
injustice to the appellants herein.  We are satisfied, therefore, that
the interim order under appeal, in W.P.M.P. No.47767 of 2017
dated 15.11.2017, constitutes a judgment within the meaning of
Clause 15 of the Letters Patent, the appellants herein are entitled
to invoke our jurisdiction against the said order, and the appeal in
W.A.No.36 of 2018, against the ad-interim order passed in
W.P.M.P. No. 47767 of 2017 in W.P.No.38480 of 2017 dated   
15.11.2017, is maintainable under Clause 15 of the Letters Patent.
It is no doubt true that, against the order passed by a Full
Bench of this Court in
Vinjamuri Rajagopala Chary v. State of
Andhra Pradesh
, the matter was carried in appeal to the
Supreme Court; and, by its order in SLP (Civil) C.C. No. 8917/16
dated 12.5.2016, the Supreme Court, while granting permission to
file Special Leave to Appeal, condoning the delay and issuing
notice, made it clear that registration could be done expressly
subject to the final outcome of the Special Leave Petition.
Learned Government Pleader for Revenue would contend,
not without justification, that pendency of the SLP before the
Supreme Court against the order of the Full Bench in Vinjamuri
Rajagopala Chary22, and an interim order being passed therein,
would not obliterate the law declared by the Full Bench; and,
notwithstanding the fact that the order of the Full Bench is under
challenge before the Supreme Court, the said order would bind
both the Division Bench of this Court, and the Single Judge, till
the judgment of the Full bench is set aside by the Supreme Court.
In
K. Venkata Reddy v. Land Acquisition Officer
, a Division
Bench of this Court observed:
..  When the matter came up before our learned brother
Kodandaramayya, J., he felt a doubt whether, having regard to the fact that
the judgment of the Full Bench is the subject-matter of an appeal before
the Supreme Court and the operation of
the said judgment
is suspended,
the dicta
laid down by
the Full Bench would be binding on this Court and
has to be followed, and referred the matter to the Bench.  We are of the
view that when a judgment of the High Court is the subject-matter of an
appeal and
the said judgment
is suspended the only effect of such
suspension is that that judgment cannot be executed or implemented. But
so long as the Full Bench judgment stands, the dicta laid down therein are
binding on all Courts including the single Judges and Division Benches of
this Court.  The dicta laid down therein cannot be ignored unless the Court
after hearing a particular case doubts the correctness of the dicta and thinks it
appropriate that it should be reconsidered.  We, however, do not feel any such
doubt that in so far as the acquisition of the land of a person, whose holding is
less than the ceiling area and is personally cultivating the same, is concerned,
he is entitled to the payment of market value in lump sum.  Payment of
compensation in instalments is violative of the provisions of clause (2) of
article
31-A(1)
of the Constitution.
(emphasis supplied)

      In
Government of Andhra Pradesh v. N. Rami Reddy
, a
Division Bench of this Court observed that, when a Court of appeal
stays the operation of the judgment, it stays the further
implementation as between the parties, of the operative portion
thereof, and thereby the ratio of
the said decision
cannot be said to
be wiped off. The observations of the Division bench, in this regard,
are as under:
..  It is now a well settled principle of law that the ratio of a judgment is the
reason assigned in support thereof. While a Court of appeal stays the operation
of the judgment, it stays the further implementation, as between the parties, of
the operative portion thereof, and thereby the ratio of the decision cannot be
said to be wiped off.
.This aspect of the matter is no longer res integra in view of
the decision of a Three-Judge Bench of the Apex Court in M/s.
Sree
Chamundi Mopeds Ltd. v. Church of SIT Association
(AIR 1992 SC 1439),  
wherein the Apex Court has laid down the law in the following terms:
"The said stay order of the High Court cannot have the effect of
reviving the proceedings which had been disposed of by the Appellate
Authority by its order dated January 7, 1991. While considering the effect of
an interim order staying the operation of the order under challenge, a distinction
has to be made between quashing of an order and stay of operation of an order.
Quashing of an order results in the restoration of the position as it stood on the
date of the passing of the order which has been quashed. The stay of operation
of an order does not, however, lead to such a result. It only means that the order
which has been stayed would not be operative from the date of the passing of
the stay order and it does not mean that the said order has been wiped out from
existence. This means that if an order passed by the Appellate Authority is
quashed and the matter is remanded, the result would be that the appeal
which had been disposed of by the said order of the Appellate Authority
would be restored and it can be said to be pending before the Appellate
Authority after the quashing of the order of the Appellate Authority. The
same cannot be said with regard to an order staying the operation of the
order of the Appellate Authority because inspite of the said order, the order
of the Appellate Authority continues to exist in law and so long as it exists,
it cannot be said that the appeal which has been disposed of by the said
order has not been disposed of and is still pending.. (emphasis 
supplied)

      Again in
Government of Andhra Pradesh vs. P. Gautam
Kumar
a Division Bench of this Court observed:
The other aspect of the contention, ie., that on account of stay of
operation of the judgment, the Prakash Singhs case (supra), directive is
itself not binding, is a contention that is wholly misconceived.  Acceptance
of this contention would lead to utter chaos and a de-construction of the
principle of stare decisis, an essential integer of our system of law.
To illustrate, if a judgment of the Supreme Court is referred to and relied upon
for conclusions or grant of relief in a judgment by a High Court; and the High
Court judgment is appealed against and a stay granted by the Supreme Court,
according to the learned Advocate-General the binding authority of the earlier
judgment of the Supreme Court is rendered inoperative and the earlier Supreme
Court judgment ceases to have a precedential value, during currency of the
order of stay.  Such a proposition is productive of universal and unmitigated
mischief and therefore does not merit acceptance.
From the guidance derived from the precedents referred to, we are of the
view that the stay of operation of the Yadavs case (supra), judgment only
disables execution of the consequences of the judgment to the parties
thereto.  Grant of stay does not extinguish the norm(s) predicated in the
judgment   .    (emphasis supplied).
The Learned Single Judge has erred in granting a similar
interim order, in W.P.M.P.No.47767 of 2017 dated 15.11.2017, as
was passed by the Supreme Court, as the law declared by the Full
Bench in Vinjamuri Rajagopala Chary22 would continue to bind
this Court.
Reliance placed by Sri Anand Kumar Kapoor, Learned
Counsel for the respondent-writ petitioners, on
Section 52
of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882, is also of no avail.
Section 52
stipulates that, during the pendency in any Court in which any
right to immovable property is directly and specifically in question,
the property cannot be transferred, or otherwise dealt with, by any
party to the suit or proceedings so as to affect the rights of any
other party thereto.  An exception thereto is where the transfer is
made under the authority of the Court, and on such terms as it
may impose.
Lis pendens literally means a pending suit, and the doctrine
of lis pendens has been defined as the jurisdiction, power, or
control which a court acquires over the property involved in a suit
pending the continuance of the action, and until final judgment
therein. (Corpus Juris Secundum (Vol. LIV, p. 570).  Expositions
of the doctrine indicate that the need for it arises from the very
nature of the jurisdiction of Courts, and their control over the
subject-matter of litigation, so that parties litigating before it may
not remove any part of the subject-matter outside the power of the
Court to deal with it and thus make the proceedings infructuous.
(Rajender Singh4;
Jayaram Mudaliar v. Ayyaswami
).
The question which necessitates examination in the present
case is not whether this Court has the power, under
Article 226
of
the Constitution of India, to grant a relief of the nature sought for
in the Writ Petition, but whether an interim order, which has the
effect of granting the main relief sought for in the Writ Petition,
could have been passed without the appellants (respondents in the
Writ Petition) being given a reasonable opportunity of being heard
by filing their counter-affidavit.  While the High Court may have
the power to permit transfer of property during the pendency of
proceedings before it, and upon such terms as it may impose, the
question is not regarding existence of such a power with the High
Court but regarding its exercise, and whether an interim order,
directing the Sub-Registrar to receive and register the document
for alienation of immovable property, could have been passed
without giving the official respondents in the Writ Petition a
reasonable opportunity of filing their counter-affidavit, more so as
the interim relief sought for, and granted, has the effect of allowing
the Writ Petition itself, and in the main relief sought for in the Writ
Petition being granted.
It is no doubt true that a Division bench would, ordinarily,
not interfere with the exercise of discretion by the Learned Single
Judge in granting interim relief.  The law as to the reversal by a
Court of Appeal of an order made by the Judge below in the
exercise of his discretion is well established, and any difficulty that
arises is due only to the application of well-settled principles in an
individual case. (Osenton (Charles) & Co. v. Johnston ;
Printers
(Mysore) (P) Ltd. v. Pothan Joseph
; Mohd. Mehtab Khan5;
Wander Ltd. v. Antox India (P) Ltd.
).
Where the appeals before the Division Bench are preferred
against the exercise of discretion by the Single Judge, the appellate
court will not interfere with such exercise of discretion by the court
of first instance, and substitute its own discretion, except where
the discretion has been shown to have been exercised arbitrarily,
or capriciously or perversely or where the court had ignored settled
principles of law regulating grant or refusal of interlocutory orders.
An appeal against exercise of discretion is said to be an appeal on
principle.  The appellate court will not reassess the material and
seek to reach a conclusion different from the one reached by the
court below if the one reached by that court was reasonably
possible on the material. The appellate court would, normally, not
be justified in interfering with the exercise of discretion under
appeal solely on the ground that, if it had considered the matter at
the trial stage, it would have come to a contrary conclusion. If the
discretion has been exercised by the trial court reasonably, and in
a judicious manner, the fact that the appellate court would have
taken a different view may not justify interference with the trial
courts exercise of discretion. The appellate court would not
interfere with the exercise of discretion by the learned trial Judge
unless such exercise is found to be palpably incorrect or untenable
or if the view taken by the Learned Single Judge is not a possible
view. (Wander Ltd.29; Mohd. Mehtab Khan5).
In the present case, the interim order under appeal, directing
the Sub-Registrar to consider registering the document without
reference to the District Collectors proceedings dated 23.08.2017,
has the effect of granting the main relief sought for in the Writ
Petition, though it is settled law that, ordinarily, the final relief
sought for in the Writ Petition should not be granted, by way of
interim relief, and the matter should await a final decision one way
or the other.  This contention of Sri A.K. Kapoor, Learned Counsel
for the respondent-writ petitioner, also necessitates rejection.
Viewed from any angle, we are satisfied that the Learned
Single Judge ought not to have, at the stage of admission of the
Writ Petition, granted the interim relief, sought for in W.P.M.P.
No.47767 of 2017, which has the effect of allowing the Writ Petition
itself even without giving the appellants herein (respondents in the
Writ Petition) a reasonable opportunity of filing their counter-
affidavit.
By the interim order passed by the Learned Single Judge, in
WPMP No.47768 of 2017 in W.P.No.38480 of 2017 dated    
15.11.2017, the endorsement of the District Collector dated
23.08.2017 was suspended.  The said interim order is merely a
workable arrangement to ensure that no irreparable injury is
otherwise occasioned.  As a result of the said order, status-quo is
sought to be maintained so that, in the meanwhile, no further
action is taken pursuant to the endorsement dated 23.08.2017
whereby the Tahsildar was directed to initiate action under the
provisions of the
A.P. Assigned Lands (Prohibition of Transfer) Act,
1977
by issuing Form-I and Form-II notices to the
assignees/purchasers on the ground that assigned land had been 
purchased, through a registered document, in violation of the
provisions of the said Act.
We may not be understood to have upheld the said interim
order.  All that we have held is that the said order, in WPMP
No.47768 of 2017 in W.P.No.38480 of 2017 dated 15.11.2017, may   
not constitute a judgment justifying exercise of jurisdiction, under
Clause 15 of the Letters Patent, at this stage.  Suffice it to make it
clear that the order now passed by us shall not disable the
appellants, after they have filed their counter-affidavit in
W.P.No.38480 of 2017, to seek vacation of the interim order passed
in WPMP No.47768 of 2017 in W.P.No.38480 of 2017 dated    
15.11.2017.  Any such application, filed by the appellants later,
shall be decided on its merits uninfluenced by any observations
made in this order.
The order passed in WPMP No.47767 of 2017 in   
W.P.No.38480 of 2017 dated 15.11.2017 is set aside and WPMP    
No.47767 of 2017 is restored to file.  The appellants herein shall
file their counter-affidavit in W.P.No.38480 of 2017 within three
weeks from today.  It is open to Sri Anand Kumar Kapoor, Learned
Counsel for the petitioners, to request the Learned Single Judge to
take up WPMP No.47767 of 2017 for hearing any day after three 
weeks from today.
Writ Appeal No.215 of 2018 is dismissed, and Writ Appeal
No.36 of 2018 is disposed of in terms of the directions given
hereinabove. Miscellaneous Petitions, if any pending, shall also
stand disposed of.  However, in the circumstances, without costs.
____________________________     
(RAMESH RANGANATHAN, ACJ)        
___________________________     
(KONGARA VIJAYA LAKSHMI, J)      
Date: 03.04.2018