[Cites
19
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Araveti Sreenivasulu vs Makam Suresh Babu (Died) Per ... on 3 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 312
Author:
S.V. Bhatt
Bench:
S.V. Bhatt
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE S.V. BHATT     

C.R.P.No.1949 of 2012 

03-10-2018 


Araveti Sreenivasulu..  Petitioner

Makam Suresh Babu (died) per LRs.M.Vijayasree & others..  Respondents   


Counsel for the petitioner:Sri M.V.S.Suresh Kumar, senior       
                                counsel 
                                                                                
Counsel for respondents: Sri N.Siva Reddy

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    


?  CASES REFERRED:     
    1987 (2) ALT 229
2   (1999) 4 SCC 702
3   (2009) 8 SCC 766
4   2012 (3) ALT 202
5   (2017) 11 SCC 57
6   AIR 1923 Madras 284 
7   AIR 1956 Madras 144 
8   AIR 2003 Bombay 57  
9   1987(2) ALT 229
10   (2017)11 SCC 57 
11   (2014) 15 SCC 529 
12 1962(1) ALT 168 (DB) 


THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE S.V.BHATT      

C.R.P.No.1949 OF 2012   

ORDER:
Heard Sri M.V.S.Suresh Kumar learned Senior Counsel for
petitioner and Sri N.Siva Reddy for respondents.
The legal representatives of sole plaintiff and sole defendant
in O.S.No.6 of 2000 on the file of the I-Additional District Judge,
Anantapur, are the parties in the instant revision.  The revision
petitioner is the legal representative of 1st defendant. Respondent
Nos.1 to 4 filed I.A.No.58 of 2011 in the Court of Additional Judge,
Anantapur to grant time to deposit the balance sale consideration
in terms of the decree and the judgment dated 30.09.2005 in
O.S.No.6 of 2000, the application was allowed on 04.01.2012.
Hence, the Revision Petition at the instance of 2nd defendant/2nd
respondent.
The application for enlargement of time was filed under
Section 148 of the Civil Procedure Code (
CPC
). The counsel
appearing for the parties have stated that
Section 28
of Specific
Relief Act, 1963 (for short the Act) is correct provision of law for
relief of extension of time or similar reliefs. The quoting of wrong
provision of law in I.A.No.58 of 2011 is not contested and arguments
are advanced on scope, jurisdiction and discretion available under
Section 28
of the Act.
The circumstances necessary for disposing of the revision are
stated thus:
The parties are referred as plaintiff (s) and the defendant (s).
Makam Suresh Babu filed O.S.No.6 of 2000 for specific
performance of the agreement of sale dated 31.10.1994 against
Araveti Venkata Lakshmamma.  The plaintiff agreed to purchase 
Ac.0-22 cents from the defendant at the rate of Rs.32,000/- per
cent and the total sale consideration works out to Rs.7,12,000/-. The
defendant received Rs.40,000/- as advance from the plaintiff.  On
30.09.2005, O.S.No.6 of 2000 was decreed for specific performance
of agreement of sale to an extent of Ac.0-19 cents and plaintiff was
directed to pay balance sale consideration i.e., Rs.5,68,000/-(32000
x 19= Rs.6,08,000-Rs.40,000=Rs.5,68,000/-) within two months i.e., from
30.09.2015.
The operative portion of the judgment reads thus:
In the result, the suit is partly decreed holding
that the plaintiff is entitled for the extent of Ac.0-19 cents
only with the boundaries mentioned therein in the
commissioners report and the plaintiff is granted two
months time to deposit the balance amount and on such 
deposit the defendant is directed to execute the registered
sale deed in respect of Ac.0-19 cents of land at the
expenses of the plaintiff and if the defendant failed to
execute the registered sale deed within the two moths
from the date of deposit, the plaintiff is at liberty to get it
done through the process of law at the costs of the
defendant.  Both parties bear their own costs.
(emphasis added)

      On the demise of sole plaintiff i.e., respondents 2 to 4 herein
have come on record as the legal representatives of plaintiff. On
18.09.2010, the legal representatives of 1st plaintiff filed the instant
application for enlargement of time granted in O.S.No.6 of 2000 to
deposit the balance sale consideration.  The case of the legal
representatives of 1st plaintiff is that the judgment and decree
dated 30.09.2005 directed deposit of Rs.5,68,000/- on or before
30.11.2005.  The plaintiff, on 29.11.2005, applied for lodgment
challan to deposit Rs.5,68,000/- as directed by the decree.  The
plaintiff was prevented from depositing the balance sale
consideration in view of stay of all further proceedings in O.S.No.6 of
2000 was granted by this Court in C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005.  The
lodgment challan dated 29.11.2005 by reference to stay order was
returned.  One K.Venugopal, S/o Narayana Swamy filed I.A.No.68 of 
2005 under
Order I Rule 10 of CPC
to come on record in O.S.No.6 of
2000.  The said application for impleading K. Venugopal as
defendant was dismissed by the trial Court.  The said Venugopal
filed C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005 against order in I.A.No.68 of 2005 and
obtained stay of all further proceedings in O.S.No.6 of 2000.  It is
matter of record that C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005 was dismissed on
29.03.2006.  Therefore, in the above circumstances, it is stated that
the plaintiff though was ready to deposit the amount as directed by
the Court in O.S.No.6 of 2000, he was prevented from complying
with the direction to deposit balance sale consideration within two
months from 30.09.2005.  It is further alleged that the plaintiff did not
contest C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005, therefore, the plaintiff was under the
bona fide impression that the stay granted by this Court was
continuing.  It is averred that on 31.08.2009 the plaintiff was
murdered, a case was registered and investigated in Crime No.277
of 2009.  In the year 2008, the family of plaintiff was shifted to
Hyderabad for education of children of plaintiffs 1 and 2.  The 2nd
plaintiff, on verification of record, has come to know the dismissal of
C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005 and thereafter steps are taken for depositing
the balance sale consideration.  The Court did not accept the
deposit tendered by plaintiff, therefore there is no default on the
part of plaintiff and the subsequent delay is on account of two
circumstances namely that the 1st plaintiff did not contest the
revision, therefore, was unware of the dismissal of C.R.P., and
secondly, the 1st plaintiff was murdered on 31.08.2009 without
knowing the outcome of CRP.  As legal representatives, it is stated
that plaintiffs 2 to 4 are ready to deposit the balance sale
consideration as per decree dated 30.09.2005. Hence, I.A.No.58 of
2011 was filed for enlargement of time for depositing the balance
sale consideration.
The 2nd defendant/Revision Petitioner filed counter affidavit in
I.A.No.58 of 2011 opposing the prayer for extension of time for
deposit into Court on all fours.
The case of the 2nd defendant is that the decree for
specific performance is a conditional decree.  The balance
sale consideration, if is not deposited within the time granted
by the Court, the plaintiff loses all the rights under the decree
and the decree cannot be enforced.  The plaintiff is
mandated by the decree in O.S.No.6 of 2000 to deposit the
balance sale consideration on or before 30.11.2005 and
admittedly, the balance sale consideration is not deposited within
the time granted by the trial Court.  Thus, the decree in O.S.No.6
of 2000 is unenforceable.  The 2nd defendant denies
the allegation viz ignorance of dismissal of C.R.P.No.3987
of 2005 pleaded by the 1st plaintiff.  The stay granted in
C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005, if is considered as the reason for not
depositing the amount on or before 30.11.2005, it is contended that
the balance sale consideration should have been deposited within
reasonable time after the disposal of C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005 on
29.03.2006.  It is further contended that the plaintiff was alive up to
31.08.2009 i.e., beyond three years from the date of decree and
judgment in O.S.No.6 of 2000.  The plaintiff did not choose to
deposit the balance sale consideration for the reasons known to
plaintiff.  Therefore, the question that the 2nd plaintiff expressing
readiness and willingness to deposit the balance sale consideration
is besides the point.  Therefore, it is contended that there are no
grounds for granting enlargement of time for depositing the
balance sale consideration. The application, hence, is not tenable
in law and no grounds are made out for accepting the prayer for
extension of time granted in the decree in O.S.No.6 of 2000. The 2nd
defendant prayed for dismissing the application.
The trial Court framed the following point for consideration.
Whether the petitioners can be granted time to deposit the
amount at this stage?
After referring to the circumstances already noticed in this
order, the learned trial Judge has taken note of the attempt of 1st
plaintiff to deposit the amount on 29.11.2005 and held that the 1st
plaintiff in fact made sincere efforts within the time stipulated by the
Decree and the Judgment to deposit the balance sale
consideration, but could not deposit on account of stay granted in
C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005, and the lodgment challan was returned by 
the trial Court. Thus, the plaintiff was prevented by stay order from
depositing the amount on or before 30.11.2005.  The plaintiff, since
did not contest the CRP, might not be unaware of the result in
C.R.P. It is, however, observed that the party to a lis is expected to
know the stage or the outcome of pending proceedings.  The
murder of plaintiff is evidenced by FIR and the circumstances stated
for not depositing the balance sale consideration within time or
thereafter are considered sympathetically by trial Court.  The trial
Court referred to the decisions reported in 2002 (3) LS, 229 and 2010
(3) ALD 730 and through the order under revision has substantially
condoned the delay of 2928 days in depositing the balance sale
consideration. Finally it ordered for depositing the balance sale
consideration immediately.  Hence, the instant revision.
Mr.M.V.S.Suresh Kumar contends that the order under
Revision suffers from patent illegality; the trial Court exercised the
discretion arbitrarily and is reflected from the conclusion that the
case for extending time is required to be considered
sympathetically in the peculiar circumstances of the case.
Therefore, the very approach of trial Court is vitiated and this Court
in the exercise of revisional jurisdiction ought to correct these
illegalities patent in the order under revision.  He contends that
Section 28
of the Act provides for rescission in certain circumstances
of contracts executed for the sale or lease of immovable property
and specific performance of such contract has been granted by a
decree.
Section 28(1)
of the Act confers jurisdiction on Court to
enlarge time for further period as the Court may allow for
performance of obligation viz deposit of purchase money,
therefore, the Court exercises equitable jurisdiction by keeping in
view the totality of circumstances but not arbitrarily.  Adverting to
the facts of the instant case, he contends that the agreement of
sale deals with sale of purchase of immovable property in
Anantapur town.  The trial Court ought to have taken note of
escalating prices of immovable property at all the places and for
no fault of vendor, the performance of obligation as directed under
the decree if is accepted, the same amounts exercising without
proper guidance and for no fault, the defendant/ vendor would
suffer great prejudice and loss.  The trial Court, after taking note of
the defence set up by defendant/vendor, while disposing of
O.S.No.6 of 2000 granted two months time from the date of
judgment to deposit the balance sale consideration.  According to
him, the 1st plaintiff was prevented by the stay granted by this Court
in C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005 in depositing the balance sale
consideration, but the 1st plaintiff for all purposes was not prevented
by any circumstance from 29.03.2006 i.e., when C.R.P. was 
dismissed, to 31.08.2009.  According to him, the 1st plaintiff was alive
for nearly three (3) years five (5) months, and during this period the
1st plaintiff chose not to deposit the amount. The murder of 1st
plaintiff on 31.08.2009 does not grant excuse for coming with the
instant prayer after lapse of several years.  According to him, the
Court while exercising the discretion is guided by all the relevant
circumstances including the changed circumstances, escalation of
prices etc., vis--vis the subject matter of litigation.  The discretion
must and should be exercised by taking note of applicable law,
limitation and the laxity in filing application by the plaintiff.
According to him, the trial Court does not exercise absolute
discretion and jurisdiction to extend time for deposit particularly by
referring to sympathetic circumstances.
The jurisdiction to extend
the time under
Section 28
of the Act is unavailable and the power
available under
Section 28
of the Act to extend the time for
complying with the condition imposed in the decree, this power is
exercised within the four corners of law.  According to him, in
situations like this the Court exercises jurisdiction in equity and,
therefore, the equitable jurisdiction is exercised without subjecting
the contesting party to hardship, loss or prejudice.  He prays for
setting aside the order dated 04.01.2012 and also allow the revision.
He relies on decisions reported in
ABDUL SHAKER SAHIB v. ABDUL     
RAHIMAN SAHIB AND ANOTHER
,
V.S.PARANICHAMY CHETTIAR FIRM               
v. C.ALAGAPPAN AND ANOTHER
,
BHUPINDER KUMAR v. ANGREJ              
SINGH
, ALI JAFFAR v. V.VENKAT REDDY  and
V.S.PARANICHAMY           
CHETTIAR FIRM v. C.ALAGAPPAN AND ANOTHER
for the proposition        
that the power under
Section 28
is examined on sound legal
principles, without room for assuming the discretion in favour of one
party and the detriment of another party.
Mr.Suresh Kumar finally contends that the point formulated for
decision by the trial Court is incorrect and assumes the plaintiffs
entitlement for enlargement.
According to him, the point for consideration ought to be
whether the application for extension of time at this length of time is
maintainable in law and whether the plaintiff is entitled for
enlargement of time or not? According to him, in matters of
commercial importance, the Court ought not to have based its
conclusions on sympathy in extending time lines, which are
otherwise very material for timely compliance by a party.
Per contra, Mr.N.Siva Reddy contends that the facts and
circumstances of the case are singular and the power to enlarge
time is exercised by keeping in view the peculiar circumstances of
the case, therefore the contentions otherwise made are untenable.
According to him, the 1st plaintiff by applying for lodgment challan
on 29.11.2005 has obeyed the time limit stipulated by the trial Court
in the decree and judgment dated 30.09.2005.  Therefore, the
readiness and willingness to pay balance sale consideration
of Rs.5,68,000/- is substantially established in the case on
hand.  The stay granted in C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005 practically
prevented the 1st plaintiff from depositing the balance sale
consideration.  Therefore, according to him, firstly there is no default
on the plaintiff and secondly, the default in depositing the amount
is due to circumstances beyond plaintiffs understanding.  It is
further contended that the 1st plaintiff, since has not contested
C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005, the plaintiff was not aware of dismissal of
C.R.P on 29.03.2006.  He concedes that the plaintiff died after 3
years 5 months from the date of disposal of C.R.P.  The inaction in
moving the matter, if any, will have to be treated as bona fide but
not indifference on the part of plaintiff or his legal representatives to
pay the balance sale consideration.  Therefore, though the trial
Court used the expression sympathetically, still the discretion for
enlargement of time is exercised by referring to hard and
undisputed circumstances of the case on hand.  Therefore, he
contends that this Court, in its discretion under
Section 115
of CPC,
ought not to re-examine and interdict the order of the trial Court, in
the absence of patent infirmity or illegality pointed, which goes to
the root of jurisdiction of the trial Court.  He next contends that the
defendants if are of the view that the plaintiff committed default,
the defendant ought to have applied for rescission of the contract
under
Section 28
of the Act. The defendant since did not apply for
rescission, the obligations created through the decree and
judgment dated 30.09.2005 would subsist.  According to him, the
contention of defendant that the decree for specific performance
has become inexecutable with the default in depositing the
balance sale consideration, is against well established precedents
that a decree for specific performance is in the nature of a
preliminary decree and till the reciprocal promises are completed,
the Court has jurisdiction.
According to him, the decree crystallized
rights and obligations of the parties and the prayer in I.A.No.58 of
2011 is to grant time for discharging the obligation fastened by the
decree.  He contends that in the absence of an application for
rescission by the defendants, the discretion exercised by the trial
Court is within its jurisdiction and no exception can be taken.
According to him, the word may under
Section 28
of the Act will
have to be read as shall.  For the proposition, the defendant must
ask for rescission of the contract, he places strong reliance on the
decisions reported in
ABDUL SHAKER SAHIB v. ABDUL RAHIMAN SAHIB         
AND ANOTHER
;
METTA RAMA BHATLU V. METTA ANNAYYA BHATLU                 
AND OTHERS
and for the proposition the word may to be read as 
shall in
SMT. VATSALA SHANKAR BANSOLE v. SHRI SAMBHAJI          
NANASAHEB KHANDARE AND ANOTHER
.
I have perused the record and noted the submissions of
learned counsel appearing for the parties.
The point for consideration is whether the prayer in I.A.No.58
of 2011 is maintainable; whether the plaintiffs have made out case
for granting the extension of time for depositing the amount as
directed in O.S.No.6 of 2000 and whether the Court in exercise of
power under
Section 28
of the Act can direct refund of
consideration received under the suit agreement.
Section 28
of the Act reads thus:
28. Rescission in certain circumstances of contracts for the sale or
lease of immovable property, the specific performance of which
has been decreed.
(1) Where in any suit a decree for specific performance of a
contract for the sale or lease of immovable property has been
made and the purchaser or lessee does not, within the period
allowed by the decree or such further period as the court may
allow, pay the purchase money or other sum which the court has
ordered him to pay, the vendor or lessor may apply in the same
suit in which the decree is made, to have the contract rescinded
and on such application the court may, by order, rescind the
contract either so far as regards the party in default or altogether,
as the justice of the case may require.
(2)     Where a contract is rescinded under sub-section (1), the
        court
(a)     shall direct the purchaser or the lessee, if he has obtained
possession of the property under the contract, to restore
such possession to the vendor or lessor, and
(b)     may direct payment to the vendor or lessor of all the rents
and profits which have accrued in respect of the property
from the date on which possession was so obtained by the 
purchaser or lessee until restoration of possession to the
vendor or lessor, and if the justice of the case so requires,
the refund of any sum paid by the vendee or lessee as
earnest money or deposit in connection with the contract.
(3) If the purchaser or lessee pays the purchase money or other
sum which he is ordered to pay under the decree within the period
referred to in sub-section (1), the court may, on application made
in the same suit, award the purchaser or lessee such further relief
as he may be entitled to, including in appropriate cases all or any
of the following reliefs, namely:
(a)     the execution of a proper conveyance or lease by the
vendor or lessor;
(b)     the delivery of possession, or partition and separate
possession,     of the property on the execution of such
conveyance or lease.
(4)     No separate suit in respect of any relief which may be
claimed under this section shall lie at the instance of a
vendor, purchaser, lessor or lessee, as the case may be.
(5)     The costs of any proceedings under this section shall be in
        the discretion of the court.
A few binding precedents on
Section 28
of the Act are
adverted to before answering the point for consideration.
In
ABDUL SHAKER SAHIB
case (1 supra) the Division Bench while  
considering the effect of non-compliance with the condition
stipulated by the Court and also the nature of decree for specific
performance held as follows:
Where plaintiff was given a decree for specific
performance of a contract to sell on condition of his
paying a certain amount to defendant within a specified
time.
Held, the decree is in the nature of a preliminary decree,
the Original Court keeping control over the action and
having full power to make any just and necessary orders
therein, including in appropriate cases the extension of
the time. The vendor may either file a fresh suit for
rescission of the contract or may, in the same suit, apply
to the Court to rescind the contract. The contract is not
determined by mere failure of the plaintiff to pay the
amount within the specified time.  Though certain
persons entitled to the benefit of the contract refused to
join the plaintiffs in the suit and have joined by them as
defendants, the decree for specific performance can be
granted.
Persons who desire the assistance of the Court
in obtaining equitable relief must come quickly.  In each
case is it a question to be decided on the facts whether
the delay on the part of the plaintiff is such that the Court
ought not to exercise its powers.    (emphasis added)

        In
METTA RAMA BHATLU
case (7 supra), Phillips, J was   
determining whether the Court can enlarge the time stipulated in
the decree and if so the manner in which the discretion could be
exercised held as follows:
As an order for specific performance of a contract
for transfer of immoveable property is in the nature of a
preliminary decree and as the Court does retain power to
make any stipulation it thinks fit with reference to the
performance that power extend time vests in the Court
which actually passes the order for specific performance
although it is an appellate Court.
In considering whether time should be granted it has
to be remembered that the delay need not be explained so
minutely in a case  of this sort as in a case, for instance,
under the
Limitation Act
, where it is sought to excuse a bar
of limitation.  Delay in such a case should be looked at more
leniently than in a case of limitation.
To the same effect is the decision of Bombay High Court in
SMT. VATSALA SHANKAR BANSOLE
case (8 supra) and held as under:
In Ramankutty Gupta v. Ayara , the Apex Court has
in no uncertain terms held that after passing the decree for
specific performance, the Court does not cease to have
jurisdiction in the suit but retains the control over the decree
even after the decree has been passed. It is further held that
it is open to the Court to exercise the powers under
Section
28(1)
of the Specific Relief Act either for extension of time or
for rescinding of contract. In the said case, the plaintiff had
deposited the amount after expiry of the period fixed by the
Court under the decree for specific performance of
agreement. The Apex Court while holding that the
application for extension of time for payment of balance
amount of consideration can be filed in the Court of the first
instance as well as in the appellate Court, has observed
that, "It is to be seen that the procedure is hand maid for
justice and unless the procedure touches upon jurisdictional
issue, it should be moulded to subserve substantial justice.
Therefore, technicalities would not stand in the way to
subserve substantive justice."
xxxxxxx 
        ... Undoubtedly, in terms of
Order 20, Rule 12A of
C.P.C
. while passing such a decree, the Court has to specify
the period for payment of consideration amount under the
agreement. At the same time, as observed by the Allahabad 
High Court in the matter referred to above, the Section 35 of
the Specific Relief Act, 1877, which was in force then,
indicated that in event of a party to a decree for specific
performance being in default, another party could either file
a suit for recession of the contract on which specific
performance was granted or he could apply to the Court
which would then rescind the decree.
Section 28
of the
Specific Relief Act, 1963 provides for certain steps to be
taken by the Judgment debtor in a decree for specific
performance of the agreement pursuant to the failure on the
part of the decree holder to perform his obligation under the
decree. Considering these provisions of law, Nagpur High
Court as well as Madras High Court have clearly ruled that
the decree for specific performance of a contract for sale,
has to be in the nature of a preliminary decree, and
therefore, the Court does not become functus officio after
passing such a decree as is fully empowered to extend the
period fixed under the decree for deposit of the money by
the decree holder. This view is confirmed by the Apex Court
in K. Kalpana Saraswathi's case (supra). Considering the
said decision of the Apex Court along with the provisions of
Order 20, Rule 12A of C.P.C
. and other decisions
particularly in the matter of Ramankutty as well as
Hungerford Investment Trust it is to be held that decree in a
suit for the specific performance has to be in the nature of
preliminary decree.
xxxxxxx 
Undisputedly, in the case in hand, the time granted to the
decree holder/petitioner to deposit the balance amount was
of one month from the date of the decree. The application
filed for extension of the time apparently discloses that the
petitioner was ill for about 15 days prior to the filing of the
application and, therefore, she prayed for extension of one
month's time to pay the balance amount. The time was 
apparently granted under the decree to facilitate the
petitioner to make payment of the balance amount, and in
terms of Order 20, Rule 12A, it is necessary for the Court to
grant the time to pay the balance amount while decreeing
the suit for specific performance. It should be always
remembered that the final end of law is justice, and so the
means to it too should be informed by equity as has even
ruled by the Apex Court in K. Kalpana's case (supra). Being
so, merely because there was failure to pay the said amount
within one month and the extension was asked for only for
one month, it was not a case of the petitioner being a
persistent defaulter. Besides the time having been granted
for the benefit of petitioner to enable her to deposit the
balance amount, she could not have been denied the fruits
of the decree in her favour merely on account of few days
delay in making payment of balance amount.
18. Before parting with the matter it is necessary to take note
of the decision of the learned single Judge in
Bhujangrao
Ganpati v. Sheshrao Rajaram
reported, in , though both the
parties have made no reference to
the said decision
.
The
said decision was passed following an un-reported decision
of the Division Bench of this Court in Civil Appeal No.
3964/1958 dated 19-8-1959 and referring to that of the Apex
Court in
Mahanth Ram Das v. Ganga Das
, .
The Apex Court   
in the said case has ruled that Section 148 of C.P.C.
empowers the Court to deal with the events those might
arise subsequent to an order for the purpose of enlarging the
time for payment even though it had been peremptorily fixed,
but also observed that such procedural orders, though
peremptory (conditional decrees apparent) are, in essence,
in terrorem, so that dilatory litigants might put themselves in
order and avoid delay. They do not, however, completely
estope the Court from taking note of events and the
circumstances which happen within the time fixed.
Considering the said ruling of the Apex Court, the learned
single Judge held that "it is, therefore, quite clear that whilst
laying down, in effect, that Section 148 must be liberally
constructed, the Supreme Court has excluded from its ambit
conditional decrees like the one in the present case." It is to
be noted that in the case before the learned single Judge,
the time specified for payment of amount in the decree for
specific performance had already expired and a request for
extension of the said time was rejected by the lower
appellate Court.
In view of provisions of law contained in
Order 20, Rule 12-A
of CPC
, and the decision of the Apex
Court in K. Kalpana Sarawathi (supra) and Ramankutty 
Guptan's (supra), which were delivered subsequent to the
decision in
Mahant Ram Das
's case, it is apparent that the
law as regards the nature of decrees in suit for specific
performance is well settled and it is to be held that the
settled law now is that mere specification of time to pay the
amount and observation therein that in case of failure to pay
amount within the specified time, the suit would stand
dismissed, that would not render such a decree either to be
conditional or final decree and, therefore, the decision of the
learned single Judge in
Bhujangrao Ganpati
's case is no
more a good law and is not binding upon this Court in view
of the above referred Supreme Court decisions which have
been delivered subsequent to
the said decision
in
Bhujangrao Ganpati
's case (supra), and the same being on 
the point in issue.
A Division Bench of this Court in CHERUKURI VENKATA RAO v.     
BRAHMOJOSYULA BALA GANGADHARA SHARMA AND OTHERS                    
considered the ambit of sub-section (3) of
Section 28
of the Act and
also the reasonable extension for performance could be
considered and held as follows:
We may point out at the outset that the filing of an
execution petition by the plaintiff for directing defendants 1 & 2 to
execute a sale deed was really unnecessary.  No execution 
petition as such is necessary for the said purpose after the coming
into force of the
Specific Relief Act, 1963
, sub-section (3) of
Section 28
empowers the Court to direct not only the execution of
sale deed in pursuance of a decree for specific performance, but
also to direct delivery of possession, and to pass all other
necessary and ancillary orders in the same suit.
xxxxxxx 
xxxxxxx 
       Treating the petitioners application as E.P. too does not
mean automatically that since it is filed within twelve years, it
ought to be ordered automatically.  Can it be said that inasmuch
as the decree did not prescribe the time for depositing the balance
consideration, it is open to the purchaser to deposit at any time
within twelve years? Cannot the concept of reasonable period
imported in such a context?  This is the question that we have to
answer.  On this question it is well to remember that the relief of
specific performance is an equitable remedy.  Indeed, the Specific
Relief Act itself is based upon equity, fair play and good
conscience.  It has been held by the Supreme Court in H.I. Trust
vs. Haridas Mundra (AIR 1972) SC 1826) that the contract
between the parties is not extinguished by the passing of a decree
for specific performance, and that the contract subsists
notwithstanding the passing of the decree.  The purchaser cannot,
and should not be allowed to take unfair advantage of the
situation.  He must act with reasonable diligence.  The application
for execution of the sale deed and/or for delivery of possession,
whether by way of an E.P. or an application under
Section 28(3)
must therefore be made within a reasonable time.  What is
reasonable time is a question of fact to be decided in the facts
and circumstances of a given case.  No hard and fast rule can be
enunciated in that behalf.  However, it may be borne in mind that
the period of limitation prescribed by the
Limitation Act
for
enforcing an agreement of sale is three years from the date fixed
for the purpose, or, if no such date is fixed, when the plaintiff has
notice that performance is refused; (
Art.54
). The said period must
be treated as the outer limit, generally speaking.  Indeed, it should
be much sooner.
The Apex Court in
BHUPINDER KUMAR
case (3 supra) examined       
the nature of decree for specific performance and the power of
court under
Section 28
of the Act and held as follows:
The following questions arose for consideration before this Court:
(i) Whether the Court has power to extend the time in favour of a
decree holder to pay the balance amount/perform conditions as
mentioned in the decree for specific performance?
(ii) Whether the appellant had shown sufficient and reasonable
ground for extension of time?
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
In
K. Kalpana Saraswathi v. P.S.S. Somasundaram Chettiar
:
(1980) 1 SCC 630, this Court has held that the court has power
under
Section 28
of the Act to extend time for making deposit. The
following conclusion in para 4 is relevant:
It is perfectly open to the court in control of a suit for
specific performance to extend the time for deposit, and
this Court may do so even now to enable the plaintiff to get
the advantage of the agreement to sell in her favour. The
disentitling circumstances relied upon by the defendant-
respondent are offset by the false pleas raised in the course
of the suit by him and rightly negatived. Nor are we convinced
that the application for consideration and extension of time
cannot be read, as in substance it is, a petition for more time
to deposit. Even so, specific performance is an equitable
relief and he who seeks equity can be put on terms to ensure
that equity is done to the opposite party even while granting
the relief. The final end of law is justice, and so the means to
it too should be informed by equity. That is why he who seeks
equity shall do equity. Here, the assignment of the mortgage
is not a guileless discharge of the vendor's debt as implied in
the agreement to sell but a disingenuous disguise to arm
herself with a mortgage decree to swallow up the property in
case the specific performance litigation misfires. To sterilise
this decree is necessary equity to which the appellant must
submit herself before she can enjoy the. fruits of specific
performance.
It is clear that the decree is in the nature of preliminary
decree and the suit would continue and be under the control of the
Court till either party moves for passing final decree. It is also
clear that though the court has power to extend time and it is the
duty of the court to apply the principle of equity to both parties.
In
Kumar Dhirendra Mullick and Ors. v. Tivoli Park
Apartments (P) Ltd.
: (2005) 9 SCC 262, this Court, after
analyzing earlier decisions, has concluded that:
when the court passes the decree for
specific performance, the contract between the
parties is not extinguished. The court does not lose its
jurisdiction after the grant of the decree for specific
performance nor does it become functus officio. The
decree for specific performance is in the nature of a
preliminary decree, and the suit is deemed to be
pending even after the grant of such decree. Hence,
the Court retains control over the entire matter even
after the decree.
Section 28
gives power to grant
order of rescission of the agreement which itself
indicates that till the sale deed is executed, the Trial
Court retains its power and jurisdiction to deal with the
decree of specific performance. Therefore, the court
has the power to enlarge the time in favour of the
decree-holder to pay the amount or to perform the
conditions mentioned in the decree for specific
performance.
It is clear that
Section 28
gives power to the court either to
extend the time for compliance of the decree or grant order of
rescission of the agreement. These powers are available to the
Trial Court which passes decree of specific performance. In other
words, when the court passes the decree for specific
performance, the contract between the parties is not extinguished.
To put it clear that the decree for specific performance is in the
nature of preliminary decree and the suit is deemed to be pending
even after the decree. Sub-
section 1
of
Section 28
makes it clear
that the court does not lose its jurisdiction after the grant of decree
for specific performance nor it becomes functus officio. On the
other hand,
Section 28
gives power to the Court to grant order of
rescission of the agreement and it has the power to extend the
time to pay the amount or perform the conditions of decree for
specific performance despite the application for rescission of the
agreement/decree. In deciding application under
Section 28(1)
of
the Act, the Court has to see all attending circumstances including
the conduct of the parties.
As discussed earlier, though the Court has power and
discretion to extend the time for fulfillment of the contract, in the
case on hand, there is neither any material to show that the
appellant was having the required money nor had he tendered or
deposited the same as per the terms of the decree. Both the
Executing Court and the High Court found that there was no just
and reasonable cause to extend the time for depositing the
balance consideration.
In the circumstances and the materials placed, we are
satisfied that due to bereft of any acceptable material for
extension of time, the Executing Court rightly declined to extend
the time, consequently rescinded the contract as requested by the
respondent judgment-debtor. The High Court, after analyzing all
these aspects and finding that the decision arrived at by the
Executing Court is just and equitable, dismissed the revision. We
are in entire agreement with the said conclusion. Consequently,
the appeal fails and the same is dismissed.
In
PREM JEEVAN V. K.S.VENKATA RAMAN AND ANOTHER
, the             
Supreme Court was considering failure of judgement debtor to
apply for rescission and the effect of such failure on the validity of
the decree.
This binding precedent answers the two decisions relied
on by Mr.Siva Reddy, viz.,
Abdul SHAKER SAHIBS & METLA RAMA       
BHATLU
case.  I find it useful to advert the very question that was
decided and also the ratio on the point.
The short question that arises for consideration in
these appeals is: whether failure of the decree-holder in a
suit for specific performance to make the requisite deposit
within the specified time, will permit the decree-holder to
execute the decree in the absence of extension of time?
xxxxxxxxxxx  
xxxxxxxxxxx  
        There is no doubt that the above provision permits
the judgment-debtor to seek rescission of a contract and
also permits extension of time by the court but merely
because rescission of contract is not sought by the
judgment-debtor, does not automatically result in extension
of time
            In
V.S.PARANICHAMY CHETTIAR FIRM
case (2 supra), the Honble  
Apex Court held thus:
The agreement of sale was entered into as far back on
February 16, 1980, about 19 years ago. No explanation is
forthcoming as to why the balance amount of consideration
could not be deposited within time granted by the court and
why no application was made under
Section 28
of the Act
seeking extension of time of this period. Under
Article 54
of
the Limitation Act, 3 years period is prescribed for filing the
suit for specific performance of contract of sale from the date
of the agreement or when the cause of action arises. Merely
because a suit is filed within the prescribed period of limitation
does not absolve the vendee-plaintiff from showing as to
whether he was ready and willing to perform his part of
agreement and if there was non-performance was that on 
account of any obstacle put by the vendor or otherwise.
Provisions to grant specific performance of an agreement are
quite stringent. Equitable considerations come into play.
Court has to see all the attendant circumstances including if
the vendee has conducted himself in a reasonable manner 
under the contract of sale. That being the position of law for
filing the suit for specific performance, can the court as a
matter of course allow extension of time for making payment
of balance amount of consideration in terms of a decree after
5 years of passing of the decree by the trial court and 3 years
of its confirmation by the appellate court? It is not the case of
the respondent- decree holder that on account of any fault on
the part of the vendor- judgment-debtor, the amount could not
be deposited as per the decree. That being the position, if
now time is granted, that would be going beyond the period of
limitation prescribed for filing of the suit for specific
performance of the agreement though this provision may not
be strictly applicable. It is nevertheless an important
circumstance to be considered by the Court. That apart, no
explanation whatsoever is coming from the decree-holder-
respondents as to why they did not pay the balance amount 
of consideration as per the decree except what the High
Court itself thought fit to comment which is certainly not borne
out from the record. Equity demands that discretion be not
exercised in favour of the decree holder-respondents and no
extension of time be granted to them to comply with the
decree.
The decision of the Apex Court in RAJENDER KUMAR V. KULDEEP       
SINGH AND OTHERS  case is directly on the facts-in-issue in the case 
on hand as well and illustrated the manner of exercise of equity,
jurisdiction or discretion by the Court, which reads as follows:
Held, as in the case of determining whether a decree for
specific performance is to be granted in the first place where
equity weights with the court, so is the situation in considering
an application under
S.28
SRA for rescinding the contract  If
the purchaser is entitled to claim compensation for
deterioration, a fortiori it must be held that the vendor should
also be entitled to compensation for accretion in value of the
subject-matter of the agreement for specific performance, in
case the execution thereof is unduly delayed by the
purchaser
S.28
provides that the court has to pass an order
as justice of the case requires  Court did not advert to one of
the main contentions regarding the escalation in land value by
which the vendors has to incur liability of around four times
the balance consideration by way of payment of unearned
increase to the L&DO so as to complete their obligation which
arose only on account of the delayed execution of the decree
 In the facts and circumstances of the case, it is very difficult
to balance the equity and rights of both the parties in the
background of their conduct as both plaintiff purchaser and
defendant vendors were equally at fault -  However, balancing
equities purchaser directed to pay vendors the land value as
per prevailing notified circle fate  Purchaser also held liable
to meet the unearned increase to be paid to the L&DO 
Equity.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances the
High Court has not made an attempt to balance equity.  As in
the case of determining whether a decree for specific
performance is to be granted in the first place where equity
weighs with the court, so is the situation in considering an
application under
Section 28
of the Specific Relief Act, 1963
for rescinding the contract.  Under
Section 28
of the Specific
Relief Act, 1963, a vendor is free to apply to the court which
made decree to have the contract rescinded in case the
purchaser has not paid the purchase money or other sum 
which the court has ordered him to pay within the period
allowed by the decree or such other period as the court may
allow.  On such an application, the court may, by order,
rescind the contract as the justice of the case may require. It
is now settled law that a suit for specific performance does
not come to an end on passing of a decree and the Court
which passed the decree retains control over the decree even
after the decree has been passed and the decree is
sometimes described as the preliminary decree.  A decree for
specific performance is a decree in favour of both the plaintiff
and the defendant in the suit.  Hence, the decree can be
executed either by the plaintiff or the defendant.  The plaintiff
or the defendant is also free to approach the court for
appropriate clarification/directions in the event of any
ambiguity or supervening factors making the execution of the
decree unexecutable.
In the instant case, converse is the position.  If the
purchaser is entitled to claim compensation for deterioration,
a fortiori it must be held that the vendor should also be
entitled to compensation for accretion in value of the subject
matter of the agreement for specific performance, in case the
execution thereof is unduly delayed by the purchaser.
Section 28
of the Specific Relief Act provides that the court
has to pass an order as the justice of the case may require.
The parties on approaching the court must get the feeling that
justice has been done in the facts and circumstances of the
case, particularly in specific performance related cases, in
terms of equity, equality and fairness.  In the facts and
circumstances of the case, it is very difficult to balance the
equity and balance the rights of both the parties in the
background of their conduct.  No doubt there was no time
fixed in the agreement for payment of the purchase money.
That was also contingent on a series of obligations to be
performed by the vendor and the duty of the purchaser to pay
the purchase money was only thereafter.  But closely
analysing the pleadings and submissions, the purchaser had
made an attempt, though belatedly, for getting the obligations
performed even at his expense.
The trial court should have passed an equitable order
while considering the application for rescission.  Having
regard to the fact that the decree was passed in 1984, it
would be unjust and unfair to relegate the parties to the trial
court at this distance of time.  For doing complete justice to
the parties, it is a case where the purchaser should be
directed to pay the land value to the vendors as per the
circles rate prevailing during 16-11-2011 to 5-1-2012.
The meaning of the words Equity Jurisdiction and Equity
Jurisprudence, in P. Ramanatha Aiyars Advanced Law Lexicon 
reads thus:
Equity jurisdiction: A broad and flexible
jurisdiction to grant remedial relief where justice and good
conscience demands it, but without purporting to create
rights, being limited to determining what rights the parties
have and whether or in what manner it is just and proper
to enforce them.  A jurisdiction in two categories, the one
dependent upon the substantive character of the right
sought to be enforced, the other dependent upon the
inadequacy of the legal remedy.
The term equity jurisdiction does not refer to
jurisdiction in the sense of the power conferred by the
sovereign on the Court over specified subject-matters or
to jurisdiction over the res or the persons of the parties in
a particular proceeding but refers rather to the merits.
The want of equity jurisdiction does not mean that the
Court has no power to act but that it should not act, as on
the ground, for example, that there is an adequate
remedy at law.
Equity jurisprudence that portion of remedial
justice which is exclusively administered by a Court of
equity as contradistinguished from that portion of
remedial justice which is exclusively administered by a
Court of Common Law.
Maxims of Equity. Pervading the administration of
equity in all its branches there appears a recognition of
certain broad principles, so generally accepted and of
such fundamental character, that they have become 
known as maxims. They are not the practical and final
doctrines of rules which determine the equitable rights
and duties of individual persons, and which are constantly
cited by the Courts in their decisions or judicial
controversies. They are rather the fruitful germs from
which these doctrines and rules have grown by a process
of natural evolution. Having not anywhere been
authoritatively declared as a code of rules, they have not
been expressed precisely in the same form by different
writers, and the treatises are not even in record as to
what precepts should be dignified as maxims. Most of
these maxims of equity have received general
acceptance.
What follows from that precedes on the point is:-
(i)       a decree passed in a suit for specific performance is in        
                the nature of a preliminary decree;
(ii)
Section 28 (1)
of the Act provides for depositing or
paying purchase money or such/other money as may   
allow; or allows the vendor or lessor to apply for
rescission in certain cases of contract of sale of
immoveable property where the specific performance
has been granted;
(iii)   Sub-section (2) enables the Court to pass orders on
restoration of possession together with the profits, if any
derived by vendee to vendor;
(iv)    Sub-section (3) allows the Court to grant reliefs of
execution of proper conveyance, delivery of
possession etc.
(v)     Sub-section (4) bars a separate suit for any relief which
can be claimed in the same suit under
Section 28
;
(vi)    Therefore, the Court which passed the decree does not
become functous officio with the passing of decree for
specific performance;
(vii)   the power under
Section 28
is discretionary and the
        court exercises equity jurisdiction.
(viii)  the exercise of discretion under this Section must be
equitable to both the vendor and the purchaser and
on exceptional factors that justify such grant beyond
the time specified in the decree.  The further caution
exercised by the Court in its discretion is that the
extension of time is not a matter of course, or for
protracted periods, which would result in parties acting
with laxity or the relief if granted would be iniquitous to
the contesting party.
(ix)    the language of sub-section (4) of
Section 28
of the Act
        reads thus:
No separate suit in respect of any relief which may be
claimed under this section shall lie at the instance of a
vendor, purchaser, lessor or lessee, as the case may be.
(x)     Therefore, the default if any subsequent to the decree
for specific performance resulting in extension of time
or rescission of contract, is decided in the same
application and having regard to the broad terms in
which
Section 28 (1)
and (4) are worded, in an
application either filed for extension of time or rescission
of contract, the Court can exercise its equity jurisdiction
under
Section 28
of the Act and pass comprehensive 
orders which give quietus to the dispute without
recourse to fresh suit.
Now, let me examine the order under revision within the
scope of Section 115 of the Civil Procedure Code by keeping in
view the legal propositions adverted to supra.
In cases like the one on hand, the Court in exercise of equity
jurisdiction or discretion walks the path the circumstances have laid
in the case. That means, the Court appreciates the circumstances
pleaded and proved; thereafter applies the provision of law.
In other words, exercise of discretion is guided by circumstances of
the case and the Court ought not to enter into extraneous matters.
Now, let me revert to the facts of the case.
The circumstances leading to filing of I.A.No.58 of 2011 are
adverted to in detail in preceding paragraphs. This Court both for
precision and to avoid repetition does not refer to these
circumstances once again, but appreciates these circumstances 
chronologically and examines whether discretion the Court has
been exercising judiciously or not.
On 30.10.1994, the suit agreement was executed between  
the 1st plaintiff and the 1st defendant.  The suit was filed in the
year 2000.  On 30.09.2005, the suit was decreed for specific
performance of an extent of Ac.0-19 cents instead of Ac.0-22
cents.   As per the decree, the balance sale consideration of
Rs.5,68,000/- is payable on or before 30.11.2005.  This Court notices
the tender of balance sale consideration of Rs.5,68,000/- made on
29.11.2005 by the plaintiff.  The lodgment challan was returned by
reference to the stay of all proceedings granted in C.R.P.No.3987 of
2005 by this Court.  On 29.03.2006, C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005 was 
dismissed.  On 31.08.2009, the 1st plaintiff died.  On 18.09.2010, the
application for extension of time is filed by the plaintiffs.  Let me first
examine the time spells namely the 1st time spell of two months
which expired by 30.11.2005.  The 1st plaintiff tendered the balance
sale consideration by way of lodgment challan, but was
unsuccessful on account of the stay granted by this Court in
C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005.  The excuse now offered by the plaintiff for
not depositing the balance sale consideration is that the plaintiff
did not contest C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005 and, therefore, was unaware
of dismissal of C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005 on 29.03.2006.  The defendants
on the other hand contend that the plaintiff was represented by an
Advocate and ignorance pleaded is only a convenient plea to
show sufficient cause for the delay.  The said dispute is verified by
referring to the cause-title in C.R.P.No.3987 of 2005.  The suit was
decreed on 30.09.2005.  On 03.10.2005, this Court granted stay of all
further proceedings in O.S.No.6 of 2000.  By the time the stay was
granted, the suit was already decreed.  The plaintiff ought to have
been vigilant and taken steps for re-submitting the lodgment
challan with a suitable reply but instead 1st plaintiff during his lifetime
preferred to keep quiet.  The 1st plaintiff if is desirous of completing
the reciprocal promise, is expected to act with due diligence and
avoid consequences arising out of non-performance including
rescission of contract.  It is because of this reason, it is immaterial
whether plaintiff did contest the CRP or not. The voluntary
non-participation by 1st plaintiff in CRP ought not to be treated as
sufficient excuse.
Civil Rules Practice, Rules 157 to 159 (old), {corresponding to
Rules 225 to 227 of the Civil Rules of Practice and Circular Orders
1980}, deal with deposit by a party into the Court.  The effect of
applying for lodgment challan within the time and the deposit of
amount subsequent to the time granted by a
Rule under CPC
or 
the time granted by the Court in the decree has been considered
by a Division Bench of this Court in AMBATI RAGHAVALU v. MOVVA     
VENKAMMA AND OTHERS .  The tender within the time is accepted as      
complying with the requirement of Rule or the condition stipulated
by the decree, even if the amount could be deposited into Court
by the party beyond the stipulated time.  In the said circumstances,
AMBATI RAGHAVALU case which has arisen under
Order XXI Rule 85 of     
CPC
has held as follows:
It is obligatory on the part of the auction purchaser to
satisfy the conditions of Or.XXI Rule 85 and including
General Stamp duty and any default in that behalf will result
in the properties being re-sold.
It is clear that rules 157 & 158 of Civil Rules of
Practice insist on a challan being obtained before a payment
could be made into court.  Without a challan, a deposit could
not be made.
Thus, this is the first step in the process of making the
deposit if the court does not issue the challan in spite of the
application for it by the party before the expiry of the
prescribed period, he is not in a position to fulfil the
obligations cast by Rule 85.  So, the non-observance of the
terms of Rule 85 is not due to any default or negligence on
his part but due to causes beyond his control. It is the
inaction or the erroneous act of the court that is responsible
for the inability of the party to deposit the money into Court.
It is in such a situation that the maxim Actus Curia Neminem
Gravabit i.e., an act of the Court prejudices no man comes
into play.  When a litigant is unable to comply with the
requirements of a statute not because of his own fault but on
account of the action or inaction of a court, the principle
underlying that maxim is attracted.
A party is not entitled to resort to Rule 159 when the
Bank or the treasury is working.
It is no argument to say that had he been diligent in
applying for a challan long before, he would have obtained
one and would have been in a position to comply with the
requirements of that rule.  A party expects a court to be
diligent in the despatch of its business and not to be inactive.
If really a party is disabled to perform the obligations owning
to an act of the court, he should not be made to suffer the
penal consequences flowing from the non performance 
thereof.
Filing an application for challan before the prescribed
time was sufficient compliance with the mandatory provisions
of
O. XXI
Rule 85 CPC
and hence O. XXI Rule 86 is not
attracted.
The ratio laid down in AMBATI RAGHAVULU case could be    
applied to the case on hand if the Court ordered issue of
lodgement challan or the lodgement challan returned by the Court
was represented and the balance of sale consideration was
deposited beyond reasonable time after 30.11.2005.  The decision
of this Court in ABMATI RAGHAVULU is distinguishable to the facts and 
circumstances of the case.  Therefore, the application for lodgment
challan cannot be treated as amounting to performing the
direction as stipulated in the decree.  Further, the Apex Court in
RAJENDER KUMAR (supra) has held that the Court exercises equity    
jurisdiction and all aspects of the matter are considered on the day
when the discretion is exercised.  For this reason as well, the plaintiff
could not establish the performance within the reasonable time.
Be that as it may, the plaintiff was alive up to 30.08.2009.
That means, if we calculate the time from the date of decree and
judgment, the plaintiff was alive for three years eleven months.
If we take the starting period from the date of disposal of C.R.P., on
29.03.2006, the plaintiff was alive for 3 years 5 months.  The
application is filed nearly after five years from the date of decree
and judgment and the trial court exercised its discretion through
order dated 04.01.2012 on sympathetic consideration.  In other
words, substantial time for deposit of balance sale consideration is
accepted nearly after seven years from the date of decree and
judgment. At the time of exercise of the discretion these aspects
are crucial and relevant one way or other.
As held by precedents the trial Court, even with the
passing of decree for specific performance, retains the power to
consider prayers connected with or incidental to the terms of
decree.  In other wards, the Court, which has passed the decree for
specific performance retains control over the decree even after the
decree has been passed.  The challenge to the order under revision
is that the discretion though is available to the Court, the discretion
has been arbitrarily exercised and secondly such wide or unfettered
discretion as held by Apex Court in RAJENDER KUMAR case     
(11 supra) is not available to the Court. The execution of the decree
for specific performance arises if the obligations fastened in the
decree are fulfilled.  Therefore, for filing an application for extension,
the period of limitation for execution of the decree is not the
applicable act even for guidance. Mr.Suresh Kumar contends that
in exercising the discretion under
Section 28
, the Court is required to
see all the attendant circumstances including the conduct of the
parties.  At the bottom of exercise of discretion, justice must be
done in terms of equity, equality and fairness.  The exercise of
discretion under this Section must be equitable to both the vendor
and vendee; and in exceptional factors or circumstances that
justify such grant beyond the time specified in the decree for
paying balance sale consideration.  The grant of extension for
deposit as a matter of course or for protracted periods results in
parties undertaking their obligations under the decree with a sense
of latitude.
The consideration of discretion cannot and ought not to be
accepted in case where the Court has to show maximum latitude  
in favour of applicant or Court accepts every circumstance stated
by the party.  Such discretion, if exercised, results in prejudice and
hardship to the contesting parties.  The Court while considering the
request for extension of time can and also could direct refund of
advance money received by the defendant if case for extension of
time is not favourably considered.  With a view to doing justice
between the parties, the Court can also direct repayment with such
terms and conditions as are just and proper.
Considering the case on hand, in the above analysis, this
Court is of the view that the first effort made by 1st plaintiff to
deposit the balance sale consideration, even if accepted as
sincere and the plaintiff was prevented by the order of stay granted
by this Court, the inaction thereafter does not relieve the plaintiffs
the heavy burden fastened on them in showing that they were
diligent etc.  Further, the subsequent inaction of 1st plaintiff during
his life time is inexplicable and the inaction is substantially for three
years and five months.  The plaintiff did not file an application either
within reasonable period or at least within three years from the date
on which the time granted by the Court expired or the C.R.P. was
dismissed.  The plaintiff was alive for 3 years 5 months from the date
of disposal of the C.R.P.  The application is now filed by the legal
representatives of plaintiff nearly after five years.  The extension of
time for depositing balance sale consideration after lapse of five
years requires deeper examination, and whether by exercising such
discretion one party is subjected to hardship, irreparable injury etc.
ought to be examined.  In the fact situation of this case, the
discretion exercised by the trial Court is more on sympathetic
grounds.  In the performance of obligation under commercial
contract where sale and purchase of immovable property is
involved, the Court ought not to extend time for deposit of balance
sale consideration on sympathetic ground and secondly beyond 
the reasonable period accepted by the precedents or time
stipulated in the decree. It is another thing if a party is prevented by
an act or omission by opposite party or orders of competent Court.
If the party is not prevented by circumstances from acting, the
equity jurisdiction demands timely reflex or performance by
plaintiff/purchaser for invoking the equity jurisdiction.   If extension is
considered and granted, then the conditions stipulated by the
Court in the decree are not treated with sanctity.  This Court hastens
to add that if the delay in deposit or default in meeting the time
limit is attributable to defendant/judgment debtor, then the
consideration is different in exercising the discretion by the Court
under
Section 28
of the Act and the limitations referred to above
are examined on case to case basis.
For the above reasons, this Court is of the view that the
exercise of discretion for extension of time by the trial Court is illegal
and untenable.  The point is answered accordingly.
The counsel are also heard on the obligation of vendor to
refund the advance amount received in the year 1994.   In the case
on hand, meagre advance of Rs.40,000/- was paid and received 
by revision petitioners father/vendor.  The sale consideration was
deposited as per the order under revision on 06.01.2012.  The
affidavit filed by revision petitioner to refund Rs.50,00,000/- (Rupees
fifty lakhs only) in full quits of all the obligations under the
agreement dated 31.10.1994 and the decree and judgment in  
O.S.No.6 of 2000 is taken on file and accepted.  The order in the
revision is set aside.
The Civil Revision Petition is, accordingly, allowed and
ordered as follows:-
(i)     the order dated 04.01.2012 in I.A.No.58 of 2011 is set
aside.
(ii)    the affidavit of revision petitioner is accepted and
revision petitioner deposits Rs.50,00,000/- (Rupees fifty
lakhs only) to the credit of O.S.No.6 of 2000 on or before
03.02.2019.
(iii)   On such deposit alone, the obligations in the
agreement of sale dated 31.10.1994 read with decree
dated 30.09.2005 stand  rescinded and in default the
rescission ordered by this Court shall be deemed to
have been withdrawn, leaving it open to decree
holder to work out the remedy by filing E.P.
(iv)    On an application made for refund by plaintiffs, the trial
court is directed to refund Rs.5,68,000/- together with
interest accrued thereon to plaintiffs 2 to 4/respondents
2 to 4.
No order as to costs.
Pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, stand closed.
___________     
S.V.BHATT, J  
Date: 03.10.2018