[Cites
17
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Aijaz Ahmed @ Mohd. Sharfuddin, S/O. ... vs 1.The Union Of India, Rep. By Secretary ... on 8 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 146, (2018) 4 ANDHLD 661, (2019) 1 ALD(CRL) 965, (2019) 1 CRIMES 218
Author:
J.Uma Devi
Bench:
J.Uma Devi
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN AND HONBLE Ms. JUSTICE J.UMA DEVI                  

Writ Petition No.6703 of 2018

08-6-2018 

Aijaz Ahmed @ Mohd. Sharfuddin, S/o. Mohd. Qutubuddin, Aged 57 years, Occ: Translator, R/o. H.No.16-9-409/21,  Old Malakpet,  


1.The Union of India, Rep. by Secretary of Ministry for Home Affairs, New Delhi  2. The State of Telangana, Rep. by its Chie

Counsel for Petitioner:Mr. M.Ram Reddy 

Counsel for Respondents 1&2:    GP for GAD (TG) 
 Counsel for Respondents 3to6:  GP for Home (TG) 
 Counsel for Respondents 7to9:   Mr. N.Naveen Kumar  
 Counsel for Respondents 10to14: ---

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1.(2014) 2 SCC 1 
2.(2006) 1 SCC 627 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN           
AND  
HONBLE Ms. JUSTICE J.UMA DEVI      
Writ Petition No.6703 of 2018

Order: (per V.Ramasubramanian, J.) 

      The petitioner has come up with the above writ petition
seeking a declaration that the failure of the 6th respondent/
Station House Officer, Malakpet Police Station, to register
a FIR against the respondents 7 to 14 despite the orders of
the learned VII Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate in
Sr.No.683 of 2018, dated 22-02-2018, is illegal and also to
declare the action of the 8th respondent/Deputy
Commissioner of Police and his subordinates in harassing the
petitioner and his family members as illegal.
      2. Heard Mr. M.Ram Reddy, learned counsel for the
petitioner, the learned Government Pleaders (GAD) and
(Home) and Mr. Naveen Kumar, learned counsel for the 
respondents 7 to 9.
      3. The averments with which the petitioner has come up
with the above writ petition are that the petitioner is doing the
job of a Translator for the past 25 years; that a person by
name R.Srinivas, who is the 10th respondent herein, used to
come to his office regularly for translation of some Urdu
documents; that in May-June, 2017, the 10th respondent 
along with some Police personnel of the Central Crime Station
came to the petitioners house and requested the petitioner to
give a statement against one B.Sailesh Saxena, Advocate, 
by offering an amount of Rs.5,00,000/-; that they wanted the
petitioner to give a statement before the Assistant
Commissioner of Police, who is the 7th respondent, to the
effect that the petitioner used to prepare forged and fabricated
documents for Mr. B.Sailesh Saxena, Advocate, in respect of
the properties situate in Hyderabad and Ranga Reddy 
District; that when the petitioner refused to give such false
statements, the officials of the Central Crime Station took the
petitioner on 11-10-2017 at 3.30 p.m. to the Central Crime
Station; that due to the harassment meted out at the police
station, the petitioner had a chest-pain and got admitted in
Apollo Hospital; that the said R.Srinivas, R.Krishna Kumar,
P.Thirmal Reddy along with the Police personnel of the
Central Crime Station are regularly visiting the petitioners
house and threatening him to give false statement; that they
also offered to pay Rs.5,00,000/- to the petitioner; that the
10th respondent came to the petitioners house and offered
an advance of Rs.2,00,000/-, but the petitioner refused; that
the petitioner was informed that several cases were foisted
against Sailesh Saxena at the instance of land grabbers
(respondents 13 and 14) since the said Sailesh Saxena filed
civil cases and obtained orders against these land grabbers;
that due to such harassments, the petitioner made
arrangements to shift from Malakpet to Somajiguda; that
under these circumstances, the 10th respondent came to the 
house of the petitioner along with the respondents 13 and 14;
that while the respondents 13 and 14 were sitting in the car,
the 10th respondent came to the petitioner and offered
Rs.25,00,000/- for giving a false statement against Sailesh
Saxena; that the 10th respondent also told the petitioner that
the respondents 13 and 14 had come to meet the petitioner;
that when the petitioner refused to meet them, they left; that
thereafter, the petitioner and his son went to M.S. Maqta for
searching for a house for rental purposes; that at that time,
the car in which the respondents 10, 13 and 14 came, started
following the petitioners car; that after seeing this, the
petitioner stopped his car near the Masjid at M.S. Maqta; that
immediately, the 10th respondent again came to the petitioner
and threatened that unless the petitioner gave a false
statement against the Advocate, he will be implicated in false
cases; that in order to avoid the harassment, the petitioner
entered the Masjid at M.S. Maqta for namaz; that after the
petitioner took treatment in Apollo Hospital and was
proceeding to Asmangadh from T.V. Tower Road, the  
respondents followed the petitioners car, overtook his car
near Samhita St. Thomas College and stopped the car and  
again threatened the petitioner; that therefore the petitioner
filed W.P.No.27608 of 2017 and the same was admitted by  
this Court; that the petitioner is suffering from diabetes,
hypertension and heart ailment for the past 15 years; that
though the petitioner gave lot of complaints to the
Commissioner of Police, no action was taken against the
respondents 7 to 14; that on a private complaint filed in
C.C.Sr.No.683 of 2018, the VIII Additional Chief Metropolitan
magistrate passed an order dated 22-02-2018 referring the
case to Malakpet Police Station under
Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C;
that the Station House Officer did not register a FIR due to
the influence of respondents 7 and 8; that thereafter
respondents 10 to 14 came to the petitioners house on
25-02-2018 in two cars and threatened the petitioner to
withdraw the complaint; that they also warned the petitioner
that he will be implicated in multiple criminal cases and that
therefore the petitioner was compelled to approach this Court
by way of the above writ petition.
      4. The 6th respondent/Station House Officer has filed
a counter affidavit denying the allegations of harassment and
also denying the allegations that the petitioner was forced to
give false statements against Mr. Sailesh Saxena. It is also
contended in the counter affidavit that in the course of
investigation of the criminal complaints against an Advocate
by name Mr. Sailesh Saxena, it was discovered that the
petitioner along with other accused created documents in the
name of non-existent persons, enabling the initiation of
a bogus litigation against the original owners of the properties
in Bhojagutta and Banjara Hills with the aim of coercing the
owners into a settlement for financial gain; that in view of the
said discovery, a notice under
Section 91
/
160
Cr.P.C was
attempted to be served on the petitioner; that the office of the
petitioner carrying the name board AIMS Associates was
found locked; that it was learnt that the petitioner had gone
to Saudi Arabia for Umrah; that the petitioner thereafter filed
W.P.No.27608 of 2017 alleging that the officials of the Central
Crime Station offered him money in order to falsely implicate
Sailesh Saxena in the criminal cases; that though the
petitioner is claiming ignorance of the cases filed against
Sailesh Saxena, he has made a reference in his Affidavit to
the civil cases filed by Sailesh Saxena, showing thereby that
he was a puppet in the hands of Sailesh Saxena; that when
the petitioner was summoned to the Central Crime Station for
examination and verification of the veracity of the confession
made by Sailesh Saxena implicating the petitioner, the
petitioner appeared for an enquiry on 11-10-2017; that after
his appearance along with his son, the petitioner claimed that
he was a patient suffering from heart ailments; that the
petitioner also gave an undertaking to appear whenever
required, for investigation; that after the VII Additional Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate, Nampally, referred the complaint by
order dated 22-02-2018 for investigation and report, the
petitioner was summoned to the police station; that at that
time the petitioner stated that he never lodged any complaint;
that therefore the Station House Officer submitted a detailed
report in Sr.No.1202 of 2018, dated 10-4-2018; and that the
present writ petition is only to pre-empt public servants from
performing their lawful duties and hence the same is liable to
be dismissed. 
      5. Drawing our attention to the private complaint filed
by the petitioner on the file of the VII Additional Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate in Sr.No.683 of 2018 and the docket
order passed by the learned Magistrate on 22-02-2018
referring the complaint to the Police under
Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C for investigation and report, it is contended by the
learned counsel for the petitioner that as per the law declared
by the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Lalita
Kumari v. Government of U.P. , the Station House Officer
was obliged to register a FIR and proceed with the
investigation and that the failure of the 6th respondent to do
so is an abdication of duties. The learned counsel for the
petitioner also invited our attention to a judgment of the
Supreme Court in Mohd. Yousuf v. Smt. Afaq Jahan  and  
contended that the scope of the investigation contemplated
under
Section 156
of the Code is different from the scope of
the investigation envisaged in
Section 202
Cr.P.C.
The Supreme Court in that case indicated various steps to be
taken for investigation under
Section 156
Cr.P.C. The
investigation should start with the making of an entry in
a book to be kept by the officer-in-charge of a police station,
of the substance of the information relating to the
commission of a cognizable offence. The investigation started
thereafter can end up only with a report filed by the Police as
indicated in
Section 173
Cr.P.C. It was further held by the
Supreme Court in that case that even if a Magistrate does not
say so in so many words, while directing investigation under
Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C., it is the duty of the Police Officer to
register the FIR, because that Police Officer should take
further steps contemplated in Chapter-XII of the Code only
thereafter.
      6. Therefore, on the basis of the law declared by the
Supreme Court in Mohd. Yousuf, it is contended by the
learned counsel for the petitioner that since the Additional
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate has passed an order on
22-02-2018 referring the matter to the Police under
Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C for investigation and report, the Police
have no alternative except to register the FIR.
      7. We have carefully considered the above submissions.
      8. Before we proceed to consider the contentions of the
learned counsel for the petitioner, it may be necessary to
record one important fact, which is not borne out by the
records in this case but which has a causal connection to the
case on hand. The present writ petition was actually tagged
along with W.P.No.4023 of 2018 filed by an Advocate by name 
B.Sailesh Saxena. The learned Government Pleader wanted   
both writ petitions to be taken together. But the learned
counsel for the petitioner insisted that this case is different
from the case filed by Mr. Sailesh Saxena and that they need
not be heard together. Though we conceded the request, both
writ petitions were heard on the same day. While the present
writ petition was heard in the morning on 02-5-2018 (the last
working day for Court before the closure of court for Summer
Vacation), the other writ petition W.P.No.4023 of 2018 filed by
the Advocate Mr. B.Sailesh Saxena was heard in the 
afternoon on the same date.
      9. The reason why we are recording the above fact is 
      (i) that in W.P.No.4023 of 2018, there are 17
respondents while there are 14 respondents in the present
writ petition;
      (ii) that the respondents 1 to 9 in both the writ petitions
are the same;
      (iii) that the respondents 11 to 15 in W.P.No.4023 of
2018 are the respondents 10 to 14 in the present writ
petition; and
      (iv) that the prayers in both the writ petitions are exactly
identical, as could be seen from the following table:
Prayer in W.P.No.4023/2018  
Prayer in W.P.No.6703/2018  
For the reasons stated in the
accompanying affidavit, the
petitioner herein prays that this
Honble Court may be pleased to 
order, direction particularly one in
the nature of writ of Mandamus or
any other appropriate writ
1) to declare the action of
Respondent No.6 in not registering
the FIR against the Respondent 
Nos.7 to 17 inspite of orders and
direction from the learned
XIV Additional Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate, Nampally, Hyderabad 
in Sr.No.662/2018 vide
Dis.No.150/XIV ACMM/HYD/2018    
dated 05-02-2018 as illegal,
arbitrary and unconstitutional in
the interest of justice and pass
such other order or orders may
deem fit and proper in the
circumstances of the case,
2) to declare the action of the
Respondent No.8 and his 
subordinates to harass the
petitioner and his family members
by coming with anti social elements
of land mafia to the petitioners
house and threatened to withdraw
the said crime pending before the
Respondent No.6 which was  
registered against the Respondent
Nos.7 to 17 as illegal, arbitrary,
unconstitutional in the interest of
justice and pass such other order
or orders may deem fit and proper
in the interest of justice and
3) to declare the action of
Respondent Nos.7 and 8  
threatening petitioner and his
family members that they will
implicate multiple false criminal
cases against the petitioner and his
family members and also implicate 
the petitioner under
Preventive
Detention Act
, if said crime is not
withdrawn pending before the
Respondent No.6 which was  
registered against the Respondent
Nos.7 to 17 as illegal, arbitrary,
unconstitutional in the interest of
justice and pass such other order
or orders may deem fit and proper
in the interest of justice.
For the reasons stated in the
accompanying affidavit, the
petitioner prays that the Honble
Court may be pleased to order,
direction particularly one in the
nature of writ of Mandamus or any
other appropriate writ
1) to declare the action of
Respondent No.6 in not registering
the FIR against the Respondent 
Nos.7 to 14 inspite of orders and
direction from the learned
VII Additional Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate, Nampally, Hyderabad 
in Sr.No.683/2018, dated
22-02-2018 as illegal, arbitrary and
unconstitutional in the interest of
justice and pass such other order
or orders may deem fit and proper
in the circumstances of the case,
 2) to declare the action of the
Respondent No.8 and his 
subordinates to harass the
petitioner and his family members
by coming to the petitioners house
and threatened to withdraw the
said crime pending before the
Respondent No.6 which was  
registered against the Respondent
Nos.7 to 14 as illegal, arbitrary,
unconstitutional in the interest of
justice and pass such other order
or orders may deem fit and proper
in the interest of justice.

      10. The only difference between the writ petition filed by
the Advocate Mr. Sailesh Saxena and the present writ petition
is that Mr. Sailesh Saxena is already an accused in 6 criminal
cases, while the petitioner is not made an accused at least as
on date. But the petitioner in the other writ petition and the
petitioner herein appear to have a common cause. This is
seen from the fact that the allegation of Mr. Sailesh Saxena is
that on the basis of fabricated materials he had been
implicated in a criminal case and the allegation of the
petitioner herein is that he is under threat and coercion to
give evidence against Sailesh Saxena. An interesting if not
intriguing commonality is that the petitioner herein as well as
Sailesh Saxena filed private complaints under
Section 200
Cr.P.C almost simultaneously. While the petitioner herein got
an order on 22-02-2018, Mr. Sailesh Saxena got an order on
05-02-2018. Keeping this background in mind, we shall take
up for consideration the contentions raised.
      11. The main grievance of the petitioner is that
he lodged a private complaint under
Section 200
Cr.P.C
as against the respondents 7 to 14 for alleged offences under
Sections 120B
,
195
,
195A
and
506
IPC read with 34
IPC
and  
that despite the VII Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate
referring the complaint under
Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C., the
6th respondent failed to register a FIR and proceed with the
investigation.
      12. The sum and substance of the allegations in the
complaint lodged by the petitioner is that the respondents
7 to 14 are compelling the petitioner to give an incriminating
statement against an Advocate by name B.Sailesh Saxena   
and that when the petitioner refused to accept monetary
consideration for giving a statement, the Police officials are
threatening to foist criminal cases against the petitioner and
started harassing the members of the family of the petitioner.
      13. But there is a missing thread in the whole story
weaved by the petitioner. According to the petitioner, the
police want to implicate Mr. Sailesh Saxena in a false case as
though he used the services of the petitioner to create forged
and fabricated documents in the names of non-existent
persons. But if this is true, then the Police should be looking
at the petitioner as a co-conspirator and co-accused in the
criminal complaints filed against Sailesh Saxena and the
Police will not be chasing the petitioner to become a witness.
Normally witnesses who give statements to the police under
section 161 of the Code, turn hostile only during trial. At that
stage, nothing can be done by the police. But to say that even
at the stage of investigation, the police want to record the
statement of an unwilling witness, is equivalent to saying that
the police want to sabotage the case of the prosecution even
at the threshold.
      14. Section 160(1) of the Code empowers the Police
Officer making an investigation, to require the attendance of
any person, if such person appears to be acquainted with the
facts and circumstances of the case. But no such statement
recorded by the Police under
Section 161(3)
Cr.P.C., shall be
signed by the person making it, in view of Section 162(1) of
the Code. This is despite the fact that the person summoned
under
Section 160(1)
Cr.P.C is bound to answer truly all
questions relating to the case, in view of
Section 161(2)
Cr.P.C. Curiously, it is not the case of the petitioner that any
summon under
Section 160(1)
Cr.P.C was served on him.  
It is not even the case of the petitioner that without serving
a summon under
Section 160(1)
Cr.P.C., he was taken to the 
police station.
      15. It is not the case of the petitioner that he is
implicated as one of the accused in the criminal cases against
Sailesh Saxena. But nevertheless, the material papers filed by
the petitioner disclose that he is fully aware of the nature of
the cases filed against B.Sailesh Saxena. The petitioner has
filed copies of all the FIRs in which Mr. Sailesh Saxena is
implicated as an accused. It is not the pleading of the
petitioner that he obtained copies of these FIRs against
Mr. Sailesh Saxena in any manner stipulated by law.
Therefore, it is so obvious that the petitioner is singing the
very same song that is set to tune and also sung by
Mr. Sailesh Saxena. 
      16. Be that as it may, the grievance of a person
proposed to be used as a witness in a criminal case may fall
under two categories. The first is when a witness is
summoned by serving a notice under
Section 160(1)
Cr.P.C 
and the second is when he is summoned to the police station
even without serving a notice under
Section 160(1)
Cr.P.C.
      17. If the petitioner had been summoned to the police
station after serving a notice under
Section 160(1)
Cr.P.C.,
the petitioner could not have had any grievance. This is in
view of the fact that he is not obliged to sign any statement
and hence if the Police Officer prepares a statement
completely different from what the petitioner stated, it will be
open to the petitioner to speak the truth when he is in the
witness box. Moreover, if the story had taken this particular
route, the petitioner would not even have come to know about
what was recorded, until he is confronted in the witness box,
with a false statement prepared by the Police in his name
under
Section 161
Cr.P.C.
      18. If the story had proceeded on the line indicated in
the second alternative viz., that of being summoned without
serving a notice on him, the petitioner should have sent a
notice either by himself or through his lawyer to the Police
refusing to appear before the Police Officer unless a notice
under
Section 160(1)
Cr.P.C was served on him. The moment  
such a notice is served, any prudent Police Officer will avoid
enlisting such a person as a witness, unless the Police Officer
himself wants to derail the investigation. At least at the stage
of Section 161 of the Code, no Police Officer would bet upon
an unwilling horse. But the story created by the petitioner in
this writ petition is that the Police Officers are bent upon
compelling an unwilling horse to cooperate with them. Since
a cooperation of this nature is always short lived and gets
exposed in the course of trial by the witness turning hostile,
no Police Officer would take this chance and hence the story
with which the petitioner has come up, is unbelievable.
      19. Apart from the fact that the story with which the
petitioner has come up is unbelievable, the prayer made by
him in the writ petition is also little tricky. The prayer in the
writ petition is to direct the Police to register a FIR against
an officer who is the Investigating Officer in about 6 criminal
complaints pending against one Mr. B.Sailesh Saxena. Once a  
FIR is registered against the I.O. in a criminal case, especially
about the manner in which he was collecting evidence in the
case, further investigation into the already registered case,
cannot go on. Seeking the registration of a criminal complaint
against the Investigation Officer, especially at the instance of
a person sought to be  made a witness, even during the
course of investigation into another criminal complaint, would
sabotage the investigation. If even during the course of
investigation by an Investigating Officer, a criminal complaint
is registered against the very same Investigating Officer about
the manner in which he is collecting evidence, the same
would derail the investigation into the criminal complaints. In
fact, Mr. Sailesh Saxena had come up with a writ petition
seeking an identical prayer and today we have dismissed the
said writ petition on the ground that the writ petition was
clearly an attempt at derailing the investigation into 6
criminal complaints for serious offences lodged against Mr.
Sailesh Saxena. Therefore, if this writ petition is allowed, the
benefit of the same would inure directly to Mr. Sailesh Saxena
and that is why we are of the view that the present litigation
is a proxy litigation, intended to benefit Mr. Sailesh Saxena.
An investigation can be derailed in several ways and the
present one appears to be a very novel one which we have not
come across so far. In cases of this nature, an order directing
investigation under section 156(3) of the Code should not
have been ordered by the learned Magistrate. In any case
such an order cannot be construed as an order for the
registration of a FIR.
      20. The reliance placed by the petitioner on the
judgment of the Supreme Court in Mohd. Yousuf, may not be  
of any assistance, since the said decision arose out of the
judgment of the Allahabad High Court quashing a charge-
sheet. The said case does not deal with a very peculiar
situation where the result of directing the Police to register
a FIR would be to abort the investigation into 6 other criminal
complaints.
      21. Therefore, the writ petition deserves to be dismissed,
accordingly, it is dismissed. The interlocutory applications,
if any, pending in this writ petition shall stand closed.
No costs.
___________________________     
V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN, J.
_______________   
J.UMA DEVI, J. 
08th June, 2018