[Cites
30
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Smt. Radhi Raney & Another vs Mrs. Nanki Feroze on 18 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 37
Author:
T. Sunil Chowdary
Bench:
T. Sunil Chowdary
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T. SUNIL CHOWDARY          

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.6465 OF 2016     

18.07.2018 

Smt. Radhi Raney & Another ..Petitioners


Mrs. Nanki Feroze ...Respondent 

Counsel for Petitioners: Sri R.A.Achuthanand

Counsel for the respondent: Sri Mohammed Imran Khan   
                                                        

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred

  2014 (9) SCALE 657 
2 2005 (4) ALD 249 
3 1987 (2) RLR 701 
4 1989 (1) RCR 409 
5 AIR 1971 SC 989  
6AIR 1957 SC 309  
7 AIR 2000 Delhi 69
8 AIR 1998 SC 1639  
9 (2004) 8 SCC 229 


THE HONBLE JUSTICE SRI T. SUNIL CHOWDARY          
CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.6465 of 2016    
ORDER:
1       This Civil Revision Petition is filed by the petitioners-tenants
under
Section 22
of the A.P. Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction)
Control Act, 1960 (for short, the Act), challenging the order dated
16.08.2016 passed in R.A.No.176 of 2013 on the file of the Chief
Judge, City Small Causes Court, Hyderabad, wherein and whereby  
the order dated 31.07.2013 passed in R.C.No.69 of 2011 on the file
of the Additional Rent Controller, Secunderabad ordering eviction
of the petitioners herein from the petition schedule premises and
handover the vacant physical possession of the same to the
respondent, was confirmed.
2       The facts leading to the filing of the present Civil Revision
Petition, in nutshell, are as follows:
3       The respondent is the absolute owner of the petition
schedule premisesPlot bearing No.009, situated in ground floor of
the building bearing Municipal No.1-8-161 to 164/6 (old
No.142/C), Innovation Residency, P.G. Road, Secunderabad.  The  
respondent let out the petition schedule premises to the petitioners
in the year 2002 on a monthly rent of Rs.4,000/-.  The respondent
filed R.C.69 of 2011 on the following grounds: (1) The petitioners
are having alternative accommodation {
Section 10(2)(v)
}; (2) the
petitioners committed wilful default in payment of rent for a period
of 37 months, commencing from June 2008 {
Section 10(2)(i)
}; and
(3) the respondent is a widow and aged about 75 years {
Section 10-
C (1) (a)
and (c)}.
4       The petitioners filed counter denying the material averments
made in the petition, inter alia contending that the petition is not
maintainable either on facts facts or in law.  However, the
petitioners admitted the jural relationship of tenants and landlord
between them and the respondent.
5       To substantiate the stand, the respondent herself examined
as P.W.1 and got marked Exs.P.1 to P.28. To dislodge the case of 
the respondent, second petitioner examined herself as R.W.1 and
got marked Exs.R.1 to R.20.
6       Basing on the oral, documentary evidence and other material
available on record, the Rent Control Court allowed the petition
holding that the petitioners committed wilful default in payment of
rent, the petitioners are having alternative accommodation and
that the respondent, who is a widow and senior citizen, is entitled
to recover immediate possession of the petition schedule premises.
Feeling aggrieved by the order of the Rent Control Court dated
31.07.2013, the petitioners preferred R.A.No.176 of 2013 on the
file of the Chief Judge, City Small Causes Court, Hyderabad. The
appellate authority, after re-appreciating the oral and documentary
evidence available on record, without being influenced by the
findings recorded by the Rent Control Court, arrived at a
conclusion that the respondent is entitled to the reliefs sought for.
Hence the present Civil Revision Petition by the petitioners-
tenants.
7       Sri R.A.Achuthanand, learned counsel for the petitioners
strenuously submitted that the findings recorded by the
authorities below are perverse and hence they are liable to be set
aside.  Per contra, Sri Mohammed Imran Khan, learned counsel 
for the respondent submitted that the authorities below considered
the oral and documentary evidence available on record in the light
of the provisions of the Act and arrived at a just and reasonable
conclusion; therefore, it is a fit case to dismiss this Civil Revision
Petition.  He further submitted that this Court shall not lightly
interfere with the concurrent finding of fact recorded by the
authorities below.
8       In order to appreciate the rival contentions, this court is
placing reliance on the following decision:
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited vs. Dilbahar Singh
wherein the Honble apex Court held at Para No.45 as under:
45. We hold, as we must, that none of the above Rent
Control Acts entitles the High Court to interfere with the
findings of fact recorded by the First Appellate Court/First
Appellate Authority because on re-appreciation of the
evidence, its view is different from the Court/Authority
below. The consideration or examination of the evidence by
the High Court in revisional jurisdiction under these Acts is
confined to find out that finding of facts recorded by the
Court/Authority below is according to law and does not
suffer from any error of law. A finding of fact recorded by
Court/Authority below, if perverse or has been arrived at
without consideration of the material evidence or such
finding is based on no evidence or misreading of the
evidence or is grossly erroneous that, if allowed to stand, it
would result in gross miscarriage of justice, is open to
correction because it is not treated as a finding according to
law. In that event, the High Court in exercise of its
revisional jurisdiction under the above Rent Control Acts
shall be entitled to set aside the impugned order as being
not legal or proper. The High Court is entitled to satisfy
itself the correctness or legality or propriety of any decision
or order impugned before it as indicated above. However, to
satisfy itself to the regularity, correctness, legality or
propriety of the impugned decision or the order, the High
Court shall not exercise its power as an appellate power to
re-appreciate or re-assess the evidence for coming to a
different finding on facts. Revisional power is not and
cannot be equated with the power of reconsideration of all
questions of fact as a court of first appeal. Where the High
Court is required to be satisfied that the decision is
according to law, it may examine whether the order
impugned before it suffers from procedural illegality or
irregularity.
9       Let me consider the facts of the case on hand in the light of
the above legal principle.
10      The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the
finding of the authorities below that the petitioners are having
alternative accommodation and hence they are liable to vacate the
petition schedule premises, is without any basis. The respondent
has taken a specific plea in Para No.7 of the petition that the
petitioners are having a residential house at Kachiguda.  In para
No.10 of the counter, the petitioners have simply denied the
pleading, as to the alternative accommodation, made in the
petition.  The petitioners have not specifically denied in the counter
that they are having a house at Kachiguda.  It is needless to say
that the petitioners have to specifically deny the material fact
pleaded by the respondent; otherwise, by necessary implication, it
would certainly amount to admission of the same.  In such
circumstances, the Court can safely arrive at a conclusion that the
petitioners are having alternative accommodation by the time of
filing of the R.C. by the respondent.
11      The first petitioner is the mother and second petitioner is the
daughter.  In order to appreciate the contention of the petitioners,
it is apposite to extract hereunder relevant portion of the cross
examination of R.W.1second petitioner:
It is true that, my mother has a house at
Kachiguda, bearing premises No.3-2-48 & 49. It is true that
it is a residential property.  It is true that, I carry out
business at Koti, Hyderabad.  It is true that the Kachiguda
premises is much closer to my shop at Koti, than the
petition schedule premises.
12      Basing on the above admission made by the second  
petitioner in the cross examination, this court can safely arrive at a
conclusion that first petitioner is having own house at Kachiguda.
It is not the case of the petitioners that somebody occupied the
said house.  As seen from the testimony of R.W.1, she has been 
carrying on business at Koti, Hyderabad.  Her testimony further
reveals that their own house is very nearer to Koti when compared
to the petition schedule premises.
13      The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that both
the petitioners are joint tenants and merely because the first
petitioner is having a residential house that itself is not a valid
ground to order eviction of the second petitioner from the petition
schedule premises. To substantiate the argument, the learned
counsel for the petitioners has drawn the attention of this court to
the following judgments:
Satyanarayana v. Moizuddin Khan
, wherein this Court
held at para No.17 as follows:
17. I find that the additional accommodation acquired by
the tenant prior to attornment of lease and prior to
execution of the rental deed cannot be taken into
consideration and cannot form the basis for ordering
eviction of the tenant.
B.R. Mehta vs. Smt. Atma Devi
, wherein the Honble apex
Court held at Para No.4 as follows:
4.  ... There was no law according to which the husband
and the wife could be deemed to be one person.  Therefore,
where proviso (h) required that the tenant himself should
acquire vacant possession of another residence before he
can become liable to eviction, the effect of its language
cannot be whittled down by arguing that proviso (h) would
apply even if it is not the tenant himself but his wife or his
other relation were to acquire such other residence.
Therefore, as a general proposition of law, the acquisition of
other residence must be by the tenant himself before
proviso (h) to sub-section (1) of
S.14
of the Act would apply.
14      In
Satyanarayana
case (2nd cited supra), the landlord filed a
petition for eviction of the tenant on the ground that the wife of the
tenant is having own house.  In the instant case, the second
petitioner is an unmarried daughter of the first petitioner aged
about 63 years and both of them are joint tenants. Under Hindu
law, an unmarried daughter is a dependent on the parents. The
material placed before the court clinchingly establishes that from
the year 2002 onwards both petitioners have been residing
together in the petition schedule premises as tenants. Viewed from
this angle, the second petitioner is a dependent on the first
petitioner. In such circumstances, the second petitioner
legitimately entitled to stay in the house of the first petitioner being
an unmarried daughter.
Therefore, the principle enunciated in
Satyanarayana
case is not applicable to the facts of the case on
hand.
15      In
B.R. Mehta
case (3rd cited supra) the landlord filed an
eviction petition against the tenant on the ground that his wife was
provided with a government residential quarter. The Honble apex
Court held that the house allotted to the wife for discharging of her
official duties as a government employee, cannot be treated as her
own house and hence eviction petition filed against the husband
on the ground of availability of alternative accommodation cannot
be ordered. Therefore, I am of the considered view that the
decisions relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners are
no way helpful to the petitioners on this aspect.
16      In the light of the foregoing discussion, I have no hesitation
to hold that the petitioners are having alternative accommodation.
The Rent Control Court as well as the Rent Control Appellate
Authority have considered the material available on record in right
perspective and arrived at a conclusion that the petitioners are
having an alternative accommodation for their residential purpose.
I am fully endorsing with the findings recorded by the authorities
below on this aspect.
17      The second contention of the learned counsel for the
petitioners is that the respondent herself refused to receive the
rent; therefore, the petition is liable to be dismissed. Per contra, the
learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the petitioners
have not tendered the admitted rent; therefore, the respondent is
justified in refusing to receive the same.
18      It is needless to say that exchange of notices between the
parties is the genesis of civil litigation.  To put it in a different way,
sowing of seed of litigation commences by issuance of a legal
notice. The issuance of reply notice and approaching of an
appropriate forum are nothing but supplying all the necessary
components to grow the seed as a tree.  The edifice of civil suit is
based on pleadings, which is the bedrock.  The pleas taken by the
parties, in legal notice and reply notice, are integral part of the
pleadings, which are eventually binding on the respective parties.
The respondent got issued legal notice dated 17.5.2008 under
Section 106
of Transfer of Property Act, under the original of
Ex.R.1, directing the petitioners to vacate the petition schedule
premises.  In the said notice, the respondent clearly mentioned the
rent of the petition schedule premises as Rs.4,500/- per month.
The petitioners got issued reply notice dated 26.6.2008, under the
original of Ex.R.3, taking a specific plea that the rent of the petition
schedule premises is only Rs.2,600/- per month, which includes
the maintenance charges of Rs.600/- per month. From the initial
stage of the litigation, there is a dispute between the parties with
regard to the quantum of rent.
19      The respondent filed O.S.No.609 of 2008 on the file of the
Junior Civil Judge, City Civil Court, Secunderabad against the
petitioners for eviction and recovery of arrears of rent at
Rs.4,500/- per month.  The civil Court dismissed the said suit by
giving a specific finding that the rent of the petition schedule
premises is only Rs.2,000/- per month. Ex.P.1 is the certified copy
of decree and judgment in O.S.No.609 of 2008. For one reason or
the other, the respondent did not choose to file appeal challenging
the finding of the civil Court.  Thereafter, the petitioners filed
R.C.No.117 of 2009 against the respondent under
Section 8
of the
Act seeking permission of the Rent Control Court to deposit the
admitted rent. Ex.P.2 is the certified copy of the petition and
Ex.P.6 is the certified copy of the order in R.C.No.117 of 2009. A
perusal of Ex.P.6 reveals that the Rent Control Court after
affording reasonable opportunity to both parties dismissed the
petition.  Challenging the order passed in R.C.No.117 of 2009, the
petitioners preferred R.A. No.153 of 2012 on the file of the Chief
Judge, City Small Causes Court, Hyderabad, and the same was   
dismissed on merits.  A perusal of the record reveals that both
parties approached different fora to ventilate their grievances.  Of
course, both parties were unsuccessful in achieving their
respective goals.
20      In the backdrop of the factual scenario, the crucial question
that falls for consideration is what the exact rent of the petition
schedule premises is.  The respondent has taken a plea in the suit
as well as in the present R.C. that the rent of the petition schedule
premises is Rs.4,500/- per month. On the other hand, the
petitioners have taken a specific stand that the monthly rent for
the petition schedule premises is Rs.2,600/-, which includes
maintenance charges of Rs.600/-. It is to be seen whether the
petitioners have offered the admitted rent and the respondent is
justified in refusing the same.
21      To substantiate the argument, the learned counsel for the
petitioners has drawn the attention of this court to the judgment of
Rajasthan High Court in Shri Banshilal v. Shri Pyarelal .  As per
the principle enunciated in this case, rent does not include the
amount paid towards furniture.
He further relied on the judgment
of the Honble apex Court in
Manali Ramakrishna Mudaliar v.
State of Madras
wherein the Honble apex Court held that electric
charges cannot form part of rent.
22      At the earliest point of time, the petitioners have taken a
specific plea in Ex.R.3 reply notice that the rent of the petition
schedule premises is Rs.2,600/- per month. The material available
on record falls short to establish that the rent of the petition
schedule premises is Rs.4,500/- per month as claimed by the
respondent. In the counter, the petitioners have taken a specific
plea that the rent of the petition schedule premises was enhanced
to Rs.2,000/- from Rs.1,000/- per month. The petitioners used to
pay Rs.600/- per month towards maintenance charges to the 
society.  As per the pleadings in the counter, the petitioners have
to pay Rs.2,600/- per month to the respondent.
23      The respondent filed O.S.No.609 of 2008 wherein the
petitioners filed written statement by taking a specific plea that
they used to pay an amount of Rs.2,000/- per month towards rent
to the respondent and Rs.600/- towards maintenance charges to 
the society. It is not in dispute that in R.C. No.117 of 2009, second
petitioner examined herself as P.W.1.  It is not out of place to
extract hereunder the relevant portion of the cross examination of
P.W.1:
It is true that, I have to pay a sum of Rs.2,600/-
every month to the respondent...... It is true, I admit that I
have to pay Rs.600/- for maintenance every month.
24      A perusal of the above portion clearly reveals that second
petitioner made an admission on oath, which is binding on her.
The admission made by second petitioner is substantial piece of
evidence. Therefore, I have no hesitation to hold that the
petitioners have to pay an amount of Rs.2,600/- per month to the
respondent towards rent and maintenance charges. 
25      The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the
monthly rent of the petition schedule premises, even as per the
finding recorded in O.S.No.609 of 2008, is Rs.2,000/- and not
Rs.2,600/-. A perusal of the judgment in O.S.No.609 of 2008
clearly reveals that the civil Court has given a specific finding that
the rent is Rs.2,000/- per month. There is no quarrel with regard
to the proposition of law submitted by the learned counsel for the
petitioners that the finding recorded by the civil Court is binding
on the Rent Control Court.  The finding recorded in O.S.No.609 of
2008 is only with regard to the rent.  Since the maintenance
charges was not the subject matter in O.S.No.609 of 2008, no
specific finding was given by the civil Court on that point.  In such
circumstances, the rigour of the principle of res judicata, as
enunciated under
Section 11
of CPC, is not applicable to the facts
of the case on hand so far as the issue of maintenance charges is
concerned.  Therefore, I am of the considered view that the Rent
Control Court has not committed any mistake in considering the
maintenance charges also in order to arrive at a conclusion on the
point as to whether the petitioners committed wilful default in
payment of the rent.
26      A perusal of Exs.R.7, R.8, R.9 to R.19 and R.20 clearly
shows that the petitioners made attempts to pay the rent at the
rate of Rs.2,000/- per month to the respondent for the months of
June 2008 to September 2008, which the respondent refused.  It is
not the case of the petitioners that they sent money order or
demand draft for Rs.2,600/- per month to the respondent. The
core point that falls for consideration is whether the refusal of rent
of Rs.2,000/- per month by the respondent itself legally prevent or
estop her from taking the plea that the petitioners committed wilful
default in payment of the rent. Admittedly, the petitioners have not
paid the maintenance charges of Rs.600/- per month to the
society.  On the other hand, the testimony of R.W.1 clearly reveals
that the respondent used to pay maintenance charges to the
society every month for all these years.  Whether the act of the
petitioners in sending rent at Rs.2,000/- per month to the
respondent will fall outside the purview of wilful default, as
enumerated under Clause (i) of Sub-section (2) of
Section 10
of the
Act, is to be considered by this Court.
27      The learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the
petitioners have not taken any steps to pay the rent even after the
dismissal of R.A.No.153 of 2012.  He further submitted that if
really the petitioners had the intention to pay the rent, why they
did not file an application under
Section 11(3)
of the Act in
R.C.No.69 of 2011? The record clearly shows that the petitioners
did not pay any amount during the pendency of the proceedings.
28      At this juncture, let me consider whether the word rent
encompasses in it the maintenance and other incidental charges or
not.  The word rent is not defined under the Act.  One has to fall
back to
Section 105
of the Transfer of Property Act to ascertain
what are the components covered under the word rent.  In order
to appreciate the rival contentions, this Court is placing reliance
on the following decisions:
Karnani Properties Ltd. V. Augustin
, wherein the Honble
apex Court held at para No.9 as follows:
9. If, as already indicated, the term it, rent is
comprehensive enough to include all payments agreed by 
the tenant to be paid to his landlord for the use and
occupation not only of the building and its appurtenances
but also of furnishings, electric installations and other
amenities agreed between the parties to be provided by and
at the cost of the land-lord, the conclusion is irresistible
that all that is included in the term "rent" is within the
purview of the Act and the Rent Controller and other
authorities had the power to control the same.
Sewa International Fasions v. Suman Kathpalia
, wherein
the Delhi High Court held at para Nos.6 to 8 as follows:
6. In order to appreciate the contention of the
learned counsel appearing for the parties, it is necessary to
ascertain as to what constitutes rent. The expression 'rent'
is not defined under the
Delhi Rent Control Act
. However,
as to what constitutes rent could be found out from the
provisions of
Section 105
of the Transfer of Property Act
wherein the word 'rent' is defined. It states that money,
shares, services or other thing to be so rendered is called
the 'rent'. Thus, apart from the money which is paid as
rent, if any service is rendered and any payment is made in
respect of the same, the same is also to be included within
the definition of 'rent'.   .
7. The question, therefore, which arises for my
consideration, at this stage is whether payment agreed to
be paid by the petitioner to the respondents towards
maintenance charges could be included within the ambit of
the expression 'rent'. Counsel for the petitioner states that
the same cannot be included as under the lease deed what 
would constitute rent was specified which excluded the
maintenance charges. I, however, cannot agree with the
learned counsel appearing for the petitioner for the simple
reason that under clause (1) of the said lease deed, the
parties agreed to pay a particular sum towards the use and
occupation of the building which is inclusive of all taxes,
rates and charges, but exclusive of the maintenance
charges which were also required to be paid by the
petitioner to the respondents in accordance with the
stipulations in the lease deed. As it is disclosed from the
records, the petitioner was paying a sum of Rs.538/- to the
respondents towards the maintenance charges in respect of 
the aforesaid premises. Those maintenance charges were  
payable for the use and occupation of the premises and for
the amenities provided by the landlord.
8. It is an established proposition of law that rent
includes not only what is originally described as rent in
agreement between a landlord and tenant but also those
payment which is made for the amenities provided by the
landlord under the agreement between him and the tenant.
The payment made towards the maintenance charges of the   
premises rented out and also for providing amenities to the
tenant would also come within the expression 'rent' as rent
includes all payments agreed to be paid by the tenant to his
landlord for the use and occupation not only of the building
but also of furnishing, electric installations and other
amenities.
29      As per the principle enunciated in the cases cited supra, rent
includes the maintenance charges and all the payments agreed to 
be paid by tenant for use and occupation of the petition schedule
premises. Thus, the admitted rent is Rs.2,600/- per month and the
respondent is justified in refusing to receive Rs.2,000/- as offered
by the petitioners. The material placed before the Court clinchingly
establishes that the petitioners committed wilful default in
payment of the rent at the rate of Rs.2,600/- per month for a
period of 37 months commencing from June 2008.
30      The Rent Control Court as well as the Appellate Authority
have considered, in various proceedings between the parties, and
arrived at the conclusion that the rent of the petition schedule
premises is Rs.2,600/- per month.   The finding recorded by the
authorities below that the petitioners committed default in
payment of the rent for a period of 37 months with effect from
June 2008 is supported by oral and documentary evidence 
available on record. I am fully endorsing the finding recorded by
the authorities below on this aspect.
31      The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that
establishment of bona fide requirement on the part of the
landlord/landlady is sine qua non even if the petition is filed under
Section 10-C(1)(a) and (c) of the Act.  He further submitted that
Section 14-D
of the Delhi Rent Control Act is pari materia to
Section 10-C(1)
of the Act.
32      To substantiate the argument, the learned counsel for the
petitioners has drawn the attention of this court to the following
decision:
M/s.
Rahabhar Productions Pvt. Ltd v. Rajendrra K. Tandon
,
wherein the Honble apex Court held at para Nos.28 and 34 as
follows:
28.
In
Surjit Singh Kalra vs. Union of India
, (1991) 2
SCC 87, a Three-Judge Bench of this Court laid down as
under:-
"20. The tenant of course is entitled to raise all
relevant contentions as against the claim of the classified
landlords. The fact that there is no reference to the word
bona fide requirement in Section 14-B to 14-D does not
absolve the landlord from proving that his requirement is
bona fide or the tenant must be a bona fide one. There is
also enough indication in support of this construction
from the title of Section 25-B which states "special
procedure for the disposal of applications for eviction on
the ground of bona fide requirement."
34. The decision in
Surjit Singh Kalra
's case (supra)
was considered by this Court in
Anand Swaroop Vohra vs. 
Bhim Sen Bahri and another
, (1994) 5 SCC 372 and was  
followed explaining, in the process, an earlier decision
in
Narain Kahmman vs. Pradumar Kumar Jain
, (1985) 1  
SCC 1, by observing that under Section 14A, the right to
recover immediate possession can be exercised by the 
landlord as soon as he is served with a notice to vacate the
government accommodation allotted to him. In such 
proceedings, the landlord, in view of the language employed
in that Section, has not to show that the premises are
required for his own residence. On the contrary, the right
available to a landlord under Section 14B to 14D is
dependent upon the requirement to show that the premises 
shall be occupied by the landlord for his own residence.
The
Court did not, therefore, digress from the view propounded
in
Surjit Singh Kalra
's case (supra) that while the landlord
has to show and establish his bona fide need, the tenant
can plead and prove that the premises were not bona fide
required by the landlord.
33      As per the principle enunciated in the case cited supra, the
landlord has to prove that the premises in question is required for
his/her bona fide purpose.  The crucial question that falls for
consideration is whether
Section 10-C(1)
of the Act is pari materia
to
Section 14-D
of the Delhi Rent Control Act or not. The
Legislature in its wisdom and foresight amended the Act, by Act
17 of 2005, introducing Sections 10A to 10C, and facilitated
certain categories of landlords/landladies to evict the tenants
without resorting to
Section 10
of the old Act.  The Court has to
interpret the provisions of the Act to achieve the avowed object for
which the Act was enacted.  The Court has to keep in mind the
underlying object of the Act while interpreting each and every
provision by letter and spirit.  Under
Section 10(3)(a)
of the Act,
the landlord is not entitled to evict the tenant without proving the
bona fide requirement.  The word bona fide requirement is not
found place in
Sections 10-A
to
10-C
of the Act.  The Legislature
intentionally did not use the word, bona fide requirement as
contemplated under
Section 10
of the Act. If the landlord is forced
to prove bona fide requirement, as contemplated under
Section
10(3)(a)
of the Act, the purpose of Act 17 of 2005 will be defeated
or frustrated. The Court shall not interpret the provisions of the
Act to negate the very object of the enactment.  On the other
hand, the Court has to interpret the provisions of an Act in such a
way to achieve its object.  If the intention of the Legislature is that
the landlord has to prove the bona fide requirement, the same
might have been reflected in Sections 10-A or 10-C of the Act.
Non-mentioning of the word bona fide requirement in Sections
10-A or 10-C of the Act clearly indicates the intention of the
Legislature that a person who files petition under
Sections 10-A
to
10-C
of the Act need not prove the bona fide requirement.
34      In order to appreciate the contention of the learned counsel
for the petitioners, it is apposite to refer relevant provisions of the
Act and Delhi Rent Control Act
, which reads as follows:
Delhi Rent Control Act
14D. Right to recover immediate
possession of premises to accrue to
a widow. -
A.P.
Rent Control Act
10-C. Right to recover
immediate possession of 
premises to accrue to a
widow: -
(1) Where the landlord is a widow
and the premises let out by her, or
by her husband, are required by her
for her own residence, she may apply
to the Controller for recovering the
immediate possession of such 
premises.
(2) Where the landlord referred to in
sub-section (1) has let out more than
one premises, it shall be open to her
to make an application under that
sub-section in respect of any one of
the premises chosen by her.
(1) Where the landlord
is-
a)      A widow and the 
premises let out by her, or by
her husband; 
b)      X x x x x x
c)      A person who is of the
age of sixty five years or more
and the premises let out by
him, or her;
Explanation II: The right to
recover possession under this
section shall be exercisable
only once in respect of each
for residential and for non-
residential use.
Sub-section (1) of
Section 14-D
of the Delhi Rent Control Act is
similar to Clause (a) to Sub-section (1) of
Section 10-C
of the Act.
Both these provisions enable the landlady, who is a widow, to file
application under
Section 14-D(1)
of the Delhi Rent Control Act or
Section 10-C(1)(a)
of the Act, as the case may be.
35      Sub-section (2) of
Section 14-D
of the Delhi Rent Control Act
is, to certain extent, similar to Explanation II to Sub-section (1) of
Section 10-C
of the Act. As per the provisions of the A.P. Rent
Control Act, the landlord can exercise the right to recover
possession only once in respect of each residential and non-
residential premises.
Under the Delhi Rent Control Act
, if the
landlord has number of houses, he can exercise the option under
Section 14-D in respect of one building only. When compared to
Delhi Rent Control Act, the A.P. Rent Control Act
is more beneficial
to the landlords.  Sub-section (2) of
Section 14-D
of the Delhi Rent
Control Act is not mutatis mutandis to Explanation II to Sub-
section (1) of
Section 10-C
of the Act. In order to appreciate the
contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners, it is not out of
place to extract hereunder the relevant Sub-sections of
Section
25B
of the Delhi Rent Control Act:
(4) The tenant on whom the summons is duly served 
(whether in the ordinary way or by registered post) in the
form specified in the Third Schedule shall not contest the
prayer for eviction from the premises unless he files an
affidavit stating the grounds on which he seeks to contest
the application for eviction and obtains leave from the
Controller as hereinafter provided; and in default of his
appearance in pursuance of the summons or his obtaining 
such leave, the statement made by the landlord in the
application for eviction shall be deemed to be admitted by
the tenant and the applicant shall be entitled to an order
for eviction on the ground aforesaid.
(6) Where leave is granted to the tenant to contest the
application, the Controller shall commence the hearing of
the application as early as practicable.
(8) No appeal or second appeal shall lie against an order for
the recovery of possession of any premises made by the
Controller in accordance with the procedure specified in
this section.
36      A perusal of the above Sub-sections clearly indicates that the
tenant is not entitled to contest the petition filed by the landlord
under
Section 14
or
Sections 14-A
to
14-D
of the Delhi Rent
Control Act without obtaining leave. The Rent Control Court may
or may not grant leave to the tenant to contest the matter.  If the
Rent Control Court satisfies that the leave petition does not
disclose any cause much less valid cause, the same is liable to be
dismissed. No appeal lies against the order passed by the Rent
Control Court in view of Sub-section (8) of
Section 25-B
of the
Delhi Rent Control Act.  However, the aggrieved tenant can prefer
revision against the order of the Rent Control Court.  Suffice it to
say, the scope of appeal is wider than the revision.  In certain
circumstances only, the revisional Court can interfere with the
impugned order and set aside the same. In an appeal, the appellate
Court can reappraise the oral and documentary evidence afresh
and arrive to its own conclusion.
Section 25-B
of the Delhi Rent
Control Act, in one way, safeguards the interests of the landlord.
Under the A.P. Rent Control Act, there is no such provision
corresponding to
Section 25-B
of the Delhi Rent Control Act.    There
is no clause in
Section 14-D
of the Delhi Rent Control Act enabling
the landlords, who crossed the age of 65 years, to file the petition
under a special category unlike in
Section 10-C(1)(c)
of the Act.
Whether the petition is filed under
Section 10(2)
of the old Act or
Sections 10-A to 10-C of the amended Act, the Rent Control Court
has to follow the same procedure.  There is no provision under the
A.P. Rent Control Act to resort to summary trial even though the
petition is filed under
Sections 10-A
to
10-C
of the Act.  Taking into
consideration the provisions of both the Acts, this Court is of the
considered view that
Section 10-C(1)
of the Act is not pari materia
to
Section 14-D
of the Delhi Rent Control Act.
37      The learned counsel for the petitioners further submitted
that by the time of letting out the petition schedule premises the
respondent is a widow, therefore, she is not legally entitled to file
the petition taking aid of
Section 10-C
of the Act.  It is not in
dispute that the respondent let out the petition schedule premises
to the petitioners in the year 2002.
Sections 10-A
to
10-C
of the
Act came into force with effect from 28.5.2005.  Had it been the
intention of the Legislature, it might have articulated Section 10-C
in such a manner excluding landlady, who lost her husband, on or
before 27.5.2005, from its purview.  A perusal of
Section 10-C(1)(a)
of the Act clearly demonstrates that the landlady must be a widow
by the time of filing of petition under
Section 10-C(1)(a)
of the Act.
Whether the landlady is a widow or not by the time of entering into
rental agreement, has no relevancy, in view of the language
employed in
Section 10-C
of the Act.
38      The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the
respondent, being a widow, by the time of letting out the premises
to the petitioners, has expressly waived her right to file petition
under
Section 10-C
of the Act.  In order to resolve the issue, this
court is placing reliance on the following decision:
Krishna Bahadur v. Purna Theatre
, wherein the Honble apex
Court held at para No.10 as follows:
10. A right can be waived by the party for whose
benefit certain requirements or conditions had been
provided for by a statute subject to the condition that no
public interest is involved therein. Whenever waiver is
pleaded it is for the party pleading the same to show that
an agreement waiving the right in consideration of some
compromise came into being. Statutory right, however, may
also be waived by his conduct.
39      The material available on record clearly reveals that by the
time of entering into rental agreement between the respondent and
the petitioners, no statutory right was accrued in favour of the
respondent. Waiver pre-supposes the vesting of a right.  When
there was no right in favour of the respondent, by the time she
entered into the rental agreement with the petitioners in the year
2002, the question of waiver does not arise.  The statutory right
was accrued in favour of the respondent on 28.5.2005 when
Section 10-C
of the Act came into force.  It is not the case of the
petitioners that the respondent by her conduct waived her
statutory right on or after 28.5.2005.  It is easy to swallow the
submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioners in this
regard but it is highly difficult to digest the same in view of settled
legal provisions and principles. By no stretch of imagination, it can
be presumed that the respondent waived her right at any point of
time.  Therefore, I am of the considered view that the submission of
the learned counsel for the petitioners has no legs to stand either
on facts or in law.
40      The learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the
respondent has taken a specific plea in the petition that she is a
widow.  The second petitioner, as R.W.1, in the cross examination
categorically admitted that the respondent is a widow.  By the time
of filing of R.C.No.69 of 2001 in the year 2011, the respondent was
aged about 78 years.  The petitioners are not disputing the age of
the respondent.  The respondent has satisfied the basic ingredients
of Section 10-C (1) (a) and (c) of the Act.
41      By the time of filing of the petition, the respondent was aged
about 78 years. By this time the respondent may be aged about 85 
years.  The respondent approached different fora from 2008
onwards in order to get back the petition schedule premises.  This
is a classic case which clearly demonstrates the plight of the
landladies in general, widow-landladies in particular, who crossed
the age of 65 years.  The respondent let out the premises to the
petitioners, who are her relatives.  The relationship, however close
and strong, is not an exception to lead to litigation in view of the
worth and value of the premises.  The respondent let out the
premises to the petitioners, with a fond hope, that they being
ladies and relatives will help her in old age, in day to day affairs.
But the petitioners forced the respondent to move from pillar to
pole i.e., civil Court and Rent Control Court in order to secure the
petition schedule premises, thereby to enjoy the same with her
children and grand children at the fag end of her life.  The first
petitioner who is also aged about 85 years equally fought the legal
battle with the respondent taking aid of her daughter, who is aged
about 63 years.  The Legislature, taking into consideration the
scenario prevailing in the society, visualised the plight of the
widows and senior citizens introduced Act 17 of 2005 with an
avowed object in order to wipe off their tears.
42      The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the
respondent is having another apartment, therefore, she is not
required the petition schedule premises.  The evidence on record
clearly reveals that the respondent is having another apartment
adjacent to the petition schedule premises.  In the petition itself,
she categorically stated that she wants to convert two apartments
into one and stay along with her children and grandchildren.  She
further stated that the petition schedule premises is required for
her personal use as well as to provide accommodation to her
children and grand children.  In M/s.Rahabhar Productions Pvt. Ltd
(8th cited supra) case, the Honble apex Court held at para No.40 as
follows:
40. We have also examined the facts set out by the
appellant in his affidavit filed before the Rent Controller for
leave to defend the present proceedings.  The pleas, in our
opinion, do not disentitle the landlord from recovering
possession of the premises in question particularly when
the respondent has clearly set out in his petition that
although he owned one more house, he wanted this  
particular premises for his own need.  The choice, and,
sufficient reasons in support thereof, having thus been
indicated by the respondent, the plea of the appellant about
alternative accommodation being available to the landlord
cannot be sustained.
43      Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and
also the principle enunciated in the case cited supra, the
submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioners is not
sustainable in law.
44      Before parting with the order, keeping in view the backdrop
of factual scenario, this Court is forced to observe that it is a
matter of common knowledge that persons who crossed 80 years   
generally feel more comfort if they stay along with their children
and grand children under the same roof.  Unfortunately, in this
case, the respondent was deprived of staying along with her
children and grandchildren for want of sufficient and proper
accommodation though she is the absolute owner of the petition
schedule premises.  If she is not in a position to enjoy the premises
as she wished, at the fag end of her life, the very purpose of
acquiring the property is meaningless.  The respondent might have
taken lot of pains in order to acquire the property by spending
huge amounts.  Unfortunately, the respondent was forced to pay
maintenance charges of Rs.600/- to the society from 2008
onwards in respect of the petition schedule premises, which is
being enjoyed by the petitioners even without paying the rent.  If
this type of tenants are allowed to squat on the premises, the dual
object of the
Rent Control Act
will be frustrated.  In view of the
factual scenario prevailing in the society, the landlords are forced
to keep the premises vacant or idle instead of letting out to the
tenants who will squat on the premises for years together even
without paying rent by taking shelter under various provisions of
the Tenancy Laws and procrastinating the proceedings as far as
possible by approaching different fora, by taking different pleas,
sometimes may be false and frivolous.  It appears that wise people
always prefer to stay in rented premises.
45      It is settled principle of law that the revisional Court shall
not lightly interfere with the findings recorded by the authorities
below, more particularly, on a concurrent finding of fact.  The Rent
Control Appellate Authority is the fact finding final authority.  The
findings recorded by the authorities below are supported by oral
and documentary evidence.  The authorities have given reasons
much less cogent and valid reasons to their findings.  Viewed from
any angle, I am unable to accede to the contention of the learned
counsel for the petitioners that the findings recorded by the
authorities below are perverse either on factual or legal aspects.
There is no illegality or irregularity or impropriety in the orders
passed by the authorities below, warranting interference of this
Court by exercising jurisdiction under
Section 22
of the Act.
46      For the foregoing discussion, this Court is of the considered
view that the Civil Revision Petition lacks merits and bona fides
and is liable to be dismissed.
47      In the result, the Civil Revision Petition is dismissed.  The
petitioners are directed to vacate and handover vacant possession
of the petition schedule property to the respondent within a period
of three months from today. No order as to costs. Consequently,
miscellaneous petitions, if any pending in this Civil Revision
Petition shall stand closed.
_________________________    
T.SUNIL CHOWDARY, J.
Date:18.7.2018