[Cites
6
, Cited by
4
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Mrs. Ruhina Khan And Another vs Abdur Rahman Khan And Others on 27 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 117, (2018) 5 ANDHLD 461
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR         

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.1967 OF 2018     

27-07-2018 


Mrs. Ruhina Khan and another Petitioners.. Petitioner

Abdur Rahman Khan and others  Respondents     

Counsel for petitioners:  Sri Ghanta Rama Rao and
                           Sri Mohd. Islamuddin Ansari
                                                
Counsel for respondent No.1     :  --
Counsel for respondent Nos.2 and 5:Sri Vedula Venkataramana and  
                                   Sri P.Raghavendra Reddy 
                                                
Counsel for respondent Nos.3, 4,
 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 to 55:  --



<Gist:

>Head Note:     

? CASES REFERRED:      

1. 2010 SCC OnLine MADRAS 6009 = (2011) 3 MLJ 34     
2. AIR 1943 CAL 13 
3. AIR 1948 MAD 369  
4. AIR 1939 NAG 242  
5. AIR 1941 NAG 159  
6. 1988 (1) K.L.T. 673
7. AIR 1962 KER 19  
8. (2008) 3 MLJ 177 =  (2008) SCC OnLine MAD 6   
9. 2016 SCC OnLine Ker 29043  
10. (1996) 6 SCC 665 
11. ILR 1999 Karnataka 107 = 2011 SCC OnLine Karnataka 1   
12. AIR 1997 SC 3 
13. AIR 1971 AP 49 
14. 1990 (1) An. W. R. 256
15. 1977 (1) APLJ 32 N.R.C. 
16. 2014 (3) ALD 29 = 2014 (4) ALT 535 
17. 2003 (6) ALD 796 
18. 2011 (4) ALD 61 (DB) = 2011 (2) ALT 405 
19. 2012 (4) ALD 553 (DB) = 2013 (4)  ALT 24 (DB)
20. 2003 (4) ALD 302 (DB) 
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR         
CIVIL REVISION PETITION NO.1967 OF 2018     

O R D E R
This civil revision petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution
arises out of the order dated 06.03.2017 passed by the learned
I Additional District Judge, Ranga Reddy District at L.B.Nagar, in
I.A.No.716 of 2017 in O.S.No.38 of 1993 (Old O.S.No.721 0f 1983). The
petitioners are plaintiff Nos.14 and 15 in the said suit. They filed the
subject I.A. under Rule 32 of the Andhra Pradesh Civil Rules of Practice
and Circular Orders (hereinafter, the Civil Rules of Practice) seeking
permission to be represented by their General Power of Attorney (GPA)
holder.  By the order under revision, the trial Court held against them and
dismissed the I.A.  Aggrieved thereby, they are before this Court.
By order dated 29.03.2018, this Court granted stay of further
proceedings in the suit taking note of the apprehension of the
petitioners/plaintiff Nos.14 and 15 that the injunction petition filed by
them may be dismissed on the strength of the dismissal of the subject I.A.
        Heard Sri Ghanta Rama Rao, learned senior counsel representing 
Sri Mohd. Islamuddin Ansari, learned counsel for the petitioners/plaintiff
Nos.14 and 15, and Sri Vedula Venkataramana, learned senior counsel 
representing Sri P.Raghavendra Reddy, learned counsel for respondent
Nos.2 and 5/plaintiff Nos.5 and 8. Respondent Nos. 3, 4, 6, 7, 8 and 9 are
the siblings of respondent Nos. 2 and 5, being the progeny of deceased
Respondent Nos.1 and 10. Respondent Nos.11 to 55 in the revision are
shown as not necessary parties.
Parties shall hereinafter be referred to as arrayed in the suit.
        Plaintiff Nos.14 and 15 are residents of the United States of
America (USA). They executed a GPA on 11.05.2017 authorizing one   
Salam M.Bawazir to look after their Court cases and their property in
Miyapur Village, Serilingampally Mandal, Ranga Reddy District. This GPA
was executed before a Notary Public in the State of California, USA. The
GPA was thereafter presented before the District Registrar, Ranga Reddy
District, and was validated by him.  On the strength of this GPA, the
subject I.A. was filed, supported by the affidavit of the GPA holder.
Plaintiff No.8, being respondent No.5 in the I.A., filed a counter-
affidavit on behalf of himself and his siblings contesting the I.A. He
contended that the predecessor-in-title of plaintiff Nos.14 and 15, namely,
late Sayeedunnisa Begum, plaintiff No.3, had relinquished her rights in the
family property, vide registered relinquishment deed dated 31.03.1971,
when she left for USA and that she was only added as a proforma party.
He further contended that plaintiff Nos.14 and 15, having been brought
on record as her legal representatives upon her death, were not entitled
to claim any rights in the family property which was the subject matter of
the partition suit in O.S.No.38 of 1993. Lastly, he contended that the GPA
executed by plaintiff Nos.14 and 15 was not in accordance with law.
The trial Court thereupon framed the point for consideration as to
whether the plaintiff Nos.14 and 15 could be permitted to be represented
by their GPA holder as prayed for. The trial Court took note of the fact
that the suit schedule property in Survey Nos.48, 19, 44, 45, 56, 77, 87,
88, 92, 93, 94, 95, 97, 98, 117/1, and 117/2 of Miyapur Village was the
subject matter of the present GPA executed by plaintiff Nos.14 and 15
while the earlier GPA executed by them was only in relation to the land in
Survey No.45.  The trial Court found that the GPA holder as per both the
GPAs was one and the same, but there was no explanation as to why two  
separate GPAs had been executed in his favour. The trial Court noted that
the land in Survey No.45 of Miyapur Village found mention in both the
GPAs and opined that as one GPA was already in existence for Survey  
No.45, it was the duty of the principals to cancel the said GPA if they
wanted to execute a fresh GPA for the land in Survey No.45 along with
the land in the other survey numbers.  The trial Court further held that the
GPA was not sufficiently stamped as it was executed on a non-judicial
stamp paper worth Rs.100/- and despite validation by the District
Registrar, no further stamp duty was collected thereon. On the
aforestated reasoning, the trial Court held that the request of plaintiff
Nos.14 and 15 to be represented by their GPA holder could not be
considered and accordingly dismissed the I.A.
        Significantly, no argument was advanced before the trial Court as
to non-compliance with the requirements of Rules 32 and 33 of the Civil
Rules of Practice. However, as the said aspect has been canvassed in
extenso before this Court, it would be appropriate to deal with the issue.
Order 3 CPC
deals with recognised agents and pleaders.
Order 3
Rule 1 CPC
states that any appearance, application or act in or to any
Court, required or authorised by law to be made or done by a party in
such Court, may, except where otherwise expressly provided by any law 
for the time being in force, be made or done by the party-in-person, or by
his recognised agent, or by a pleader appearing, applying or acting, as the
case may be, on his behalf.
Order 3 Rule 2 CPC
states that recognised
agents of parties by whom such appearances, applications and acts may 
be made or done are, amongst others, persons holding powers-of-
attorney authorising them to make and do such appearances, applications
and acts on behalf of such parties.
Order 3 Rule 6 CPC
deals with the
power of the agent to accept service. Sub-rule (1) thereunder states that
besides recognised agents described in
Order 3 Rule 2 CPC
, any person 
residing within the jurisdiction of the Court may be appointed an agent to
accept service of process. Order 3 Rule 6(2)
CPC
provides that such
appointment may be special or general and shall be made by an 
instrument in writing signed by the principal, and such instrument or, if
the appointment is general, a certified copy thereof shall be filed in Court.
Order 6 Rule 14 CPC
states that every pleading shall be signed by the
party and his pleader, if any. The proviso thereto, however, states that
where a party pleading is, by reason of absence or for other good cause,
unable to sign the pleading, it may be signed by any person duly
authorised by him to sign the same or to sue or defend on his behalf.
Order 6 Rule 15 CPC
deals with verification of pleadings and sub-rule (1)
thereof provides that every pleading shall be verified at the foot by the
party or by any of the parties pleading or by some other person, proved to
the satisfaction of the Court, to be acquainted with the facts of the case.
Order 6 Rule 15(4)
CPC
states that the person verifying the pleading shall
also furnish an affidavit in support of his pleadings.
Chapter III of the Civil Rules of Practice deals with Advocates and
Recognised Agents. Rules 32 and 33 therein are extracted hereunder:
32. Party appearing by Agent:-
(1) When a party appears by any agent, other than an advocate,
the agent shall, before making of or doing any appearance,
application, or act, in or to the court, file in court the power of
attorney, or written authority, thereunto authorising him or a
properly authenticated copy thereof together with an affidavit that
the said authority still subsisting, or, in the case of an agent
carrying on a trade or business on behalf of a party, without a
written authority, an affidavit stating the residence of his principal,
the trade or business carried on by the agent on his behalf and the
connection of the same with the subject-matter of the suit, and
that no other agent is expressly authorised to make or do such
appearance, application, or act.
(2) The Judge may thereupon record in writing that the agent is
permitted to appear and act on behalf of the party; and unless and
until the said permission is granted, no appearance, application, or
act, of the agent shall be recognised by the Court.
33. Signing or verification by Agent:-
If any proceeding, which under any provision of law or these
rules, is required to be signed or verified by a party, is signed or
verified by any person on his behalf, a written authority in this
behalf signed by the party shall be filed in court, together with an
affidavit verifying the signature of the party, and stating the reason
of his inability to sign or verify the proceeding, and stating the
means of knowledge or the facts set out in the proceeding of the
person signing or verifying the same and that such person is a
recognised agent of the party as defined by Order III, Rule 2 of the
Code and is duly authorised and competent so to do.
In effect, Rule 32 deals with an agent other than an Advocate
appearing for a party while Rule 33 deals only with signing or verification
of proceedings by an agent. Rule 32(1) makes it clear that it has
application to a situation where a party appears by an agent other than an
Advocate. Therefore, the said agent would appear for the party in all
respects and not merely for the purpose of signing and verifying
pleadings. When the party appears through an agent other than an
Advocate, the agent is required, before he appears or acts in the Court or
makes an application thereto, to file the power of attorney or written
authority or a properly authenticated copy thereof along with an affidavit
that the said authority, whereby he is empowered to do so, is still
subsisting. In the event of an agent carrying on a trade or business on
behalf of a party without a written authority, an affidavit stating the
residence of his principal; the trade or business carried on by the agent on
his behalf; the connection of the same with the subject matter of the suit;
and that no other agent is authorised to make or do such appearance,
application or act, shall be filed. Rule 32(2) provides that the Judge may
thereupon record in writing that the agent is permitted to appear and act
on behalf of the party and unless and until the said permission is granted,
no appearance, application or act of the agent shall be recognised by the
Court.
Rule 33 deals with an agent signing and verifying on behalf of his
principal and states that if any proceeding, which under any provision of
law or the Civil Rules of Practice, is required to be signed or verified by a
party but is signed or verified by the agent, a written authority in this
behalf signed by the party shall be filed in Court, together with an affidavit
verifying the signature of the party and stating the reason of his inability
to sign or verify the proceeding and stating the means of knowledge of
the facts set out in the proceeding of the person signing or verifying the
same  and that such person is a recognised agent of the party, as defined
by Order 3 Rule 2 CPC, and is duly authorised and competent to do so.
The issue presently is as to what is the nature of the procedure
prescribed by Rules 32 and 33 of the Civil Rules of Practice.  Should it be
construed to be merely directory or mandatory to the extent of holding
non-compliance therewith to be fatal?
In K.SANTHANAM V/s. S.KAVITHA , a learned Judge of the  
Madras High Court had occasion to deal with this issue. Referring to Rules
16 and 17 of the Civil Rules of Practice framed by the Madras High Court,
which are in pari materia with Rules 32 and 33 of our Civil Rules of
Practice, the learned Judge considered the issue of non-compliance with
these rules and the consequences thereof. The trial Court had allowed an
application permitting the GPA holders to prosecute the suit on behalf of
the plaintiff on the basis of a rectified GPA. The learned Judge observed
that even in the absence of a power of attorney, a party to a suit is
entitled to have the pleading signed on his behalf by any person duly
authorised by him to do so. Holding that it is well settled that defective
presentation of a plaint cannot result in its rejection, the learned Judge
opined that a defect which is curable in nature would not fall within the
ambit of
Order 7 Rule 11 CPC
, which enumerates the situations where a
plaint can be rejected. The learned Judge further observed that an error
of procedure is merely an irregularity which can be cured. Reference was
made to BENGAL JUTE MILLS V/s. JEWRAJ HEERALAL , SUBBIAH            
PILLAI @ S.S.M. SUBRAMANIA PILLAI V/s. SANKARAPANDIAM           
PILLAI , SARJUPRASAD V/s. BADRIPRASAD  and NETRAM V/s.
BHAGWAN , wherein it was held that a plaintiff can orally authorise
another person to sign a plaint for him. The learned Judge therefore held
that it would always be open to a principal to ratify the act of the agent,
by producing an authenticated power of attorney.
In NARAYANAN NAIR V/s. JOHN KURIEN , the Kerala High    
Court dealt with non-compliance with a similar provision akin to Rule 33 of
our Civil Rules of Practice contained in the Kerala Civil Rules of Practice.
The Kerala High Court observed that the rule applied only to cases where
proceedings are required to be signed or verified by the parties concerned
and could not be imported into a case where the plaint or written
statement can be signed, as sanctioned by substantive law, by any other
person duly authorised by the party. Reference was made to
Order 6 Rule
14 CPC
which permits such a course to be adopted in making the 
pleadings and the Kerala High Court observed that its scope could not be
curtailed or restricted by unduly reading the Civil Rules of Practice into it.
It was further observed that the sanction offered by substantive law could
not be stultified by resort to the rules framed under such law. Referring to
the proviso to
Order 6 Rule 14 CPC
, the Kerala High Court pointed out
that the same did not even require production or even creation of a power
of attorney or written authorisation and there was nothing to suggest that
a written authorisation is indispensable for proper compliance therewith.
The Kerala High Court found that case law seemed to support the view
that even oral authorisation would be sufficient. Distinguishing the earlier
judgment of the Kerala High Court in IYAKKU MATHOO V/s. JULIUS ,   
which held to the effect that absence of a written authority was a defect
in constituting due authorisation, the Kerala High Court pointed out that
the said case related to a suit instituted on behalf of a plaintiff residing
abroad permanently and concluded that there would be sufficient
compliance with the requirements of
Order 6 Rule 14 CPC
if there is
satisfactory material to show that the signatory to the plaint had the
authority of the plaintiff to sign the plaint on his behalf and such authority
need not necessarily be in writing.
In MRS.SUJATHA JAYAKUMAR V/s. KARNATAKA SOAPS             
AND DETERGENTS LTD. , a learned Judge of the Madras High Court     
was dealing with a case where the suit had been filed by the power of
attorney agent of the plaintiff, who had verified the plaint and signed the
vakalat on its behalf and had also filed an application for leave of the
Court to sign and verify the pleadings but the same had not been ordered
by the trial Court. The defendant in the suit contended that the plaintiff
could not maintain the suit as the power of attorney holder was not
permitted to sign the plaint. This objection was raised by the defendant at
the stage of cross-examination of P.W.1. The learned Judge held that the
procedure adopted by the Court below in not ordering the leave
application before proceeding further was irregular but the same would
not go to the root of the case. Observing that the Court below could allow
the application even at that stage as the trial was not over, the
defendants contention was rejected.
FOCAL IMAGE INDIA PVT. LTD. V/s. FOCAL IMAGE LTD.  is       
a decision to the contrary. Therein, a learned Judge of the Kerala High
Court was dealing with a case where the plaint had been presented
defectively by the power of attorney holder and only after the appearance
of the defendant, an attempt was made to cure the said defect. The
learned Judge framed the question as to whether the plaintiff could be
allowed to verify the pleadings and sign the plaint after the appearance of
the defendant in the suit. Opining that an inherent defect which would
vitiate the original presentation of the suit could never be cured
subsequently, the learned Judge observed that it was an admitted fact
that the institution of the suit was inherently defective. The learned Judge
further observed that there was no provision either in
the CPC
or in the
Civil Rules of Practice framed by the Kerala High Court, which permitted
the plaintiff to verify and sign the pleadings after the appearance of the
defendant in the suit. The learned Judge held that the institution of a
plaint by an unauthorised agent is an inherent and incurable defect which
could vitiate the institution of the plaint itself and therefore, the plaintiff
who instituted an inherently invalid and defective plaint through an
unauthorised agent could not be allowed to make the plaint valid and
perfect by his subsequent act, on the basis of an objection raised by the
defendant. The learned Judge observed that a plaint instituted by an
agent is liable to be rejected in limini unless he is duly authorised and the
power of attorney or other written authority is produced in Court to that
effect at the time of institution of the plaint itself, as the institution of such
a plaint by an unauthorised agent is barred by Order 3 Rules 1 and 2
CPC
and Rules 22 and 23 of the Kerala Civil Rules of Practice (similar to Rules
32 and 33 of our Civil Rules of Practice). The learned Judge distinguished
the decision of the Supreme Court in J.K.INDUSTRIES LTD. V/s. 
CHIEF INSPECTOR OF FACTORIES AND BOILERS , pointing out         
that in that case, an officer of the Corporation, referred to in
Order 29
Rule 1 CPC
, signed the defective plaint which could be ratified by the
Corporation thereafter so as to make the institution of the suit valid. But,
in the case before him, a stranger to the company, who had no authority
to institute the suit, did so in its discretion. Reference was made to
NARAYANAN NAIR6, wherein the Kerala High Court had observed that    
the only question to be determined is whether a person who signed the
plaint was the duly authorised agent of the person who figures as the
plaintiff therein and if the answer is in the negative, the suit is liable to be
dismissed for want of a valid plaint. The learned Judge therefore held that
the plaint was liable to be rejected.
In KITHANIA TEXTILES V/s. EAST INDIA TRANSPORT     
AGENCY , a learned Judge of the Karnataka High Court was considering  
the question as to whether a Regional Manager of a company, on the
basis of a special power of attorney executed in his favour by the
company, would be competent to sign and verify the plaint in a suit filed
on behalf of the company. Considering Order 29 Rules 2 and 3
CPC
, the
learned Judge opined that a Joint Director, Secretary or other Principal
Officer of a company would not need any specific authorisation to sign or
verify the pleadings, as these persons are endowed with status of
responsibility and trust. Further, the learned Judge was of the opinion that
any other officer of the company who is specifically authorised in respect
thereof may also sign and verify the pleadings. As the Manager in that
case produced the Resolution of the company authorising him to sign and
verify the pleadings, the learned Judge concluded that it was not
necessary to produce a power of attorney.
In UNITED BANK OF INDIA V/s. NARESH KUMAR , the     
Supreme Court went to the extent of holding that by virtue of
Order 6
Rule 14 CPC
, read with
Order 29 Rule 1 CPC
, signing and verification of a
plaint by a person holding office could be accepted, even in the absence
of a formal letter of authority or power of attorney.
Closer home, in M.PARTHASARTHI V/s. THE STATE OF A.P.     
REPRESENTED BY SECRETARY, EDUCATION DEPARTMENT,                
HYDERABAD , a learned Judge of this Court was dealing with an office
objection where fourteen persons who filed the writ petition signed on the
vakalat but only one of them signed and verified the writ petition, stating
that he was doing so for himself and on behalf of the other petitioners. An
authorisation letter purporting to be under Rule 17 of the Civil Rules of
Practice and
Order 6 Rule 14 CPC
signed by the other petitioners was also
filed. The office took an objection that either all the petitioners should sign
and verify the writ petition or they should file an affidavit or a power of
attorney authorising one of them to sign and verify the writ petition. The
office also objected to the letter of authorisation on the ground that it did
not constitute sufficient compliance with the rules. Dealing with these
objections, the learned Judge observed that it is not only a rule of
convenience but also one of prudence to insist upon production of a
power of attorney or an affidavit evidencing the claim of the party who
signs and verifies the petition that he has been duly authorised by the
other petitioners to do so. Observing that if a party is unable to sign a writ
petition himself, any person duly authorised by him could do so and as
the
CPC
does not define the words duly authorised, execution of a power of
attorney could certainly be due authorisation, as it is universally accepted
by law. As to what other modes of due authorisation could be adopted by
law and whether a mere letter of authorisation is one such mode of due
authorisation was stated to be the question to be considered. The learned
Judge observed that the Courts anxiety is to ensure that the facts alleged
by the petitioners are duly verified and such verification is duly done by an
affidavit, which is a sworn affidavit. However, a mere letter of
authorisation, though purported to be signed by the other petitioners, is
neither a sworn statement of those persons nor is it signed in the
presence of a recognised authority. Thus, insistence upon filing of a power
of attorney or on a sworn affidavit was stated to be a rule of convenience
as well as of prudence. The learned Judge therefore summed up that it
would be reasonable to assume that the words duly authorised in
Order 6
Rule 14 CPC
require that such authorisation should be in some form
analogues to the requirements of Rule 52 of the Appellate Side Rules
which states that if a petition is presented by a party, it shall be signed or
marked by him and such signature or mark shall be acknowledged before 
the Registrar or some other functionary who shall certify therein that the
contents of the petition were explained by him or the signature or mark of
the petitioner was made or acknowledged before him. Reference was 
made by the learned Judge to Rule 17 of the Madras Civil Rules of
Practice, which was applicable in the state of Andhra Pradesh at that point
of time, which required that if any proceeding which is required to be
signed or verified by a party is signed or verified by any person on his
behalf, the written authority in this behalf shall be filed in the Court
together with an affidavit verifying the signature of the party and stating
the reason of his inability to sign or verify the proceedings. The learned
Judge observed that this Rule threw much light on the problem to be
resolved as it requires that a written authority signed by the party, who is
unable to himself sign or verify the proceedings, together with an affidavit
stating the reasons of his inability for signing and verifying the proceeding
himself, has to be filed. The learned Judge observed that no reason is
conceivable for making a distinction between this procedure that is made
applicable to the Courts of first instance and the procedure that has to be
followed in signing and verifying writ petitions. The learned Judge
accordingly concluded that it is not only a rule of convenience and
prudence but also a logical consequence of the relevant rules that a party,
who is unable to sign the writ petition himself, should either file a power
of attorney or an affidavit stating the reason for his inability to personally
sign and verify the petition and authorising some other person to sign and
verify on his behalf. The learned Judge referred to the commentary on
the
Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908, by the learned author Mulla, 13th Edition,
and observed as under:
The signing of plaints is merely a matter of procedure. If a plaint is
not signed by the plaintiff or by a person duly authorised by him in
that behalf, and the defect is discovered at any time before
judgment, the Court may allow the plaintiff to amend the plaint by
signing the same. If the defect is not discovered until the case
comes on for hearing before an appellate Court, the appellate Court
may order the amendment to be made in that Court. The appellate 
Court ought not to dismiss the suit or interfere with the decree of
the lower Court merely because the plaint has not been signed.
The omission to sign or verify a plaint is not such a defect as could
affect the merits of a case or the jurisdiction of the Court.
The learned Judge further observed that signing and verifying of a
plaint is only a matter of procedure but nevertheless, it is the requirement
of law. If the failure of the plaintiff to sign and verify the plaint is
discovered at any stage, it should be permitted to be corrected. The
learned Judge finally summed up as under:
12. There is, therefore, no doubt in my mind to hold that
in order to avoid all future difficulties, doubts or complications it
is essential for the parties to prove due authorisation by
producing a Power of Attorney or a sworn affidavit of the party
who is not personally signing and verifying the petition.
13. Even so, learned counsel submitted that the
requirement of filing an affidavit has been satisfied in this case
by the fourth petitioner who has filed and verified the petition on
behalf of the other petitioners, has himself filed an affidavit
stating that the other writ petitioners have authorised him to
sign and verify the writ petition. But such an affidavit by a
person who is actually signing and verifying the petition does not
meet the requirements of the situation. What is required is the
affidavit of the party or parties who is or are not signing and
verifying. Otherwise, the very purpose for which such an
affidavit is required is likely to be defeated. After all, the fourth
petitioner, who is swearing to the affidavit has already signed
the petition and it would not be difficult for him to swear to
another affidavit. If the Court is to be satisfied that the parties
had authorised him to sign and verify the petition on their
behalf, it is their affidavit that is essential to prove such
authorisation and not the affidavit of the person who has come
forward that he has got a representative capacity.
14. For the reasons, I answer the reference by holding
that if some of the parties to the writ petition do not personally
sign and verify it, but authorise somebody else to sign and verify
on their behalf either a Power of Attorney or an affidavit sworn
by them in the presence of an attesting Officer or functionary
recognised by law stating the reasons for their inability to sign
and verify the petition personally and authorising another person
to sign and verify on their behalf, should be filed.
In JANAB SYED KAZIM SAHAB V/s. JANAB SAYEED        
BAKARAM SAHAB , one of the questions that fell for consideration 
before a learned Judge of this Court was whether the suit filed by the
plaintiffs was defective in the absence of permission of the Court, as one
of them was represented by a power of attorney holder, but no leave was
sought by him under Rule 32 of the Civil Rules of Practice. The plaint itself
was signed by the GPA holder. The learned Judge opined that as an 
Advocate and not the power of attorney holder appeared for the principal,
viz., the second plaintiff in the suit, Rule 32 of the Civil Rules of Practice
had no place and consequently, permission from the Court was not
mandatory under such circumstances. The learned Judge observed that  
Rule 33 is an additional provision which is not repugnant to the provisions
of the CPC
and that the presentation of the plaint, signed and verified by
the power of attorney holder coupled with the very power of attorney
executed in his favour filed in the Court, would not require any permission
from the Court, as an Advocate, duly appointed by the said power of
attorney holder, entered appearance in the Court for the principal plaintiff
but in order to hold the said plaint to be valid, it must be accompanied by
an affidavit of the executant of the general power of attorney in terms of
Rule 33. The absence of the said affidavit would not invalidate the suit
resulting in dismissal thereof as no objection had been taken with regard
to non-compliance with Rule 33. The learned Judge therefore concluded
that the defendant could not be allowed to raise the objection at the time
of appeal as he should be deemed to have been waived the same.
In M.LAXMA REDDY V/s. BAQUR ALI BAQURI , it was     
observed that a pleader can be validly appointed by the power of attorney
or agent who is authorised to do so and it is only in cases where the party
appears by an agent other than a pleader or Advocate that the provisions
of
Section 16(1)(2)
apply. It was found that the requirement of the rules
had been complied with as the power of attorney as well as the affidavit
of the plaintiff had been filed.
More recently, in G.PURNACHANDER V/s. SYNDICATE BANK,       
WARANGAL BRANCH , a learned Judge of this Court dealt with the   
question as to whether the plaint in that suit was signed and presented by
a competent person. The plaintiff was a bank and its Manager verified the
pleadings and signed the vakalat on its behalf. The learned Judge opined
that the Branch Manager of the bank was competent to represent the
bank and the irregularity in not seeking leave would not go to the root of
the case. Reference was made to MD.MUNAWAR HUSSAIN V/s. USHA          
KIRAN CHIT FUNDS, SATHUPALLI, KHAMMAM DISTRICT ,          
wherein it was held that if the civil Court did not follow the procedure
contemplated under Rule 32 of the Civil Rules of Practice and only after
numbering of the suit, the issue was raised, the irregularity in proceeding
with the suit would not go to the root of the case. The contention that the
judgment passed in such a suit would be contrary to Rule 32 was not
accepted. In view of this judgment, the learned Judge opined that
institution of a suit and verification of the pleadings by a competent
person is to be looked into before registration of the plaint and any such
contention cannot be gone into after registration of the plaint as it would
not go to the root of the case.
In MADUPU HARINARAYANA @ MARIBABU V/s. LEARNED            
1st ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE, KADAPA , a Division Bench of      
this Court dealt with a GPAs right of audience before a Court of law.
Reference was made to the definition of
Power-of-Attorney in the
Powers-of-Attorney Act
to include any instrument empowering a specified
person to act for and in the name of the person executing it. Adverting to
Rule 33 of the Civil Rules of Practice, the Division Bench observed that
when pleadings are verified and signed by a person under a written
authority, such document should be filed with an affidavit of the authority
holder to the effect that such person is a recognized agent of the party, as
defined in
Order 3 Rule 2 CPC
.  Holding that it is well settled that a GPA
holder can sign and verify the pleadings, sign affidavits, instruct
Advocates to whom vakalat is issued, the Division Bench observed that he
could do no more as he could not give evidence on behalf of the party to
the proceedings who had given the power of attorney.  The Division
Bench therefore held that a GPA in favour of a person to act for another
person in a Court proceeding cannot be construed as authorising the
holder of the GPA to argue a case in the Court.
Significantly, in NATUBHAI CHOTABHAI PATEL V/s. PATNAM     
SHAKUNTALA , the question referred to a Division Bench of this Court
was whether the procedure contemplated under Rules 32 and 33 of the 
Civil Rules of Practice is mandatory or curable by moving an appropriate
application and whether the Court, depending upon the facts and
circumstances, can rectify the same. The factual matrix was that a suit for
declaration of title and delivery of possession, apart from rectification of
entries in the revenue records etc., was filed by the GPA holder but
without obtaining the order of the Court permitting him to represent the
plaintiff under Rule 32(1) of the Civil Rules of Practice. The defendant
contended that the suit was non est in the eye of law as its very
presentation was invalid. The trial Court however did not accede to the
defendants request and dismissed the I.A.
      Reference was made by the Division Bench to SECRETARY TO    
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, MINISTRY OF DEFENCE, NEW DELHI              
V/s. INDIRA DEVI , wherein a Division Bench of this Court had held
that when a GPA holder represents a party, the Court is required to record
in writing that he is permitted to appear and act on behalf of the party
and once a person files a suit on behalf of a party as a GPA holder, he
enters into the shoes of that party and except to the extent of personal
knowledge, he is entitled to depose on other facts. Observing that Rule 32
of the Civil Rules of Practice was introduced to discourage parties from
appointing agents to represent them in Courts other than legal
practitioners, the Division Bench pointed out that the wording of Rule 32
clearly indicated that the authorisation is for all purposes, including the
filing of pleadings, examination of witnesses, marking of documents and
advancing of arguments, which is generally expected to be performed by
an Advocate, who is a legal expert. If the party is prepared to take the
risk of authorising an agent other than an Advocate to undertake this
exercise, the Bench was of the opinion that in order to make sure that the
party did authorise the agent to represent him in the matter, an affidavit
is necessary, but in cases of authorising an agent to sign the pleadings
while authorising a legal practitioner to appear on his behalf, it is sufficient
if the Court is satisfied that he was authorised to sign and in such a case,
filing of an affidavit is not mandatory and the defect can be cured at a
later stage also by convincing the Court that the agent was duly
authorised by the party in that regard. Paras 14 and 15 of the judgment
are relevant and are extracted hereunder:
14.
In
Kamal Silk Mills v. Kuncham Mohana Rao
, 2002 (1) 
ALD 722 (DB), an order has been passed by the Court below 
showing that specific contention was raised by the judgment debtor
claiming that the decretal amount was already discharged and he
need not pay any amount towards the decree, but he failed to
place before the Court as proof any receipt to that effect issued by
the petitioner, and that no permission was obtained from the
Original Court under Rule 32 of the Civil Rules of Practice
authorizing the General power of Attorney holder to present on
behalf of the original decree holder as long as the General Power of
Attorney was in force, and that the Court below failed to notice that
no such contention was ever raised in the suit, therefore, the High
Court held that the judgment debtor was not to raise such a plea at
the stage of execution of the decree.
15. A party generally represented by an Advocate. This
provision enables an agent to represent the party. This provision
has been introduced to discourage the parties to appoint the
agents to represent them in the Courts than the legal practitioners.
The wording when a party appears by any agent other than an
Advocate used in Rule 32 clearly indicates that the authorization is
for all purposes including the filing of the pleadings, examination of
the witnesses, marking of the documents and advancing of the
arguments, which is generally expected to be performed by an
Advocate who is a legal expert in the field. If an agent represents
the party, he may not know the implications and complications of
the issues involved in the matter, thereby it is likely to cause
injustice to the party. If the party prepares to take the risk of
authorizing an agent, it is an indication that the party is prepared to
reap the consequences by appointing an agent. In order to make
sure that the party authorized the agent to represent him in the
matter, an affidavit is necessary. But in cases of authorizing an
agent to sign the pleadings while authorizing a legal practitioner to
appear on his behalf, it is sufficient if the Court is satisfied that he
was authorized to sign and in such a case, the filing of an affidavit
is not mandatory, therefore, the defect can be cured at a later
stage also by convincing the Court that the agent was duly
authorized by the respective party in that matter. But if an agent is
authorized to undertake the signing of pleadings, adducing of
evidence and advancing of arguments, the agent shall be permitted
in writing and the party has to file an affidavit that he has duly
authorized the agent to represent him instead of an Advocate. In
case of a party executing a General Power of Attorney in favour of
another person, the General Power of Attorney holder also cannot
be permitted to represent the party in the suit for all purposes
namely to sign the pleadings, to adduce evidence and to advance
arguments unless an affidavit is filed by the party affirming that he
has authorized his General Power of Attorney holder to represent
his case for the above purposes. But for mere signing of the
pleadings on behalf of the party duly represented by an Advocate,
permission from the Court is not necessary by way of filing an
affidavit to that effect. It is sufficient if the Court is satisfied that
the agent or power of attorney holder is duly authorized to sign the
pleadings, after perusal of such authorization, which was filed along
with the pleadings.
The aforestated portion of the judgment implies that the Division
Bench dealt with only Rule 32 of the Civil Rules of Practice though the
later part in Para 15 indicates that Rule 33 of the Civil Rules of Practice
was also considered. This aspect is clear from the following observation
made in paragraph 15 of the judgment:
15.     . But in cases of authorizing an agent to sign the
pleadings while authorizing a legal practitioner to appear on his
behalf, it is sufficient if the Court is satisfied that he was authorized
to sign and in such a case, the filing of an affidavit is not
mandatory, therefore, the defect can be cured at a later stage also
by convincing the Court that the agent was duly authorized by the
respective party in that manner. .  But for mere signing of the
pleadings on behalf of the party duly represented by an Advocate,
permission from the Court is not necessary by way of filing an
affidavit to that effect. It is sufficient if the Court is satisfied that
the agent or power of attorney holder is duly authorized to sign the
pleadings, after perusal of such authorization, which was filed along
with the pleadings.
As regards a situation falling under Rule 32 of the Civil Rules of
Practice, the observation of the Bench in Para 15 may be referred to:
15.                   But if an agent is authorized to undertake
the signing of pleadings, adducing of evidence and advancing of
arguments, the agent shall be permitted in writing and the party
has to file an affidavit that he has duly authorized the agent to
represent him instead of an Advocate.
In effect, the Division Bench held that where the GPA holder merely
signs the pleadings in a case where the principal is represented by a legal
practitioner it is sufficient if Court satisfies itself that he has the authority
to sign such pleadings and the filing of an affidavit is not mandatory. Any
defect in this regard can also be cured at a later stage by convincing the
Court that such GPA holder was duly authorized by the principal to
represent him in the matter. However, in a case where the GPA holder not
only signs the pleadings but also adduces evidence and advances
arguments on behalf of the principal, he would necessarily have to file an
affidavit of the principal affirming that he authorized the GPA holder to do
so.
In the light of the principles emerging from the aforestated binding
judgment, the final observation that Rule 32 of the Civil Rules of Practice
is not mandatory seems to be an oversight as it is Rule 33 which was held
to be not mandatory but no mention was made of the said Rule in the
concluding paragraph. Rule 32, on the other hand, was clearly held to be
mandatory as the Bench observed that when no legal practitioner appears
for the principal and the GPA holder undertakes not only the signing of
pleadings but also the job of a legal practitioner, he must necessarily file
the affidavit of the principal authorizing him to do so.
Applying the aforestated principle to the case on hand, it is clear
that the situation falls within the ambit of Rule 33 and not Rule 32 of the
Civil Rules of Practice as plaintiffs 14 and 15 are represented by counsel
and their GPA holder is merely signing pleadings on their behalf.
Therefore, notwithstanding the fact that the said GPA holder himself
signed the affidavit and not plaintiffs 14 and 15, it is not fatal. As long as
the said GPA holder is able to demonstrate that he had the authority to
sign such pleadings on behalf of his principals, sufficient compliance with
Rule 33 of the Civil Rules of Practice is made out.
As regards the finding of the trial Court that the GPA dated
11.05.2017 is not valid as the earlier GPA executed in favour of the very
same GPA holder, in relation to one out of the several survey numbers,
has not been cancelled, is not tenable. The subsequent GPA would prevail
as the GPA holder is the same in both and no complications would arise.
As regards the other observation of the trial Court with regard to sufficient
stamp duty not being paid on the GPA dated 11.05.2017, perusal thereof
reflects that the District Registrar and Collector under
Section 42
of the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (for brevity, the Act of 1899) certified on the
back of the first page that the instrument was duly stamped. However, as
the trial Court found that the earlier registered GPA was subjected to
stamp duty to the tune of Rs.15,97,200/- and it pertained to only one out
the several survey numbers covered by the later GPA, the aspect needs
further examination by the authorities under the Act of 1899. It would
therefore be within the power of the trial Court to impound the said
document under
Section 33
of the Act of 1899 for examination as to the
correct stamp duty payable thereon and take necessary steps under the 
Act of 1899 for such purpose.
Subject to this observation, the rejection of the GPA dated
11.05.2017 by the trial Court is set aside. This Court further finds that
there is no violation of the procedure prescribed under Rule 33 of the Civil
Rules of Practice, as there is no reason to doubt the authenticity of the
GPA authorizing the very same GPA holder, who was appointed under the  
earlier GPA, to represent the principals in the suit in the context of the
other survey numbers. However, as already stated supra, the trial Court
shall take necessary steps under the Act of 1899 in relation to the said
GPA in the context of the stamp duty payable thereon.
The civil revision petition is accordingly allowed to the extent
indicated above. Pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall stand
closed in the light of this final order. No order as to costs.
_______________   
SANJAY KUMAR, J    
27th JULY, 2018