[Cites
14
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Pitta Chandramma And 4 Others vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh Rep. By ... on 14 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 182
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

Criminal Revision Case No.171 of 2018

14.06.2018 

Pitta Chandramma and 4 others. ... Petitioners

The State of Andhra Pradesh  Rep. by Public Prosecutor, High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad, For the State of Telangana an

Counsel for Petitioner  : Sri Ramakrishna Pativada

Counsel for Respondent: Public Prosecutor (Andhra Pradesh) 

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:

1)MANU/UP/0306/1991    
2)(2010) 7 SCC 578 
3)1988 Crl.LJ. 199
4)2001(1) ALD (Crl.) 324

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO          

Criminal Revision Case No.171 of 2018

ORDER:
This Criminal Revision Case is filed by the petitioners/A.1 to A.5 under
Section 397
Cr.P.C, aggrieved by the order dt.05.01.2018 in
Crl.M.P.No.274/2017 in S.C.No.140/2009 passed by the Assistant Sessions   
Judge, Vizianagaram, whereby the learned Judge dismissed the petition filed
by the petitioners under
Sections 202
and
309
Cr.P.C seeking to drop the
evidence of LWs.6 to 12.
2)      The petitioners/accused filed Crl.M.P.No.274/2017 on the submission
that the witnesses, who were examined by the Judicial First Class Magistrate,
Cheepurupalli under
Section 202
Cr.P.C, are only to be examined before the
Trial Court and since LWs.6 to 12, who were not examined by the learned
Magistrate during the enquiry under
Section 202
Cr.P.C, the Trial Court may
drop the evidence of LWs.6 to 12. The said petition was dismissed by the
learned Assistant Sessions Judge, Vizianagaram, in his order dated 05.01.2018
on the observation that the Court during trial stage cannot go beyond
investigation and question the enquiry under
Section 202
Cr.P.C or
cognizance order.
Hence, the instant Crl.R.C.
3)      Heard Sri Ramakrishna Pativada, learned counsel for petitioners and
learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the State (Andhra Pradesh).
4)      Learned counsel for petitioner would argue,
Section 202
Cr.P.C. ordains
that in a compliant case if it appears to the Magistrate that the same is
exclusively triable by Court of Session, he shall direct the complainant to
examine all his witnesses and commit the case to Sessions Court in terms of
Sections 208
and
209
Cr.P.C. Non-examination of all list mentioned witnesses
by a Magistrate is a grave procedural error. Further, even if the Magistrate
without insisting examination of all the list mentioned witnesses and permit
the complainant to examine only some of them and commits the case to  
Sessions Court, the said Court shall examine only those witnesses who were
earlier examined before the Magistrate but not other witnesses who were not
examined by the complainant. The reason is that under
Sections 208
and
209
Cr.P.C., the Magistrate while committing the case to Sessions Court shall,
furnish all the copies to the accused including the statements of witnesses
recorded under
Section 202
Cr.P.C. Naturally, the Magistrate can give copies
of the statements of only those witnesses who were examined by the 
Magistrate but not others who were omitted. If during trial, the Sessions Court
proposes to examine all the witnesses including those who were omitted to be
examined before the Magistrate, then the accused can not have the advantage
of their earlier statements so as to confront them during trial to point out any
contradictions or improvements. Therefore, examination of the omitted
witnesses for the first time in the Sessions trial would amount to gross-
infraction of procedure contemplated under
Sections 202
,
208
and
209
Cr.P.C.
He relied upon the decision reported in
Leela Dhar vs. State of UP
.
5)      Per contra, learned Additional Public Prosecutor would argue that under
Section 202
Cr.P.C. it is not mandatory that a complainant or the Magistrate
shall examine all the witnesses mentioned in the list of witnesses in respect of
a case exclusively triable by Sessions Court. The complainant has liberty to
examine such of the list mentioned witnesses on whom he may repose  
confidence. Similarly, there is no embargo for Sessions Court during trial to
examine only those witnesses who were examined earlier before the 
Magistrate.       It can examine even omitted witnesses as well. There is no
hard and fast rule that the Sessions Court shall examine only those witnesses
whose 161
Cr.P.C
. statements were recorded or those whose statements were   
recorded by the Magistrate before committal.  He thus prayed to dismiss the
revision case.
6)      The following points would arise for determination.
1.      Whether a Magistrate shall invariably examine all the list mentioned
witnesses in a complaint case exclusively triable by Court of
Session?
2.      If point No.1 is held in negative, whether Sessions Court during trial
can examine only those witnesses whose statements were recorded   
by the Magistrate before committal or it can examine the omitted
witnesses also?
7)  POINT No.1:  As per proviso to
Section 202
Cr.P.C., if it appears to the
Magistrate the offence complained of is triable exclusively by a Court of
Session, he shall call upon the complainant to produce all his witnesses and
examine them on oath.
8)      The case on hand, admittedly, is triable by a Court of Session. Coming
to fulfilment the aforesaid requirement, we have the decisions of Apex Court
and this High Court to the effect that there is no requirement to examine all
the witnesses mentioned in the complaint. The Courts in this regard, have
explained the term all his witnesses appearing in proviso to Section 202(2)
Cr.P.C.
9)      In Shivjee Singh vs. Nagendra Tiwary and others vs. Nagendra
Tiwary and others  it was held that even though in terms of proviso to Section
202(2) Cr.P.C. the Magistrate is required to direct the complainant to produce
all his witnesses and examine them on oath, however, failure or inability of
the complainant or omission on his part to examine one or some of the
witnesses cited in the complaint, will not preclude a Magistrate from taking
cognizance and issuing process or passing committal order, if he is satisfied
that there exists sufficient ground for doing so. Such an order passed by the
Magistrate cannot be nullified only on the ground of non-compliance with the
proviso to Section 202 (2) Cr.P.C.
10)     In
Jumrnan and others vs. State of UP and another
similar question
fell for consideration before Allahabad High Court. A learned single Judge
observed thus:
Para-13. Further elementary rule of interpretation is that the Statute
must be read as a whole, in the instant case reading the entire
Section
202
as a whole and particularly the Second Proviso to
Section 200
makes
it manifest that the intention of the legislature was not that the
complainant may be compelled to examine all the prosecution witnesses 
rather only those witnesses were to be examined who can be said to be
'his' witnesses. The emphasis by the Legislature appears to be on the
word 'his' which cannot be ignored in making a proper interpretation. In
order to ascertain as to whether the witnesses of the complainant on
whom he places his reliance are his witnesses or not, a question may be
put to the complainant as to who are the witnesses whom he wants to
examine or when certain number of witnesses have been examined a  
question can be put to the complainant as to whether they are the only
witnesses or some more witnesses are required. To ascertain number of
witnesses or to put a question to the complainant, no special form has
been prescribed under the Code nor any strict procedure has to be
followed rather it has to be ascertained judicially. I am accordingly of
the view that
Section 202(2) (Proviso)
does not connote that all the
prosecution witnesses must be examined rather only those witnesses may  
be examined who are of the choice of the complainant or in whom the -
complainant reposes the confidence.
Para-14. The only limitation on the number of witnesses would be that no
more witness would be permitted to be examined at the trial by the
complainant in a case triable exclusively by the Sessions, when the case
is committed to the Court of Session, under
Section 207
or
Section 208
of
the Code a copy of the statement of witnesses to be examined by the
complainant or other material on the record has to be given to the
accused before the case is committed to the Court of Session. It is another
matter that if the ends of justice require that some more witnesses are to
be examined in that even after following the procedure under
Section 311
of the Code, the Court can examine any other witness, but not as witness
of the complainant or prosecution, rather as a court witness.
11)     Subsequently, a Full Bench of this Court in
G.Subba Naidu and others
vs Talluri Mahalakshmamma and another
also reiterated the same principle
as follows:
Para-4We are the view that the Legislature has qualified 'all'
with the words 'his' and in case on the basis of the statement of the
witnesses produced by the complainant the Magistrate finally takes
the cognizance and commits the case in terms of
Sections 208
and
209
he will be giving the copies of the statements of only those
witnesses whose statements were recorded by him and Allahabad   
High Court in the judgment
referred to above
(supra) has correctly
stated that, only those witnesses can be examined in the trial which
were examined before the Magistrate. (Emphasis No.1). This view
appears to be correct in view of sub-clause (c) to
Section 209
of
Cr.P.C. as well which lays down that the Magistrate shall send to
the Court of Session the record of the case and the documents and
articles, if any, which are to be produced in evidence. So, whatever
the documents are sent under
Section 209(c)
by the Magistrate to
the Court of Sessions including the statements of the witnesses can
be relied at the time of trial. Therefore, it is not necessary in our
view for the complainant to produce all the witnesses in an enquiry
under
Section 202
Cr.P.C.(Emphasis No.2).
12)     Therefore, the Apex Court and High Courts including ours were of the
view that in a compliant case triable exclusively by Court of Session, the
Magistrate need not direct the complainant to examine all the list mentioned
witnesses but suffice for the complainant to produce all his witnesses which
means those witnesses on whom the complainant repose confidence.
Thus, Point No.1 is answered in negative.
13) POINT No.2:  Since Point No.1 is held in negative, the question would
arise whether Sessions Court during trial can examine only those witnesses
whose statements were recorded by the Magistrate before committal or it can
examine the omitted witnesses also? The answer is not far to seek as it is no
more res integra for, in
Jumrnans
case (3 supra) High Court of Allahabad
clarified this legal point also in para-14 of its judgment which is extracted
supra. From the aforesaid judgment, it is clear that in a case triable exclusively
by a Court of Session, the Magistrate need not direct the complainant to
examine all the list mentioned witnesses but, suffice if the complainant
examines all his witnesses on whom he reposes confidence. If their statements
project sufficient material, the Magistrate can commit the case. The only
limitation in such an instance as per Allahabad High Court is, during trial no
more witnesses would be permitted to be examined by the complainant. 
However, if the ends of justice require that some more witnesses have to be
examined, by following the procedure under
Section 311
Cr.P.C., the Court
can examine any other witness, but not as witness of the complainant or
prosecution rather as a court witness.
This view was approved by a Full Bench
of our High Court also in
G.Subba Naidus
case also. (Vide Emphasis No.1).
14)     The net result in view of above precedential jurisprudence is that
learned Assistant Sessions Judge, Vizianagaram no doubt can examine the  
omitted witnesses i.e. LWs.6 to 12 or any other person as a witness in terms of
Section 311
Cr.P.C. as a court witness if in his view the evidence of such
witness is essential to the just decision of the case by giving reasons. If any
such person is examined as court witness, needless to emphasize, the Court 
shall afford opportunity to prosecution and defence to cross-examine such
witness.
This point is answered accordingly.
15)     In the result, it is held that the Assistant Sessions Judge, Vizianagaram
can examine either the omitted witnesses i.e. LWs.6 to 12 or any other person
as a witness in terms of
Section 311
Cr.P.C. only as a court witness, if in his
view the evidence of such witness is essential to the just decision of the case
by giving reasons. If any such person is examined as court witness, the Court
shall afford opportunity to prosecution and defence to cross-examine such
witness.
16)     This Criminal Revision Case is disposed of accordingly.
As a sequel, miscellaneous applications pending, if any, shall stand
closed.
_________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 14.06.2018