[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
K.Rambabu vs State Of Madhya Pradesh, Rep. By Its ... on 24 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 58
Author:
C.Praveen Kumar
Bench:
C.Praveen Kumar
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.PRAVEEN KUMAR          

WRIT PETITION (SR) No. 45278 of 2018   

24.08.2018 

K.Rambabu .... PETITIONER   

State of Madhya Pradesh,  Rep. by its Principal Secretary, Government of Madhya Pradesh  Secretariat, Madhya Pradesh State a 

Counsel for Appellant :Sri Ch.Ramesh Babu 

Counsel for Respondents         :   --      

<GIST : 

> HEAD NOTE :   

? Cases referred :
1.      (14) (1873) 8 SP 107
2.      (1994) 4 SCC 711 
3.      (1985) 3 SCC 217 
4.      (2007) 11 SCC 335 
5.      (1999) 4 SCC 656 
6.      (2002) 1 SCC 567 
7.      (2004) 9 SCC 786 
8.      (2006) 6 SCC 207 
9.      (2010) 1 SCC 457 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C. PRAVEEN KUMAR         
WRIT PETITION (SR) No. 45278 of 2018   

ORDER:
1)         Pursuant to an office note with regard to maintainability of
the writ petition before this Court, the matter is posted under the
caption for orders of the Court.
2)      In order to decide the issue of maintainability and the
objection raised by the office, it would be useful to refer to the
facts in issue.
3)      The writ petitioner herein, who is a resident of Hyderabad, is
said to be the Managing Director of M/s. Sasanka Infra Projects
Private Limited.  The 5th respondent namely Narmada Valley
Development Authority, Katni, Madhya Pradesh, awarded the  
contract to the 4th respondent namely HES Infra Private Limited,
having its registered office at Hyderabad, to execute
Vijayaraghavghar Branch Canal from 0.00 to 57.170 KM and Pilongy 
Distributory from 0.00 KM to 7.93 KMs of Bargi Diversion Project
on Turnkey basis.  The said contract was sub-contracted to
Sasanka Infra Projects Private Limited, of which the petitioner is a
Managing Director, vide agreement dated 15.02.2013.  Two years 
later, the 4th respondent is said to have terminated the sub-
contract, through a letter dated 08.09.2015.  The claim made by
the petitioner with the 4th respondent came to be answered saying
that the said amount would be paid after the amount is received
from the 5th respondent.  It is urged that to initiate action against
the 4th respondent, the petitioner needs some documents from the
office of respondents 2 and 3.  Hence, he made an application
under
Right to Information Act, 2005
before the 2nd respondent
ie., Public Information Officer, O/o. the Executive Engineer,
Katni, Madhya Pradesh State.  On 25.05.2018, the 2nd respondent  
is said to have dismissed the application intimating the right of
the petitioner to prefer an appeal before the 3rd respondent ie.,
Appellate Information Officer, O/o. Executive Engineer, Katni,
Madhya Pradesh State, which was also dismissed on 30.06.2018.   
Challenging the same, the present Writ Petition came to be filed
before this Court.
4)      An objection came to be raised by the office, which is as
under:
Please clarify, how the writ is entertainable as the
relief sought for pertains to other State ie., (Madhya
Pradesh).
5)      An endorsement is made by the petitioner stating that the
petitioner is a resident of Hyderabad and the appeal was rejected
on pending proceedings before Honble High Court of Hyderabad
and the said order was received in Hyderabad by petitioner.
6)      Not being satisfied with the explanation given, the Registry
posted the present writ petition for orders of the Court.
7)      The main ground urged by the learned counsel for the
petitioner is that since the order was communicated to the
petitioner in Hyderabad; that he is a resident of Hyderabad and
since the reason for rejecting his application by the Appellate
Authority was due to pendency of the writ petition in this Court,
pleads that this Court would get territorial jurisdiction to deal
with the matter.
8)      It is to be noted here that the grievance of the petitioner is
against respondents 1 to 3, having their offices in the State of
Madhya Pradesh.  As observed by me earlier, the present writ
petition came to be filed challenging the order passed by the 3rd
respondent rejecting his request to furnish certain documents, so
as to enable the writ petitioner to file cases against the 4th
respondent.  It appears that the entire emphasis of the petitioner
is on clause (2) of
Article 226
of the Constitution of India basing on
the purported cause of action.
9)              In order to decide as to whether this Court would get
jurisdiction, it would be useful to refer to clauses 1 and 2 of
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, which reads as under:
226. Power of High Courts to issue certain writs. (1)
Notwithstanding anything in
Article 32
, every High Court
shall have power, throughout the territories in relation to
which it exercises jurisdiction, to issue to any person or
authority, including in appropriate cases, any
Government, within those territories, directions, orders or
writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus,
mandamus, prohibition, quo-warranto and certiorari, or
any of them, for the enforcement of any of the rights
conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.
(2) The power conferred on a High Court by clause (1)
shall not be in derogation of the power conferred on the
Supreme Court by clause (2) of
Article 32.
10)     The word cause of action is not defined either in the
Constitution of India or in any other statutory enactment including
the Code of Civil Procedure
, but in Cooke v. Gill  the word cause
of action has been described as cause of action means every
fact which it would be necessary for the plaintiff to prove, if
traversed, in order to support his right to the judgment of the
Court.
11)     This provision came up for consideration before the Apex
Court, in the case of
Oil and Natural Gas Commission vs. Utpal
Kumar Basu and others
.  In the said case the petitioner Oil and
Natural Gas Commission (ONGC) through its consultant Engineers  
India Limited (EIL) issued an advertisement in the newspaper
inviting tenders for setting up of Kerosene Recovery Processing
Unit in Gujarat, mentioning that the tenders containing offers
were to be communicated to EIL, New Delhi. After the final
decision was taken by the Steering Committee at New Delhi, the
respondent NICCO moved the Calcutta High Court praying that 
ONGC be restrained from awarding the contract to any other
party. It was pleaded in the petition that NICCO came to know of
the tender from the publication in the Times of India within the
jurisdiction of the Calcutta High Court. The Apex Court while
rejecting the plea of NICCO, that the Courts at Calcutta get
jurisdiction on the ground that it has read the advertisement at
Calcutta, submitted the offer from Calcutta; made
representations from Calcutta and sent fax messages from
Calcutta apart from receiving a reply thereto at Calcutta, held
that they would not constitute facts forming integral part of cause
of action.
12)     In State of Rajasthan and others v. M/s. Swaika Properties
and another  which was referred to by the Honble Supreme
Court in
Oil and Natural Gas Commission
(2 supra), the Special
officer, Town Planning Department, Jaipur at the instance of the
improvement Trust, Jaipur issued a notice intimating that the
State Government proposed to acquire a large part of the lands
situated on the outskirts of Jaipur for public purpose, namely;
implementation of a development scheme.  The said notice was 
served on the owners of the land at their Calcutta office.  After
holding enquiry, a final notification was issued for acquisition of
the land.  The attempt of the land owners to seek exemption
under the provisions of
Section 20
of the Urban Land (Ceiling and
Regulation) Act, 1976 went in vain.  Thereupon the land owners
filed a Writ under
Article 226
of the Constitution in the High Court
of Calcutta.  The ex parte  ad interim relief granted by the
Calcutta High Court was questioned before the Supreme Court. 
Setting aside the interim order of the High Court, the Supreme
Court held that mere service of notice under
Section 52 (2)
of the
Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 on the respondents
at their registered office at 18-B, Brabourne Road, Calcutta, could
not give rise to a cause of action within that territory, unless the
service of such notice was an integral part of the cause of action.
It was further held that the entire cause of action, culminating in
acquisition of the land under Section 52 (1) of the said Act, arose
within the State of Rajasthan ie., within the territorial jurisdiction
of the Rajasthan High Court of the Jaipur Bench.
13)     Alchemist Ltd. And another v. State Bank of Sikkim and
others
, was a case where the appellant company was having its
registered and corporate office at Chandigarh.  Respondent No.1
was the State Bank of Sikkim and respondent No.2 was the State 
of Sikkim, was desirous of disinvesting 49% of its equity capital in
the first respondent bank, to a strategic partner with transfer of
management in the first respondent bank, issued an
advertisement in Economic Times and invited offers for strategic
partnership.  It was stipulated in the advertisement that the
offers made by the parties would be subject to scrutiny by the
Board of Directors of the first respondent bank with the right
reserved by the Board of Directors to accept or reject the offer
without assigning any reason.  The appellant submitted its formal
proposal for the strategic business partnership vide its offer dated
03.02.2004.  After short-listing the offers, the Board of Directors
in its meeting held negotiations with the appellant.  The Chairman
and the Managing Director of the first respondent bank visited
Chandigarh for further negotiations.  On being asked, the
appellant deposited a sum of Rs.4.50 crores to show its bona fides
with the State Bank of India, Chandigarh.  Respondent No.1 bank
informed the appellant company that its proposal was accepted in
principle subject to consideration and approval of the Government
of Sikkim.  However, the appellant received a communication at
Chandigarh on 23.02.2006 by which the first respondent bank
informed the appellant company that the Government of Sikkim 
has not approved the proposal submitted by the appellant and
sought to withdraw the communication, dated 20.02.2004. 
Thereupon the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court of
Punjab and Haryana challenging the letter-cum-order dated
23.02.2006. The High Court of Punjab and Haryana dismissed the 
Writ Petition on the sole ground that it did not have the territorial
jurisdiction to entertain the Writ Petition, as no cause of action
has arisen within its territorial jurisdiction.  Accordingly, without
entering into the merits of the case, the High Court has dismissed
the Writ Petition granting liberty to the appellant to seek
appropriate remedy before an appropriate Court.  The said
decision was challenged by the appellant in a civil appeal before
the Supreme Court, wherein it has advanced the following
submissions in support of its plea that the Punjab and Haryana
High Court has territorial jurisdiction to entertain and decide the
Writ Petition on merits.
i) The Appellant-Company has its Registered and
corporate office at Chandigarh;
ii) The Appellant- Company carries on business at
Chandigarh;
iii) The offer of the Appellant-Company was
accepted on February 20, 2004 and the acceptance  
was communicated to it at Chandigarh;
iv) Part performance of the contract took place at
Chandigarh inasmuch as Rs.4.50 crores had been  
deposited by the Appellant-Company in a fixed
deposit at Chandigarh as per the request of the first
respondent;
v) The Chairman and Managing Director of the first
respondent visited Chandigarh to ascertain the
bona fides of the Appellant-Company;
vi) Negotiations were held between the parties in
the third week of March, 2005 at Chandigarh;
vii) Letter of revocation dated February 23, 2006
was received by the Appellant-Company at 
Chandigarh. Consequences of the revocation ensued  
at Chandigarh by which the Appellant-Company is 
aggrieved.
14)     After exhaustive reference to the case law on cause of
action, the Supreme Court held as under:
From the aforesaid discussion and keeping in view the
ratio
laid  down in
catena of decisions by this Court, it is
clear that  for the purpose of deciding, whether facts
averred by the petitioner- appellant, would or would not
constitute a part of cause of action, one has to consider
whether such fact constitutes a material, essential or
integral part of the cause of action. It is no doubt true
that even if a small fraction of the cause of action arises
within the jurisdiction of the Court, the Court would have
territorial jurisdiction to entertain the suit/petition.
Nevertheless it must be a part of cause of action,
nothing less than that. In the present case, the facts
which have been pleaded by the Appellant company, in 
our judgment, cannot be said to be essential, integral or
material facts so as to constitute a part of cause of
action within the meaning of
Article 226(2)
of the
Constitution. The High Court, in our opinion, therefore
was not wrong in dismissing the petition. (Emphasis
added)
15)     In
C.B.I., Anti-corruption Branch, Mumbai v. Narayan
Diwakar
, the Apex Court was dealing with a case, where A,
who was posted in Arunachal Pradesh moved the High Court of  
Guwahati for quashing of FIR filed against him by the CBI, on
receiving a wireless message through Chief Secretary of the State
asking him to appear before CBI Inspector in Bombay. An
objection was raised by the department, that the High Court of
Guwahati had no territorial jurisdiction to entertain the writ
petition. But the same turned down. However, the Honble
Supreme Court, upheld the objection stating that the Guwahati
High Court could not have entertained the petition.
16)     In
Union of India v. Adani Exports Ltd.
the question of
territorial jurisdiction came up for consideration before the Apex
Court. In the said case, A filed a petition under
Article 226
of
the Constitution in the High Court of Gujarat claiming benefit of
the Passport Scheme under the EXIM policy. Passport was issued  
by Chennai Office and entries in the Passport were made by
authorities at Chennai. But none of the respondents were
stationed within the State of Gujarat. It was, therefore,
contended that Gujarat High Court had no territorial jurisdiction
to entertain the petition. The contention, however, was negatived
and the petition was allowed. The respondents approached the
the Apex Court, wherein it was held that the Gujarath High Court
had no jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition and set aside the
order of the High Court.
17)     In
National Textile Corporation v. Haribox Swalram and
others
the Apex Court dealt with a situation, where the textile
mills were situated in Bombay and the supply of cloth was to be
made by them, ex-factory at Bombay. According to the writ
petitioners, the money was paid to the mills at Bombay. After a
detailed discussion, a learned Single Judge of Calcutta High Court
held that the Calcutta High Court had no jurisdiction to entertain
the writ petition. The Division Bench has reversed the finding on
the ground that concluded contract had come into existence
which can be cancelled only after giving an opportunity of hearing
and consequently the question of revocation of the contract, at its
Calcutta address, would constitute a cause of action. The Apex
Court did not agree with the view expressed by the Division
Bench, since it was nowhere pleaded in the writ petition that the
appellant herein had initiated any action under
Section 11
of the
Act, by issuing any notice to the writ petitioner for cancellation of
the contract.  It was held that mere fact that the writ petitioner
carries on business at Calcutta or that the reply to the
correspondence made by it was received at Calcutta, is not an
integral part of the cause of action and, therefore, held that the
Calcutta High Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the writ
petition.   However, on merits the Apex Court agreed with the
view taken by the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court.
18)      In
Om Prakash Srivastava vs. Union of India and
Another
, answering a similar question, the Apex Court observed
that from a plain reading of Clause(2) of
Article 226
, it is
manifestly clear that the High Court can exercise power to issue
direction, order or writs for the enforcement of any of the
fundamental rights or for any other purpose, if the cause of action
in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, notwithstanding that
the seat of the Government or authority or the residence of the
person against whom the direction, order or writ is issued is not
within the said territory. In para 7 the Apex Court observed as
under:-
7. The question whether or not cause of action wholly or in
part for filing a writ petition has arisen within the territorial
limits of any High Court has to be decided in the light of the
nature and character of the proceedings under
Article 226
of
the Constitution. In order to maintain a writ petition, a writ
petitioner has to establish that a legal right claimed by him
has prima facie either been infringed or is threatened to be
infringed by the respondent within the territorial limits of
the Courts jurisdiction and such infringement may take
place by causing him actual injury or threat thereof.
19)     In
Rajendran Chingaravelu vs. R.K. Mishra, Additional
Commissioner of Income Tax and Others
, the Apex Court while 
considering the scope of
Article 226(2)
of the Constitution,
particularly in relation to cause of action in maintaining a writ
petition, held as under:
9. The first question that arises for consideration is
whether the Andhra Pradesh High Court was justified
in holding that as the seizure took place at Chennai
(Tamil Nadu), the appellant could not maintain the
writ petition before it. The High Court did not
examine whether any part of cause of action arose in
Andhra Pradesh. Clause (2) of
Article 226
makes it
clear that the High Court exercising jurisdiction in
relation to the territories within which the cause of
action arises wholly or in part, will have jurisdiction.
This would mean that even if a small fraction of the
cause of action (that bundle of facts which gives a
petitioner, a right to sue) accrued within the
territories of Andhra Pradesh, the High Court of that
State will have jurisdiction.
20)     From the
judgments
referred to above
, it is clear that even if
part of cause of action or a fraction of cause of action arises
within the jurisdiction of the High Court, the writ petition can be
maintained before the said Court.
21)     Keeping in view the law
laid down in
the
judgments
referred
to above
, it is to be noted as to whether there was any part of
cause of action, within the jurisdiction of this Court.
22)     A reading of the averments in the affidavit filed in support of
the writ petition and the documents filed would show that the
petitioner is aggrieved by the order passed by the 3rd respondent
in Madhya Pradesh, rejecting the request of the petitioner to
furnish him with certain documents so as to enable him to file
cases against the 4th respondent.
23)     The law
laid down by
the Apex Court, in
Oil and Natural Gas
Commission
(2 supra), squarely apply to the facts on hand.   It was
also a case where Calcutta High Court entertained the writ
petition on the ground that the advertisement was read in
Calcutta, which was circulated in Calcutta, made representations
from Calcutta, sent fax message from Calcutta and received a
reply there to at Calcutta.  The same came to be rejected by the
Apex Court holding that they would not constitute facts forming
part of cause of action.   Therefore, mere communication of the
order  to the place of residence of the petitioner, does not by
itself give any cause of action or confer jurisdiction on this Court
to entertain a writ petition
24)     Therefore, serving a copy of the order at Hyderabad and the
person against whom he intends to initiate action is a resident of
Hyderabad, would not constitute facts forming integral part of
cause of action, when the grievance was against the order passed
by the third respondent.
25)     For the aforesaid reasons, the objection raised by the office
is sustained.
________________________    
JUSTICE C. PRAVEEN KUMAR       
24.08.2018